ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Author has thought fit for the Reasons he has given you, to alter the
Method he laid down in his Preface to the First Dialogue, and to propose the
Subjects he treats of in this following Method.

Bibliotheca Politica: OR AN ENQUIRY INTO The Ancient Constitution OF THE
ENGLISH GOVERNMENT; Both in respect to the just extent of Regal Power, and the
Rights and Liberties of the Subject. Wherein all the Chief Arguments, as well
against, as for the late Revolution, are impartially Represented, and
considered, in Thirteen Dialogues.

Collected out of the Best Authors, as well Ancient as Modern.

To which is added an Alphabetical INDEX to the whole Work.

LONDON, Printed for R. Baldwin in Warwick Lane, near the Oxford-Arms where may
be had the First, Second, T^ird, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Seventh, Eighth, Ninth,
Tenth, Eleventh, Twelvth, and Thirteenth Dialogues, 1694.

THE QUESTIONS Debated in the Ensuing Dialogues.
WHETHER Monarchy be Iure Divino, Dialogue the First.

Whether there can be made out from the Natural, or revealed Law of God, any
Succession to Crowns by Divine Right? Dialogue the Second.

Whether Resistances of the SVPREAM POWER, by a whole Nation, or People, in
cases of the last extremity can be justified by the Law of Nature, or Rules of
the Gospel. Dialogue the Third.

Whether Absolute Non Resistances of the SVPREAM POWERS be enjoined by the
Doctrine of the Gospel, and was the Ancient Practice of the Primitive Church,
and the constant Doctrine of our Regormed Church of England. Dialogue the
Fourth.

Whether the King be the Sole Supreme Legislative Power of the Kingdom; and
whether our Great Councils or Parliaments, be a Fundamental Part of the
Government, or else proceeded from the Favor and Concessions of former Kings.
Dialogue the Fifth.

Whether the Commons of England, represented by Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses in Parliament, were one of the Three Estates in Parliament before the
49th of Henry III. or 18th of Edw. I. Dialogue the Sixth.

Whether the Commons of England, represented by Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses in Parliament, were one of the Three Estates in Parliament, before
the 49th of Henry III. or 18th of Edw. I. The Second Par^^ Dialogue the Seven^h.

A Continuation ^f the former Discourse, conc^rn^ng the Antiquity of the
Commons in Parliament, wherein the best Authorities for it are proposed and
examined. With an Entrance upon the Question of Non Resistance. The Third Part,
Dialogue the Eighth.

Whether by the Ancient Laws, and Constitutions of this Kingdom, as well as by
the Statutes of the 13th and 14th of King Charles the II. all Resistance of the
King, or of those Commissioned by him, are expressly forbid, upon any pretense
whatsoever.

And also, whether all those who assisted, his present Majesty King William,
either before, or after his coming over, are guilty of the breach of this Law.
Dialogue the Ninth.

I. Whether a King of England can ever fall from, or forfeit his Royal Dignity
for any breach of an Original Contract, or wilful violation of the Fundamental
Laws of the Kingdom.

II. Whether King William (commonly styled the Conqueror) did by the Conquest
acquire such an absolute unconditioned Right to the Crown of this Realm, for
Himself, and his Heirs, as can never be lawfully resisted; or forfeited for any
Maladministration, or Tyranny whatever. Dialogue the Tenth.

I. In what Sense all Civil Power is derived from God, and in what Sense may be
also from the People.

II. Whether His Present Majesty King William, when Prince of Orange, had a
just Cause of War against King James the II.

III. Whether the Proceedings of His Present Majesty, before he was King, as
also of the late Convention, in respect of the said King James, is justifiable
by the Law of Nations, and the Constitution of our Government. Dialogue the
Eleventh.

I. Whether the Vote of the late Convention, wherein they declared the Throne
to be vacant, can be justified from the Ancient Constitution, and Customs of
this Kingdom.

II. Whether the said Convention declaring King William and Queen Mary to be
Lawful and Rightful King and Queen of England, may be justified by the said
Constitution.

III. Whether the Act passed in the said Convention after it became a
Parliament, whereby Roman Catholic Princes are debarred from succeeding to the
Crown, was according to Law. Dialogue the Twelfth.

I. Whether an Oath of Allegiance may be taken to a King or Queen de facto, or
for the time being.

II. What is the Obligation of such an Oath, whether to an actual defense of
their Title against all Persons whatsoever, or else to a bare submission to
their Power.

III. Whether the Bishops who refused to take the Oath of Allegiance to their
present Majesty's, could be lawfully deprived of their Bishoprics. Dialogue
the Thirteenth.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Author writing these Dialogue purely for the discovery of Truth, and for
giving a full and impartial account of all the considerable Arguments and
Authorities that have been urged on either side, in the Controversies discussed
in the foregoing Dialogues; if therefore any Person who having perused them, is
dissatisfied with any of the Arguments, Answers, or Authorities there made use
of, and supposes he could confute them, or else put better in their stead, if
such Persons do not think it worth while to write a Treatise on purpose on this
Subject, they may (if they please) send their Animadversions to the Publisher
of these Dialogues, who will undertake to communicate them to the Author, who
hereby also engages to Publish them fairly, without any Alterations, or
Additions; together with his Answers or Replys to them, if the Subject will
admit it; the Persons concerned, may follow the Method used in the foregoing
Appendix of Additions, but are desired to send in their Animadversions by the
beginning of next Michaelmas Term, when (if sent) they shall be Published.

Bibliotheca Politica: Or A DISCOURSE By way of DIALOGUE, WHETHER MONARCHY BE
IVRE DIVINO: Collected out of the most Approved Authors, both Ancient and
Modern.

Dialogue the First.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwin in Warwick Lane, near the Oxford-Arms 1694.

The Epistle Dedicatory.
To all Impartial and unprejudiced Readers, especially those of our Hopeful and
Ingenious Nobility, and Gentry..
HAving, out of Curiosity, for some years before the late wonderful happy
Revolution, as well a^ since, for the satisfaction of my own Conscience,
carefully perused all Treatises of any value that have been published of late
years concerning the Original, and Rights of Civil Government, a^ well of
Monarchy, a^ the other kinds thereof; as also of the Ancient Government, and
Fundamental Constitutions of this Kingdom, I have found it necessary in order
to my better retaining of what I had read, and making a more certain Judgment
thereupon, to commit to writing the most considerable Arguments on both sides,
as well of those who have Monarchy to be Jure Devino, as of those who only
allow it to Government in general; of those who hold an Absolute Subjection, or
Passive Obedience (as their Phrase is) as well as of those who hold Resistance
in some Cases necessary: of those that maintain our Monarchy to have been
limited, by the very constitution it self, and of those that suppose all our
rights, and Liberties, (...) the very Being of Parliaments themselves, to owe
their Original wholly to the gracious Concession, and Favor of our former
Kings. Having made some impartial Collections of this Nature, I showed them to
some Friends, who told me they thought they might prove of great use for the
satisfying of some men's doubts and scruples concerning Lawful Obedience to the
Government of their present Majesty's, as looking upon it as the best and most
ingenious way of Conviction to propose the Arguments fairly on both sides,
without interposing my own Judgment, but to leave it to the intelligent, and
impartial Reader to embrace that side on which he found the most rational and
convincing Arguments: This task, though troublesome enough, I was prevailed with
to undertake, not for Fame's sake, since I do not desire to be known; but
merely for the puplick good and happiness of my Country; but being also
satisfied that a Subject of this great important deserved more pains than what
I had yet bestowed upon it, and to be handled in a more Artificial Method, than
the old dry Sch^lastick way of Objection, and Solution: I therefore thought
that it would prove more pleasant, as well as profitable for the Readers
(especially those of our young Nobility and Gentry, for whom I principally
design this undertaking) to digest all that I had written on these Subjects
into so many distinct Dialogues, or Conversations, supposed to be held between
two intimate Friends, who, notwithstanding their different Principles and
Opinions in Politics, had always maintained a strict and generous
correspondency: but I was the more inclined to this way of writing, not only
because I have observed that Controversial matters written by way of Dialogue,
according to the true Rules thereof, have very well obtained among all
intelligent Readers; but also since the Subjects I treat of are of a nice
nature, and that the Collections I had made contained strict Inquiries into the
Principles, and Ten^^s, in the Writings of diverse persons of Reputation for
Learning, and Ingenuity; I was sensible how invidicus a T^^k it must be to
write on purpose against so many great men, as also how troublesome and ^edious
is would prove to my self, as well as the Readers, to pursue and confute the
Opinions of any Author page by page, since it must be chiefly imputed to that
mannar of managing of Controversies, that answers to Books prove so
unacceptable to the World. And though I grant that this way of writing has
also its difficulties and objections, as being more diffu^ive, and so taking up
more time both to write and read Discourses Dialogue-wise; where either one or
other of the Disputants (...) often apt to rove from the Subject; ye^ I must
also affirm, that this may be in great part prevented by the Writer, who may,
if he plea^^^ take care to keep close to the Question, and not start afresh,
Har^, (...) the old one is run down; and a^ for the diffusiveness of Dialogues
above Polemical Discourses, that is no considerable Objection, since a man may
either make, or answer Objections in almost as few words this way as the other.
And tho it be granted that matter of ^een form in Dialogues the more tedious,
yet the Reader, as well as Traveller, will find that the (...) of the Road
often (...) for its (...) somewhat (...). But whether I have truly put (...)
the Rules of Dialogue in that, (...) the ^^suing Discourses I intend to publish
on these Subjects, Ti^^st (...) to the Readers. Judgment; but this much I think
I may safely affirm that I have carefuly avoided all bitter, and reflecting
language on either side, since I design these Discourses for common places of
Ar^gi^^^^nt^^ no^ forms of (...). And I have also declined showing my self a
Party, or giving my own opinion in any Question proposed, and therefore I have
(...) either (...) my Disputants converting each other to his own Opinion;
since I know nothing is more easy in writing of Dialogues, well as Romances,
than to make the Knight Efrane always beat the Giant.

But it is fit I give you some account of this present* Discourse, as also of
the rest that may follow it. This first Dialogue then (...) chiefly on this
(...). Whether any particular Spec^es of Government is of Divine Right, or
Institution^ The next shall be, Whether there can be made out from the natural,
or revealed Law of God any Succession to Crowns by Divine Right? The third and
fourth, Whether Passive Obedience (as it is called) or an absolute
Nonresistance of the Supreme Powers, in any case whatsoever, be enjoyed by the
Law of Nature, and the holy Scriptures? As also, Whether this has always been
the Doctrine of our Reformed Church of England? The fifth concerns the Original
of Civil Authority, in what sense it is derived from God, and in what form the
People, and whether their Consent be always necessary to make any Government to
be obeyed for Conscience sake? The sixth shall treat of the Original, and
Fundamental Constitution of our English Government, whether it was an absolute
or limited Monarchy in its first Institution; and whether the King is, and has
been the sole Legislative Power of the Nation? The seventh, Whether the
Parliament, or great Counsel, owe its Orignal to the mere Grace, and Favor of
our Kings, or whether it is not as Ancient as the Constitution it self? The
eighth and last, Whether our late Revolution, and the Conventions and present
Parliament's Declaration, and Recognition of their present Majesty's K. William
and Q. Mary, be not Legal, and according to the Ancient Constitution, and
Fundamental Government of this Kingdom? and consequently, Whether the Oath of
Allegiance may not be taken to them, not only as King and Q. de facto but de
Iure?

In all which Discourses I have considered and contracted the best Arguments
that I could find made use of by the most considerable both Ancient and Modern
Authors, either in Latin, or English, especially the Pamphlets that have been
writ on either side since the late Revolution: But as for those in our own
Language, whenever any Author speaks so well, and argues so closely, that to
put it into other words would make it worse, I have still put the Arguments of
either one, or other of the Disputants in his own word, tho, because I would
not be thought guilty of Plagiary, I have truly quoted the book and page from
whence I took it, and I hope no Author will take it ill, if I have made bold
sometimes to contract their Arguments, without altering their sense, or words
farther, than by putting in or out a word or expression to make the style run
the more smoothly, and I desire they would not think I write on purpose to
confute them: since I freely declare my design is not to write against any
man's Opinions, as they are his, but only freely to examine them, in order to
an impartial discovery of the Truth; and since some of them may have been
perhaps, too commonly, and favorably received by our ordinary Gentry and
Clergy, if therefore any ingenious person will take upon him farther to assert
or vindicate any Opinion here questioned either by the one or other of our
Disputants, and will clearly, and fairly show me where my Argument might (...)
been put more home, or any Objection more solidly answered, shall be so far
from taking it amiss, that I shall rather give him my thanks for his pains; and
do here farther promise to insert all, or at least the substance of his
Arguments under their poper Heads, with all due acknowledgments to their
Authors, if ever the Discourses will bear a second Impression; only I desire
him, whosoever he shall be, so far to imitate the Gentlemen who are supposed to
converse in these Dialogues, as to for. bear all rude Reflections, and course
Language, otherwise I hope they will give me their pardon if I only take notice
of their Reasons, and pass by their Passion.

Nor would I have any Candid Reader to slight the two first Dialogues, because
they treat of Opinions at present out of fashion. viz. The Divine Right of
Monarchy and Succession from the Patriarchal Power given by God to Adam, since
you may easily remember that it is not many years ago, that our Pulpits and
Presses would scarce suffer any other Doctrines either to be Preached or
Published, than on these Subjects: It faring with some Political Opinions, as
with Fashions, which are never so generally received, and worn, as when they
have been in Vogue at Court. Those Divines and Lawyers who were the first
Inventers, or new Vampers of them, commonly receiving the greatest Rewards and
Prefermets, who (as the Court Tailors did Fashions) could invent such
Doctrines, and Opinions, as were most burdensome, and uneasy to all sort of
People, except a few Great ones, who were to gain by them; and I desire you
also farther to consider, that however odd, or unreasonable these Doctrines may
seem to most men, yet certainly they must have, at least, a great appearance of
Truth, since they were able to Captivate the Reasons of the Major part of both
Houses of Convocation in the beginning of the Reign of King James the First,
they then declaring them by several Cannons, made on purpose, the only sure
Foundations of all Civil Authority, as also of Obedience thereunto; as plainly
appears by that late Treatise which goes under the name of Bishop Overal's
Convocation-Book. And tho neither the King, nor Parliament, then thought fit to
give those Cannons the stamp of Civil Authority, whereby they might become
Laws: Yet for all this, it did not hinder diverse Learned, and Ingenious men, as
well of Clergy, as Laity, from embracing these Opinions, such as were Sir
Robert Filmer, and his Vindicatior Mr. B. as also the most Reverend and Learned
Bishop Sanderson, with diverse others of note, whose Arguments I have made use
of, and considered in the two first Dialogues, and that in a way as little
reflective as possible; since I know what is due to the memory and fame of such
great, and worthy Persons; and therefore I have only made use of the initial
Letters of their Names, or Titles of their Books in the Margin, with an Index
at the beginning of each Discourse, showing what Book each mark does signify;
which Method I have persued through all the rest of these Discourses; and of
what is not so mark^, I desire the Reader to look upon the words, if not the
sense, to be my own; since I do not pretend to be an Inventer of new Notions in
Politics, and there is no man more sensible than my self of that Old Latin
Sentence, Nihil dictum, quod non dictum prius.

But though I have already finished almost all the Discourses, on the Subjects
above mentioned, yet am I not very fond of publishing them, after so many
several Treatises that have been written thereon; though my design be for the
saving of the Readers money as well as time, to reduce what is material in all
of them into so many 12 d. Books, and therefore I have at present published
this first Dialogue, as an Introduction to the rest, that according to the
success I find this meets with abroad, I may be more, or less encouraged to
proceed^ nor ^eed it seem strange to any considering person, that I choose
rather to publish one Discourse at a time; since it is but too public a
Complaint how scarce a Commodity Money (as well as Paper) is at this time.

And therefore I have given the Printer leave to publish one of these
Discourses in a month, or oftener, as he shall think good, since I am sensible
the greatest part of common Reader would rather part with eight or ten
shilling^ at so many several times, than all at once; and have therein
endeavored to imitate the Great Council of the Nation, who have thought fit to
divide the present Pole-Tax into four quarterly Payments.

I have but one thing more to advertise the Reader; viz. That though the Title of
this Discourse mentions no more than the discussing the Question Divine Right
of Monarchy, yet the natural Powers of Fathers, and Masters of Families, and
Freemen, are here dis^inctly treated of, and closely enquired into, as being
the first Elements, or Principles of all Civil Powers, as those alone out of
which they could be at first regularly made, and into which they are upon the
dissolution of Civil Governments again to be resolved.

To conclude therefore, I hope that the Arguments in this, and all the
following Discourses, may prove so plai^ and convincing to all careful, and
unprejudiced Readers, that they may as easily discover the Truth, as an honest
unbiased Iury-man can a^ a Trial judge on which side the Right and Justice of
the Cause inclines, upon the barehearing the Evidence on both sides; nay, even
before the Court has summed it up: Since, I think it may prove more useful, as
well as divertive, to hear, or peruse the Arguments, and Reasons, in short,
that may be brought o^ either side, and thereon to pass a Judgment, than to
Read over the tedious and Voluminous De^ds, and Evidences of the Estate in
Question; But on which side soever you bring in your Verdict, I heartily wish
that God would direct your minds, and guide your Judgments to find out and
embrace the Truth, which as it was the only End of my writing, so it is now and
will be also of publishing this and those other Treatises, I intend on the
Subjects I have before mentioned.

Adieu.
The Subject of the First Dialogue.
WHether Hereditary Monarchy be of Divine Right or Institution?

Authors made use of in this Dialogue, and how denoted in the Margin.

1. Sir Robert Filmers's. 1. Observations on Grotius de Belli and Pa^u. R. F.
O. G. 2. Patriarcha F. P. 3. Anarchy of mixed or limited Monarchy. F. A. M M. 4.
Preface to the Observations on Aristotle F. P. O. 5. Directions for Obedience
to Governors. D. O. G.
2. Mr. Bohun's Preface to Sir Robert Filmer's Patriarcha. B. P. P. His
Conclusion to the same. B. C. P.
3. Patriarcha non Monarcha. P. N. M. 4. Grotius de Iure Belli and Pacis. G. I.
B. 5. Pufendorf de Iure Naturae and Gentium. P. I. N. 6. Two Treatises of
Government. T. T. G. 7. Rushworth's Historical Collections. R. H. C. 8. Bishop
Sanderson's preface to the power of the Prince, etc. B. S. P. P.
Adertisement.
I Desire always to be understood, that when I make use of the word People, I
do not mean the vulgar or mixed multitude, but in the state of Nature the whole
Body of Freemen and women, especially the Fathers and Masters of Families; and
in a Civil State, all degrees of men, as well the Nobility and Clergy, as the
Common People.

THE First Dialogue BETWEEN Mr. FREEMAN, a Gentleman, AND Mr. MEANWELL, a Civil
Lawyer, Supposed to be immediately upon the late KING James's first Departure.
F. GOOD Morrow Sir, what! at your Study thus early this Morning.


M. That is no wonder, if you were acquainted with my Hours: But pray Sir, may
I not likewise ask you what extraordinary occasion brings you out of your
Lodgings so much sooner than your ordinary time?


F. Why Sir, I Will tell you: Being awake very early this Morning, and not able
to sleep for thinking on the great Change, that might happen, let either the
King or Prince get the better: and hearing some odd Rumors last Night of the
King's Intentions to go away: I was resolved to get up, and go to the
Coffee-house, to hear what News; where I had scarc^ sat^ down, before a
Gentleman comes in from Whitehall, and brings us a certain account, that the
King withdrew himself this Morning between three and four of the Clock, no Body
knows whither, (though most believe he is gone after the Queen into France) which
I thought would be so surpri^ing (I will not say welcome) to you, that being so
near your Lodgings, I thought it would be worth while to step up, and tell you
of it, and take your Thoughts of this great (and I hope happy) Change, which so
great a Revolution is likely to produce in this Nation.


M. I thank you, Sir, for your kindness, though it is not half an Hour ago, that
one I employ in some Business relating to a Client of mine, came hither, and
gave me the same account that you do, though it was no great surprise to me, for
ever since Sunday that the King sent the Queen and Prince away, I believed that
he gave the Game for lost.


F. I must confess I was of another Mind, and thought that when he had secured
the Queen and Child, he would have had one Brush with the Prince before he
could have got to London, and if he had the worst of i^, he could have but gone
away at last. But to leap away on this Manner, and to loose Three Kingdoms
without ever striking one stroke, it is not, I confess, suitable to that high
Character his Admirer have always had of his Courage and Conduct.


M. Alas! Good King what would you have him do? Or whom could he rely on? When
some of his near Relations, and diverse of those whom he had raised almost from
nothing had deserted him? How could he then trust an Army of Mercenaries, who
being most of them but the Dregs of the People, would, it is likely, rather
have delivered him up to the Prince, than have ventured their Lives for him.


F. What you have said concerning his Majesty's Relations and Confidents
deserting him, makes rather against than for the King's Cause; since it cannot
be supposed they would have left a Prince to whom they were so much obliged, to
join themselves with his Enemy, from whom they had no reason to expect greater
Advantages, than they had already, unless they had been satisfied in their
Conscience^ that the Protestant Religion Established in these Nations, and also
our Civil Rights and Liberties were in imminent danger of being utterly lost
and destroyed; and though I grant that some of the King's Officers and Soldiers
went over to the Prince; yet considering how few they were, that did so, not
being (as I am credibly informed) above seven or eight hundred Men at the most;
and what great numbers of Men he had left with him, he might methings, have
turned out those Officers, he suspected, and put others in their Rooms, who
would have Engaged to Live and Die with him, and if this would ^ot have done,
he might have sent those Regiments he most suspected back to London: And then
reckoning the Scotch and Irish Forces that came lately over, besides the
Papists he had in his Army, and those who having more Courage, than Conscience,
could never expect to Fight for a Prince, who would pay them better: I am
confident (if this had been done) he migh after the going over of those few
Troops, have made up as good, if not a better Army than the Princes; and so
need not have scampored last Week from Salisbury in that haste he did, whilst
the Enemy was near fifty Miles off. But as it is, I am very well satisfied with
all that has happened in this great Revolution, and convinced of the Truth of
that old saying* Ques perdora vult Jupiter, demantat pri^^.


M. So far I go along with you, that God does often make use of the Wickedness
and Treachery of Men, to bring his great Designs about* But whether God has
ordained this great Revolution, as you call it, for a Deliverance or Punishment
to this Nation, I am yet in doubt, for if you please to consider how much those
two Causes have contributed to this turn of Affairs, I suppose if you argue
according to my Principles we must own that though this Change has happened by
Gods permissive Providence, (as all things else though never so ill) yet whether
he does approve of ^ll that has been done to procure it, I much doubt; since
if diverse of our Nobility, with some of our Clergy had not quitted their
Doctrines of Passive Obedience, and Non Resistance, so long owned by the Church
of England, this Revoluion could not have happened at all, or at least not so
suddenly, as it did: So that indeed I must confess, I am not only grieved at
his Majesty's hard Fortune, but also stand amazed, and cannot but reflect with
wonder on the strange Vicissitude of Worldly Affairs, to see a Great King, who
but last Week commanded a Powerful Army of more than Forty Thousand Men forced
out of his Throne, and made to fly his Kingdom by a Prince that did not bring
half that Number into the Field. And who can sufficiently Bewail the King's
Misfortunes, who has been at once betrayed by the ill Advice of his
Counselors, the Treachery of his Friends, and tho Cowardice of his Soldiers?


F. Methinks Sir. there is no such great cause of wonder, much less of concern
in all this: For who can much admire that a Prince should be thus used, who had
not only provoked a Powerful Enemy to invade him from Abroad, but (by
industriously laboring to introduce Popery and Arbitrary Government at Home)
had lost the Hearts of almost all, except his Popish Subjects, insomuch that
many of his own Soldiers were so terrified with the Thoughts of being
discarded (like the Protestant Army in Ireland) to make room for Irish and
French Papists, that they had very little Courage to Fight, when they saw
Casheering was the best Reward they could expect, if they proved Victorious:
And who can much pity a Prince, who would rather loose the Affections of his
People, than displease a few Priests and Jesuits: So that if he suffers he may
thank himself; it not being Religion, but Superstition, which brought this
Misfortune upon him. Since the King having got a Prince of Wales, and (as it is
highly suspected) joined himself in a strict League with France for the
Extirpation of Heretics, it laid an absolute necessity upon the Prince of
Orange to come over, that by the Assistance of the States of Holland, he might
not only relieve us, but vindicate his own, and her Royal Highness his
Princess^s Right to the Succession, and secure his Country from a dangerous
and powerful invasion, which it was threatened with both by Sea and Land,
whenever the Kings of France and England should be at leisure to join their
Forces to make War upon them; which you know all Europe has expected for above
these two Years last past.


M. These things were somewhat, if they could be proved; but indeed, to deal
freely with you, I look upon this League, and the Story of the Suppositious
Birth of the Prince of Wales, as mere Calumnies cast out of Wicked and Crafty
Men to render the King more odious to his People.


F. Nay, Sir, you don't hear me positively affirm, either the one or the other;
since I grant they are not yet made out; but whatsoever will consider all the
Circumstances of the Birth of this Child cannot but be strongly inclined to
believe it an Imposture, notwithstanding all the Depositions that are taken to
the contrary. And as for the French League, you may be sure if there be any
such thing, it is kept very private; and yet I must tell you there are very
high and violent Presumptions to believe it true, or else why should the King
of France in a late Memorial to the Pope, complain that his Holiness by
Opposing his Interest in Europe had hindered him in those great Designs he had
for the Extirpation of Heresy, by which he must surely intend England or
Holland; Protestantism being sufficiently expelled out of his own Country
already. And he could not do it in either of the other without the Consent and
Assistance of his Brother the King of England? Or to what purpose should the
King of England join with France to ruin Holland, and his own Son in Law into
the Bargain, but to make a War merely for Religion; since neither the Dutch,
nor the Prince their Stadt-holder, gave him till now any just Provocation?


M. Well, however, these are but bare suspicions and presumptions, at most, and
not proofs; and therefore in a doubtful matter, as this is, if we ought to
judge favorably of the Actions of others, much more of Princes, whose Councils
and Actions, though private, yet are still exposed to the Censure and Calumnies
of their Enemies, and therefore I hope you will not blame me, if I freely
confess, that I am deeply concerned to see an innocent and Misled King forced
to seek his Bread in a Foreign Land, and the more, since many of the Nobility,
Gentry and Common People have contributed so much to it, by taking up Arms
against him; and that so great a part of his own Army, and Officers should
contrary to their Allegiance and Trust reposed in them, run over to the Enemy.
Nay, that some of our Bishops and Clergymen should, contrary to the so often
acknowledged Doctrines of Passive^ Obedience and Non-Resistance, not only
Countenance, but be likewise active in such desperate undertakings, and this
in-direct opposition to the known Laws of God and this Kingdom; which must
needs make our Church a Scorn to our Enemies the Papists, and a Shame and
Reproach to all Protestant Churches abroad, and render the people of England
odious to all the Crowned Heads in Europe.


F. Well, Sir, I see you are very warm, and I hope, more than the cause
deserves. You may Judge as favorably of the King's Proceedings, and as hardly
of the Actions of the Nobility, Gentry, Clergy and People in this matter as you
please. But yet I think I can make it as clear as the Day, that they have done
nothing by joining in Arms with he Prince of Orange, but what is justifiable by
the Principles of Self preservation, the Fundamental Constitutions of the
Government, and a just Zoal for their Religion and Civil Liberties, as they
stand secured by our Laws; unless you would give the King a Power of making up
Papists, and Slaves whenever he pleased. But as for your Doctrine of an
Absolute Obedience without Reserve, and the Divine Right of Monarchy and
Succession, you need not be much concerned whether the Papists laugh at you or
no, since there are very few of them (if any) who are such Fools themselves as
to believe such futilous Opinions. But indeed they have more reason to laugh at
you whilst you maintain, than when you quit them; since as they have only
rendered you a fit Object of their Scorn, so they would have made you but a
more cas^^ Sacrifice to their Malice. For what can Thieves desire more, than
that those they design to Rob, should think it unlawful to resist them? And
what could the Papists have wished for more, than that our Hands being fotterred
by this Doctrine of an indefinite Passive-Obedience, our Lives, Religion and
Liberties should lie at their Mercy; Which how long we should have enjoyed,
whenever they thought themselves ^^rong enough to take them away, the late
cruel Persecutions, and Extirpations of the Protestants in France, Savey,
Hungary, and other places have proved but too fatal Examples, and therefore no
wonder (let your highflown Churchmen write or preach what they please) if the
Body of the Nobility, Gentry, and People of England could never be persuaded to
swallow Doctrines so fatal to their Religion, and destructive to their Civil
Rights and Liberties both as Mon and Christians.

And as for the Antiquity of these Doctrines, I think they are so far from
being the Ancient Tenets of the Church of England, that they are neither to be
found in its Chatechism, Thirty Nine Articles, or Book of Homilies, taken in
their true Sense and Meaning; tho indeed there is something that may tend that
way in some of the late Church-Canons about fifty years ago, but I do not look
upon them as the Ancient Established Doctrine of our Church, because these
Canons are not confirmed, but condemned by two Acts of Parliaments, and
consequently never legally Established as they ought to be by the public
Saction of the King and Nation? Our Old Queen Elix Divines, Vid^ Bilson of
Christian Subjection, Edi^. 1586. p. 2^9, 280.
such as Bishop Bilson and Mr. Hooker being wholly ignorant of these Doctrines,
nay, teaching in several places of their Writings the quite contrary. No^ was
this Doctrine of absolute Subjection, and Non-Resistance ever generally
maintained, until about the middle of King Iame's Reign, when some Court
Bishops and Divines began to make new Discoveries in Politics as well as
Divinity, and did by their Preaching and Writings affirm that the King had an
absolute Power over Men's Estates. Hooke^'s Ecclesias. Policy, L. 1. p. 11.
So that it was unlawful in any Case to disobey or resist his Personal
Command^, if they were not directly contrary to the Law of God, as may appear
by Dr. Hars^et then Bishop of Chichester, his Sermon upon this Text, Give unto
Caesar the things that are Caesar's, wherein he maintained, That all the
Subjects Goods and Money were Caesar's, that is, the Kings, and therefore were
not to be denied him if he demanded them for the public use; which Sermon,
(tho ordered by the Lords and Commons to be Burnt by the Hangman) yet was so
grateful to the Court, that he was so far from being out of Favor for it, that
he was not long after Translated to Norwich, and from thence to the
Archbishopric of York. So likewise about the beginning of the Reign of King
Charles the First, Dr. Manwaring preached before him, the substance of whose
Sermon was somewhat higher than the former, R. H. C. p. 609.
( viz.) That the King was not bound by the Laws of the Land, not to impose
Taxes or Subsidies without the Consent of Parliament, and that when they were
so imposed, the Subjects were obliged in Conscience, and upon pain of
Damnation to pay them; which if they refused to do they were guilty of
Disloyalty and Rebelion. For which Sermon he was Impeacht by the Commons in
Parliament 4. Car. I* and thereupon Sentenced by the House of Lords, to be
Disabled to hold or receve any Ecclesiastical Living, or Secular Office
whatever, and also to be Imprisoned, and Fined a Thousand Pound.
Notwithstanding all which, we find him presently after the Parliament was
disolved, not only at Liberty, Ib. 635.
but also presented by the King to a Rich Benefice in Essex, and not long after
made Bishop of St. David's. So likewise: one Dr. Sibthorp about the same time
preached an As^ize Sermon at Northamt^n, on Romans 13.7. wherein he maintained
much the like Doctrines, as that it was the King alone that made the laws and
that nothing could excuse from an active Obedience to his Commands, but what is
against the Law of God and Nature: And that Kings had Power to lay Pole Money
upon their Subject Heads* But this much I have read, that this Sermon was
Licensed by Dr. Laud then Bishop of St. David's, Vide Archbishop Abbot 's
Narrative, R. H. C. p. 434.
because Archbishop Abbot had refused to do it as contrary to Law, for which he
was very much frwoned upon at Court, and it is supposed to have been one of the
main causes of his Suspension from his Arch-Episcopal Jurisdiction, which not
long after happened. But as for this Sioth^rp, tho he lived long after, (even
till the Kings Return) yet being (as Archbishop Abbot describes him) a man of
but small Learning, I cannot learn that he was ever preferred higher than the
Parsonages of Barchley, and in Northamptonshire.

But I find a New Doctrine broached by some Modern Bishops and Divines about
the middle of the Reign of King James the first. That Monarchy was of Divine
Right, or Institution at least; so that any other Government was scarce
warrantable or lawful; and of this New Sect we must more especially take notice
of Sir R. F. who has written several Treatises to prove this Doctrine, and
which is worse, That all Monarchs being Absolute, they cannot be limited or
obliged either by Oaths, Laws or Contracts with their People, F. P. c. 3. 7, 8.
farther than they themselves shall think fit, or consistent with their
supposed Prerogatives; of which they only are to be the Sole Judges: So that
whoever will but consider from the Reign of our four last Kings, what strong
inclinations they had to render themselves Absolute, and that few Divines, or
Common, or Civil Lawyers were preferred in their Reigns to any considerable
Place, either in Church or State, See Cowel 's Interpreter Titles King,
Parliament, Prerogative.
who did not maintain these New Opinions both on the Bench and in the Pulpit:
You need not wonder when the Stream of Court Preferment ran so strong that way,
if so many were carried away with it; since it was but to expose themselves to
certain misery, if not to utter ruin, to oppugn it. All who offered by Speaking
or Writing to maintain the contrary, being branded with the odious Names of
Puritans, Common-wealths-men, Whigs, etc. Some of whom you may remember were
not long since imprisoned, Fined, nay, Whipped for so doing. So that it was no
wonder if there were but very few to be found who durst with so great hazard
speak what they thought, nor could any thing but the imminent danger upon our
Laws, Religion and Properties, proceeding from the Kings illegal practices have
opened the Eyes of a great many Noblemen, Gentlemen and Clergy, who contrary to
the Opinions so much lately in vogue, did generously venture both their Lives
and Estates, to join their Arms with the Prince of Orange against the King's
unjust and violent Proceedings.


M. I do not doubt, notwithstanding all you have said, to prove before I have
done, these Doctrines of Non-Resistance, and of the Divine institution of
Monarchy to be most consonant to the Word of God, and to the Doctrine of the
Primitive Church, and also to that of our Reformed Church of England. Nor were
those Divines you mention in K. James the First's time, the Authors or*
inventers of these Doctrines which were publicly received, and Decreed by both
Houses of that Convocation which began in the first Year of K. James, and
continued till the Year 1610. as appears by diverse Manuscript Copies of the
Acts or Decrees of this Convocation, the Original of which was lately in the
Library founded by Dr. Cousins late Bishop of Durham, besides a very fair Copy,
now to be seen in the Archbishops Library at Lambeth: which if you please to
peruse, you may be quickly satisfied that the Church of England (long before
ever Sir R. F. writ thoses Treatises you mention) held that Civil Power was
given by God to Adam and Noah, and their Descendants, as also that absolute
subjection and obedience was due to all Sovereign Powers, without any
resistance; as claiming under those Original Charters: These Doctrines being
there fully and plainly laid down and asserted, as the Doctrines of our Church:
So that you deal very unjustly with the memory of those Divines, as also of Sir
R. F. to make them the first breachers of it, whereas you may find that it was
the opinion of the whole Convocation, for many years before ever those Divines,
or that Gentleman began to Preach, or write upon this subject; Nor were these
the only men who maintained these Principles, but Archbishop Usher and Bishop
Sanderson, (whom I suppose you will not reckon among your flattering Court
Bishops) have as learnedly and fully asserted those Doctrines, you so much
condemn, as any of that party you find fault with, and have very well proved
all resistance of the Supreme Powers to be unlawful, not only in absolute but
limited Monarchies Of the Truth of which you may sufficiently satisfy your
self, if you will but take the Pains to read the Learned and Elaborate
Treatises written by those good Bishops, ( viz.) The Lord Primate Usher's Power
of the Prince, and Obedience of the Subject, and the Bishop of Lincoln's
Preface before it, as also the said Bishop's Treatise de Iura nouto, written
whilst he was Doctor of the Chair in Oxford.


F. I must beg your pardon, Sir, if I have never yet seen or heard of that
Convocation Book you mention, much less of the opinions therein contained,
since there is no mention made of their proceedings, in any History or Record
of those times either Ecclesiastical or Civil, as I know of. But this much I am
certain of; That these Determinations or Decrees you mention, (call them which
you please) never received the Royal Assent, much less the confirmation of the
King and Parliament, one of which (if not both) is certainly requisite to make
any opinion either in Doctrine or Discipline to be received by us Laymen for
the Doctrine of the Church of England, otherwise the Canons made in 1640 would
oblige us in Conscience, though they stand at this day condemned by Act of
Parliament: so that however, even according to your own Principles, you cannot
urge this Book as the Authoritative Doctrine of the Church of England, unless
their Determinations had received the Royal Assent: which you your self do not
affirm they had, for you very well know that, as in Civil Laws, no Bill is any
more than waste Parchment if once the King has refused to give his Royal
Assent to it, so likewise in Spiritual or Ecclesiastical matters, I think no
Decrees or Determinations of Convocations are to be received, as binding either
in points of Faith or Manners by us Laymen, till they have received the
confirmation of the King, and the two Houses of Parliament; or otherwise the
consequence would be, that if the King who has the nomination of all the
Bishoprics and Deaneries, as also of most of the great Prebendaries in
England, of which the Convocation chiefly consists, should nominate such men
into those places, which would agree with him to alter the present established
Reformed Religion ^n Governmen^, and to bring in Popery or Arbitrary Power, the
whole Kingdom would be obliged in Conscience to embrace it, or at least to
submit without any contraditio^ to those Canons the King and Convocation should
thus agree to make, which of how fatal a consequence it might prove to the
Reformed Religion in this Kingdom, this Kings choice of Bishops and Deans, such
as he thought most fit for his turn, would have taught ^s when it had been too
late.


M. You very must mistake me Sir, if you believe that I urge the Authority of
this Book to you, as containing any Ecclesiastical Canons, which I grant must
have the Royal Assent, but whether that of the two Houses of Parliament, I very
much question, since the King without the Parliament is Head of the Church, and
diverse Canons made under Queen Elizabeth, and King James are good in Law at
this day, though they were never confirmed by Parliament. But I only urge the
Authority of this Book to you, to let you see that these Doctrines are more
Ancient than the time you prescribe, and also that the Major part of the
Bishops and ^lergy of the Church of England, held these Doctrines which you so
much condemn, long before those Court Bishops or Divines you mention; meddled
with this controversy, and I suppose we may as well quote such a Convocation
Book, as a Testimony of their sense upon these subjects, as we do the French,
Helvetian, or any other Protestant Churches Confessions of Faith, drawn up and
passed in Synod of their Divines, though without any confirmation of the Civil
Power.


F. If you urge this Convocation Book only as a Testimony, and not Authority, I
shall not contend any further about it, but then let me tell you, that if the
Canons or Decrees of a Convocation, though never so much confirmed by King and
Parliament, do no further oblige in Conscience, than as they are agreeable to
the Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures, sure their determinations without any such
Authority can only be looked upon as the Opinions of so many particular private
Men. And though I have a very great Reverence for the Judgments of so many
Learned Men; yet granting those Doctrines you mention to be contained in this
Book, I think notwithstanding, that we may justly examine them according to the
Rules of Reason, and express Testimonies of Scripture, by either of which, when
I see you can convince me of the falsehood of my Tenets, I shall count my self
happy to be be^^er informed. But as for those Treatises of Bishop Us^er, and
Bishop ^anderson which you now mentioned, I must needs confess they are
learnedly and elaborately written, and though I am against Rebellion as much as
any man, and do believe that subjects may too often be guilty of it, yet am I
not therefore convinced that it is absolutely unlawful in all cases whatsoever,
even in the most Absolute and Arbitrary sort of Civil Government, for the
People when violently and intolerably oppressed, to take up Arms and resist such
unjust violence, or to join with any Foraign Prince who will be so generous as
to take upon him their deliverance. So that though I freely acknowledge that
those good Bishops you mention, were very Pious and Learned men, ^im that I
bear great reverence to their memories, yet does it not therefore follow, that
I must o^^ them to be Infallible, or as great Politicians as they were Learned
Divines; or that they understood the Laws of England as well as they did the
Scriptures or Fathers; and perhaps there may be a great deal, more said on
their behalf than can be for diverse others, who have since W^^een and Pr^^ so
much upon those subjects, for if you please to consider the times of their
writing those Treatises, you will find them written about the beginning or
middle of the late Civil Wars, which they supposed to be beg^n and carried on
contrary to all Law and Justice, under the pretenced Authority of the two
Houses of Parliament, against King Charles the First; and therefore it is no
wonder if they thought themselves obliged to Write very high, for the
Prerogatives and Rights of Princes, and the absolute obedience of Subjects when
they saw even the Kings just and lawful Prerogatives in danger to be taken from
him by force. And although they may perhaps stretch several of these points too
far, yet this may be very excuseable, since it is a hard matter to Write so
exactly against any error, as not to fall into the contrary Extreme, which
nevertheless may sometimes prove useful enough: As those who would set a stick
straight are forced to bend it to the other side: and so these Doctrines which
might then be seasonable, whilst the People carried on their animosities
against the King, farther than in Justice they ought, have not now the same
reason and cogency, when this King has so manifestly endeavored to pull up
the very foundations both of our Religion and Government* So that I am
persuaded, could those good Bishops have lived by the course of Nature to our
times, and have seen the ill and fatal use has been made of those Doctrines by
those in Power, they would either absolutely have renounced them, or at least
have been very cautious how they published such doubtful opinions to the World.


M. I must beg your pardon Sir, if I am not of your Opinion, for I look upon
the absolute subjection of the subjects to the higher or supreme Powers to be a
thing of such constant and eternal Obligation, that no change of times or
circumstances can ever dispense with us in, or discharge us from it; and I am
so far from believing that those good Bishops would ever have recanted their
opinions in this particular, that had they lived until this time, I think they
could not, without the imputation of time servers, have forborne publicly to
declare and maintain them: for sure we must not deny or lay aside true
Principles, because of some inconveniences or hardships that may thereby happen
to our Religion, Persons or Civil Liberties, since that were the ready way to
give a License to the rankest Rebellion, and the highest disobedience to the
Supreme Powers, for so the Primitive Christians might have claimed a right to
Rebel against the Heathen Emperors, pretending they were not bound to submit
themselves unto them, because they persecuted Gods Church, and put the
Christians to death for no other reason than that they were such. Whereas we
may plainly see St. Peter and St. Paul teach us another lesson, and command
absolute subjection without reserve to the higher Powers, which were then the
Tyrannical persecuting Emperors, and that the Primitive Christians, who
immediately followed the Apostles, understood them in this sense; and although
they had sufficient strength, yet thought it unlawful to resist those ^eathen
Emperor's under which they lived. I refer you to that vast Treasure of
Quotations, out of the Fathers and Ancient Church Historians, collected with
such Learning and Industry by the Lord Primate Usher in the second Treatise.


F. It is not my intention Sir, at present to fall into a severe examination of
so many Texts of Scripture and Quotations of Fathers and other Authors, as are
made use of by those Learned Men you lately mentioned, which require more
consideration than our short time will now afford, therefore the best method I
can propose to you for the true stating and understanding this Noble
Controversy, were first to look into the Natural state of Mankind, after the
Fall of Adam, and enquire, First, If God has appointed any kind of Government
by Divine Institution before another. Secondly, If he has not; how far Civil
power may be looked upon as from God, and in what sense, as derived from the
people. Thirdly, Whether Resistance by the Subjects, in some Cases, be
incompatible and absolutely destructive to all Civil Government whatsoever.
Fourthly, Whether such Resistance be absolutely contrary to the Doctrine of
Christ contained in the Scriptures, and that of the Primitive Church pursuant
thereunto. Fifthly, Whether such Resistance be contrary to the Constitution of
this Government. and the express Laws of the Land. Sixthly, Whether what has
been done by the Prince of Orange, and those of the Nobility, Gentry, etc. in
pursuance of these Principles, has been done according to the Law of Nature,
the Scriptures, and Ancient Constitutions of this Kingdom; which material
Points, if we can once subtle, and discover where the Truth lies, it will prove
the clearest Comment and best Interpretation of all those places of Scripture,
and Quotations of Fathers, and other Authors which are Cited by Divines or
other Writers, for the Doctrines of the Divine Institution of Monarchy, and the
Absolute Subjection of Subjects without any Resistance. For when we have once
discovered what the Law of Nature or right Reason dictates; I think we may rest
satisfied that that is the true Sense of the Scripture: God not having given us
any Precept or Command, in Moral, or Practical things, that can be contrary to
the Law of Nature or Reason; or incompatible with the happiness and welfare of
Mankind in this Life; as the Revealed Will of God does chiefly regard that
which is to come.


M. I do very well approve of your Proposal, and therefore pray give me first
your Opinion on those Heads, that I may see how far I may agree with you, and
wherein I must differ from you; for I do assure you my Intention is not to
argue with you merely for disputes sake, but that we may correct the Errors of
each others understanding, and discover, if it be possible, where the Truth
lies; therefore pray Sir, begin first with the Natural state of Mankind, but
remember to do it like a Christian, and one that believes that we are all
derived from one first Parents, and that we did not at first spring up out of
the Earth like Mushrooms, or as the Men whom Ovid ^eigns to have been produced
of the Dragons Teeth Cadmus is feigned to have sown, who as soon as they sprung
out of the Earth, immediately fell a Fighting and Killing each other.


F. I thank you Sir for your honest and kind advice, and shall therefore in the
first place suppose, that the necessity as well as being of all Civil
Government, proceeded from the Fall of Adam, since if that had not been, we had
still lived as the Poets fancy Men did under the Golden Age, without any need
of Kings or Commonwealths to make Laws against Oppression, Theft, Adultery,
Murder, and those other Injuries which Men are now too apt in this lapsed
corrupt state to commit against each other, much less would there have been any
need of Judges or Executioners, either to sentence or punish Offenders, for if
Man had continued as free from Sin as he was in Paradise, there could have been
no need of a Supreme Coercive Power, since every Man would have performed his
Duty toward God and his Neighbor without any punishment or constraint, So
that all the Authority that can be supposed could have been then necessary for
the Good and Happiness of Mankind, would have been no more than that of the
Husband over his Wife, or that of Parents over their Children, the former of
which would not have been an Absolute Coercive power neither, but rather such a
power as his understanding then had over the inferior Faculties of his Soul,
joined with a voluntary submission of her will to his, the Coercive power of
the Husband, and his more absolute Rule over her being conferred by God on
Adam, and in him on all his posterity after the Fall, for the regulating and
restraining the unreasonable desires and passions of the Woman, which then
began to exert and show themselves in her; and as for paternal Authority, that
would have been so far from being Coercive, that Children having no Inclination
to disorder either in their Wills, Appetites or Passions, there would have been
so little need of punishments, that they would not have required so much as
reproof or correction: God having planted the Laws of Nature or Reason in every
Man's Breast, then free from Rebellions Motions against it, so that Children
then could have had no more to do, than to pay their Parents all that
Gratitude. Duty and Obedience which was due to them, as the subordinate Causes
of their Being, which could only consist in performing those indifferent
things, which they then would have had occasion to command them, since Mankind
being Immortal, and the Earth bringing forth of it self all Necessaries for
Humane Life, there could have been no occasion of attending and relieving their
Parents when Sick, Old or Decrepit, and unable to keep themselves; and so
likewise upon the same grounds all other Men would have been equal by Nature,
in respect of any civil difference; for when there was no necessity of Men's
Service, there would have been no distinction between Master and Servant: But
after the Fall, the stare of Mankind was altered, and Self-love, and the desire
of Self-preservation grew so strong and exorbitant above all Natural Equity,
that the inordinate passions of Men blinding their Reasons, they began to think
they had a Right, not only to the Necessaries of Life, but to whatever their
unruly Appetites d^sired, or that they thought they could make themselves
Masters of. To remedy which Inconveniences, I suppose the Fathers and Masters
of Families, and other Freemen (in whom alone then resided that little
Government that then was in the World) were forced after some time to agree
upon one or more Men into whose hands they might resign all their particular
powers, and to make Laws for the due Governing and Restraining those disorderly
Appetites and Passions, and also endowing them with a sufficient Authority to
put them in Execution: But which of the Governments now extant, or that have
been formerly, were Prior in Nature, I think cannot well be known; whether it
was a Monarchy, or an Aristocracy, consisting of all the Heads or Fathers of
Families, or Freemen, is not material since the SS. are silent in it; but it
being sufficient to suppose, that it was at first begun by the persuasion or
mediation of some one or more Wise and Virtuous persons, and was consented to
by thy whole number, consisting of many Families, who were sensible of those
great Inconveniences and Mischiefs they lay under for want of Civil Government.
But be it which way it will, it is most certain that it was principally intended
by God, for the God and Preservation of the Governed, and not for the Greatness
or Advantage of the Person or Parsons appointed t^ Gover^, since God designed
all Civil Government for the restraining of Man's inordinate Passions and Lusts
after the Fall, and procuring by sufficient rewards and puni^^ments, that Peace
and Happiness which could now no longer be obtained by Men's Natural
Inclinations to that which was equitable and honest; and besides, it is
absolutely impossible to suppose, that any great number of people not pressed
by the Invasion of a powerful Enemy from abroad* (which could not be supposed
in this early Age of the World) would ever be brought to consent to put
themselves under the absolute power of others, but for their own greater Good
and Preservation, or to part with their Natural Liberty without advantaging
themselves at all by the Change.


M. I will not take upon me to assert, after what manner Mankind would have
been governed in case our First Parents had continued in their Primitive state
of Innocence; But this much I think I may boldly affirm in opposition to what
you have already said, that Civil Government after the Fall was not alike in
all the Fathers and Masters of Families, but that Adam alone was by God endued
with it, as the great Father and Monarch of Mankind; so that not only Civil
Power, in genere, but in specie, R. F. A. M M. p. 254, 255.
(viz.) Monarchical, was immediately after the Creation conferred by God upon
him. And Adam was Monarch of the whole World even before he had any Subjects.


F. Sir, not to interrupt you, it seems somewhat hard to conceive how Adam
could be a Father before he had Children, or a Monarch before he had Subjects.


M. If you please to consider it, you will find no absurdity at all in this
Assertion. For though I confess there could be no actual Government without
Subjects, Ibid.
nor Fatherhood without Sons; yet by the Right of Nature it was due to Adam to
be Governor of the World, when as yet he had neither Sons, nor Subjects, so
though not in act, yet at least in habit, or in Potentia (as they say in the
Schools) Adam was a King, and a Father, from his Creation, and even in the
state of Innocence, he had been Governor over his Wife and Children; for the
Integrity, or Excellency of the Subjects does not take away the Order, or
Eminency of the Governor: For Eve was subject to Adam before he sinned, and
the Angels who are of a most pure Nature, and cannot Sin, are yet Subjects to
God, and perform all his Commands: Which will serve to con^ute what you say in
Derogation of Civil Government, or Power, that it was introduced by Sin, or the
Fall of Man. Government, I grant as to co-active Power, was not till after Sin,
because Co-action supposes some disorder which was not in the state of
Innocence; but as for directive Government, the State of Humane Nature requires
it; since Civil Society cannot be imagined without a Power of Government. For
although as long as Men continued in the State of Innocence, they might not
need the direction of Adam in those things that were necessarily and morally to
be done. Yet things indifferent that depended merely on their Free Will, might
well be directed by Adam's sole Command.


F. Pray, Sir, give me leave to settle this Point-between us, before you
proceed farther, and I doubt not when you better consider what I say, you will
not think we have any just occasion to differ. So far then you and I are
agreed, that even before the Fall, Adam was superior over his Wife and
Children, and that they owed him, not only Gratitude and Respect, as a Parent,
but also Obedience in all indifferent things: Yet I deny that this Power or
Sup^^iority of Adam over his Wife and Children, was at all a Despotical or
Civil Power, but merely Oeconomical, for the Good and Convenience of Adam, and
the well ordering and preservation of his Family; which you will easily grant,
if you please to consider what are the Essential Differences of Civil
Government from Oeconomical. Now the Essential Properties of Civil Government
consist in preserving and defending the Subjects, both in War and Peace, from
Foreign Enemies, and Intestine Injurie^, and Invasions of Men's Persons or
Properties, and in revenging and punishing all such Transgressions by Death, or
other Punishments, and consequently in making Laws concerning Property, and for
restraining all Robberies, Murders, and the like* Now, in the state of
Innocence there could be no need of any of these Essential Functions of Civil
Power; for your self must grant, that Man was then not apt to Sin, and
immortal; so that all Laws about Peach or War, Punishments of Offenses, public
Judgments concerning Meum, and Tuum, and all Injuries, were absolutely
needless, and had never been in Nature, if Adam had not sinned; and then how
you can call this Authority, or Superiority (which I grant Adam had over his
Wife and Children) Civil Power, I can by no means understand.

But I do utterly deny, that even after the Fall, Adam was a Monarch, or Sole
and Absolute Lord over the whole Earth, and all Creatures therein contained;
and desire you to give me such plain proofs of it, either from Reason, or
Scripture, that I need no more doubt of it, than your self.


M. I shall first of all give you an Argument drawn from the Reason of the
thing* and in the next place, the Authority of Scripture, for my Opinion: and
first, I think it is evident, that every Man that is Born, is so ^at from being
Free, that by his very Birth he becomes a Subject of him that begets him; and
even Groti^^ h^mself acknowledges that, Generatione ^us acquiritur in liberos.
And indeed, the Act of Begetting, being that which makes a Man a Father, his
Right of a Father over his Children, can Naturally arise from nothing else; and
the same Author in another pl^ce has these words upon the Fourth Commandment,
Parentum nomine, qui naturales luns Magistraus, etiam alios Rectores par est
iutelligi* quorum authoritas Soci^tatem humanam continet: And if Parents be
natural Magistrates, Children must needs he Born Natural Subjects. So that, not
only Adam, but the succeeding Patriarchs had, by Right of Fatherhood, Regal
Authority over their Children, as may (...) by diverse Testimonies out of
Scr^pture, and therefore at is very reasonable that all Fathers should have a
Power over the Lives of their Children, since it is to them that they owe their
Life, Being and Education; and I think that even the Power which God himself
exercises over Mankind, is by Right of Fatherhood.


F. Before you come to Scripture, give me leave, in the first place to examine
your first Argument, which you deduced from the Law of Nature or Reason: For I
doubt, if you please better to consider of it, you will and that so light and
Transitory an* Action, as that of Generation, cannon give any Man an absolute
Property and Dominion over the Person and ^^fe of those whom he Begets; since
sew Men do principally intend the giving of a Being to another, so much as they
do their own pleasure, in that Action; nor do we owe our Lives (properly
speaking) to our Parents, but to God, who is the true and original Cause of our
Being, though it is true, he makes use of our Parents as Physical, though not
as Moral Means, or Instruments for that end; since it does not lie in their
power to hinder their Generating of Children, if they perform the Acts
necessary thereunto; so that both the antecedent and the consequent are
altogether false, viz. That Parents give their Children, Life and Being, and
that therefore they have and absolute power over their Lives and Persons; which
if it were true, would give the Mother an equal Title to the Lives of the
Children, as the Father, seeing they owe their Lives as much to the one as the
other: Which power in the Mother, I am sure you will not admit of. But as for
what you say concerning the power of Fathers, arising from Education, though I
confess that is a much better Title than the other: Yet does it not follow,
that, because by reason of my Parents care of me before I was able to help my
self, I owe my preservation and well being to them; that therefore they are to
be perpetual and absolule Lords over my Person and Life: Since by thus breeding
me up, they only performed that Duty, and Trust which God had laid upon them,
for the good and preservation of Manking, and which they could not without
committing a Sin, either refuse or decline, and therefore their Authority or
Power over my Person, being only for my well-being, can extend no farther tan
whilst I am not of years of discretion to understand the true means of my own
good and preservation: And though I grant that I am bound in gratitude to
return this Care and Kindness by all Acts of Duty and Piety toward them, as
long I live; yet does it not therefore follow, thar they are Masters of my
Life, and of all that I have; since this were to take away more than they
themselves ever gave* and though I should grant you that even the Power which
God himself exercises over Mankind is by Right of Fatherhood; yet this
Fatherhood is such, T. T. G. c. 5. p. 69.
as utterly excludes all pretense of Title in Earthly Parents; for he is our
King, because he is indeed maker of us all, which no Natural Parents can
pretend to be of their Children: but if you please more closely to consider
your own Argument, you will find that he will quite destroy your Hypothesis.
For if all Fathers have an absolute power over their Children, by Generations,
then Adam could only have power over his own Children which he begat, and none
at all over his Grandchildren, since their Fathers by this Argument of
Generation ought to have had the same power over their Children, which Adam had
over them, for the same reason: So that this Monarchical Power of Adam as a
Father could extend no farther than one Generation


M. I shall not further urge this Argument of Generation, since I see you are
not satisfied with it; but this much I think I can clearly prove from
Scripture, that Adam was Lord over the Persons and Lives of his Wife and
Children, by virtue of that command which God gave Eve, Genesis 3. v. 16. Unto the
Woman he said, I will greatly mutilply thy sorrow and thy Conception; In sorrow
thou shall bring forth Children, and thy desire shall be to thy Husband, and he
shall rule over thee. From which words it appears that Adam had not only an
absolute Power granted him by God over his Wife, but all the posterity that
should be born of her. For in the first place it here appears that Eve was to
yield an absolute subjection to her Husband; who was to rule over her as her
Lord, from these Words, and thy desire shall be [subject] to thy Husband, (as
it is better expressed in the Margin) and he shall rule over thee. And if his
Wife was thus to be subject to him, B. P. P. 21.
then likewise by a party of reason all her Children were to be so too: it
being a maxim in the Law of Nature, as well as in the Civil Law, that Partus
sequitur ventrem: so that if Eve was to be absolutely subject to Adam, the
Issue by her must be so too, as in the case of a Master of a she Slave, not
only the person of the Woman, but all that are begotten of her either by her
master or any other man, are likewise his servants, otherwise the Children
would be in a better condition than their Mother, for Adam having no Superior
but God, both his Wife and Children must have been a like subject to him. There
is likewise another rule in the Civil Law, Ib. 32.
which is a voice of Nature too, quicquid ex me, and uxore mea nascitur, in
potestate mea est, and tho this is true in some sense in all Fathers
whatsoever; yet it was so in a more superlative degree, where the Father had no
Superior over him but God; as Adam had not; Ib. 20, 21.
and farther it seems apparent to me from the very method that God used in
Creating Mankind that Adam's Wife and Children should be subject to him: for if
Adam and Eve had been Created at once, it could not have been known which of
these two had the best right to command, and which was to obey. For Adam's
strength or wit alone, would not have given him any Authority over her, and it
might be that Eve was as strong and as wise as he, or at least she mi^ht have
thought her self so, and if these two had differed and fought, naught but the
event could have declared which of them should have been Master.

So when they had Children born between them, the Children could have told as
little which of the Parents they should have obeyed, in case they had differed
in their commands: so that it had been impossible this way that any Government
could have been in the World. But when God Created only one Man, Ib. 22.
and out of him one Woman was made, sure he had some great design in this, for
no other Creature was thus made at twice but Man. 24. 1 Timothy 2.12, 13
Now St. Paul shows a reason for Gods acting thus, when he says, the Woman
should not Teach, nor usurp Authority over the Man, etc. And mark the reason;
for Adam was Created and then Eve. So that in the Apostles Judgment this was
one main cause why Adam should be Superior to his Wife, and all other Husbands
to their Wives; 25.
and in the Corinthians from the History of the Creation the same Apostle
deduces two other Reasons, 1 Cor. 11.8, 9.
for the Superiority of the Man over the Woman. For (says he) the Man is not of
the Woman, but the Woman of the Man; (that is, Eve was formed out of Adam)
neither was the Man Created for the Woman, but the Woman for the Man: So that
you see here is Adam stated in a degree Superiority over his Wife before the
Fall: and immediately after it, God again renewed Adam's Title, 26.
when he told Eve (as I have but now mentioned) thy desire shall be subject to
thy Husband, and he shall rule ever thee; now I so far agree with what you at
first laid down; that if the fall had not disordered her faculties, and
rendered her apt and prone to disobey her Husband, this command need not have
been given her, but she would have known her duty from the order and end of the
Creation, without this explicit positive Command.


F. You have Sir, taken a great deal of pains to prove that which I do not at
all deny, that as well before as after the Fall, Adam (and consequently all
other Husbands and Fathers) ought to be Superior to their Wives and ^hildren,
and likewise Govern and Command them in all things relating to their own good
and that of the Family, as long as they continue Members of it: nay, that after
Children are separated from their Fathers Family, they still owe their Parents
all the gratitude, duty, and respect imaginable; but yet I deny that this power
which Adam had over Eve, and his Issue by her, and all other Husbands have over
their Wives and Children, is a regal despotical power, or any more than
Conjugal in respect of his Wife, and Paternal in respect of the Children, nor
is that filial reverence: and obedience which Children yield their Fathers, the
same with that respect and duty which a Wife owes her Husband, or the same with
that servile subjection which slaves owe their Lord and Master; neither is the
duty of a Wife of the same kind with that which Sons pay their Fathers, or
Slaves their Lords; nor did Sarah when she called Abraham Lord (who was then
Master of a separate Family, and so subject to none) ever suppose that her
Husband had the same Authority over her as he had over Hagar her Bondwoman, to
sell her, or turn her out of doors at his pleasure: but to make it more
apparent to you, that this power granted to Adam over Eve, was not regal nor
despotical, but only conjugal, and for the well ordering of the Family, where
some one must command in chief, and the rest obey to avoid confusion, will
appear, first, If you consider that this Subjection of Eve to Adam was not
enjoined till after the Fall, and is part of Gods Judgments denounced against
Her, for tempting Her Husband to eat the forbidden Fruit, and certainly
included somewhat more than that Superiority which he had over her by his
Creation, or else God should not have made it any part of the Judgment
denounced upon her. If this submission she owed to her Husband before the Fall,
had been of the same Nature with that Subjection she was to be under after it;
which yet I take to be neither servile nor absolute, but only a conjugal
Obedience or Submission of her will to his, in all things Relating to the
Government of the Family and the carriage of her self; though I do not deny but
the Husband may sometimes restrain her by force* in case she carries her self
unchastly, or indiscreetly, to the loss of her Reputation, and prejudice of his
Interest, when she will not be directed, or advised by his persua^ion, or
commands, which before the Fall when she was in a state of Innocence there was
no need of; since, (as your self grant) before the Fall she know what was her
duty, and performed it without any force or (...), etc. And therefore that Text
which you have now quoted out of Genesis, thy desire shall be [Subject] to thy
Husband, and he shall rule over thee, is not fairly cited, for as for the
Marginal addition, viz. [ Subject] to thy Husband, it is not warranted from the
H^brew Original or Version of the LXX. The Hebrew having no more than ( thy
desire shall be to thy Husband) which the LXX renders i. e. the conversion or
inclination of the desire; by which some Interpreters understand no more than
the carnal Appetite: so likewise from the words (rule over thee) they likewise
observe that Moses makes use of the same Hebrew word, when he makes mention of
the Sun and Moon ruling the Day and Night, tho they do not do it by any
violence, or corporeal force; so likewise by this ruling of the Husband, is not
to be understood any absolute, despotick power, whereby he has a right to
dispose of the person and actions of his Wife in all things at his pleasure,
but that she may in many cases refuse, nay control his commands, and resist
his actions, in case they prove unlawful or destructive to her self and
Children.

But that this Argument of St. Paul of the Husband's Superiority over his Wife,
was not granted to Adam alone, but equally extends to all Husbands whatsoever,
appears from the very Text it self, or otherwise St Paul had argued very
impertinently of the duty of all Wives; and if so, it will follow that every
one of Adam's Sons as soon as he took a Wife, had the like Authority over her
as Adam had over their Mother; And if over their Wives, then by your Maxims (of
partus sequitur ventrein) and quicquid e^ me and uxore mea nascitur, in
potestate mea est, all the Sons of Adam must have had the same Power over their
Children as their Father had over them: So that the same consequence will still
follow from theses places of Scripture, and also from you Civil Law Maxims,
that either Adam had no Civil, or Despotick Power over his Wife, and Children,
or else, if he had, that every one of his Sons when Married, an separated from
his Fathers Family had the same, and consequently there were as many Princes as
distinct Masters of Families, and then what would become of Adam's Monarchy, I
give you leave to Judge.


M. I must beg your pardon if I am not satisfied with your answer to my last
argument: For I am still of opinion notwithstanding what you have said, that
Eve was to yield an absolute subjection to her Husband, from that place already
cited, That her ( viz. Eve's) desire ( i. e. will) should be subject to her
Husband, etc. To which you answer that this subjection of Eve to Adam, was not
the same which Sons owe their Fathers, or Slaves to their Lords; And that Eve
owed Adam, not a filial, or servile, but a conjugal subjection.

For I would ^ain know the difference in the State of Nature, B. P. P. 27, 28.
between one and the other: For if you please to compare that place of
Genesiis, I but now quoted with that other, where God gives Cain power over
Abel his Younger Brother, you will find them the same in words as also in
sense. For in this God likewise tells Cain, That unto thee, shall his desire be
subject and thou shall rule over him. Genesis 4.7.
And ^ure God could not intend by these words, that Abel should yield a
Conjugal, but a filial subjection to his elder Brother, and these words are not
capable of two senses, but must be understood a like in both places ( i. e.)
That the Desire (which is a Faculty of the Soul, and that the most active too)
was to be subject, and the body, and all the Powers of it, were to be
overruled by him* which is as full and absolute a subjection as can be
expressed in words; and whereas you say that these words were not spoken till
after the Fall, and thence seem to infer, that Eve did not owe Adam so much as
a Conjugal Subjection before that; St. Paul has given you an answer to that
already, which it is needless to repeat, and therefore upon the whole matter I
think your distinction of a Conjugal Subjection different from a Filial or
Servile one, will signify nothing,


F. I doubt not, Sir, but I shall be able to make good this distinction of a
Servile and a Filial Obedience, and in order to it, shall reply to the
consequence you have made, for Eve's absolute subjection to Adam from the like
Expression used by God to Cain, concerning his ruling over his Brother Abel, as
is used here to Eve concerning her Subjection to her Husband; and that because
the Subjection of Abel was absolute, that therefore her Subjection must be so
too. I must crave your pardon if I deny your Assumption; for I think I am able
to prove, that neither Abel, nor any other younger Brother, was, or is obliged,
by virtue of this Text to yield an absolute Obedience to his Elder Brother, in
the state of Nature or that he is therefore his Lord and Master. Nor can I see
any absurdity, but that the same words might be spoken to several Persons, yet
in different senses, which according to the Nature of the Persons to whom they
were spoken might have different Effects. As here these words when spoken to
Eve enjoin a Conjugal Submission of Eve's Will to Adam as her Husband, but when
spoken to Abel they may signify a Fraternal Submission of Abel's Will to
Cain's as the Elder, and perhaps the wiser of the two, but without giving any
absolute or despotick power over either.


M. I cannot be yet satisfied with your Reply; for methinks this is but to play
the Fool, and trifle with God's Word, when he told Cain thy Brother's desire
shall be Subject to thee, that is, ( say you,) Thou shall rule over him only as
far as he thinks sir, or if thou have the knack to wheedle or persuade him: Was
not this a mighty matter for God Almighty to appear to Cain about? An Excellent
and Rational way to appease his Wrath toward his Brother? Whereas God here
plainly enjoyneth a subjection from Abel to his Elder Brother, and if so, by
Virtue of the same words, a like Subjection of Eve to Adam, and then it will
likewise follow, that as the streams are of the same Nature with the Fountain,
the Subjection of all her Posterity will likewise be included in hers, which I
have sufficiently proved already, had you not mistaken the true sense of those
two Maxim^ I laid down. For first, if Partus sequitur vontrem* and the Mother
be a Subject, as Eve was, all her Posterity must be so to all Generations. And
if Quicquid ex me and uxore mea nascitur in potestate mea est be true, then
Adam's Grandchildren, and Great-Grand-Children, deriving themselves from him
and Eve, must be likewise under Adam's power. Nor ca^ I see how his Sons, or
Grandchildren, by setting up separate Families, could ever discharge
themselves from this absolute Subjection to Adam, since they could never have
quitted his Family without his consent; and when they did quit it, unless he
pleased to manumit them, they, their Wives and Children, were still as much
Subject as they were before. Since I do not see if they were once Subjects to
him, how any thing but his express will, and consent could ever discharge them
from it. Nor was that Authority (which every one of these Sons of Adam might
Exercise over their Wives and Children, though they were not freed from the
power of their Father) any more inconsistent with that Subjection and Obedience
they owed him, as their Prince, than in an absolute Monarchy, the power of
Fathers, and Husbands, over their Wives and Children, as to the things relating
to the well-ordering and governing their Families, is inconsistent with that
supreme predominant power which the Monarch has over the Father himself, and
all his Family, or than the power of a Master of a Family, in the Isle of
Barbados, over his Slaves that are Married, and have Children, is inconsistent
with that Marital and Paternal power which such a Slave may exercise over his
Wife and Children within his own Family, though still subordinate to the will
of the Master, who may forbid any such Slaves, or their Children to Marry, but
where he has a mind they should and may likewise hinder them, from correcting
or putting to Death their Wives and Children without his consent. Though such
Subjects in an absolute Monarchy, or Slaves in a Plantation cannot have or
enjoy any Property in Land or Goods but at the Monarchs, or Masters will* And
so likewise at first none of these Sons of Adam, though they set up distinct
Families from their Fathers, could enjoy or enclose any part of the Earth
without his Grant or Assignment to whom the whole was given by God before.

It seems likewise to be a great mistake, when you at first affirmed that all
Civil Government was Ordained by God, for the benefit and advantage of the
Subjects, rather than the Governors. Whereas from the first and most Natural
Government it appears that Children who were the Subjects were Ordained as much
for the benefit and help of their Parents, who were the first Monarchs, as
their Parents for them. From all which we may draw these Conclusions: F. A. M.
M. p. 244.
First, that from Genesis 3. v. 6. already Cited, we have the Original Charter of
Government, and the Fountain of all Civil Power derived from Adam as the Father
of all Mankind. So that not only the Constitution of power in general, but the
special limitation of it to one kind, (viz.) Monarchy, and the determination of
it, to the individual person of Adam, are all Ordinances of God. Neither had
Eve or her Children any Right to limit Adam'^ Power, or join themselves with
him in the Government. Now if this Supreme Power was settled, and sounded by God
himself in Fatherhood, how is it possible for the people to have any Right to
alter, or dispose of it otherwise; it being God's Ordinance that this
Supremacy* should be unlimited in Adam, and as large as any Acts of his Will.
So that he was not only a Father, but a King and absolute Lord over his Family;
a Son, a Subject, and a Servant, or Slave, being one and the same thing at
first, the Father having power to dispose of or sell his Children or Servants
at his pleasure; F. P. O. A.
and though perhaps he might deal too severely or cruelly in so doing, yet
there was none above him, except God, in the state of Nature, who could call
him to an account, much less resist or punish him for so doing*


F. You have, Sir, made a very long Speech upon the Monarchical power of Adam,
which you have made of so large an Extent, that this imaginary Kingship will
swallow up all the other more dear and tender Relations both of a Husband, and
of a Father* So that were I not satisfied you were a very good natured Man, and
spoke more the sense of others than from your own Natural Inclinations, I
should be apt to believe that if you had sufficient Power you would prove as
great a Tyrant over your Wife, Children, and all that should be under your
Command; as such Arbitrary Tenets would give you leave; but since I hope your
Error lies rather in your Understanding, than in your Nature^ I shall make
bold to show you the mistakes you have committed in those Principles you here
lay down. I might first begin with the place of Scripture you farther insist
upon; for Eve's absolute Subjection to Adam from the like Expression used by
God to Cain concerning his ruling over his Brother Abel, as is used here to
Eve, and though you are pleased to think my exposition of this place so
ridiculous; yet I doubt not but I be able to prove, when I come to speak of
this pretended Divine Author of Elder Brothers over this younger, that this
place cannot be understood in any such sense, according to the best
Interpretation that both the reason of the Subject, and the sense the best
Commentators put upon it can allow* but I shall defer this till we come to
discourse concerning the successors of Adam in this Monarchical Power you
suppose. And therefore I shall only at present pursue that absolute Power,
which you suppose Adam to have had, not only over Eve, but all her descendants.
So that your Argument of Eve's, and consequently all her Childrens, absolute
Subjection to Adam, depends upon a very false supposition. For if the
Subjection of Eve to Adam, and of all Wives to their Husbands is not servile or
absolute, neither can that of the Children be so, since according to your own
simile, if the streams are of the same nature of the Fountain, they can never
rise higher than it, and though I grant, Adam might in some cases have put his
Wife or Children to death, for any enormous crime against the Law of Nature,
yet I allow him that power, not as a Husband or Father, but only as a Lord or
Master of a separate Family, who having no Superior in the state of Nature, I
grant it is endued by God with this Prerogative, for the good of his Family,
and preservation of Mankind, lest such horrid crimes, so much to its prejudice
should pass unpunisht. But that the Husband or Father does not act thus in
either of these two capacities, I can easily prove.

First, Because the Scripture tells us the Husband and Wife are one Flesh, Genesis
2.24. Ephesians. 5.29, 30.
and that no man ever yet hated his own Flesh* so that it is impossible for a
Husband to put his Wife to death, till by the greatness of her Crimes, she
becomes no longer worthy of that tender affection he ought to bear her. Then as
to the Father, he, as a Father, ought not to desire to put his Son to death,
whose being he has been the cause of, and who is principally made out of his
own substance, and on whom he has bestowed nourishment and education for so
many Years, until he finds that instead of a Son he proves an Enemy to his
Family, or has so laid wait against his Life, that as long as he lives he
cannot be safe; or else commits some of those heinous crimes which by the Laws
of God and Nature do justly deserve no less punishment than Death, in short
when he ceases any longer to deserve the name of a Son.

Yet this Authority holds no longer than whilst the Son remains part of his
Fathers Family, and so Subject to his Power, and this I take to be the reason
why we do not read, that Adam took any notice of Cains's murdering his Brother,
because he was before freed from his Power, by setting up another Family, which
certainly had been Adam's duty to have done, had he been then under his
jurisdiction, Murder being as great a crime before the Flood as after, Genesis 9.5.
though the punishment of in by Death were not positively enjoined by God till
then: But I shall prove this point more particularly by and by, as also, that
Adam's Children might enjoy, or enclose some part of the Earth without any
grant or assent from Adam, to whom you suppose (though without any proof as yet)
that the whole Earth was given by God.

To conclude, I doubt you mistook me when you say, I at first affirmed that all
Civil Government was ordained by God, for the benefit or advantage of the the
Subjects, rather than that of the Governors, and therefore you undertake to
show me, that in the first and most natural Government, viz. that of a Family,
Children who are subjects in the state of Nature, are ordained as much for the
benefit, and help of their Parents, who are their Princes or Masters, as their
Parents for them; in which assertion you fall in to more than on mistake, for I
do not assert that in Civil Government the benefit or advantage of the Subject,
is only to be considered; For I shall easily grant that Princes may very well
challenge a very great share in the honor and other advantages that may be
reapt by their Government; and yet for all that when the happiness and
preservation of the Subjects, is incompatible with that of the Prince, the
former is to be preferred, and Bishop Sanderson is of this opinion; when he
tells us in his Lecture De oblg. consc. Prael. 5.. 19.
De Iuramento; That the end of Civil Government, and the obedience that is due
to it, is the safety and tranquillity of humane society, and therefore the end
is certainly to be preferred before the means, when they cannot both consist
together; but this is no argument for the preferring the benefit or advantages
of Parents, before that of their Children, since Paternal Government is not
Civil Government; nor are Fathers absolute Princes or Masters over their
Children, as you suppose, and yet I think I may safely affirm, that even in
this Paternal Government, though it be granted that Children are ordained for the
benefit, or help of their Parents, yet when their happiness and preservation is
inconsistent with that of their Children, it may be a great doubt which is to
be preferred, since Gods chief intention in Parents, was for the Preservation
and Propagation of Mankind; and therefore I cannot see how it could ever be any
part of the Paternal Power, for a Father to make his Child a Slave, or to sell
him to others at his pleasure as you suppose: This being no part or end of the
design or duty of a Father.

And whereas you lay to my charge my mistaking the true sense of those Civil
Law Maxims you have quoted; I think I can easily prove that the mi^^ake lies on
your side, and that you have misapplied them, to make them serve your purpose:
For as to your first Maxim, Partus sequitur Ventrem, from which you infer, that
the Child ought to be of the same condition with the Mother, this rule in your
Civil Law relates only to Bastards, and not Legitimate Children, who follow the
condition of the Father according to your Digest: Dig. 1. Tit. 6. L. 16.
Qui ex uxore mea nascitur filius mariti est habendus, so likewise in your
Code, Cod. Tit. 19. L. 14.
Cum legitimae nuptiae factae sunt, patrem liberi sequuntur, vulgo quaesitus
matrem sequitur. Nor is your second Maxim more true; Dig. Tit. 5. L. 19:
for though I grant according to your Roman Law, the Father might have absolute
power over his Wife and Children: yet I cannot see how this word and nascitur,
can be extended beyond those that are born of a man and his Wife, and therefore
can never concern Grandchildren, much less any more remote Descendants, and
this very Law, that a Son or Daughter might be killed by a Father, seemed so
cruel and odious, even to the Ancient Romans themselves, that neither the Law
of the Twelve Tables, nor the Julian Law of Adulteries, which were provided
against Fathers, Sons, and Daughters, ever extended it to the Grandfather,
Grandson, or Granddaughter by Interpretation; or argument a cas^^ consimili.
Nor do these words, in Potestate mea est, prove more than that all Children are
born under the Power of their Parents, though whether they shall always continue
so as long as they live; is not to be proved from this Maxim; nor if it were,
does that make it a Law of Nature. For I must needs observe this, of diverse of
you Civilians, that what ever Maxim you find in your Civil Law Books, that will
make for your Notions, you presently adopt them for Laws of Nature, without
ever enquiring by the strict Rules of Reason, and the Good of Mankind, (by
which alone any Law of Nature is to be tried) whether they are so or no.

I shall not trouble my self to confute those false Conclusions you have
brought from those weak Promises; for if I have destroyed your Foundation, I
think your Superstructure cannot stand; and therefore you must pardon me, if I
cannot find this Original Charter of Government, and of all Civil Power, to be
derived from Adam by any Argument that yet you have brought either from
Scripture, or Reason; only give me leave to observe thus much, upon what you
have said, That if not only the Constitution of Civil Power in general, but the
special Limitation of it to one kind, ( viz.) Monarchy, be the Ordinance of
God, I cannot see how any other Government but that can be lawfully set up, or
obeyed by Men, since no Government can challenge this Privilege against Divine
Institution.


M. Since this Hypothesis does not please you, I shall be glad if you can show
me any better Original, either of Adam's Paternal Power, B. P. P. 36.
or of Civil Government, than this, that God gave Adam over Eve, who indeed was
as at the first Subject, so the Representative of all that followed, and it
reaches not only to all her Daughters in relation to their Husbands, but to all
of them in relation to their Fathers, and to her Sons too, in relation to both
their Father, and their Eldest Brother after his Decease, if no body Superior
to both of them, and him interposed, and diverted, or rather overruled it.

For (1.) If a Priority of Being gave Adam a power over his Wife, it gave him
much more so over his Children.

(2.) If God's taking Eve out of Adam, the forming her of one of his Ribs
without his concurrence, did yet make her his Inferior, his Children were much
more so, which were derived from him, and by his Act.

(3.) If she were formed for him, not he for her; and that was another reason;
this extended to his Children too, who were begotten for the comfort and
assistance of both him, and her.

(4.) When God put Eve under the Subjection of her Husband after the Fall, her
Children must needs be so too, if they were not excepted, but we Read of no
exception.

(5.) Is it not an Eternal Law of Nature, that all Children should be subject
to their Parents? And did not this Law spread it self over the Face of all the
Earth, as Mankind increased?

And whereas you would limit this Power of Parents over their Children, Ibid.
both in its Extent and Duration, this is purely owing to the Civil Laws of
Nations, and not to the Laws of Nature, and is different in different places;
some having restrained the Power of Parents more* and some less. But God gave
the Parents a Power of Life and Death over their own Children, amongst his own
People the Jews, and that not limited in Duration neither, for the Fathers
Power over his Son was not determined but by his Death, though they could not
execute that Power, but in the presence of a Magistrate. And I am also sure
that in all the Histories and Relations I have met with, amongst civilized
Nations (where it is not otherwise ordered by the Civil Laws of the Country)
all Husbands, and Fathers have Power of Life and Death over their Wives, and
Children, and so it is at this day amongst many Eastern Nations, and was
anciently amongst the Romans, Gauls, and Persians, etc. Which power I take not
to have been given, or conferred on them, but rather left to them by the Civil
Laws of their Country in the same state, as it was established by the Law of
Nature, or rather Nations. Now if such Husbands and Fathers anciently had, and
still have a power of Life and Death in diverse Countries over their Wives and
Children, I desire to know what higher power they could enjoy, since he that
has power over a Man's Life, which is of the highest concern to him, may
certainly command him in all things else?

But as for your last Scruple that you cannot see, if Monarchy be of Divine
Institution, how any Government but that can be lawfully set up or obeyed by
Men, I think it may be a satisfactory Answer, if I tell you, that if those who
are Born under a Monarchy can justify the Form they live under to be God's
Ordinance, F. A. MM. p. 266.
they are not bound to forbear their own Justification, because others cannot
do the like for the Forms they live under; let others look to the defense of
their own Government: If it cannot be proved, or showed that any other Form of
Government had ever any Lawful beginning, but was brought in, or erected by
Rebellion, must therefore the Lawful and Just Obedience to Monarchy be denied
to be the Ordinance of God?


F. I hope before I have done, to give you a clearer Original from the Law of
Nature, as well of Paternal Authority, as Civil Government, without recurring
to Divine Revelation which (as I said before) would oblige none but Jews, and
Christians, or Mahometans, whose Law is a mixture of both the other. In the
mean time give me leave to tell you, that Eve's being the Representative of all
Wives, did not put either her self or her Daughters into any absolute
Subjection either to Adam, or their Husbands; if it did, then could not this
Subjection be likewise owing either to Adam as the Patriarch, or Grandfather of
the Family, or to his Eldest Son after his Decease, since this would make every
Wife in the state of Nature to have had two absolute Lords, her Husband, and
her Husband's Father, which is contrary to our Savior's Rule, That no man can
serve two Masters, that is, in the same kind of Service: And therefore it
plainly makes out my distinction, that there is a great deal of difference
between a Conjugal Submission of a Wife to her Husband, and a Servile
Subjection of a Servant to his Lord, as also of that Obedience, or Duty, which
a Subject owes his Sovereign, since by your own Hypothesis it necessarily
follows that either Cain's Wife (for Example) was not to be subject to her
Husband, or else must be free from all Subjection to her Father Adam: But as
for any Submission to Cain, as Elder Brother after Adam's Decease, I desire to
be excused meddling with it till we have dispatched the Question in hand.

I come now to those fresh Considerations you bring for this Monarchical power
of Adam; for indeed I cannot call them new Arguments, because most of them have
been answered already. The first Consideration is from the Priority of the
Being which you suppose gave Adam a Power over his Wife, and consequently over
his Children; but I think his Priority of Being could give him no such Power at
all over her, and consequently not over them, for I desire to know whether if
God had been pleased to have Created, the same day that Eve was made, twenty
single Men, and their Wives, that therefore Adam must have been from his being
first Created, Monarch over them all, unless God had particularly commanded it?

I grant indeed that from God's Creating Eve out of Adam, it did render her
inferior to him, and also from God's express command, that she was to be
subject to him in all Conjugal Duties, yet did neither of these render her, or
her Children absolute of perpetual Subjects, and Slaves to Adam. And that their
being derived from him, or by his Act does not at all alter the Case, I have
already proved.

As for the third, that if she wene formed for him, and not he for her, that
this must be another reason which must extend to his Children too: Here the
Assumption is not only false, but the Consequence too: For she was not only
formed for him, but that they might be a mutual help to each other, and
therefore the Scripture tell us, A Man shall leave his Father and his Mother,
Genesis 2.24.
and shall cleave unto hit Wife, and they two shall be one Flesh; which words
(in my Opinion) are very far from proving any such absolute Subjection; for no
Man can ever tyrannize over his own Flesh; and if such an absolute Subjection
had been intended, from Eve to Adam, it had been more consonant to reason, for
the Scripture to have enjoined her to have left her Father, and Mother, to
cleave to her Husband. Whereas indeed there was no more meant by this Text,
than that when a Man marries, he may freely quit his Fathers Family, and
joining himself to his Wife, may set up another of his own. But as for the
Children that were begotten between them, though I grant they might be intended
both for the comfort, and assistance of him, and her, yet I have already proved
that the Parents are more chiefly intended for their Childrens Propagation, and
Preservation, than the Children are for their Interest and Happyness.

Your fouth consideration is only a supposition of the question which is yet to
be proved, that Eve was under an absolute subjection to Adam after the Fall, I
have already proved this supposition not to be true, and therefore the
consequence, as to the Children is false likewise.

Your fifth, is rather an interrogation than an Argument, whether Children
ought not to be, and have not always, been subject to their Parents all over
the World? In answer to which I grant that it is true, that they have ever been
so, though not in your sense. For I hold this subjection neither to be servile,
or absolute, nor yet perpetual, as long as they live: but in reply to this
limitation of the Power of Parents over their Children both in its extent and
duration, you tell me this is purely owing to the Civil Laws of Nations, and
not to the Laws of Nature, and for a proof of this you produce Gods own people
the Jews, for an example that the power of the Father over his Son, was not
determined but by his Death. But your self confesses that he could not exercise
this Power of Life and Death, but in the presence of the Magistrate; the
circumstances of which if they be considered, will rather make against you; for
first the Father could not have this rebellio^s* Son put to Death, till he had
accused him before the Elders of the City, that, is the Judges who were
established in every Precinct, who upon a solemn hearing, were to sentence such
a rebellious Son to be stoned to Death by all the People of the City: where you
may observe that the Father had no power to put him to Death himself, and
therefore acted in this case as an accuser or a witness, not as a Judge. But if
you will believe Maimonides, one of the most Learned of the Jewish Rabbis, he
will tell you that by the Municipal Law of the Jews, Tract. Memarim.
this power of the Father did scarce extend beyond the thirteenth year of the
Son's Age, after which the Son was reckoned Adult, and Emancipated from his
Fathers Powers, and could not after that incur this punishment of a Stubborn
and Rebellious Son; and a Father who did but strike his Son after he was Adult,
incurred Excommunication, for that he offended against the Law. And though I
grant that the Nations you mention did exercise a Power of Life and Death over
their Wives, and Children, yet will not the Practice of some particular
Nations, though never so much civilized, amount to a proof of a Law of Nature,
which is only to be made out from evident Rules of Right Reason, and the great
end of this Law, the common good of Mankind; and especially when against the
Examples of those Nations which you produce, I can likewise set those of many
more Nations, where this Custum was not allowed, after once Civil Government
was established. And as for the Romans themselves, amongst whom the greatest
Examples of this kind are to be found, they will not all of them amount to
above three, or four, in six or seven hundred years, and then, though there might
be very good cause for it, yet the People of Rome never so much esteemed or
loved such Fathers after they had put their Sons to Death, as they did before,
but counted them too severe and cruel for so doing. De Clem.
And you read in Valerius Maximus, and Seneca, that they killed Erixiin a Roman
Gentleman, for whipping his Son to Death like a Slave; so much did they abhor
all such Cruelty of Parents toward their Children; and afterward, when by the
General Corruption of Manners amongst the Romans, Fathers grew more cruel to
their Children, and often put them to Death without cause. Those of your
Faculty, suppose that some of the Roman Emperous (though it is uncertain who)
took away this Power from Fathers, and made it (as it is now among us) Murder,
for a Father to put his Son to Death, though others, since there are no
particular Edicts to be found concerning this matter, do suppose this Law to be
changed by degrees, and to be left off by common consent of the Romans
themselves for it seems dangerous to grant to a private person the cognizance
of any crime, which might belong to public Authority; and they thought it
better to strengthen both the Paternal and Marital Power by other Laws than
putting to Death. And therefore Simplecius upon Epictetus his Enchiridion,
says, that the Romans allowed Fathers this Power, because they thought they
might very well trust their Natural Affection to their Children, for the
exercise of that Power of selling them or putting them to Death, which 'twas
supposed they would rarely use, unless compelled by extreme necessity or
unpardonable crimes; and therefore if a Father would put his Son to death, he
was to do it with his own hands, that he might suffer as well as his Son, but
when this render affection ^oo failed, it was no wonder that the Roman Emperors
did not think it for the common good of their People, to trust Fathers with
this Power any longer, which they had hitherto exercised, not so properly by
right of Fatherhood, as that of the Master of a Family, who governed his
Servants and his Sons by a like Authority.

To conclude, I cannot but observe, how slyly* you wave my objection against
the Divine Institution of Monarchy, for though you seem loath expressly to condemn
all other Governments as unlawful, yet the consequence will be the same upon
your principles: For if it be a good argument which some make use of, for the
Government of the Church by Bishops, because that Government being supposed by
them to have been instituted by the Apostles by Divine Precept, therefore that
no other Government but Episcopacy can be lawful, or any true Church, where
that Government is not in use: so the same argument will likewise hold in Civil
Governments, that all others must be unlawful if Monarchy alone were ordained
by God, and that all other forms whatsoever began from Rebellion or the Fancies
of Men.


M. To answer what you have said, in the first place I cannot so slightly pass
over this argument of the Law of Nations, by which I supposed the Power of
Fathers over the Persons of their Children is sufficiently established, and
from whence also it appears that among the Jews as well as Romans, the Children
were looked upon as part of the substance of their Father, and consequently that
they had a perpetual right in their Persons, as long as they lived, that the
Romans had the power of selling their Children three times, your self do not
deny; that the Jews also had it in use among them appears, first by the story
of the poor Woman, the Widow of one of the Sons of the Prophets, who
complained to Elisha, in the second of Kings, Chap. 4.1.
telling him that her Husband is dead, and the Creditor is come to take her two
Sons to be Bondmen. And so likewise in the New Testament, our Savior in St.
Matthew, supposes it as a thing commonly practiced in those parts of the World
where he lived. For in the Parable of the King, who would take account of his
Servants, Matthew. 18.24, 25.
amongst whom one owed him Ten thousand Talents: But for as much as he had
nothing to pay, his Lord commanded him to be sold, and his Wife, and Children,
and all that he had, and payment to be made. Which was founded upon that Law
amongst the Jews, that Fathers might sell their Children for Bond-servants,
Verse 5.
until the year of Iubilee* as appears by Nehemiah, Chap. 5. where he relates
the Complaint of those poor Jews, who had been forced for want to bring their
Sons and their Daughters into Bondage: Neither was it in their power to redeem
them, for other Men had their Lands, and their Vineyards.

And amongst the Romans, this Power of selling their Children continued till it
was forbidden by the Emperor Justinian. And as for the Grecians, Plutarch in
his Life of Solon relates, that till his time it was lawful amongst the
Athenians, for Fathers to sell their Children to pay their own Debts: And I
suppose it was upon this account, that Cymon the Son of the great General
Miltiades, was kept in Prison by the Athenians, till he had paid the Fine of
ten Thousand Talents, which his Father died indebted to the Commonwealth. And
Philostratus in his Life of Apollonius Thyanaus relates, that it was common
amongst the Phrygians to sell their own Sons: And to come to more Modern Times,
a Son amongst the Muscovites* may by sold four times, but after the fourth Sale
the Eather has no longer a Right in him, as the Baron of Heber^lein tells us
in his Relation of Muscovy; and it is not only in use amongst them, but also
amongst the Tartars, East-Indians, Chinese, and the People of Japan, not only
to sell their Children themselves, but also, that they are liable to be sold by
the Prince, or his Officers, for their Fathers Debts, or Offenses: So that you
see here is the Consent of most of the Civilized Nations in the World, who
sure, in this, follow the Dictates of Nature, and Reason, in the exercise of a
full, and absolute Propriety, and Dominion in, and over the Persons of their
Children; so that if it be a received Custom, or Law amongst most Nations, it
is also from Reason too, since the Law of Nations is only that which receives
its obligation from the Consent of many Nations, as Grotius well observes: And
Aristotle lays it down as one of the strongest proofs, when all men agree in
any thing: And Cicero tells us, That the Consent of most Nations is to be
looked upon as a Law of Nature; and therefore these Customs are to be esteemed
as obligatory amongst all Civilized Nations, where the Municipal Laws of those
Countries have not restrained or altered this Natural Power, and Interest,
which Fathers had originally over the Persons of their Children.

But as for what you say, that according to my Principles no other Government
can be Lawful besides Monarchy, I shall give you the same Answer, that some of
the most Moderate of our Divines have given to those, who would make the like
Objection against us of the Church of England, tha^ believe Episcopacy to be
Iure Divine; viz. That God may for the necessity of some Ecclesiastical Order
and Government in a Church, allow that Form of Government to be Lawful, which
himself never Instituted; Nay, which perhaps was unlawful to have been set up
in the Church at all; and so likewise in Civil Governments, I will not deny,
that those Forms may be lawfully obeyed as the Ordinance of God which he never
Institu^ed, but have wholly proceeded from the Rebellions, or Inventions of Men.


F. I must confess, Sir, I cannot see how any Law of Nations can be supposed to
lay any Obligation upon Mankind different from the Law of Nature, and Reason,
or the revealed Law of God in Scripture. And, though I confess there is some
division amongst Learned Men about this matter; yet I think it is far more
rational to suppose* that there are but two Law that can be Rules of Humane
Actions, the Natural Law, and the Divine. And of this Opinion is the Learned
Grotius himself in the place you but now cited, where he says, he added the
words, many Nations, because there can scarce be found any Natural Law, which
is also wont to be called the Law of Nations, that is common to all Nations:
Yea, that is often looked upon as a Law of Nations in one Country, which is not
so any where else; as (says he) we shall show in its due place, concerning
Captivity, and Postluminium.

And for a farther confirmation of this, I will make bold to read to you in
English some part of what the Excellent Pu^endof has written upon this Subject
in his Learned Work De Jure Naturae and Gentium, S. 23.
Lib. 2. Cap. 3. which you may here read with me.

The Law of Nature and the Law of Nations is accounted by many one and the
same, which only differ by an extrinsick denomination. And form hence, Hobbs,
De Cive, C. 14. 4. Divides the Law of Nature into the Natural Law of Men, and
the Natural Law of Common Wealths, which is commonly called Jus Gentium: And
then adds that the Precepts of both are the same; but because Commonwealths,
when once instituted do put on the personal properties of Men, that Law which
speaking of the duty of particular men, we call Natural, being applied to all
Commonwealths or Nations, is called Jus Gentium* to which opinion we do
likewise subscribe; neither do we think there can be any other voluntary or
positive Law of Nations, which can have the power of a Law properly so called,
and which may oblige all Nations as proceeding from a Superior. But most of
those things which amongst the Roman Civil Lawyers, and others are referred to
the Law of Nations, as suppose about the manner, of acquiring of Contracts, and
the like, do either belong to the Law of Nature, or else to the Civil Laws of
particular Nations, which agree together, for the most part, in these things:
yet from which n^ new, or distinct sort of Law is Rightly constituted, because
those Laws are common to Nations not from any Agreement or Mutual Obligation,
but in that they do by accident agree from the peculiar Will of the Lawgivers
in each particular Commonwealth; from whence the same things may be changed by
one People or Nation, without consulting the rest, and often times are found to
be so changed.

And of this he here gives us several Examples of different customs amongst
Nations in making War upon each other, according to diverse forms, or tacit
Agreements, whereby War may be managed with a little Cruelty as may be: but
thus he proceeds;

These Customs although they may seem to contain some Obligation, as arising from
this sort of Tacit agreement amongst Nations, yet if any Prince shall wage a
lawful War, or neglect them, or should do quite contrary to them, he would not
be guilty of any sin against the Law of Nature; but only of a piece of
Roughness or Incivility, that he did not make War according to those Rules of
Honor which are used among them, by whom War is looked upon as a liberal Art.
[And a little farther proceeds thus.]

Amongst the principal Heads of the voluntary Law of Nations, Grotius reckons
the right of Ambassadors, where we also suppose that by the very Law of Nature,
Ambassadors are inviolable even with the Enemy, as long as they appear
Ambassadors, and not Spies, and do not contrive Plots against those to whom,
they are sent, and having shown the necessity of Ambassadors in order to Peace,
he thus goes on; but there are other privileges Attributed to Ambassadors,
especially to those, who reside in a place rather to fish out the Secrets of
another State, than for Peace sake, those privileges depend from the mere
indulgence of that Prince to whom they are sent, and so if it seems good to him
may be denied them, without the violation of any Right, if he will likewise
suffer that his own Ambassadors should be Treated in a like manner.


M. I see whether this Author tends, but do not understand what use you ^an
make of it to your purpose.


F. But I will quickly show you if you please to have a little Patience, and
therefore to apply what I have now read, to the matter in hand, in the first
place, it is apparent from this Author, that the Law, or Custom of Nations,
has no Obligation as such, but only as it agrees with the Law of Nature, and
the Law of God, and what Laws of Nations, are founded on the Law of Nature, can
only be tried by some rule, which certainly is not to be learned from the
Knowledge of the Customs or Laws of all Nations, since who is able to know them
all? And therefore these Laws must be tried either by the natural light of a
Man's own Conscience, or else by considering whether this or that practice of a
Nation conduces to the Honor or Service of God, or the common good and
happiness of Mankind, and so may be known as well by the unlearned as the
learned. Now I suppose you will not affirm, that this Law of the absolute
Property and Dominion of Fathers in and over their Children, can be discovered
by either of these ways, or that a Man's Conscience will tell him, that it is
his duty to let his Father Kill him or Sell him, or use him like a Brute,
without any contradiction or resistance. And as for the other, I think I have
sufficiently proved that this absolute power which you assert of Fathers over
their Children, does not proceed from that great Law of Nature, viz. the common
good and preservation of Mankind, to which the practice of it may prove very
destructive, which if proved, I think, I may easily answer all that you have
now said about the particular Customs, or Laws of diverse Nations concerning
this Matter, though your Instances were many more than they are.

For in the first place as for those you allege out of the Scripture, they do
(as I said before) only regard the Municipal Laws of the Jews; those of the
Romans touching this matter, did only concern those Commonwealths whilst they
were in being and no other Nations whatsoever, and for this opinion, I have
both Grotius and Pufendrof of my side, for the former in the beginning of the
Chapter last quoted, after having set down the different Powers which Fathers
may exercise over their Children, according to their different Ages: thus
affirms; as you may here see. Whatsoever is beyond these Powers, proceeds, only
from a voluntary Law, which is different in diverse places so by the Law which
God gave the Jews, the Power of the Father over his Son or Daughter, to
dissolve their Vows was not perpetual, but only endured as long as the Children
were parts of their Fathers Family.

And by the same Rule I may add, that Children were not reckoned as part of
their Fathers Goods, and to be sold by him, or seized upon by Creditors for his
Debts any longer, than they continued Members of their Fathers Family, and
consequently were not seized upon as his Sons, but Servants. And I desire you
to show me an Example, where ever among the Jews, the Children after they were
Adult, and parted from their Fathers House, were sold or seized as Slaves for
their Fathers Debts. And as for the Romans, it is plain, they acknowledged
their Patria Potestas to be in use amongst them, neither by the Law of Nature,
or Nations, but only from their own Civil Law, as appears by this Title, almost
at the very beginning of Iustininian's Institutions, (as I suppose you know
better than I) Patria Potestas est Juris Civilis, Just. L. 1. 2. T 9.
and Civium Romanorum propria. The Text follows in these words (as I remember)
Jus Potestatis quod in liberos habemus proprium est Civium Romanorum, nulli
enim alii sunt homines qui talem in liberos habeant Potestat^^, qualem nos
habemus; And therefore they would not permit strangers to exercise it over
their Children within the City of Rome. And if the Power of the Father among
the Jews and Romans was not by the Law of Nature, or Nations, no more could it
be so, though exercised amongst never so many other Nations, since if it were one
of the Laws or Preceps of Nature, it could never have been taken away, or
restrained by any Civil Law without the express Consents of all Fathers. And as
for your Instance of Cymon amongst the Athenians; it makes nothing to this
purpose; since if I take it at the worst, it makes no more, than that the
Athenian Commonwealth dealt very ungratefully, and Tyrannically with Miltiades
and his Son; and it might be that they kept him Prisoner as being Heir to his
Fathers Principality in the Thracian Chersonnese, out of which they supposed he
might pay the Debt; as the King with us does often put an Heir in Prison for
his Fathers Debts, where he has Assets by Descent.

But for all your other Examples, unless they have a reason in Nature to
support them, they will no more prove that by the Law of Nations Fathers should
have a Right of Life and Death, or of selling their Children, than if you
should argue from the Common Custom amongst the Lacedaemonians, the Aborigines
in Italy, the Inhabitants of the Kingdom of Sophiris, as amongst the Indians
mentioned by Qu Curtius, and the Chinese, and the Inhabitants of Formosa at
this day; all which either did, or now do destroy their Children as soon as
they are brought forth, or else in the Womb before they are born, if they please
so to do. And as for some of these Nations you have instanced in, and
particularly the Muscovites, who can ^ell their Children, but four times, it is
apparent it is only a Municipal Law; for if the Property of the Father over the
Sons Persons were by them looked upon as perpetual, he might not only sell him
four times, but forty, if it were possible.

But on the other side, I have against this Custom of your N^tions, the
Examples of diverse altogether as Wise, and Civilized, who did not permit
Fathers to exercise this absolute Power over their Children, and therefore
against your Example of the Jews, I set that of the Egyptians, who did not
Permit Parents to put their Children to Death, nor yet to sell them, unless in
case of great necessity, and when they could not otherwise maintain them, and
then I grant it may be necessary, So likewise against your Roman Law, I set
that of all the Greek Nations, none of whom permitted Fathers to put their
Children to Death, Plutarch in Lycurgo.
except the Spartans, and that was only in one case, and that was only in one
case, and that with the judgment and consent of the eldest Men of the Family,
yet when their new born Infants were so weak or ill shaped as to be thougt not
worth the rearing. So likewise against* your examples of the Ancient Gauls, I
set that of the Germans, a Nation altogether as wise and civilized as the
other, to whom I could likewise add the Ancient Britains, Spaniards, and diverse
others, and to the more Modern examples of the Eastern Nations, where this
custom is permitted of selling or killing their Children; I shall oppose the
Turks and Persians, amongst whom it is forbidden, as also amongst all the
Nations of Europe, who believe Christianity; and if we go over to America, we
shall find that they are there so indulgent to their Children, that no fault
whatsoever, though never so great, shall make them put them to Death. And to let
you see that this is most suitable to Reason, the two greatest Philosophers
amongst the Greeks, Plato and Aristotle, have condemned it; The former in his
Laws, where he expressly forbids it, supposing that in no case whatever, a
Father ought to put off all Piety and Humanity toward his Son, and that a Son
should be rather led by Nature, than driven by force to obey his Father;
especially since his Power is sufficiently established by the Law, and the
appointing of public Judges; and Aristotle in his Morals to Nicomachus, Lib.
8. cap. 12. accuses the Jus Patrium in use among the Persians as Tyrannical,
and Grotius tells you; he makes use of these examples of the Romans and
Persians, only that we might distinguish Civil Rights from natural. VI. P.
Aerodius Rerum Judicatarum L* VI. cap. 17. De emendatione Liberorum.
From whence it appears that the putting of Children to death by Parents, was
looked upon as an odius thing amongst the wisest of the Ancients; and therefore
neither the Lex Regia, nor the Law of the XII. Tables, nor the Julian Law de
Adulteriis (all which left Fathers a Power over the Lives of their Sons and
Daughters) yet would extend this Power by Interpretation to the Grand Father
toward his Grandson or Granddaughter.


M. Yet for all this I think all the wisest and most Civilized Nations were of
my opinion, and it is from them that we ought to take this Law of Nations
rather than the others; and therefore I think the Romans were a great deal
wiser and better People than the Greeks, and the Ancient Gauls, than the
Germans. Nor does your argument against this power of Life and Death in Fathers
by the Law of Nature, seem cogent, that if it were so, it could never be taken
away or restrained by any Civil Law* since this argument will make v^ much
against that power of Life and Death, with which you invest your Fathers of
Families in the state of Nature, since if they have it by the Law of Nature, it
could no more he restrained, or taken away by Civil Laws, than any Paternal
Power in the like case.


F. I pray Sir, hold, if this controversy is to be decided by the Wisdom and
the Civility of Nations, we shall never have done; For in the first place, who
shall judge of this consent of the most Civilized People? and that no account
is to be made of those whom you call Barbarous; for what Nation will
acknowledge it self to be so; or can arrogate so much to it self, as that it
may require all others to conform themselves to their Laws and Customs; and
that all Nations must be barbarous that act otherwise? Anciently the arrogance
of the Greeks, made them look upon all other Nations as Barbarous, and then the
Romans succeeded in this foolish conceit of themselves; and at this day we
People of Europe (who are but a few in comparison of the rest of the World) do
suppose our selves to exceed all others in Knowledge. And yet on the other side
there are diverse Nations who prefer themselves far before us, and I have read
that the Chinese have a saying, that the Europeans see with one Eye,
themselves with two, but that all the rest of the World are stark blind, and
yet this Nation maintains a Power of selling, and exposing their Children,
which we Europeans abhor. Now pray tell me if there is not some common rule to
be drawn from reason, or the common good of Mankind, how shall we judge which
is in the right? So that notwithstanding all that has been said on this
subject: I think I may safely conclude with the Judgment of the Learned
Pufendorf, in Lib. 6. Cap. 2. where speaking of the Paternal Power, he says
thus, But neither the same Power as such, seems to extend it self to that of
Life and Death by reason of any fault, but only to a moderate chastisement. For
since this authority is employed about an Age, that i^ weak and tender, and in
which such incorrigible crimes can hardly be committed, which nothing but Life
can expiate, it is much better that a Father should turn out of Doors a Son who
does wilfully refuse through obstinacy and wickedness all due correction. So
that Abdication and Disinheriting seems to be the utmost punishment which can
be inflicted by a Father on a Son considered as such.


M. I see it is to no purpose to spend longer time about this question but
since your self have all along allowed that the Father of a separate Family in
the state of Nature, has a Power to put his Wife or Children to Death, in case
they have committed any heinous sins or offenses against the Laws of God or
Nature, but you have not yet told me (and I doubt cannot) how Adam or any other
Master of a Family could be endued with this Power of Life and Death, unless it
were granted him by God.


F. I promise to give you full satisfaction to this question by and by; but in
the mean time, pray let me make it a little more plain to you, that this Power
of Life and Death, which may be exercised by Masters of separate Families, over
their Wives and Children in some cases, is not by any Power they receive from
God, as Husbands or Fathers but only as Heads or Masters of such Families, may
by proved by this instance, suppose a Master of a Family independent on any
other (as in the Indies) has neither Wife nor Children, yet sure he has
notwithstanding the same Power of Life and Death over his Servants or Slaves,
for such great offenses as you have mentioned, in case there be no superior
Power over him to take Cognizance of such Crimes. And to make this yet plainer,
suppose a Married Man having a Wife and Children will live (together with them)
in the Family of such a Master as I have now described (yet not a^ a Servant,
but as an Inmate or Boarder) and whilst he so continues, his Wife Kills one of
her Children, or one of his Sons, Murders his Brother, who has right to punish
this offense, but the Master in whose Family he is an Inmate* And this follows
from your own supposed: for if every separate Family in the state of Nature be
a distinct independent Government, then all those that enter themselves, as
Members of such a Family must be subject to the Master or Governor of it. Nor
do you reduce me into any absurdity by your reply to my argument, That if* the
Power of Life and Death were Originally in Fathers by the Law of Nature, it
could never be restrained nor taken from them without their consent; that then
this will make as much against the like Power of Masters of Families; since I
must grant, this is taken away by Civil Laws, And why not the other? To this I
reply, that you do not observe the strength of these words, Without their
consent; For I suppose that no Power whatever can take this out of the hands of
such Fathers, or Masters of Families in the state of Nature, without they
assign it to the Supreme Powers of the Commonwealth upon its first Institution;
whereas you make this Power to be obtainable by Force, as by Conquest, or
Usurpation, not only over those that are not at their own disposal, as Children
and Servants; but over their Fathers and Masters too, without their consents;
which is contrary to the Law of Nature and Reason.


M. I see you take it for granted, that I will admit your Instance of the Power
of Life and Death to be in the Masters of Families, and not as Fathers in the
State of Nature: But as plain as you think it, since you question the Power of
Life and Death, which I suppose to be inherent in all Fathers; I know not why I
may not with more Reason question your allowing the like Power to Masters of
separate Families, since there is no reason, in my Opinion, which you can bring
for such a Power in your Masters of Families, which I cannot with like reason
urge may be also exercised by Fathers, and Husbands, over their Wives and
Children, in case they deserve it. For if it be for the good and preservation
of mankind, that great and enormous Crimes, such as Murder and Adultery, should
be punished, and that with Death; Who is more fit to inflict these punishments,
or who can be supposed to judge more impartially of them, than the Father, or
Husband himself? Since he cannot put his Son or Wife to Death, however they may
deserve it, without very great reluctance; since he, a^ it were, thereby lops
off a Limb from his own Body. And therefore I cannot see any Reason, why such a
Married man as you describe, should by coming under another Man's Roo^ only, as
an Inmate, or Boarder, and not as a Slave, (which I grant would alter the Case)
should lose that Power of Life and Death, which I suppose he has by the Laws
of God and Nature over his Wife and Children, unless he had actually given it
up to the Master of that Family with whom he came to Board. And therefore as I
do not deny, but that a Master of a separate Family has power of Life and
Death, and also of making Peace and War, with other such Masters of Families,
nay, with Princes themselves, if there be occasion, as we read in Genesis,
Chap. 14. That Abraham made War with the four Kings who had taken Lot Prisoner.
So likewise when Judah pronounced Sentence of Death against Thamar his
Daughter-in-Law, for playing the Harlot, Bring her forth, says he, and let her
be burnt, Genesis 38. I own this was not done by the Authority of a Father alone
(she not being his own Daughter, and his Son being then dead;) but as the
Master of a separate Family, who has (I grant) power of Life and Death, as he
is Lord over the persons of his Children, a^ Servants, and consequently over
their Wives also; for if he has power over his Son, he has certainly the like
over all that belong to him, as long as they continue members of his Family,
and that he has not thought fit to manumit, or set them free. But now I desire
to know by what right these Patriarch^ could exercise all these mark^ of
Sovereignty, especially this great Power of Life and Death, unless it were
derived from God at first; since no Man has any power to dispose of his own
Life at his pleasure, and therefore sure has naturally no power over that of
another man's: So that not only this Power of the Patriarchs, but also that of
all Monarchs to this day, must be derived from this Divine Original.


F. Well then, I find you're forced to quit the power of a Father, as such by
Generation, since it plainly appears, that this power of Life and Death, which
you affirm a Husband, or Father may exercise over their Wives or Children in
the state of Nature, is not, quatenus, as a Father, but Lord and Master over
them; which in the first place I cannot allow to be true in relation to the
Wife; nor that the submission of the Wife's Will to the Husband must imply a
power of Life and Death over her; for if she is not his Slave (as certainly she
is not, for then a Man might sell his Wife when he pleased) I cannot see how
she her self could convey by force of the contract, any such Power over her
Life, tho I grant, indeed, if she happen to commit Murder upon one of her
Children, or other Person of the Family, he may proceed against her as an
Enemy, but not as a Subject; and if it be for Adultery it self, I cannot see
that the Husband can by the Law of Nature punish her with Death; for since that
Crime does really dissolve the bond of Matrimony, Divorce, or putting her away,
and deserting the Child born in Adultery, was even among the Romans looked upon
as a sufficient punishment. But as for the Power of Parents over their
Children, I do not deny, but that a Father may have the like power over his
Children whilst they are part of his Family, as over his Slaves or Servants in
Case of such great and enormous Crimes as you have already mentioned; but that
this is not as a Father, but Master of a Family, your self have already granted
in your Instances of Abraham and Judah; tho if you will consider the last a
little better, you will find that Judah did not proceed thus against Thamar, as
her Father, or Master, but by some other Right; For if you please to look upon
the 11th Verse of that Chap. of Genesis, from whence you cite this Example, you
will find that Thamar, after the Death of Onan her Husband, went with Judah's
leave, and dwelt in her own Father's House, and she was then a Member of his
Family, and consequently (according to your Hypothesis) not under Judah's
Power, when she was thus got with Child by him; and therefore not he, but her
own Father ought to have condemned her, if this Judgment had belonged to him as
to the Master of the Family. And therefore some of the Rabbis suppose, that
when Judah gave this Judgment against Thamar, he did not act either as a
Father, or Master of the Family, for he was then under the Power of the
Cananites; (who certainly had some Civil Government among them at that time)
and therefore they suppose that he acted thus as a Civil Judge, appointed by
the supreme Magistrate of that Nation.

But to defend the Instance I have given you of a Father of a Family losing his
power of Life and Death, upon his becoming a part or Member of another Family;
you your self have already yielded me as much as I can reasonably desire for
the defense of my Assertion, since you allow this power of Life and Death to
Fathers, not as such, but as Lords, and Masters over their Children, as over
their Slaves; and if so, I desire to know who can challenge this Power but the
Master of the Family with whom he ^ives, unless you can suppose two distinct
Heads, or Masters in the same House, and then they will not be one Family, but
two, under distinct Heads, each of them still retaining their distinct Rights.
But you will say, that this Boarder, or Inmate, is not a Servant, or Slave to
the Master with whom he lives, and therefore has not forfeited; or given up
his Right, or Power of Life and Death over his own Children to him; but it is
no matter whether he did, or not, since by making himself a Member of the
others Family, he ceased to be Master of his own, and concequently must lose
all the Natural Rights or Prerogatives belonging to it, of which, I grant this
of Life and Death to be the chief; for if Families in the state of Nature, are
like so many distin Commonweat^^, independent upon each other; it will likewise
follow, that the Heads of those Families must be in all things necessary for
the Good and Preservation of the Family, like so many distinct Civil
Sovereigns, and consequently must have a power of Life and Death, and also of
making Laws, with Punishments annexed to them* in all Cases where the good and
peace of the Family require it. If therefore in a Civil State, or Monarchy, and
a^solute Prince come into the Dominions or Teritories of another, it is
acknowledged by all Writets on this Subject, That such a Prince loses that
power of Life and Death which he had before, and cannot exercise it as long as
he is in the other Princes Dominions: So by the same Reason, if the Masters of
Families, in the State of Nature, are like so many Civil Sovereigns, it will
follow, that they must cease to be such, when they become members of another
Family, unless you will fall into the absurdity of supposing to absolute
independent Heads, or Masters, in one and the same House; which, what a
confusion it would bring, I leave to your self to judge.


M. I shall not much dispute this Power of Life and Death with you, as
belonging to Masters of separate Families: But pray show me how they can
exercise this Power over the Lives of those that are under their Jurisdiction,
unless it were granted them by God, by virtue of that Original Power given to
Adam, not only as a Father, but Prince of his Posterity.


F, I do not doubt but I shall give you a satisfactory Answer to this important
Demand, without supposing any extraordinary Divine Commission from God to Adam;
For as for your Instance of Abraham's making War, Leagues, or Covemants with
other Princes, it i^ no more than what any Master of a seperat^ Family may do
for his own and their defense; and what if you or I were Masters of a Family in
the In^ies, where their is no Power above us, we might do as well as Abraham,
and all this without any other Commission from God, than the great Right of
Nature, Self-preservation, and the Well performance of that trust which God
has put into our hands, of defending, and providing for our selves and our
Families, since if God has ordained the End, he has likewise ordained all
means necessary thereunto; and therefore there is no such great Mystery in this
as you suppose.


M. If there were no more in it than a mere Right of Self defense, for which I
grant Re^aliation, or Revenge may be also necessary, you would have a great
d^^l of Reason on your side; But pray show me how a Father, or Master of a
Family* can Cond^mn either his Wife, Child, or Servant to Death, as a
Punishment for any enormous Crime, such as I have mentioned (and you agreed to)
without such a Divine Comm^ssion as I suppose Adam had. Since I own Revenge or
Re^alla^ion may ^e used by private men in the State of Nature, by the Right of
Self defense, (...) grant may be exercised between equals; But since all
punishments, properly taken, are the Acts of Superiors toward their Inferiors,
I cannot conceive how any Father, or Master of a Family, can inflict so great a
Punishment as Death upon any Member of it, unless he derived this Power
immediately from God, by virtue of the Divine Charter committed by him to Adam,
and and from thence to be derived to all Masters of Families, or civil
Sovereigns, who could never derive this Power from the Joint Compacts or
consent of Fathers, of Masters of Families; since no man could convey that to
another, which he had not himself. And I have already, I think, with a great
deal of Truth Asserted, That no man has power over his own Life, to take it
away when he pleases, and therefore cannot have it over another man's; much
less can convey any such Right to others, except it were granted at first by
God, in the manner I have supposed, which I conceive may easily be made out by
several places in Genesis; by which it plainly appears that Adam, and after him
Noah, were supernaturally endued with this Divine Power.


F. Tho ^ am satisfied that this Hypothesis is extremely absurd, since if it
were so only, Christian or Jewish Sovereigns, or Magistrates, who acknowledge
the Scriptures, could lay any claim to* or exercise this Divine Power; whereas
we find it practiced by all those Nations, with whom the memory of Adam, and
Noah is quite lost, and therefore must claim this Prerogative, not from any
Revealed, but Natural Law of God; yet however since you think you have such
clear Texts of Scripture on your side, I desire you to produce them, tho, if
they should make out what you say, they would only serve to confirm, by Divine
Revelation, that Prerogative of Life and Death, which all Masters of Families,
as well as Civil Sovereigns, enjoyed by the Law of Nature, before ever the
Bible was written.


M. As for my own part, I am so well satisfied of this Supreme Power of life
and death granted at first by God to Adam, and after to Noah, that I cannot see
that without the supposal of this, any Supreme power could lawfully be
exercised by civil Sovereigns at this day: And therefore I am of Mr. Selden's
opinion, who in his most learned Treatise, De Iure gentium apud Hebraeos,
maintains with the Jewish Rabbis, That the Law of Nature can never be planly
proved, and made out by Reason, without a Tradition of its Preceps, as given by
God to Adam, and thence conveyed to Noah, and his posterity: Which Divine Laws,
or Commands, are called by the Jews the Seven precepts of Noah, which
whatsoever Nation, or People, would observe, they permitted them to live as
Inhabitans among them; though they did not embrace Circumcision, or those other
Rights and Ceremonies commanded by the Law of Moses. Now amongst these
Precepts, that of instituting public Judgments for capital Crimes, is one of
the first, in pursuance of that Command which God gave Noah immediately after
the Flood, Genesis 9. v. 6. Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood
be shed: for in the image of God made he man. By which Text almost all
Commentators understand that it is not any common man, but the person of the
civil Magistrate or Sovereign that is to be meant: Since it would be both
impracticable, and also breed great confusion in civil Societies, if by this
word man, every common person, not endued by God with this Supreme Power of
Life and Death, should be understood; and therefore I do suppose with the most
Learned Jews, that this Power was first exercised by virtue of that Divine
Charter that was given of it by God to Adam, and then renewed again to Noah, by
the Text abovementioned.

Now that Adam had by Divine grant an absolute Dominion over the whole World,
F. O* 210, 211*
and all Creatures therein contained, will appear from Genesis 1. v. 27, 28. (here
is the Bible, I desire you would read it with me) So God created man in his own
image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them. And
God blessed them; and God said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and
replenish the Earth, and subdue it; and have dominion over the Fish of the Sea,
and over the Fowl of the Air, and over every living thing that moves upon the
Earth. By which Grant, or Donation, from God of subduing the Earth, and having
dominion over the Creatures, Adam was made the general Lord of all things, with
such a particular propriety to himself, as did exclude his Children from having
any share in it. So that if Cain had his Fields for Corn, or Abel his Flocks,
and Pasture for them, it was only by Adam's Grant* or Assignation, none of his
Children or Descendents having any property in Lands or Goods, without his
particular Grant, or Permission.


F. You must pardon me, Sir, if I cannot be of your Opinion, that all the
Preceps of the Law of Nature must depend upon no firmer foundation, than a
Tradition of the Seven Preceps, supposed by the Jewish Rabbis to be given to
Adam, and Noah, and from them conveyed to all their Posterity, since we find
not the least mention of any such Precepts in the Scripture, or in Josephus,
Philo Judaeus, or any other ancient Writer, but only in the T^lmud: Which
though it pretends to a great Antiquity in its Traditions, yet any judicious
man that will but peruse it, may easily see the falsehood, as well as absurdity
of the pretended Tradition of these Precepts; one of which is against ea^ing
the Members of any living Creature; which savours so strongly of a Jewish
Superstition, that if that were a true Precept, or Law of Nature, no man could
eat a Dish of Lambstones, or a Black pudding, without sinning against the Law
of Nature: And it is very impro^^^ to suppose, that all mankind, except Jews,
Christians and Mahometans, should be obliged to live or act by those Laws or
Preceps they never heard of. For* it (as you your self must grant) the memory
or tradition of these Precepts be quite lost amongst all Nations, except the
Jews, it is all one as if they had acted without any Law at all; and
consequently, if they have not some better grounds for their observation of the
Law of Nature, than these Preceps of Noah, I doubt whether (according to your
Hypothesis) all Civil Sovereigns that do not own the original of their Power of
life and death* to this Divine Charter granted to Adam, and Noah, must be no
better than Murderers, since they take upon them to exercise this great
Prerogative without any Divine Authority for so doing. But I hope to show you
before we have concluded this conversation, that, not only the Power of Life,
and Death, but also other Laws of Nature, may easily be deduced, by Reason, to
have been given by God to Mankind, by the ordinary Course of his Providence,
without recurring to Divine Revelation; which can only oblige those that have
heard of it. But since you lay so much stress upon those Texts of Scripture you
have now cited; I pray give me leave to examine, whether they will bear that
sense you put upon them. As for the first of those Texts you quote, Whosoever
sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, etc. Suppose I should
take it in that sense you put upon it, only to extend to Civil Sovereigns, or
Magistrates, it will be so far from proving a Power of Life and Death to have
been granted by God to Adam, and from him conveyed to Noah, that this place
seems to imply the contrary; for if it was a known Law before, that Murder was
to be punished with death by a Father, or other Magistrate, to what purpose was
this Command now given to Noah? Since if it were a Divine Law before the Flood,
wherefore is it here repeated? And therefore all Expositors agree, that this is
the first Precept enjoining Murder to be punished by the Civil Magistrate,
which, before any of the Kin of the Person slain might have executed, as
appears by Genesis 4. v. 14. when Cain said unto the Lord, I shall be a
fugitive, and a vagabond on the Earth; and it shall come to pass, that every
one that finds me, shall slay me; which had been a needless fear, if none but
Adam had a power to take away his life for the murder of his Brother, as you
suppose; much less that God should have needed to have set a mark upon him to
keep him from being murdered by his Brethren, or other Relations. Nor will
that other place you cite out of Genesis prove Adam's sole dominion over the
Earth, and all the things and persons therein contained: For if you please to
consider it, you will find, That it is so far from proving your Opinion, that
it speaks the direct contrary. pray therefore observe of whom Moses speaks in
that place; surely not of Adam alone, when he says, Male and Female created he
them; and God blessed them, and said unto them, Be fruitful and multiply, and
replenish the Earth, and subdue it, and have dominion over the Fish of the Sea,
and over the Fowl of the Air, and over every living thing that moves upon the
Earth: From whence we may observe, P. n. M. p. 10.
First, That these words being directed in the plural number, both to the Male
and Female, were not intended to Adam alone, but by way of anticipation, not
only to himself, and Eve, (who was not then made) but likewise to their
Posterity (that is) all mankind; Then that they should be fruitful, and
multiply, and replenish the Earth, and subdue it, (that is, possess and enjoy
it) and have dominion, etc. over every living thing that moves (in the Hebrew)
creeps upon the face of the Earth. By which words it appears, That not any
dominion over Mankind, but only over Bruit-beasts, that move or creep upon the
Earth, is hereby conferred. And that this must be the true meaning of this
place, is plain, if you will but read the two next Verses that follow. And God
said, Behold, I have given you every Herb bearing seed, which is upon the face
of all the Earth; and every Tree, in which is the fruit of a Tree yielding
seed; to you it shall be for meat. And to every beast of the Earth, and to
every Fowl of the Air, and to every thing that creeps upon the Earth, wherein
there is life* I have given every green Herb for meat; and it was so. Which
words are certainly directed to the same persons as the former (that is) to all
Mankind, by the same Argument as that every green Herb is here granted for meat
to every Beast of the Earth, and every Fowl of the Air, etc. that then was, or
ever shall exist in Nature. So that this Text which you have cited to prove
this absolute and sole dominion of Adam over the Earth, and all thee Creatures
therein contained, is so far from proving any such thing, that it seems to me
to make out the direct contrary Doctrine, viz. That the Earth, and all the
Creatures th^rein, were not granted to Adam alone, as the sole Lord and Master
of them; but in common to himself, his Wife, and all his Posterity, who had as
good a right to them, `as he had himself. So that I must tell you, if you
intend to bring me over to your Opinion, you must produce some better proofs
out of Scripture, or Reason, than those made use of by (...) R. F. and
therefore I desire that you would give me some plaine^ proof^ for Adam's
absolute Power over his Wife, and all his posterity, than hitherto you have
done; since I cannot see any Divine Charter granted by God in Scripture, of any
absolute power, or dominion, over their Lives, or Persons.


M. I shall, Sir, do my best endeavor to give you all the satisfaction I can
possibly therein; therefore I desire you farther to take notice, That Mr.
Seldom, in his Mare Clasum, and all the Jewish Rabbis have understood this
Text in Genesis, L. 1. c. 4.
to give Adam an absolute power over the Earth, and all things therein
contained, exclusive to his Posterity as long as he lived. And the said Author
from the ancient Tradition of the Jews, Ibid.
is of the same Opinion in his Mare Clausum* So that if Sir R. F. and diverse
others have erred in the sense of this place, I believe it is more than you or
I can prove, since sure they would not have put this sense upon it, without
they had some good reason for it.

But this much I suppose you will admit, that Adam was created by God, Luke
3.27.
and is in Scripture called the Son of God, as indeed he was; and if so, let
your self, or any other rational man consider^ Whether it be at all likely that
God should not endow this Son of his, B. P. P. Sect. 32.
the Father of mankind, with so much Authority and Power as should enable him to
govern his own Family, and Children, as long as he lived, without depending
upon them for their consent, and chopping Logic with them, whethe^ his
Commands were reasonable, or lawful or not: And if a power of life and death
was necessary (as the murder of Abel by Cain shows it was) whether Adam had no
more share in that Power, than any of his Children, or Grandchildren: which is
sufficient to show you the absurdity of your Tenets. That the Authority of Adam
over his posterity was not absolute in its exercise, as well as perpetual in
its duration; and this I think you cannot but admit, because you have already
acknowledged this Power of life and death to proceed from, or to be granted by
God to Adam; and so consequently must have continued with him as long as he
lived.


F. Well, I perceive you find your Monarchy, or absolute Dominion of Adam over
Eve, and all her Posterity, as also over all the Creatures of the Earth, not to
be proved from any of these Places of Scripture you have brought for this
extravagant Opinion* and therefore you now urge upon me my own concession of
this Supreme and Absolute Authority of Life and Death, which I do not deny but
Adam might have exercised in some cases over his Wife and Children as long as
they continued part of his Family: But that he was not endued with this
Prerogative as a Father, but as a Head or Master of his own Family, I think I
have sufficiently proved, and therefore need not repeat it. And indeed your own
instance of the murder of Abel by Cain, (which for all we can find past
unpunished by Adam) sufficienly proves, That this Power of Life and Death over
his Children or Grand children, when once they were separated from his Family,
was not a necessary Prerogative of his Government, or else that his Children,
and Grandchildren, when they have erected (...) milies of their own, had it as
much from God as he* and that from the same reason which you give, why God
endowed Adam with it, viz. because without such a Power they could not have
been enabled to Govern their Children and Families as long as they lived. So
that Adam's being created by God, or called his Son, gave him not a jo^ more
power over his Children, and his Descendents, than what as a Master, or Head of
a Family he would have had by the Law of Nature however; and it is all one in
this Case, whether you suppose Mankind to have been created by God, or to have
existed from all Eternity, provided you hold the being of a God, according to
the Hypothesis of the more modern, Platonists, who tho they held the Eternity
of the World, yet likewise owned all things to be governed by God's Providence:
And therefore if on this Supposition, Mankind could not be well governed, nor
preserved, without inflicting of Capital Punishments for great Crimes, and that
they are necessary for its peace and preservation; it is likewise as necessary,
that there should be some Judge appointed by God to inflict them, which in the
State of Nature can be only the Head, or Master of a Family; as after Civil
Government is once instituted, it belongs to the Civil Sovereign, or
Commonwealth. And this I hope will serve to answer your Scruple, how Adam, or
any other Master of a separate Family, may very well be endued with this great
Power of Life and Death by the Law of Nature, without supposing any Charter
granted him for it by Divine Revelation* or else depending upon his Childrens
consent for his exercise of it.

But before I farther consider, whether this Power of Adam, or of any other
Father, or Master, be perpetual or not, and extends any farther than his own
Family, give me leave to examine, Whether or no Children, when grown to years
of Discretion, and even whilst they continue Members of their Father's Family,
may not in some Cases chop Logic with him (as you call it) and not only
question, but judge whether their Commands be reasonable, or lawful, or not; or
else Abraham (for example) mut have sacrificed to Idols, Vid. Jos. Ant. lib. 1.
c.
because his Father bid him. Whereas Josephus tells us, He rather chose to quit
his Country, and his Father's house, than to sin against God. And therefore I
think you cannot deny, but if Husbands, or Fathers command their Wives or
Children to do any thing that is morally unlawful, or contrary to the Laws of
God, or Nature, they may lawfully (nay are obliged) not to obey such unlawful
Commands.


M. I shall so far agree with you, That if the thing commanded be apparently
contrary to the Laws of God, B. P. P. Sect. 48.
and Nature, that they are not obliged to obey their Commands; but they must be
evidently, and apparently so, before they thus take upon them to refuse
obedience to them; otherwise I deny that their Conscience, however misguided,
ought to be any excuse, or just ground of their disobedience. For if their
Conscience be truly grounded upon the Laws of God, or Nature, that will excuse
them, but if it be not, Conscience without such a Law, can never do it. And yet
this nonperformance of the unlawful Commands of the Husband, or Father, may
very well consist without any Anarchy, or disorder in the Family, since the
Wife and Children must always yield him an active-obedience, in performing all
his Commands; or else a passive one, in submitting to whatever harsh usage, or
punishment such a Husband, or Father shall please to exercise, or inflict upon
them for their non performance of them, tho never so unlawful* But yet
certainly in all possible and indifferent things, Children are boun^ yield, not
only a passive, but an active obedience to their Father's commands. For if his
Children should have a liberty to judge of his commands, whether they are
reasonable, or not, what can ensue but Anarchy and Confusion in all Families?


F. Well, I am glad we are so far agreed, that a Wife and Children in the state
of Nature have liberty to Judge of their Husband's and Father's Commands,
whether they are lawful, or not, and also to disobey them, when they are not
so: And I think I may carry this a little farther, and affirm, That such Wife
and Children ought not to obey the Commands of such a Husband or Father, though
they are not really contrary to such Divine, or Moral Laws, but only
erroneously supposed so by them; and therefore most Casuists agree, That even
an erroneous Conscience does oblige, as long as a man lies under that mistake.
For St. Paul tells us, Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin, Romans 14. Nay
farther, Such an erroneous Conscience may excuse a man before God, if his
ignorance was not wilful, but invincible, and not proceeding from his own
fault; but of this no man can Judge, but God alone, and the Party whose
Conscience it is; and therefore such a Husband, or Father, can have no Right or
Authority to compel their Wives and Children to perform such Commands, because
the Will ought always to follow the Dictates of the Understanding; and
therefore they should not be forced to do that which they Judge contrary to
God's Moral, or Divine Law; since Conscience may be instructed, but can never
be forced. Neither will your distinction of an Active and Passive Obedience
help you in this matter; For Active Obedience I understand well enough; but as
for Passive Obedience, I think it is next door to that we call a Bull, or
Nonsense. And to prove this, I shall give you this plain instance; Suppose you
had a Jew to your Servant, and should command him to do you some work or other
on a Saturday, which he judged a Breach of the Fourth Commandment, that forbids
him to work on the Seventh Day, (or Sabbath) and you being very angry, should
cudgel him soundly for this refusal; whereupon he tells you, That you may beat
him as long as you please, he would not resist, but yield a passive Obedience;
but yet could not perform your Commands. I ask you now, Whether you would rest
satisfied that this Jewish Servant had sufficiently performed what you bad him,
by submitting to your cudgelling? And whether your Dinner or Horse would not be
as much undressed after this sort of passive Obedience, as it was before?


M. Perhaps indeed this Phrase of Passive Obedience may be somewhat improper,
and may be more properly termed an absolute Subjection, or Submission; but it
is all one what we call it, as long as you understand what we mean, since such
Submission does sufficiently avoid that Anarchy and confusion which would
necessarily follow, in case it were lawful for Wives, or Children, in any case
whatsoever, to resist their Husbands, or Fathers, though for the defense of
life it self; since no Government can be maintained, where the Parties governed
have a right to resist their Superiors, or Governors, in any case.


F. I grant indeed that no Government can be maintained where the Parties
governed resist their Superiors or Governors in the due exercise of their
Power; P. n. M. p. 110.
but when, they exceed those limits, they cease to Act as true Superiors, or
Governors; and therefore when instead of Husbands, or Fathers, they prove
Destroyers of their Families, I doubt not but they may then be lawfully
resisted by them. For suppose such a Father of a Family should in a furious or
drunken fit go about to kill his Wife, or one of his innocent Children, can any
body think this was Treason against the Monarch of the Family, if his Wife, or
one of his Sons, should rescue her self, or this innocent Child out of his
hands by force, if they could not otherwise quiet him?


M. This supposition of Madness, or Drunkenness, in Fathers of Families, B. P.
P. Sect. 47.
you Gentlemen of Commonwealth Principles make great use of, to justify your
Doctrine of Resistance; and I know no reason why you might not extend it as well
to Anger, Lust, or any other Passion that a man is subject to; and have given
all the World a power to Judge when a man is Drunk, or mad, as well as his Wife,
Children, or Servants, nor do I know why you so much insist upon it, but
because the Authors from whence you had it, are so in love with Rebellion and
Disorder, that they seek and catch at every opportunity to recommend it to the
World. But, I believe, had you a Wife, Child, or Servant, that should take the
liberty of controling you upon this pretense, you would be more enraged with
the Reason of the Resistance, than with the Resistance it self.


F. I am sorry, Sir, any thing I have said can so far transport you to passion,
as to make such unkind Reflections upon your Friends; but pray be not so hot;
is it not possible that a Master, or Father, in the State of Nature, may be
mad, or drunk?


M. Yes; And is it not possible also that the Wife may be so too? B. P. P. Ibid.
Now suppose they should mutually charge each other with madness, or drinking
too much, who shall Judge betwixt them ^ What horrible confusion must this
introduce into all Societies, to give inferiors a power to Judge their Superiors
to be mad, or drunk, and thereupon to resist, and oppose them with force? But
if it does at any time happen; Wives, Children, and Servants, that are dutiful,
may have ways to appease their Husbands, Fathers, or Masters, when mad, or
drunk, without resisting or Fighting them; as by getting out of the way, or by
submission, Prayers and Tears, which Nature has taught them on such occasions
to make use of, and which is a thousand times a better method, than those
violent Courses you propose.


F. All I desire of you in this Conversation, is, that you would be pleased to
believe, I do not Argue out of any love to Rebellion, or Disorder, or that I
desire to encourage it in private Families, much less to recommend it to the
World; only what I speak, is purely out of a desire of the happiness and
preservation of Mankind; and I hope I say no more, than what all sober men will
allow may be every day practiced in private Families; and therefore, since you
will needs have it, I do extend this Power of Resistance, not only to Madness,
or Drunkenness alone, but even to Anger, Lust, or any other Exorbitant Passion
a man can be subject to; and I do likewise give all the World a power to Judge
when such a man is mad, or furiously passionate, as well as his Wife, Servants,
or Children, if in those drunken or mad fits he goes about to kill them, or
any else. For I think in that case, you will not deny, but any honest Neighbor
may step in and bind him, or hold his hands, and so may likewise the Wife or
Children themselves. As suppose this Father or Husband should be so far
Transported with passion, or lust, as to go about to kill his Wife, or ravish
his Daughter; I hope you will not deny, but they may lawfully resist him, if
they can neither run away, nor yet pacify him by submission, prayers, or tears,
which I grant are much better methods, if they may prevail: But what if they
can neither get away, nor yet any of those gentle means, you propose, can work
any good upon him, what shall they do then? Can any one believe that God has
appointed an innocent Wife, or Children, to be made a Sacrifice to the madness,
drunkenness, passion, or lust of such a Father, or Husband? And as for the Case
you put, Where the Husband or Wife should charge each other with madness, or
drinking too much, who should judge between them? it is a mere Cavil; for as
long as they only fall out, and only brangle, it is no matter whether there be
any Judge, or not. But if it proceeds to blows, and they are like to mischif or
kill each other, no doubt but the Children or Neighbors may come in, and part
them; and may either hold, or shut up one, or both of them, till they are sober.


M. Pray, Sir, let us leave this touchy Discourse concerning Self-defence, till
anon, when we shall have occasion to fall more naturally upon it. Suppose then
I should at present grant you, That a Wise or Children may (in case of such
Extremities as may happen to them by the madness, or Drunkenness of the
Husband, or Father) restrain, or resist his violence, in case no other means
can prevail; what is this to disobeying his Commands, or resisting him when he
is sober? Which certainly they have no right to do. But to come as near you as
possible I can, and to let you see I am not a man of a domineering temper, and
who approves of unnecessary Severities, or unnatural Rigours, either in Masters
of Families, Husbands, or Fathers; I grant that no Father, or Master of a
Family, has any right to punish, or put to death the meanest of his Slaves,
much less his Children, without a sufficient cause; or that he may sell his
Children, or otherwise Tyrannize over them by cruel usage, or too severe
punishments, since they are not only part of his own Substance, and to whom by
the order of the Creation he gave a being, but was also (as you well observe)
ordained by God for their happiness, and preservation, as they were also (as
well as his Wife) for his constant help, comfort and subsistence; and therefore
they were, as much, or more, made for him, as he for them, as it is plain
concerning the Wife from the Text in Genesis, when God said, It is not good
that the man should be alone, I will make him a help meet for him, Genesis 2.17. (
viz.) the Woman; and therefore, as her subjection to her Husband is perpetual,
as long as she lives, so likewise is that of the Children in whom he acquireth
a Property by their Education for so many years; which I look upon as a greater
obligation than their Generation; and over both whom he must, in the State of
Nature, have an absolute power of life and death; which though I grant he may
happen sometimes to abuse, yet I suppose no person living has any right in
that state to resist him in the Execution of it, much less to call him to an
account, or punish him for the Maladministration of his Power. And you have
granted, that the Husband in the state of Nature has a power of life and death
over his Wife, if she murders her Children, or commits any other abominable
sin against Nature; and that then she may be justly cut off from the Family,
and punished as an Enemy to Mankind, and so certainly may his Children too. But
what need I say any more of this Subject, when you have not as yet answered my
former Arguments, concerning the absoluteness and perpetuiry of this Conjugal
Subjection, (and that which will likewise follow from it) the constant service
and subjection of Wives and Children to their Fathers in the state of Nature.
Therefore pray, Sir, let us return again to that Head, and let me hear what you
have to object against those Reasons I have brought for it.


F. I beg your pardon, Sir, if I have not kept so close to the Point as I might
have done; but you may thank your self for it, who brought me off from what I
was going farther to say on that Head, by your discourse of Passive Obedience
and Non-Resistance, and I know not what strange unintelligible Power of Life
and Death conferred by God on Adam, as a Husband, and a Father. But first give
me leave farther to prove, that this subjection of the Wife is neither
absolute, nor irrevocable. For proof of which I shall lay down these
Principles. 1. That the Wife in the State of Nature, when she submits her self
to the power of her Husband, does it to live as happily as she did before, o^
rather to enjoy more of the comforts of life than in a single State. 2. That
therefore she did not renounce either her own happiness or Self-preservation.
3. Neither did she make him the sole and absolute Judge of the means that may
conduce to these ends: for if this were so, let him use her never so cruelly,
or severely, she could have no cause to censure him, or complain in the least
against him. 4. If she have not so absolutely given up her Will to his, she is
still Judge when she is well used by him; or else so cruelly, that it is no
longer to be endured. And therefore if such a Husband will not allow his Wife
sufficient Food and Raiment, and other necessaries; or that he uses her
cruelly, by beating, or other punishments, or has endeavored to take away her
Life; in all these cases in the State of Nature, and where there is no Superior
Power to complain, or appeal to, she may certainly quit him; and I think she is
not bound to return, to co-habit with him again, until she is satisfied he is
sorry for his former cruel Treatment of her, and is resolved to make amends for
the future. But whether this Repentance be real, or not, she only can be Judge,
since she can only Judge of her own happiness, and the means of her
preservation. And the end of Matrimony being for their mutual happiness, and
help to each other; if he have broke his part of the Compact, she is then so
far discharged from hers, and consequently in the mere state of Nature (which
is that we are now talking of) the Vinculum Matrimonii (as you Civilians term
it) will be likewise dissolved: So likewise such a Husband, for no just cause,
or crime in the Wife, but only to be rid of her, should endeavor to take away
her life, as suppose to strangle her in her sleep, or the like, no doubt but
she may (notwithstanding your Conjugal Subjection) resist him by force, and
save her life, until she can call in her Children, or Family, for her rescue
and assistance; who sure may also notwithstanding this absolute Daspotick Power
you place in their Father, or Master, rescure her from his rage and malice
whether he will or not: Nay they are bound to do it, unless they will be
Accessaries to her Murder.


M. These are doubtful Cases at best, and do very seldom happen; and a Husband
can scarce ever be supposed to be so wicked, as to hate, and destroy his own
Flesh, and therefore we need not make Laws on purpose for Cases that so rarely
happen.


F. Rarely happen! I see you are not very conversant at the Old Bailey, nor at
our Country Assizes; where if you please to come, you may often hear of Cases
of this Nature; and I wonder you that are a Civilian, and have so many
Matrimonial Causes in your Spiritual Courts, brought by Wives for Separation,
propter Saevitiam, etc. Should doubt whether Husbands do often use their Wives
so ill, that it is not to be endured. But if the Wife have these Privileges,
pray tell me why the Children shall not have the same, according to your own
Maxim of partus Sequitur Ventrem, since the Subjection of Children must be
according to your own Principles, of the same natere with that of the Mother;
and then pray what becomes of this absolute and perpetual Subjection you talk
of?


M. Yet I hope you will not affirm, but that Children are under higher
obligations of Duty and Obedience to their Father, than a Wife is to her
Husband, with whom perhaps she may in some cases be upon equal terms; but
Children can never be so in respect of their Father, to whom they are always
inferior, and ought to be absolutely Subject in the state of Nature (that is)
before Civil Laws have restrained Paternal Power.


F. I thank you Sir, for bringing me so naturally to the other Head I was
coming to, and I agree with you in your other Maxim, of Quicquid ex me and
^xore mea nascitur in potestate mea est, yet not in your sense; For i^ I should
grant, that the Father's Power over the Child, commences from his Power over
the Mother by her becoming his Wife, and submitting her self, and consequently
all the issue that should be begotten of her, to her Husband's Power; yet (as I
have proved already) in case of the Wife, so I think I may affirm the same in
that of the Children, That they are not delivered by God so absolutely to the
Father's Will, or disposal, as that they have no Right, when they attain to
years of Discretion, to seek their own happiness and preservation in another
place, in case the Father uses them as Slaves, or else goes about to take away
their Lives without any just cause, since when Children are at those years, I
think they are by the Laws of Nature sufficient Judges of their own happiness,
or misery, that is, whether they are well, or ill used; and whether their Lives
are in danger, or not, by their Father's Cruelty.

For though I grant that Children considered as such, are always inferior to
their Parents; yet I must likewise affirm, that in another respect, as they are
men, and make a part of that great aggregate body of mankind, they are in all
points equal to them; that is, as the Parents have a right to Life, Happiness,
and Self-preservation, so have they likewise, and consequentially to all
necessary means thereunto, such as Food, Clothes, Liberty (I mean from being
used as Slaves) which Principles, if true, will likewise serve for a farther
proof against that absolute Property, and Dominion, you supposed to be
conferred on Adam over the Earth, and all things therein, exclusive to that of
his Wife and Children. For if they had a right to a Being and
Self-preservation, whether he would or not, so had they likewise to all the
means necessary thereunto; and he was not only obliged to provide Food and
Raiment for his Children, whilst they were unable to do it for themselves, but
also when they grew up to Years of Discretion, they might take it without his
assignment, and this by Virtue of that Grant in Genesis, I before quoted, And
God said, Genesis 1. ( viz. to the Man and the Woman, and in them to all mankind
then in their Loins) Behold, I have given you every herb bearing seed which is
upon the face of the Earth, etc. Behold, to you it shall be for meat. So that
sure you were too rash, in affirming with Sir R. F. That a Son, a Slave, and a
Servant, were all one at the first: For I hope I have proved the Father does
not acquire any absolute Property in the person of the Son, either by his
begetting him, or bringing him up; for then I grant, a Son and a Slave would be
all one. But if you please better to consider it, you will find, that Fathers
were never ordained by God for perpetual Lords and Masters over their Children,
but rather as Tutors and Guardians, till they are of Years of Discretion, and
able to shift for themselves; God having designed the Father to beget, and
bring up his Child, nor for his own interest, or advantage only, but rather for
the Child's happiness and preservation, which by the Laws of God and Nature he
is bound to procure: For as it is the Son's Duty never to do any Action that
may make his Father repent his begetting, or bringing him up; so on the other
side, the Father ought not to Treat his Son so severely, as to make him weaay
of his Family, much less of his Life. It is the Apostle's Precept, Ephesians. 6.4.
Parents provoke not your Children to wrath; which certainly he knew they were
apt to do, or else that precept had been needless. Now pray tell me, if Adam
had used one of his Sons (whom he loved worse than the rest) so cruelly, as to
make him a Slave instead of a Son, and when grown a Man, should have put him to
all the servile and hard labor imaginable, with scarce Victuals enough to live
upon, or Clothes to cover him, What must this Son have done? Born all
patiently? Or else do you think it had been a damnable sin, if he had fled into
the Land of Nod, to Cain his elder Brother?


M. To answer your Question, I think in the first place it had; for I do not
only take Cain to have been the first Murderer, B. P. P. c. 2. Sect. 9.
but Rebel too; and in the next place this Question is needless; for it can
scarce be supposed, that ever Adam, or any Father can be so wicked and
ill-natured, as to use a Son thus cruelly without some just occasion; but if he
had, I think he ought to have endured any thing from his Father, rather than
have left him without his leave, since I cannot see how Children can ever set
themselves free from their Father's Power, whether they will or no.


F. If that be the condition of Children, they are then, instead of Sons, as
absolute Slaves as any in Turkey, whenever their Father pleases. But you have
already granted, that Fathers ought not to use their Children like Slaves, nor
to sell them for such to others; And tho I have no great kindness for Cain, yet
I know not what warrant you have to call him Rebel; I am sure neither the
Scripture, nor Josephus, mention his going to the Land of Nod, as an offense
committed against his King and Father Adam; but rather as a piece of
compliance, or obedience to God's Sentence, who had made it part of his Curse
so to do.


M. I shall not much trouble my self whether Cain was a Rebel or not; I only
tell you* what some Learned men have thought of his quitting his Country; but
as for other Children, tho I grant their Fathers ought not to use them like
Slaves, yet if they should happen to do so, I think such Children ought to bear
it as a Judgment inflicted by God for their Sins, and should not by any means
set themselves free, tho their Fathers use them never so severely, since it is
God's will they should be Born, and continue under the power of such severe
Fathers.


F. But pray, Sir, tell me, what if this Son had fallen into the power of a
Stranger who would thus make a Slave of him, Was he likewise bound to bear this
as a punishment from God for his Sins, and might he by no means set himself
free? Since this could not happen without God's permissive Providence at least,
and I think you will s^arce prove it more in the Case of the Father, unless you
will allow God to be the Author of Tyranny and Oppression.


M. I Grant that a Man that is made a Slave to a Stranger by force, without
just cause given by him, may set himself free by what means he can; But I deny
he has the same Liberty in respect of his Father, since the Father's power
over him is from God, and so is not the Stranger's.


F. What power of the Father do you mean? That of making his Son a Slave, or of
using him as a Father ought to use a Son? The latter of these I very well
understand to be from God, but not the former; And if the Father has no such
power from God, I cannot see how it can be any Act of disobedience in a Son to
look to his own Liberty, and Preservation, since Cruelty and Tyranny can never
be Prerogatives of Paternal Power, as you your self confess.


M. I grant, indeed, a Father has no such Power from God to treat his Son thus
cruelly; but if he does, I say again* That God having ordained the Son to be
absolutely subject to his Father, he must endure it, let the consequence of it
be what it will: And I suppose you will not deny, but that in case of
necessity, as when a Father has not wherewithal to nourish, and breed up his
Children, he may sell, or assign his interest in them to any person who will
undertake to provide for their Nourishment and Education; and that the Children
so sold, or assigned, do thereby become absolute Servants to the person to whom
they were thus assigned as long as they lived; and why this should be their
condition in respect of a Stranger, and not so to their Father, I can see no
Reason, since their Father would have been at as much trouble and charge for
their Education as the Stranger.


F. I so far go along with you, that in case of such necessity as you mention,
a Father may sell, or assign the present interest in his Child to a Stranger;
yet I cannot see any Reason that this Sale, or Assignment, should confer so
absolute a Property in the Person of this Child, as that therefore he should be
a Slave to this Master, or Fosterer, as long as he lived, since admitting that
the Father, or other person who takes upon him that Care, may perhaps justly
claim a Right in the Service or Labor of the Child, to satisfy them for their
trouble and charge in bringing him up; yet it does not therefore follow, that
this Service is due as long as the Child lives, but rather until such time as
they can make their Labor satisfy them for their Charge and Trouble in keeping
him, which may very well be by that time the Child attains to Twenty five years
of Age at farthest; and there are those that have offered, to breed up and
maintain all the Foundlings, and Bastard Children in England, if they may be
bound to serve them until about that Age; so that I see no reason, why a few
years of Education, should give any Man a right over another's person as long
as he lived.

But if you urge, that the Child owed his Life to his Father, or Fosterer,
since without his assistance he must have perished, and therefore the Service
of the Child's whole Life is but little enough to recompense it: To this I
Answer, That the Parents are under an absolute Obligation, by the Laws of God
and Nature, to breed up their Child, and they sin, if they do not perform it as
they ought; the end of a Father being chiefly for the Breeding up, and
preservation of the Child, and therefore there is no Reason he should acquire
such a property in him, merely because he did his Duty; And the Duty of a
Father being to better the condition of his Son, and not to make it worse, I
doubt whether an absolute and perpetual Servitude, or Death it self, were the
better bargain; and if this Right will not hold for the Father himself, much
less will it be for a Fosterer, since he is likewise obliged by the Laws of
Nature, and common Humanity, as well as by his Contract with the Father, to
breed up this Child so assigned him; and not to let him perish, if he be able
to breed him up. Nor ought this Father's or Fosterer's temporal advantage,
which he may make of this Child, to be the principal end of his undertaking,
but the doing good to mankind, and the advantage he may reap thereby, is to be
considered only as an encouragement, and not as the only motive to this Duty,
since he is Obliged to do the same thing, tho he were sure the Child would
either dye, or be taken away from him, before he could be with him half long
enough to satisfy him for his Charge.

Neither does this reason hold true even according to the Scripture Rules of
gratitude, That a Man has a right to exact of one to whom he has done a
Courtesy, or bestowed a Benefit, a return as great as the benefit bestowed;
since this were not Beneficence, but mere Bartering, or Exchange; and a Man who
had his Life saved by another's assistance, (suppose by pulling him out of the
Water) must be obliged by this Principle to submit his Life to his disposal
ever after. And therefore I desire you would give me some better Reasons, why
such a Son ought to be so absolutely subject to his Father's Power, as that it
is not lawful for him upon any account whatsoever to free himself from it, let
his Father use him never so cruelly or severely.


M. Well Sir, since you desire it, I will give you the best Reasons I have, why
God cannot permit so unreasonable a Liberty as this would give to all Children,
in case they should make use of it whenever they thought fit; and therefore God
has ordained it thus, to take away all those pretenses of undutifulness and
disobedience which Children might make, should they be permitted to be their
own Judges, when they might quit their Father's Family without his leave; which
pretense of cruel usage they would be sure to make use of, thereby to leave
their Parents upon every slight occasion, saying, That their Fathers were so
cruel and severe, that there was no living with them any longer; when, indeed,
it was not so, but on the contrary, no just cause of complaint against them,
more than bare correcting them for their Faults, and so the Father be Berest of
any, nay, all his Children who should be helpful and serviceable to him in his
old Age, which would breed great confusion and inconveniences in Families,
especially in the State of Nature, as in the Case you have put concerning
Adam's Sons, they being the only Servants he could have to make use of, on all
occasions.


F. I desire you in the first place to take notice, That I put this Case
concerning Adam by way of supposition only; not but that I have a better
opinion of our first Parent (notwithstanding his Fall) than to believe him so
ill-nattur'd, or that he was ever so cruel as to use his Children thus hardly.
But in this depraved state of Nature such unnatural Rigours and Cruelties in
Fathers, as well as Disobedience in Children, is but too frequent, which no man
needs to doubt of, that will but consult the Custom of diverse Nations in
Africa, and other Countries at this day, where they sell their Sons for Slaves,
and exercise this Fatherly Power with the greatest Tyranny and Rigor; using
them as Slaves, or felling them to others for such things as they want. And if
you think it against the Law of Nature for such Children, when they see
themselves ready to be sold to work in the Mines in Peru, or Sugar-works at
Barbados, to run away into another Countr^y to avoid such a Condition, which
is as bad or worse than death, you may enjoy your own opinion; but I am sure
you will have but f^w Proselites, but such as are of the like Arbitrary
Principles; and as for your Pretense, that if Children should be allowed to
judge when their Fathers treated them too severely, or like Slaves, they would
all run away, that is but a Subterfuge: For first, it is a needless Caution,
Children being, when young, not apt to leave their Parents who have bred them
up, upon whom they depend for their subsistence, and to whom, if they are
treated like Children, they seldom fa^l to bear a natural Duty and Affection;
and if well used, they will, when of years of discretion, be likewise willing
to stay with them, and look after them when Sick, or Old, not only for Duty,
but also for their own advantage, and in hopes of having a share in what Goods,
of Estates they may leave behind them when they dye. But if, when they come to
years of discretion, they can better their condition by marrying, and leaving
their Fathers Family, their Parents are bound in conscience to let tehm go,
since it is their duty to better the condition of their Children, and not to
make it worse: Always provided that such Children either take care of their
Parents themselves, or else hire others to do it for them, in case they want
their assistance by reason of their old age, Poverty or Sickness; but if
children may not quit their Fathers Families, tho they are never so hardly or
severly dealt with, the consequence will be, that Fathers may keep their
children as Slaves as long as they live, tho it were a hundred years, or else
may sell them to others, to be used worse if possible; the absurdity of which
assertions, and how contrary to the common good of Mankind, I might leave to
any indifferent Person to judge of.

Therefore, I think, I may very well (according to the learned Grotius) divide
the lives of children into three Periods of ages. The first is the Period of
Infancy or imperfect Judgment, before the child comes to be able to exercise
his reason. The Second is the Period of perfect Judgment or discretior, yet
whilst the child continues still part of his Fathers Family. The third is,
after he has left his Fathers, and entered into another Family, or sets up a
Family himself. In the First Period, all the actions of children are under the
absolute Government of their Parents: For since they have not the use of
reason, nor are able to judge what is good or bad for themselves, they could
not grow up nor b^ preserved, unless their Parents judged for them what means
best conduced to this end; yet this power is still to be directed to the
principal end, viz. The good and preservation of the Child. In the second
Period, when they are of Mature Judgment, yet continue part of their Fathers
Family, they are still under their Fathers Command, and ought to be obedient to
it in all actions which tend to the good of their Fathers Family and concerns.
And in both these Ages, I allow the Father has a Right to make his Children
work, as well ^^ enable them to get their own living, as also to recompense
himself for the pains and care he has taken, and the charge he may have been at
in their Education, and also to correct them in case they refuse to work or
obey his Commands. But in other actions, the Children have a Power of acting
freely, yet still with a respect of gratifying and pleasing their Parents, to
whom they are obliged for their being and Education* Since without their care
they could not have attained to that age. But this duty being not by force of
any absolute subjection, but only of Piety, Gratitude and Observance, it does
not make void any act, tho done contrary to their duty. The third and last
Period is, when the Son being of years of discretion, either by marriage or
otherwise, is separated from his Fathers Family. In which Case, he is in all
actions free, and at his own disposal, tho still with respect to those duties
of Piety and Observance, which such a Son must always owe his Father, the cause
thereof being perpetual.


M. I must beg your pardon if I cannot come over to your opinion,
notwithstanding all you have said in this long discourse; since I cannot
conceive, F. O. G. p. 22.6.
how in any Case Children can naturally have a power or moral faculty of doing
what they will without their Parents leave; since they are always bound to
study to please them, and tho by the Laws of some Nations, Children when they
attain to years of discretion, have a power and Liberty in many actions, yet
this Liberty is granted them by positive and humane Laws only, which are made
by the Supreme Fatherly Power of Princes, who can regulate, limite or assume
the Authority of inferior Fathers for the public benefit of the
Commonwealth. So that naturally the Power of Parents over their Children never
ceases by any seperations, tho by the permission of the transcendant, Fatherly
power of the Supreme Prince, Children may be dispensed with or privileged in
some cases from obedience to subordinate Parents.


F. And I must beg your pardon, Sir, if I cannot alter my opinion in this
matter, for all that you have now said, since you can give me no better Reasons
than what you did at first; and tho you say, you cannot conceive how Children
can ever in any case, have a power or moral faculty of doing what they will
without their Parents leave, yet they may have such power in many cases,
whether you can conceive it or no. For tho I do grant, that Children are always
bound to study to please their parents, P. n. M. 20.21.
yet does not this duty of gratitude or complacency include a full and perfect
Dominion of Fathers, in the state of Nature over the persons of their Children,
and an absolute power over them in all cases whatsoever, so that the Children
can have no right to consult their own good or preservation, however it may be
endangered by their Fathers passion or ill nature, since a Wife is always
obliged to this duty of complacency to her Husband; yet is not this so
absolute, but that in a State of Nature she may quit his Family in those Cases
I have already mentioned, and against which you had nothing to object; and I
deny your position, that Children when they attain to years of discretion,
derive that power, and liberty they use it many actions, from positive Humane
Laws only, or that the power which Parents naturally have over their Children,
can never cease by any separation, but only by the permission of the Father.

For as for Bodin, and diverse others that have written on this Subject, they do
no more than follw others, who have asserted this absolute power of Fathers
upon no better grounds than the Civil or Roman Municipal-Laws, without ever
troubling themselves to look into the true Original of Paternal Authority or
Filial Subjection, according to the Laws of Reason or Nature. And most
Treatises of this Subject being commonly writ by Fathers, no wonder if they
have been very exact in setting forth their own power over their Children, but
have said little or nothing of the Rights of Children in the State of Nature,
and therefore I shall farther let you see, that this duty of Children, even of
pleasing or obeying their Parents, can only extend to such things as they may
reasonably or Lawfully command. For suppose, that Adam had commanded some of
his Sons or Daughters never to Marry, you cannot deny but this command had been
void: (that being the only means then appointed to propagate Mankind,) for when
there then lay a higher obligation upon them to increase and multiply, than
there is now, they might then certainly have chosen Wives for themselves, when
they were of years of dicretion and capable of Marriage.

And farther to show you, that Children may in some Cases separate themselves
from their Fathers Family and Subjection, without their Fathers consent, is
apparent, as to the Daughters, who if they were at first obliged by this
precept to Marry, might likewise do it, whether he would or not, and were to be
obedient to their Husbands when they were Married, the obedience which they
before owed to their Father, being now transferred to their Husband, or also
they must serve two Masters, which is against our Saviors Rule, by which it
appears, that the subjection of Daughters in the State of Nature is not
perpetual: And to prove that Sons have a like Right to separate from their
Fathers Family, let us suppose that Adam had been so cruel, and unnatural as
some Fathers are, that being only sensible of the profit he received from his
Sons labors, he would never have permitted them to leave his Family, nor to
enjoy any thing of their own, but would have kept them like Slaves as long as
they lived; if you affirm, that he might have done so if he had pleased, and
that the Sons had no Lawful means to help themselves, since he only was Judge
whether ever he thought fit to set them free or not: You your self have already
granted the contrary, when you affirmed, that a Father had no Right to sell his
Child as a Slave, and then sure he can have as little Right to use him so
himself.

But as for what you say against that natural equality of Children to their
Parents considered as Men, you might easily have understood it, if your
thoughts were not so wholly taken up with this transcendant imaginary Empire of
Fathers in the State of Nature, as if they were some what more than Men. For
pray tell me, are they not equal, who have the same Right from God to the same
things? For if Fathers have a Right to live and be preserved, so likewise have
the Children, and if they have a Right to the end, they have likewise the same
to the means necessary thereunto, such as are food raiment freedom from
Slavery, etc. And if they are thus equal, they must likewise when they attain
to years of discretion, be endued with a Power of judging for themselves,
concerning what things are necessary to their happiness and perservation, and
what tends to their misery or destruction, and consequently may very well judge
whether their Fathers treat them kindly or cruelly; for if the Father in the
State of Nature in the sole Judge of the means that conduce to his Sons
happiness and preservation, without his consent he may determine that Poverty.
Slavery and Torment, shall be fit means, and conducing to this end, which is
against sense and reason; and tho I grant, that Sons may sometime be mistaken
in the true means that may lead to these great ends of life, yet does not this
take away their Right of judging for themselves, any more than it does the same
Right from their Fathers, who as Men are also liable to the like mistakes.
Neither did any Slave or Subject ever give up his will so totally to his Master
or Monarch, as absolutely to renounce all Right to happiness and self
preservation, or to the means that may conduce thereunto. But I think, we have
sufficiently debated this great point of the Natural Power of Fathers over
their Children, and therefore.

Let us in the next place consider whether Children may not upon these
Principles in some Cases make use also of self defense, even against their
Fathers, if they cannot otherwise avoid certain ruin and destruction,
therefore I will first ask you what you think of this Case? A Son in the State
of Nature being separated from his Father's Family, and having Children and
House of his own, what shall he do in Case his Father, by the evil suggestions
of a Stepmother, or other wicked Persons, be so far incensed against his Son,
as to send Men to burn his House, plunder him of his Goods, and destroy his
Plantation?


M. If the Son be absolutely set free from his Fathers Family and Power with
his consent, I do not deny but that such a Son may resist those Persons his
Father sends to ruin him and his Family, and may repel their violence by
force, but I do not allow the Son the same power to resist the Person of the
Father, if he should come himself thus to destroy him.


F. Why so? Do you think a Father by being so, has any greater Right to
destroy his Son and ruin his Family then a Stranger?


M. No; but because the Person of a Father ought always to be esteemed by the
Son as Sacred as his Natural Prince, and if he should have a Right to resist
his Father by force, he might happen to kill him in the scuffle, which would be
a sin against Nature.


F. Well, suppose the worst, would this be more a sin against Nature, than to
suffer himself, Wife, and Innocent Children to be turned out of all they have,
and left to perish by hunger and cold? St. Paul says, That he that does not
provide for his Family is worse than an Infidel, and I think so would the Son
be if for fear of hurting his Fathers Person, he should permit all his Family
to be exposed to certain beggary and ruin.


M. This precept of St. Paul obliges only, when a Man may provide for his
Family by Lawful means, but not when it cannot be procured but by doing what is
unlawful, as I take this resistance of the Person of the Father to be.


F. I grant indeed that a Father, acting as such, is not to be resisted, even
when he corrects his Son, but I suppose you will not say that in the Case I
put, he acts as a Father, but an Enemy, when he goes about without any just
occasion to kill or ruin him, unless you can suppose, that the will to
preserve and destroy can consist together in the same Subject; neither can you
affirm that the Father has any right to deal thus wickedly and violently
toward his Son, and his innocent Family. By what Law then must the Son be
obliged to Sacrifice his own life, and that of Wife and Children, and all that
he has, to this imaginary Duty?


M. There seems to me two good reasons for it. The first is that gratitude
which the Son must always owe his Father for his Being and Educa^ion, and
therefore if he give up his Wife, Children, and all that he has to his Will,
it would scarce be a sufficient requital for all the Benefits he has received
from him. The second is, because no circumstances whatsoever can take off or
obliterate this Relation; and tho it is true your Father, whilst acting thus
does not deal with you as a Father, but an Enemy, yet he is still your Father,
and you are and will be always his Son do what you can, and so consequently you
will still owe him Subjection. For it is a maxim not only of the Civil Law, B.
P. P.. 15.
but that of Nature too, and this most of all in the State of Nature, that is,
before Civil Laws had restrained tha^ Paternal Power, Iura Sanguinis nullo
delicto dirimi possunt, and lastly from the fourth Commandment of, Honor the
Father, etc. Now no Man can tender honor to him whom he goes about to resist,
and so may also destroy.


F. I consists you have urged this Argument as home as the thing will bear; but
yet I think I can show you, that the Son is so far from acting against the Law
of Nature in thus resisting his Father, that I think he would rather transgress
it if he acted otherwise. But first to answer your Arguments, I deny, that
either Generation or Education do confer so great a benefit, that a Man is
obliged to Sacrifice himself, his Wife, and Children, and all he has in return
for it. First for Generation, I suppose you will not much insist on that, since
you must grant that a Father does not act in that matter, as a voluntary, but
Natural Agent; neither is it in his Power to hinder the Child that he gets from
being conceived or born; neither did he get him so much to propagate his
Spe^ies, as to gratify his own present natural appetite.

Then for Education, which I grant is much the greater obligation, since by the
former I am only born an irrational helpless Creature, but by the other I am
made a reasonable Man, able to help and provide for my self, and knowing my
duty to God and other Men, yet even these obligations are not great enough to
make me Sacrifice my self and all that I have to his fury or humor. I grant
indeed, that if it were to save a kind Father's life, a Son may be obliged to
venture, nay lay down his life to perform it; but I deny, that even for such a
Father, he has a Right to give up the lives of others which are not at his
disposal (as those of his Wife and Children are not) in this case. For this
were not only to return more than was first given, but also to pay debts with
that which is not my own; and to give up their lives, and let my Father take
them away is all one, if I can hinder it, qui non prohibet facit. Then as for
the Relation of a Father, which you say no fault of his can obliterate or
destroy; you must grant that it may be suspended for a time, as when a Man
binds, or resists his mad or druken Father who would kill him, or his Wife or
Children, he does not do it to the Father, but to the mad Man or Drunkard, and
so likewise in this Case, he does not resist his Father, but a furious
unreasonable Creature, who is so far from behaving himself as becomes a Father,
that he does not act like a Man: Nor does your Maxim hold true in all Cases,
and therefore is no Law of Nature, for Iura Sanguinis aliquo delicto dirimi
possunt, or else a Father could never put his Son to death for any crime
whatever, which you have affirmed he may; but certainly when he acts thus, it
is not as a Father, nor does he destroy him as a Son, but an Enemy or
Malefactor.

Now I desire you or any indifferent Man to consider, since the common good of
Mankind is the sum of all the the Laws of Nature, and the great rule by which
they are to be tried, which rule is to be preferred, and conduces more
thereunto when they cannot consist at once or together. That a Father, who by
your own confession, comes to do an unlawful wicked action, ( viz.) to ruin
and destroy his Son, with his Wife and Children, should be resisted, and
consequently one Man's life put in hazard, than that many innocent Persons
should be ruined, and perhaps starved to death for want of food and shelter.
And as for the fifth Commandment, that extends no more to the Father than to
the Mother; tho you are pleased to leave her out, because it makes against your
opinion: and therefore if by Honor, is meant, Thou shall no resist, then no
Man should resist his Mother any more than his Father, if she went about to
kill him, and yet not the Mother, but the Father, is by your Hypothesis, the
natural Monarch that has this Power of Life and Death over the Son. But let us
pursue this point no farther, if you will not be convinced I cannot help it.

But pray tell me now, what a Son must do, if his Father transported by fury
and malice should go about to kill him with a Sword or other Weapon, and that
he has no other way left to save his life, neither by entreaty nor flight,
(which I grant ought to be done if possible,) whether he may resist his Father
with what next comes to hand, or suffer himself to be killed?


M. I am much better satisfied in this Case than in the other, that he ought
rather to let his Father take away his life than resist him, since here is but
one life to be lost, whereas, I confess, the other Case was harder, because
there were more lives concerned than the Sons, and I am of this opinion partly
for the same reasons as before, and partly because it is more suitable both to
Reason, and the Law of Nature, as also to Holy Scripture, Preceps and Examples:
For i^ St. Peter command, Servants to be Subject to their Masters, etc. Not
only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward. And if Servants, much
more Sons, who owe their Fathers a higher duty and obedience, than Servants can
owe their Masters; and Isaac was so far convinced, that his Father Abraham had
Power over his life; that tho he was a lusty young Man, and could carry Wood
enough to consume a Burnt-offering, yet do we not find, that he offered in the
least to resist his Father, when he was about to bind him to be Sacrificed: For
he very well knew, that his Father could not be resisted without endangering
his life if not taking it away in the scuffle; and sure you will grant, that a
Son ought rather of the two to let his Father kill him, than he take away his
life, by whose means he received his own; especially since Abraham was the
Master of a great Family; and in whose life and well being, not only his
Mother, but all the Family had an interest as necessary for their well being
and happiness: Nor can I think, that Abraham would have so readily assented to
God's Command for the doing of it, had he not been already satisfied, that he
had an unaccountable power of Life and Death over his Son by the Laws of God
and Nature.


F. In the first place, to answer your authorities from Scripture, as for that
place of St Peter you have cited, i^ is not a precept given by the Apostle to
Sons, but to Servants or Slaves, whose lives and all that they had were at
their Masters absolve disposal, being those whom the Apostle Paul calls,
Servants under the yoke; and unless you will make a Slave and a Son to be all
one, (which you have already denied) this precept does not at all concern them.
And as for Example of Isaac, that will make as little for your advantage, for
first as to Abraham, he could not but know, that to kill his Son without any
just cause, was as much murder in him as in any other Man: Now what could be a
juster or a higher cause than Gods particular Command? So that as this act of
Abraham is not to be taken as an Example by other Fathers, so neither does the
Example of Isaac oblige other Sons to the like Submission; therefore it is most
reasonable to suppose, that Isaac being then (as Chronologers make him to be)
about nineteen or twenty years of age, P. n. M. p. 27.
and of years of discretion to ask where was the Lamb for the Burnt-offering,
was also instructed by his Father, before he came to be offered, of the reason
of his dealing thus with him, and then the Submission was not paid to his
Fathers but to Gods will, from whom he miraculously received his being. But if
any Man doubt wheter resistance in such a Case were Lawful, I leave it to his
own conscience to consider, whether if his Father had him alone in a place
where he could neither run away nor yet call for help, he would suffer his
Father to cut his Troat without any resistance, only because he pretended
Divine Revelation for it. Not but that I so far agree with you likewise, as to
limit such a resistance only to the holding his Fathers Hands, or warding off
his blows, but not to the taking away his life, but of the two rather to lose
his own than to kill him, for the reasons you have given, and which I will not
deny; but yet if the Father be mad, I much doubt whether the Son is bo^nd to
let him kill him rather than take away his life, since such a Father's life is
no way useful to the good of the Family. So that tho I should grant that
Paternal Power is from God, and consequently irresissible, yet does it not
follow that all the unjust force or violence, which a Father as a Man may use
against his Sons life or fortune, is such part of a Paternal Power as God has
commanded us not to resist, since your self must grant that he does not thus
act (in going about to kill his Son) as a father, but a violent and wicked Man:
So that where the father has no Right, to take away his Sons life, I think in
all such Cases, the Right of the Son to resist him does take place. And if a
Man may resist or bind his Father when he is Mad or Drunk, and in such fits
goes about to kill him, I can see nothing to the contrary why he may not do
the same thing, when his Father is transported by a sudden rage or unreasonable
malice, since both of them do take away the use of natural Reason as much the
one as the other, according to that saying of the Poet, Ira furor brevis est.
Anger is but a short madness: Fury and Malice being alike fatal and destructive
to the Sons life and safety, with Drunkenness and Madness; nor does such a Son
resist his Paternal Power but only his Brutish force and violence. So that if
Sons when grown to years of discretion) have not a right to defend their lives
in the State of Nature against all Persons whatsoever, who go about to take it
away without any just Cause, every Son ought to suffer his Father to kill him,
when ever being transported by madness, drunkenness or sudden passion, he has
will so to do: which how it can consist with that great Law of Nature, of
propagating and preserving the species of Mankind, if a Father should have any
unreasonable unlimitted Power, I Will leave it to your self or any other
reasonable Man to consider; nor does it follow, that because a Son can in no
wise be Superior to his Father, he ought not therefore to resist him; since
tho I grant punishment is a Right of Superiors over their Inferiors, P. n. M.
yet so is not resistance; since every one knows that resistance; is exercised
between equals, as I have already proved, Sons are to their Fathers in all the
Rights of life and self-preservation: and conseqently to judge when their Lives
and Estates are unjustly invaded.


M. I must confess I am in a great doubt which will most conduce to that great
Law you mention, (which I grant to be the Sum of all the Laws of Nature) viz.
of preserving or prosecuting the common good of Mankind; that Fathers should
have an absolute irre^istible Power over the Lives and Fortunes of their
Children, let them use it how they will, or else that Children should have a
Right to resist them in some cases, when they go about to take away either of
them without any just Cause: for tho I own, that (if the former Principle be
true) Parents may be sometimes tempted to take away their Childrens Lives or
Estates without any just Cause: so on the other side if Children shall assume
such a Power to themselves of judging when their Fathers do thus go about, to
invade either their Lives or Estates, it will (I doubt) lay a foundation for
horrid confusions and divisions in Families, since if Children are under a
constant subjection to their Fathers, they ought then to be absolutely Subject
to them in the State of Nature, and therefore ought not to be resisted: For if
all Fathers, and Masters of Families, are trusted by God with an absolute Power
of Life and Death over the Wife, Children, and Servants of the Family, as your
self cannot deny, then no resistance of this absolute Power can subsist with
the peace and tranquillity of that Family, without the diminution or total
destruction, of that absolute Power, with which they are entrusted.

And tho I admit that Parents ought neither to use nor sell their Children for
Slaves, not to take away either their Lives or Goods without great and
sufficient Cause: yet of these Causes Fathers in the state of Nature must be
the only and uncontrolable Judges; since if Children (whom I still consider as
Subjects, tho not as Slaves in the State, as long as they continue members of
their Fathers Family,) should once have a Right to resist, when they thought
their Lives or Estates were unjustly invaded; they might also oftentimes
through undutifulness or false suggestions pretend or suppose that their
Fathers were mad drunk or in a passion, and went about to take away their
Lives, when really they intend no such thing, but only to give them due
correction: Which would give Children an unnatural power of resisting, or
perhaps of killing their Fathers upon false surmises or flight occasions.

And as this would introduce great mischief and confusion in privte Families,
so would it likewise prove a Foundation of Rebellion against all Civil Powers
whatsoever; if Subjects who are the same thing in a Kingdom, that Children are
in a Family, (in the State of Nature) should take upon them to resist their
Prince when ever they think he goes about to invade either their Lives or
Fortunes, which would likewise serve to justify all the most horrid Rebellions
in the World; since all Rebels whatsoever may or do pretend, that their Lives,
Liberties and Fortunes are unjustly invaded, when indeed they are not, and
Likewise upon the least hardship or injustice in this kind inflicted upon any
private Subject, either by the Prince or his Ministers, (which abuses and
violences do often happen even under the Best Governments,) any such private
Person who shall think himself thus injured, may upon this principle take up
Arms, and endeavor to right or defend himself against such violence, by which
means under pretense of securing a few Men in their Lives or Estates, whole
Kingdoms (if such Persons can find follows enough) may be cast into all the
mischiefs and confusions of a Civil War, till the Prince and Government be
quite destroyed.


F. I must confess, the Arguments you now bring are the best you have yet
produced, since they are drawn from that great and certain Law of procuring the
common good and peace of mankind. But, I hope I shall make it plain to you,
that no such terrible consequences will follow from the Principles I have
already laid down, and therefore I must first take notice that you have in your
answer confounded two Powers together, which ought to be distingishued in the
State of Nature. ( viz.) The Power which Fathers, as Masters or Heads of
Families, may exercise over the Lives of their Children or Servants whilst they
remain Members of their Family; and that reverence and duty which Children must
always owe their Fathers as long as they live, even after they become Fathers
or Masters of Families of their own. In the first State, I have already
allowed, that such Fathers, as Masters of Families may Lawfully exercise a far
greater Power over their Children, whilst they are members of their Family,
than they can when they are separated from it, yet is not this Power in all
Cases absolute or irresistible, as I have already proved; and therefore I do in
the first place restrain this Right of self-defence, only to such Cases, where
a Father would take away a Sons life in a fit of drunkenness, madness or sudden
passion, without any crime committed or just cause given: which I also limit to
a bare self defense, without injuring or taking away the life of the Father if
it can possibly be avoided; and in this Case if the Son, who is like to suffer
this violence, may not judge when his life is really in danger to be destroyed,
because he may pretend so when really it is not. This is no just reason to
overthrow so great a Right as self Preservation; since if this were a
sufficient objection, it would have the same force against all self defense
whatsoever: For it does often happen that wicked and unreasonable Men will
pretend that they were forced to take away the lives of others only to preserve
their own, when indeed it was altogether false and needless, and they only
killed them to satisfy their own malice or passion, And therefore, as there is
no reason that the abuse of this natural Right should be used as an Argument
against the use of all self-defence by any Man whatsoever. So likewise neither
ought the like abuse hereof by some wicked Children to be brought as an
Argument against its being made use of at all by others, who are never so
unjustly assaulted, and in danger of their Lives from their Fathers violence.
If the first principle be true, (on which this is founded) that a Son may
exercise this Right of self-defence in such Cases, without any intrenchment
upon his Fathers Paternal Authority, or that Filial duty and respect which he
must always owe him when ever he returns to himself, and will behave himself
toward him as becomes a Father, and not like an Enemy or Cutthroat.

And as for the quarrels and confusions, which you allege may happen in
Families between Fathers and Children, in case such a liberty should be
allowed, those inconveniences will prove very inconsiderable if you please to
take Notice, That first I do not allow this Right of resistance to be exercised
by any Children before they attain to years of discretion. Secondly, that after
they have attained to these years, no resistance ought to be made against a
Father whilst they remain part of their Fathers Family, but only in defense of
their own, their Mothers, Wives* and Childrens Lives; since I grant, that a Son
as long as he continues a member of his Fathers. Family, ought to bestow all
his own labor for his Fathers profit, and cannot acquire any property either
in Lands or Goods without his Fathers consent: And since you conceive this
Right of self-defence, if allowed to Children, would be the cause of so great
mischiefs in Families, if Children should have no Right to judge when their
Fathers abused their power over them; let us a little consider on which side
this abuse is most likely to happen, for if you please but to look into the
World, and survey the Nature of Fathers and Children, and set the faults of the
one against the other, you will find, (that as I confess,) it is the Nature of
many Children to contradict and disobey their Fathers Commands, and that most
young people hate restraint, and love too much liberty, and may oftentimes
think their Fathers too harsh or severe to them, when really they are not; yet
does such false surmises and disobedient actions seldom end, either in absolute
resistance or taking away their Fathers lives by force, or if they do so, it is
really done for their own defense, or whilst they are assaulted by them in
their own Lives, or those of their Children, but is commonly acted privately to
satisfy their own revenge or malice, which I hold to be utterly unlawful, so
likewise let us consider on the other side, P.n. M.p 41,
those temptations that Fathers lie under of injuring their Children, or taking
away their Lives, or u^ing them like Slaves, without any just Cause; you will
find that they by reason of their age, natural temper or infirmities, may be
easily transported to that degree of passion, that not considering the follies
of Youth, they may oftentimes in their passion, either beat them so cruelly, as
utterly to disable or maime them, or else take away their Lives for little or
no Cause. And besides, Fathers being often covetous and ill-natured, (which are
the vices of old age,) may (where there is no power over them to restrain them
from it) either keep them as Slaves themselves, or else sell them to others for
that purpose, (as I have already given you an example of the Negroes in
Africa,) and which of these two inconveniences are most likely to happen
between Children and Parents in the State of Nature; I should leave is to any
indifferent Man to judge between us. And therefore I think, it more conduces to
the good and peace of Families, and consequently the happiness and preservation
of Mankind, (which are the end of all Laws) that Children should be allowed
these Rights (I have al^erdy laid down) of asserting this Natural Liberty from
Slavery, and defending their Lives, and those of their Wives and Children from
the unjust violence of their Fathers than that they should be left wholly at
disposal to be maimed, killed or ruined, when over this coveteousness, passion
or malice may prompt them to it: Sense if all Fathers were satisfied that their
Children have a Right thus to defend themselves in these Cases against their
unjust violence, it would be a means to make them act more catiously, and to
behave themselves with greater tenderness and moderation toward them.

So than to conclude, I utterly deny that these Principles I have here laid
down, do at all rend to countenance Rebellion, or raising disturbances in Civil
Governments, since I cannot allow you have proved Parents to be Princes or
Monarchs in the State of Nature, or that Families, and Kingdoms or
Commonwealths are all one: Or if I should grant them to be so, yet would it not
therefore follow, that every private Subject in a Civil State has the same
Right to defend his life, or that of his Wife and Children, against the
violence or injustice of the Supreme Powers, as a Son may have in the State of
Nature to defend his life, etc. against his Fathers rage or violence; since I
grant no particular Subject can contradict or resist the Supreme Power of the
Lawful Magistrate (however unjustly exercised) by force, without disturbing or
at least endangering the quiet and happiness of the whole Community, and
perhaps the dissolution of the Government it self, which is against the duty,
not only of a good Subject, but also of an honest Moral Man, who will not
disturb the public tranquillity for his own private security or revenge. But in
private Families the Case is otherwise, and Children may resist their Father in
the Cases already put, without introducing either Anarchy or Civil War in the
Family; since it can scarce be presumed that either their Mother, Brothers or
Sisters, will take part with a Son or Brother against their Husband and Father,
unless it ware that they might thereby hinder him from committing murder, by
defending their Son or Brothers life, when thus violently and without cause
assaulted; and if it should sometimes happen otherwise, yet this would be a
much less mischief, then that out of this fear the Lives and Liberties of an
innocent Wife and Children, should suffer without cause by his drunkenness or
passion.

But as for the resistance which Sons may make in the State of Nature, and when
separated from their Fathers Families, it is of a much larger extent since they
may then not only defend their own Lives, but also those of their Wives and
Children with their Estates against their Fathers unjust violence, Tho I do
here likewise restrain this self-defence, only to cases of actual invasion or
asault of such Fathers, upon the Lives and Estates of his Children, in which
cases, I also absolutely condemn all actions and proceedings done by way of
prevention, before such violence or assault is actually begun to be made upon
them; much less do I allow of any revenge or return of evil for evil, by such
Children, when the danger is over; since however such revenge may be Lawful
between Persons in the State of Nature, no ways related or obliged to each
other; yet do I by no means allow the same Privilege to Children against their
Parents, since I look upon the obligation they have to them to be of so high a
Nature, that it can never totally be cancelled, tho in those cases of
self-preservation and defense they may be suspended for a time, As if I owed my
life, and all that I have to some great Person, who has either saved the one,
or bestowed the other upon me, tho I should be very undutiful and ungratful
too, if upon his becoming my Enemy tho without any just cause, I should go
about to return his injuries in the same kind; yet were I not therefore obliged
to give up that Life and Estate he had before bestowed upon me, when ever he
thought fit, without any just occasion to take them away; and I am confident
that Resistance in these cases, and with these restrictions, does neither
derogate from that Gratitude and Piety, which Children always ought to pay
their Fathers, nor yet can tend to encourage either Anarchy or Rebellion; since
such Sons when once married and are become Masters or Heads of Families
themselves, they then cease to be under their Fathers Subjection as they were
before, tho I confess they are always to honor and reverence him according to
Gods Command in all cases, when they will deal with them as Fathers, and not as
Enemies


M. I shall no longer dispute this Right of Resistance in Children in the Cases
you have put, since I see it is to little purpose to argue longer with you
about it; but this much I think is still true, that all Supreme Powers
whatever, cannot without Rebellion and absolute dissolution of the Government
be risisted by the Subject; so that if the Government of Fathers or Heads of
Families be Supreme as you seem to grant, that cannot be resisted neither,
without bringing all things therein to Anarchy and confusion.


F. Pray give me leave Sir to interrupt you a little; I desire you to remember
that I do not allow the Power of Fathers or Masters of Families to be any more
then Oeconomical and not Civil Power, and I have already showed you how
Resistance of such a Power, when violently and unjustly exercised, may be
resisted without any Anarchy or confusion in the Family; but as for Resistance
of Civil Powers in some Cases, it is not the Subject of this discourse, and
therefore I desire you would now mind the Subject in Hand, and not pass off to
any other till we have dispatched this, so that I would rather if you have any
fresh objections to make, that you would now do it, because it grows late.


M. I must confess ingeniously, your Arguments have much s^aggered me, since I
see great inconveniences may happen, on either side; for if the Father or
Master may be the sole Judge, when and how he may exercise this absolute Power.
I grant all those mischiefs may sometimes fall out, which you have here set
forth, so on the other side if the Children may be Judges in their own case,
those evils may often happen, which I have already alleged: And therefore pray
pardon me, if I am not too hasty in altering my opinion in this point without
better consideration; but methinks you have not yet fully answered one of my
main Arguments, to prove the Power of Life and Death to proceed from God alone,
and therefore must have been conferred as first on Adam, since no Man has a
Power over his own life, (as I said before) and therefore cannot have it over
that of others.


F. I thought I had already as good as answered this doughty objection, when I
had yielded to you, that neither private Men nor Masters of Families have any
Right to defend their own lives, much less to take away those of others, but as
it is granted them by God in the Law of Nature, in order to the procuring the
great end of it, viz. the happiness and propagation of Mankind, which I own,
could not in this lapsed and depraved State of Nature we now are in, long
subsist without such a Power. Yet I think I have already sufficiently proved,
that we have no need to recur to I know not what divine Charter granted by God
to Adam or Noah, and from them derived to all Civil Magistrates that ever have
been or shall be in the World, the consequence of which would be, that no
Sentence of Death could be justly given against any Man, but in such Kingdoms
or Commonwealths, who own this Authority as conferred on them by God in Adam
or Noah, from which they must deride their Title to it. Now I desire you would
show me how many Kingdoms or Commonwealths there are in the World, who ever
heard of, much less owned this Divine Charter, this fine notion, yea scarce
reaching farther, than some few Divines and high Royalists of our own Island.

But be it as it will, the Antecedent, or first Proposition is not true, that
no Man in any case whatsoever has power over his own life, and therefore
neither is your consequence; for I suppose, that for the same End for which the
Civil Powers may take away another Man's life, viz. in order to the greater
good of Mankind, (of which my Religion or Country is a part,) I am likewise
Master of my own, and may lay it down or expose it, when I think it can conduce
to a greater good than my single life can amount to. And therefore the Example
of Codrus the Athenian King is highly celebrated by all ancient Authors, and is
not condemned by any Christian Writer, that I know of, for Exposing himself to
certain death to gain his Citizens the Victory, the loss of which would have
been the ruin of the State. And in the first Book of Maccabees, Chap. 6.43.
(which the it be not Canonical Scripture, yet is allowed to be Read in our
Churches, as containing Examples of good manners,) you may Read, that Eleazar
the younger Brother of Judas Maccabeus, is there highly commended for his
valor in killing the Elephant, on which the supposed King Antiochus was
mounted, that he might thereby destroy him likewise, tho he might be assured of
his own death by the Elephants falling upon him: And the zeal for the Christian
Religion amongst the Primitive Christians was so great that we may read in
Tertullian, and diverse Ecclesiastical Historians, of whole Troops of Martyrs,
who tho unaccused, yet offered up their lives at the Heathen Tribunals to a
voluntary Martyrdom; and farther, Eusebius himself, does not condemn, Eusebius. l.
8. cap. 12.
but rather commends some Primitive Christians, that being like to be taken by
their Heathen Persecutors, cast themselves down head long from the top of their
Houses, esteeming (as he their tells us) a certain Death as an advantage,
because they thereby avoided the cruelty and malice of their Persecutors. I
could likewise give you (if it were not two tedious) several other Examples of
Ancient Martyrs, who have given up themselves to certain Death to save the
Lives of some of their friends, or else of Christian Bishops, whom they looked
upon as more useful to the Church than themselves, and which St. Paul himself
does likewise suppose to be Lawful, when he tells the Romans, That the scarcely
for a Righteous Man would one dye, Romans 5. v. 17.
yet per adventure for a good Man some would even dare to dye, that is a Man
highly beneficial to others. And the same Apostle, in the last Chapter of this
Epistle, returns thanks to Priscilla and Aquila, not only on his own behalf,
but also for all the Churches of the Gentiles, because they had for his Life
laid down their own Necks, that is, hazarded their lives to save his, and where
ever they might have thus exposed them, surely they might have lost them too.
And therefore I think, I may with reason affirm, that in most Cases, where a
Prince or Commonwealth may command a Man to expose his Life to certain
destruction for the public good of his Religion or Country, he has power
likewise to do it of his own accord, without any such command, the Obligation
proceeding not only from the orders of his Superior, but from that zeal and
affection, which by the Laws of God and Nature he ought to have for his
Religion and Country, even beyond the preservation of his own Life.


M. Well, I confess, that this that you have now said carries, some color of
reason with it, and is more than I had considered before. But pray resolve me
one difficulty more, which still lies upon my mind. By what Authority, less
than a Divine Commission from God himself revealed in Scripture, do Supreme
Powers take upon them to make Law^? And that under no less penalty than Death
it self, against such offenses, as by the Laws of Nature do no ways deserve
Death, such as Theft, Counterfiting the public Coin, with diverse other
offenses, needless here to be reckoned up. And if a Father (as you will not
allow him) has no Right over the Lives or Persons of his Wife and Children, I
cannot see how a Master of a separate Family can have any such Power, more than
his Wife or any other of the Family; and the Scripture seems to countenance
this Power of punishing for Murder, to be in any that will take it upon them,
and therefore you see Cain, said, whoever meets me will slay me. And God tells
Noah, whoever sheddeth Man's Blood, by Man shall his Blood be shed, without
restraining it to any Man particularly who is to do it.


F. This Objection is easily answered, if you please to consider, what you your
self did a good wh^^^ since urge to me, that God endowed Adam with so much
Authority, as should enable him to govern his own Family and Children as long
as he lived; which I readily granted you, and I only differed in the manner of
its derivation, you affirming it to proceed from a Divine Charter or Grant, by
Revelation conferred upon him by God, and I maintaining, that both he and every
other Master of a separate Family, derive it only from Gods Natural and not
Revealed Law, which if it be well proved, such Masters of Families, as also all
Civil Powers (whom I suppose to be endued with the Power of all such Masters of
Families or Freemen taken together) may for the some end, ( viz.) the good
Government, and Peace of their Families and Commonwealths, make Laws under no
less a Penalty than Death it self, against such offenses as by the Law of
Nature do not deserve it, since without such a Power (the wickedness of Man
being come to this height it is) no Family or Commonwealth, could be long
preserved in Peace or safety. And therefore, I suppose you will not affirm, but
that such a Master of a Family, may very well inflict any punishment less than
Death for such offenses, which if they find too gentle to amend those crimes,
they may likewise for the same reason increase the punishments ordained for it.
And therefore, I yield, that tho Theft does not in its own Nature deserve
Death, yet if the Master of such a separate Family shall find his Children or
Servants to be so addicted to this vice, as not to be amended by any less
punishments than Death, he may, for the quiet of his Family, make a general
Law, that whosoever for the future shall commit Theft, shall suffer Death; and
I doubt not, but such a Law when promulged, may be Lawfully Executed, since
this Master of a Family is entrusted by God with the sole Power of judging, not
only what are crimes, but also what are fit punishments for them, since both
are alike necessary for the happiness and preservation of the Family. And I so
far agree with you, that such Masters of Families, have as much Power over the
Lives of their Children and Servants, as the most absolute Monarchs have over
their Subjects, that is, for their common good, and no farther. And upon the
same Principles, do all Kings and Common wealths inflict capital punishments
for the Transgression of all such Laws, as do any way entrench upon the common
interest and safety of their People, and upon this ground, they may justly
inflict no-less punishments than Death, for Coining of false Money, which is
but a sort of Theft from the public Treasure of the Commonwealth. And the same
may be said for all capital punishments ordained against other offenses of the
same Nature.


M. If Fathers or Masters of Families are endued by God, (as you your self now
own,) not only with this Power of Life and Death, for enormous crimes against
the Laws of Nature, but also to make new Laws, or ordain what punishments they
please for such offenses, as they shall judge destructive to the quiet and
happiness of their Families, I see no difference (notwithstanding what you have
hitherto said to the contrary) between Oeconomical and Civil Power. F. P. c.
1.. 10.
For if we compare the Natural Rights of a Father or Master, with those of a
King or Monarch, we shall find them all one without any difference at all, but
only in the latitude or extent of them. For as the Father or Master over one
Family: So a King, as a Father or Master over many Families, extends his care
to Preserve, Feed, Cloth, instruct, and Defend the whole Commonwealth; his
War, his Peace, his Courts of justice, and all his Acts of Sovereignty, tend
only to preserve and distribute to every Subordinate, and inferior Father and
his Children, their Rights and Privileges. Has a Monarch Power to make new
Laws, and appoint what punishments he will to enforce their Observation? So
also has a Father of a Family. Has an absolute Prince Power to command or
dispose of the Goods and Estates of his Subjects, for their common quiet and
security? So also has a Father or Master of a Family. So that all the Duties
of a King, are summed up in this Universal Fatherly care of his People; and if
the Sovereignty be the same, I cannot see and Reason, why the Rights and
Prerogatives of it should not be so too. And therefore, if non resistance
against their Authority, be an unseparable Prerogative of Sovereign Power, then
if a Father or Master of a Family be endued with it, he ought no more to be
resisted, than the most absolute Monarch.


F. I perceive your Head is very full of this Notion of the idintity of Natural
and Civil Power, or else you would never insist so long upon it as you do,
after what I have proved to the contrary. And therefore, since I see you look
upon this as your topping Argument; I shall do my endeavor to show you more
plainly the difference between them. For tho I grant, that such Fathers or
Masters of Families, (as we here treat of,) are endued by God with diverse
Powers, which are Analogous, or perhaps the same with those of a King or
Monarch, that is, of defending their Families as far as they are able from
Foreign force and Domestic injuries, and of revenging and punishing all
offenses that may prove prejudicial or destructive to the Peace and Happiness
of their Families; yet does it not therefore follow, that the Government of
private Families and Kingdoms are all one, since they differ very much, not
only in their Institution, but also in their End. For first, the Fatherly Power
by the Law of Nature, is ordained only for the Generation and Education of the
Children till they come to be grown up; and his Authority as a Father, is
ordained by God only for those Ends; and therefore this Relation of a Father is
so inherent in him, that it can never be parted with, or assigned over to any
other, so as to make the Child or Son so Assigned, to owe the same duty to him,
as he did to his Father.

There is also, besides the Power of a Father, that of a Master, or Head of a
Family over his Children and Servants, whilst they continue Members or Subjects
of it, which Power I grant may be assigned, or made over to one, or more
Persons, when ever such Master shall think fit to institute a Kingdom or
Commonwealth: Yet, as Dr. Sanderson very well observes, this Power of a Master
differs very much from that of the Civil Powers of a Kingdom or Commonwealth,
as well in the object as end of this Power. For first, the Power of a Father is
only over one single Family, whereas that of a Commonwealth is over diverse
Families, united under one Civil Head. Secondly, in respect of the end, the
Power of the Master is chiefly ordained for his own interest and advantage, but
that of the Civil Power, chiefly respects the good of the whole People or
Community. Lastly, the Power of the Master of the Family, is only for the
maintaining his own Natural Property, in those things which he has acquired in
the State of Nature, whereas one great end of Civil Government, is to introduce
and establish Civil Property in things, according to the Laws of the
Commonwealth, and also to maintain it when so constituted. To conclude, Fathers
beget their Children, and Masters acquire to themselves Slaves and Servants,
but it is from the consent of Fathers or Masters of separate Families, that any
sort of Civil Government commenced at first, so that the People at first made
Kings, and not the Kings the People: And further, it is the duty of Fathers and
Masters to provide for their Children and Servants, but the People ought to
provide for their Kings, not only for their necessities, but for their
Magnificence and Grandeur; so that the Power of Fathers and Masters is Natural,
whereas that of Kings and Republics is Political and Artificial, as proceeding
from compacts or the consents of diverse Heads of Families or other Freemen.
And as Kingdoms and Families differ in the manner of their Intitution, so do
they likewise in their ends, which is of a far larger extent in the latter than
in the former, the maine design of instituting Kingdoms and Commonwealths,
before not only to defend their Subjects from such injuries or violence that
they may do each other, but chiefly by their united Forces, to Guard them from
the violence and invasion of Foreign Enemies.

For tho I grant, it may be sometimes happen, that a Family may consist of so
great a number of Children, Servants or Slaves, as may make a little Army, such
as Abraham's was when he made War againk the four Kings, yet is this purely
accidental, and not at all essential to the being of a Family, which is as
perfect in all its constituted parts, if it consists of three or four Persons,
as of three or four hundred. Whereas a Kingdom or Commonwealth cannot subsist,
unless it can either by its own Power or united Forces, defend its Members from
Foreign Force and Invasions: So also in private Families, in the State of
Nature, there can be no property acquired in Lands or goods by any Members of
it, without the Masters express will or permission. But in all Civil
Governments, the very institution and preservation of Civil Property was one of
its chiefest ends, which may be easily proved by experience: Since in all
Nations, where there is any property either in Lands ^or Goods, there is a
necessity of some Civil Government to maintain i^. Whereas in diverse parts of
Africa and America, where there is no distinct property in Land, and where
there are no other Riches, than every Man's Cottage and Garden, with their
Hunting and Fishing Instruments, there is no need of any Common or Civil Power
over them, higher than that of Masters or Fathers of Families, who own no
Superiority among themselves, unless it be when they go to War, and then they
choose out of their own numbers for their Captains or Leaders, those whom they
know to be stoutest and most experienced, whose Power determines as soon as the
War ceases.

But to make an end of this long Discourse, suppose, I should grant all you can
desire, the Oeconomical and Civil Government do not differ in kind, but in
largeness or extent, yet will it not follow, that therefore it must be in all
Cases irresistible, since I think I am able to prove, that no Power whatever
(except that of God himself, can be endued with this Prerogative) if once it
goes about to frustrate, and destroy all the main ends of Government, ( viz.)
the happiness and safty of the Subjects, either by dowright destroying of them,
or else by reducing them to a condition of Slavery and Misery, as the Great
Turk uses his Christian Subjects. But to let you see, I would deal fairly with
you, I will discourse this point of Adam's Soveraignity no farther, but will at
present take it as the Lawyers say, de been esse, or for granted, and I desire
you would show me in the next place when Adam dyed, by what Law, either Divine
or Natural, Cain or Seth (chose which you will) could command over all the rest
of his Brethren and their Descendants. And then again, if you could do this,
what benefit this Doctrine would yield to all Princes and States at this day,
or how you intend to deduce a Title for them from Adam or Noah, or any of their
Sons to their respective Kingdoms, and consequently to an absolute Subjection
of their Subjects, without which all your Hypothesis will signify nothing.


M. I must return you thanks Sir for your candid dealing, and for the great
pains you have taken to enlighten my understanding in this important question.
And tho I doubt, you have laid down Principles not so suitable to Gods Will
revealed in the Holy Scripture, yet I will not imput it to any want of
sincerity in your self, who I hope, are satisfied of the truth of what you have
maintained; so on the other side, I desire you not to take it ill, if I cannot
leave my own opinion, which I have always hitherto looked upon, as most suitable
to the Doctrine of the Church of England, and to the Practice of the Primitive
Church, and to the Laws of the Land, and must continue therein, till I am
convinced I am in an Error. But since I desire to have a further Conversation
with you upon this important Subject, pray let me know, when we shall meet
again, that I may prove to you, from Holy Scripture as well as those Authors, I
have perused that there is a Divine Right of Blood instituted by God for the
Succession of Kingdoms, which cannot without a kind of Sacrilege, or the
highest Injustice, be taken away from the Right Heir.


F. I kindly accept your profer, and if you please shall Discourse this
important Question with you to Morrow in the Evening, if your Occasions will
give you leave.


M. I expect you between seven and eight, and in the mean time am your Servant.


FINIS.
ADVERTISMENT.
STate Tracts: Being a further Collection of several Choice Treatises relating
to the Government; from the Year 1660. to 1680. Now published in a Body, to
show the Necessity, and clear the Legality of the Late Revolution, and Our
present Happy Settlement, under the Auspicious Reign of Their Majesty's, King
William and Queen Mary. Printed for Richard Baldwin.

Bibliotheca Politica: Or a DISCOURSE By way of DIALOGUE, WHETHER There can be
made out from the Natural, or Revealed Law of God, any Succession to Crowns by
Divine Right?

Collected out of the most Approved Authors, both Ancient and Modern.

Dialogue the Second.

LONDON, Printed for R. Baldwin in Warwick Lane, near the Oxford-Arms; where
also may be had the First Dialogue. 1692.

The Subject of the Second Dialogue.
WHether Hereditary Succession to Crowns be by Divine Right, or Institution, or
not? Authors made use of in this Discourse, and how denoted in the Margin.

1. Sir. Robert Filmer's Patriarcha. F. P. Preface to his Political
Observations. F. P. O. Observations on Forms of Government. F. O. G. Directions
to Obedience. F. D. O.
2. Patriarcha non Monarcha. P. N. M. 3. Mr. Bohun's Preface to Sir R. Filmer's
Patriarcha. B. P. P. Conclusion to the same. B. C. P.
4. Two Treatises of Government together. T. T. G. 5. Grotius de Iure Belli and
Pacis. G. I. P. 6. Bishop Sanderson's Preface to Archbishop Usher's Power of
the Prince. S. P. P.
Advertisement TO THE READER.
THE Author of these Discourses hopes you will be so charitable as to believe,
that though he has made one of his Disputants argue pretty stiffly against the
Divine Right of Monarchy, and Succession to Crowns, yet He is no
Common-wealths-man, or one who hereby designs or desires Alterations in the
Government of this Nation, either of Church, or State, since none can admire
their Excellent Constitution more than himself; much less does he prefer an
Elective, before an Hereditary Succession to Crowns, since he justly esteems
the latter, as being a most Excellent, if not (Only) Means to prevent all
Disputes, and Civil Disturbances about Succession, and therefore is never to be
departed from, unless when some Natural, or Moral Disability in the Person, or
other unavoidable necessity renders it absolutely inconsistent with the Public
Peace, and Safety of the Kingdom.

Therefore as a Man may be said to be truly devout without Superstition (which
is but the Corruption, or Abuse of Religion;) so the Author likewise thinks
that a Subject may be truly Loyal, and Obedient to his Prince, though he has
never heard of, or does not believe any Divine Right of Monarchy derived from
Adam, and Noah, or of Succession from God's Promise that Cain should Rule over
Abel: Nor has the Author an Aversion to Absolute Monarchy as such, could he be
assured that Princes would be always as wise, and good as they ought to be;
nay, he owns, that diverse Nations have never been more happy than under the
Government of such Monarchs. As the Roman Empire (For instance) never arrived
to a greater height of Riches, and Power, (if we may believe Historians) than
under Nerva, Trajan, and the two Antonines: So that indeed the fault is not in
Absolute Monarchy as such, but in the too general Corruption of Humane Nature,
which rarely produces Persons of just Abilities, both as to Wisdom, and
Goodness, fit for so great a Trust.

I confess Subjects may be sufficiently happy, and (if they please) contented
under any Form of Government, where the Governors are of Equal Capacity and
Honesty, and have a real hearty Love, and Concern for the Common Good of their
People: But where these are wanting, it is not mere Forms, or empty Names can
make them so; and therefore the Author very justly admires the Wisdom of the
Ancient German, and Gothic Nations, who preferred a Limited Monarchy to all
other Forms of Government, as an Excellent Medium between the Mischiefs of
Arbitrary Power, and those unhappy Inconveniences that attend Republics, where
either the Common People, or Nobility must govern.

But the Author farther hopes, that though he makes one of his Disputants in this
Dialogue to show the absurdity, and fatal consequences of Sir R. F's
Principles; yet the Reader will not from thence infer, that he passes an
absolute Judgment against them; much less has He done this out of any
prejudice to Sir R's Person, which he never was acquainted with, since he has
rather an honor for his Memory, his Writings speaking him as a Person of
Gentile Learning, and subtle Ingenuity: But whether his Tenets be destructive
to the Fundamental Constitutions of this Government, the Author submits to the
Reader's considerate Judgment, which he hopes will be made without partiality,
or any prejudicate Opinion proceeding from this, or that Party, or Faction, and
will determine according to the Merits of the Cause; and therein observe the
Apostles Rule, to try all things, and hold fast that which is good.

The Author lastly desires the Reader not to think the worse of this
performance, though all the Latin Quotations are not Englisht; for since these
Discourses are supposed to be between Gentlemen, and Scholars, and principally
intended for such, it would be thought needless to translate them.

THE Second Dialogue BETWEEN Mr. FREEMAN a Gentleman AND Mr. MEANWELL a
Civilian.
M. YOU are I see, Sir, a punctual man to your hour; Pray do me the favor to
sit down by the Fire, I will but make an end of what I am writing, and wait on
you presently.


F. Your Servant Sir, take your own time, but pray remember the point you are
now to satisfy me in.


M. Now Sir, I have done, and if I remember right, I am to derive a Title to
all the Kings, and Monarchs that have ever been or shall be in the World from
that Supreme Fatherly Power conferred by God on Adam. But pray take notice I
undertake this Task only for Monarchies, not Commonwealths, whom I must own to
be of mere Humane Invention; And though I will not say that they are absolutely
unlawful, yet I think they are not the Powers ordained by God in Scripture.


F. Well Sir, we will discourse farther of that anon: and therefore I do assure
you, I do not desire any more of you now than that you should prove the Divine
Institution of Monarchy, and I think that task sufficient if it can be made out
in one or two meetings.


M. It may seem indeed somewhat absurd to maintain, that all Kings are now the
Fathers of their People, since you will say experience shows the contrary. F. P.
Chapter 1. 8.
It is true all Kings are not now the Natural Parents of their Subjects, yet
they all either are, or are to be reputed the next Heirs to those
Primogenitors, who were at the first the Natural Parents of the whole People,
and do in their right succeed to the exercise of the Supreme Jurisdiction, and
such Heirs are not only Lords of their own Children, but also of their
Brethren, and all others that were subject to their Fathers, and therefore I
suppose, that God, when he conferred this Supreme Power on Adam, did not intend
it should die with him, but descend to his Heirs after his Decease.


F. Well, I shall at present grant you all this likewise, though it might be
questioned. But pray who were those Heirs? many, or but one Person?


M. I suppose you will also grant me at present, what we before disputed, that
the Power of Fathers over their Children, being the Fountain of all Regal
Authority, Ibid.
by the Ordination of God himself, it follows that Civil Power, not only in
General is by Divine Institution, but even the assignment of it specifically to
the eldest Parents.


F. Pray whom do you mean by Eldest Parents, our Great Grandmother (...) if you
mean by it one that had longest had Children, she must come in as next Heir by
these words.


M. No Sir, you altogether misapprehend me, I mean the Eldest Son of Adam; Eve
was his Wife, and could have nothing to do to inherit in an Hereditary Monarchy
as this was.


F. (...) your pardon Sir, if I misunderstood you, but you must thank the
looseness or impropriety of your expression for it, for I suppose you cannot
deny, but Eldest Parents commonly signify either the Eldest men, or Women that
have Children, or those who have longest had Issue and then in either of these
senses, our Great Grandmother Eve, stood fairest to be Heir of this Divine
Power of Adam; but this I am sure of, Parents can never signify Heirs Male or
Female, much less a Child who may sometimes (according to your hypothesis)
happen to be Heir; but since I am gotten into this mistake, I shall not leave
my hold, but shall make bold a little to argue our Great Grand Mother's Title,
for indeed I cannot see any reason why her Eldest Son (for Example) should have
any right to Govern his Mother, and all his Brothers and Sisters, whilst she
was alive.

For first, if your Argument from Generation must be good, that every man that
is born, becomes a subject to him that begets him, this Argument will serve for
Eve as well as Adam; since (as I have already proved) the Mother has as great
(if not a greater) share, in the Generation of the Children, than the Father;
Or secondly, if you insist upon the Divine grant you so much ^^lked of last
time, of Adam's Dominion over the Creatures, in which his Children were
included; I then proved to you, that this Grant was made as well to Eve as
Adam; And consequently the either she must have thereby an equal right with
him, or at least after his Decease to this Dominion, as a Husband and Wife when
joint Purchasers have to an E^tate at Common Law. And lastly, If the
Commandment of Honor thy Father and thy Mother, were then in Force by the Law
of Nature or by express Command from God, and that by Honoring, obeying must
be meant (as most Commentators agree) then it will follow, that after Adams
Decease, all Eves Sons and Descendants, though never so remo^e, were to have
obeyed or been subject to her, and not to her Eldest Son, unless you can show
me that the Salique Law against the succession of Women was made by Adam the
first Monarch, which I suppose you will not undertake to prove.


M. I must confess, I did not consider this difficulty, for indeed it might
never have happened, since Eve might have died before Adam, or if she did
outlive him (which is uncertain) yet she was then very old, and consequently
(besides the natural weakness of her Sex) incapable, or unfit for Government,
and so might very well leave it to Seth, since Cain the Eldest had by the
Murder of his Brother, and his flying away into another Country, forfeited his
Birthright, and made himself incapable of the Succession.


F. So then here is a Forfeiture, and an Abdication of this Divine Right of
Succession in the very first Descent; whereas indeed I supposed, that this
Divine Right had been at least as unforfeitable as the Crown of England, the
very Descent of which, as our Lawyers tell us, purges all defects in the next
Heir, though he had murdered his Father and Elder Brother too. But I only show
you the absurdity of this Notion, and shall not longer insist upon it,
therefore pray proc^ed.


M. I cannot tell what might have been said, if Cain had come to claim his
Birthright, but this is certain, that he neither did or could come to do it,
since God condemned him to live in a strange Country far from his Brethren, B.
P. P. c. 2. 9. Genesis 4.16, 17.
and we read That Cain went out from the presence of the Lord, and dwelt in the
Land of Nod, on the East of Eden, and he built a City, and called the Name of
it Enoch, after the Name of his Son Enoch. And there are four descents set down
immediately of his Family, which could be no other than the Princes of that
City of Cain's Race. So that you see, even in Cain's Line, the Principality
descended to the Eldest Son.


F. I confess Cain's Children and Grandchildren are particularly set down in
Scripture, but that they were Princes or Monarchs over their Posterity, or
which way this City was Governed after Cain's Death, whether by one, or by all
the Sons of Cain is no where mentioned, but I see some Men can find even
absolute Monarchy in a Text, where the Scripture mentions no such thing, and no
wonder, for the Alchymists have found out likewise the invention of their
Elixir, or Philosophers Stone, in such Texts as you or I can see no such thing.
But to be more serious;

That a Father should be Lord over his Children and Posterity. I confess there
may be some color of reason, though none cogent enough to make it out: But that
an Elder Brother has any Natural or Divine Right, to be Lord over all the rest
of his Brethren, I can find no ground for, in reason, even upon your own
Principles, for if every Man by his Birth become the subject of him that begets
him, it will necessarily follow, that a Man by his Birth cannot become a
subject to his Brother, who (sure) did not beget him.

Therefore I suppose you will still insist upon that place in the fourth of
Genesis, which you cited at our last Meeting, when God told Cain (speaking as
you suppose) of his Brother Abel, His desire shall be subject unto thee, and
thou shall Rule over him. From which words I then told you. I thought an
absolute subjection of Abel, and of all younger Brothers whatsoever could not
reasonably be inferred, for you may remember I showed you, that this Promise by
God to Cain concerning Abel might be only personal, and relate to Abel only,
and not to the rest of his Brethren, much less, all other younger Brothers,
that should be in the World; And in the next place this Ruling might only have
been by advice and persuasion, and not by any Authority or Right of commanding
him. So that if this be the place (as I suppose it is) from whence you would
deduce your Divine Right of Elder Brothers being Monarc^s over the younger in
all Hereditary Monarchies, I must freely tell you I think it a very bold
undertaking to found a Divine Right upon such doubtful expressions, as these of
God to Cain.


M. I confess, I was now about again to urge this place to you; for as I was
not then well satisfied with your explanation of it, which you now again
repeat, so upon second thoughts I am much more unsatisfied with your Paraphrase
upon them. For you seem to me plainly to pervert the sense of the words, BPP.
64.
and make them signify just nothing. For sure when God spoke the same Words to
Eve concerning Adam, as he did to Cain concerning Abel, can you conceive they
were meant personally to Eve only, and concerned no other Wife that should be
after her? Or can you assign any Reason why these words should be rather meant
personally in the last, and not in the first case? Unless you will do it out of
pure Love to Anarchy and confusion. And if you say these words do not signify
any despotick Power, but a Ruling or Governing by fair means or persuasion,
this seems mere trifling with Gods Word, who says expressly, Thy Brothers
desire shall be Subject to thee; That is (say you) as far as he thinks fit, and
thou shall rule over him, that is, if thou have the knack to wheedle or
persuade him. Would not this have been a mighty matter for God Almighty to have
appeared to Cain about, and an excellent Argument to comfort him, Ib. c. 2. 7.
and to appease his Wrath against his Brother? So that it seems apparent by
this Law given by God to Cain and Abel, that this Regal and Paternal Authority
was not to dye with him, nor ^o be equally divided amongst all his Children at
his Death, or that from thenceforth no man should have a Right by Birth of
commanding another, for this command to Abel could not be supposed to take
place in the Life of Adam, for then Adam was Lord over all his Children, and so
none of them without his permission could rule over the rest, and if it were
otherwise by Adam's appointment, then Adam was the Sovereign still, and the Son
or Grandson so exercising this Power was but his Deputy: but after Adam's
decease then it became a real Sovereignty in his Eldest Son, as having none but
God Superior to it.


F. I hope you will judge more charitably of me* than to believe that the sense
that I have put upon these words, though different from yours, is out of any love
of Anarchy or confusion, much less out of any design to pervert or wrest this
place of Scripture: and if I should be so severe as you are, perhaps I might
with more reason lay this charge at your Door: for in the first place, I am not
satisfied with your Argument, that these words could not be meant personally,
or concerning Abel only, because the same words when spoken of Eve do likewise
concern her Posterity, and therefore when spoken concerning Abel they must
likewise relate to all Younger Brothers in Hereditary Monarchies: which
consequence I may with very good reason deny, for whatsoever subjection may be
due by virtue of the like words from Eve and her Posterity, to Adam and all
other Husbands, is to be supposed to have been enjoined, because all Women are
descended from Eve, and so were represented by her as their first Parent. Thus
St. Paul supposes all men to be in a state of Sin and Death, Romans 5. v. 12.
as represented by Adam; their Ancestor, by whose disobedience all have sinned.
But no man will affirm that all the Elder Brothers, or Monarchs in the World
were represented by Cain, and all younger Brothers by Abel, no man at this day
being (as appears in Scripture) descended from either of them: and I cannot but
take notice that the better to strengthen your Notion you again foist in out of
the margin of our English Bible, His desire shall be subject to thee, whereas
in the Hebrew it is no more than, His or its desire shall be to thee.

And that the words Rule over, are to be interpreted according to the subject,
and do not always mean a ruling by force, or command appears by the same Hebrew
words made use of in the first of Genesis* concerning the two great Lights that
God set in the Firmament, v. 17, 18.
to give Light upon the Earth, to rule over the Day, and over the Night, which
cannot signify a ruling by force or command, but only by a natural influence,
or pre-eminence of the Sun and Moon above the Stars or Planets. And though you
are pleased to ridicule this explanation of mine, yet I think, I may with as
much reason treat yours with the like contempt, for since your self grant that
this Power of Cain over Abel, was not to commence till after the Death of Adam,
and that this Murder of Abel was committed above a hundred years after Adams
Creation, Gen 5. v. 3.
appears by the time of the Birth of Seth, (who was born sometime after Abel's
Death) would not this thing have been a mighty comfort to Cain, when he was in
his dogged humor, if God had bid him cheer up, for the time should come that if
he behaved himself well, about eight hundred years hence, when his Father Adam
should die, he should then Lord it over his Brother, and be revenged of him for
the affront he had received in having his Sacrifice preferred before his own?
So that this interpretation of yours is so absurd, that I do much rather agree
with diverse learned commentators as well Jews as Christians, who make not only
a quite different interpretation, but also a different version of these words
from the Hebrew Text, and if you have the Learned Jesuit Menochius his Notes
upon the Bible, I pray let me see them. Here pray observe what he says upon
this place. Se^ sub te erit appetitus ejus; in Hebraeo, and apud LXX est, ad te
conversio ejus: sensus est, Peccatum ejusque appetitus, and concupiscentia te
sollicitabit ad consensum* sed ita, ut ad te converti, and a te conseusum
petere, and impetrare debeat; id noster interpres ad sensum clare vertit, sub
te erit appetitus ejus; by all which he means no more, than that sin should
tempt, or solicit him to offend, but that he should rule over it, that is, had
a power so to do if he would use it as he ought. So likewise Mr. Ainsworth upon
this place, (as you may see in Pool's Critics) puts a li^e sense upon the
following words, referring the whole sentence to the sin in these words,
Peccatum ponitur pro poena Peccati; juxta Hebraeos ita accipitur, Genesis 19.15.
Lev. 20. 9. 1 Rep. 7.9. sinsus est prope te punitio peccati and ad te desiderum
ejus, i. e. cupit te poena peccati tui, ut solet post peccatum admissum. Sed tu
si vis dominaberis illi, i. e. potes declinare peccatum, q. d. poena haec,
sicut canis est, qui ad ostium cubat* cupiens ingredi, sed in potestate Domini
est, vel claudere ostium, ne ingrediatur, vel aperire ut intret. Probatur hic
sensus 1. Prius membrum de praemio l^quitur, reportabis scil. praemium, ergo
posterius loquitur de poena, peccatum jam inerat ipsi, punitio vero nondum, sed
ad fores erat. So that according to these learned Comentators, this place is to
be thus turned out of Hebrew, If thou do not well, sin lies at the door, and
to thee is its desire, but thou may or shall rule over it, which seems to me
to be a much more Genuin and Rational Interpretation, than that of our English
or Latin Bibles; so that I think I may justly except against the Authority of
so doubtful and obscure a place, as sufficient to found your Monarchical Power
of Elder Brothers, in the State of Nature.


M. Well Sir, since you are no better satisfied with this Testimony o^^ of
Genesis, for the Divine Right of Primogeniture, I will no longer insist upon
it, though I am not yet convinced, but that my Interpretation of this place is
truer than yours, since I have likewise great Authorities on my side, both
Ancient and Modern, besides our common versions to authorize it, and therefore
since I have many other examples out of Scripture of this kind, I shall the
less insist upon it, but will now proceed to the examples before the Flood.
First therefore, it seems highly probable if not certain, that whatever Civil
Government there was in the World, before that period of time (as it is very
rational to believe there necessarily m^st be some in so long a space as near
two hundred years) it was chief^y administered by those first Patriarchs, whose
names you will find particularly recited in the fifth of Genesis, and sure that
long Chain we there have of them, B. P. P. 52.
by whose Lives the Chronology of the World is only reckoned till the Flood,
were in their several Generations considerable persons, nay Princes over their
own Families which could not but be very numerous, and indeed the very counting
the Age of the World by the years of their lives is to me an Argument that they
were no obscure unregarded men, but that they were either Monarchs or Princes
of all Mankind or at least over that part of the World in which they lived,
(...).

(...).


and Josephus is likewise of my opinion in the first Book of the Jewish
Antiquities, where (as you may see) cap. 3. he expressly tells us, thus, Seth
autem centesimo and quinto anno genuit Eno^. Qui dum quinque and nongentos
vixisset annos. rerum curam tradidit filio suo Carnae, and immediately after
proceeds thus, Lamec^um autem filium genuit Ma^husalas, Enocho oreus, cum annos
ipse habere (...) CLXXXVII. Imperium vero Lamecho eidem tradidit paren^, quod
jam tenuerat ipse annos DCCCCLXIX. Lamechus pariter Principatum reliquit Noe
filio, post quam regnasset annos DCCLXXVII. Noe denique verum summam tenuit
annos nongentos and quinquaginta; Lamecho annos 382. aetatis habenti genitus.
And Noah, the last of the Ten Patriarchs, and the surviving Patriarch of all
Mankind, was declared by God the Universal Monarch of the World, as soon as he
came out of the Ark, to whom he granted the Dominion over all things, as
appears by those words of God to Noah, V. 2* 3. F. O. G. p. 47. L. 1. C. 4.
Genesis 9. whereby I conceive, that though it has been thence concluded by Mr.
Seldom in his Mare Clausum, that there was a general Community between Noah,
and his Sons, yet the Text does not clearly warrant it: For although the Sons are
there joined with Noah in the blessing, yet it may best be understood, with a
Subordination, or a Benediction in Succession; and the Blessing might truly be
fulfilled, if the Sons either under, or after their Father enjoyed a Private
Dominion: Nor is it probable, that the Private Dominion, which God gave to Adam
and by his Dona^ion, Assignation or Cession to his Children, was abrogated, and
a Community of all things instituted between Noah, Joseph. Antiq. Iud. Lib. 1.
Cap. 3. 4. Oxon. edit.
and his Sons after the Flood. And when Noah was left the sole Heir of the
World; why should it be thought that God would disinherit him of his Birth
right and make him only Tenant in Common with his Children? And if the Blessing
given to Adam, Genesis 1.128. be compared to that given to Noah, and his Sons,
Genesis 9.2. there will be found a considerable difference between these two
Texts. In the Benediction of A^^m we find expressed a subduing of the Earth and
a Dominion over the Creatures; neither of which are expressed in the Blessing
of Noah, nor the Earth there once named: It is only said, The Fear of you shall
be upon the Creatures, and into your hands are they delivered; then immediately
it follows, Every moving thing shall be meat for you, as the green Herb, etc.
The first Blessing gave Adam Dominion over the Earth, and all Creatures; the
latter allows Noah Liberty to use the Living Creatures for Food: Here is no
alteration or diminishing of his Title to an absolute Propriety of all things,
but only an Enlargement of his Commons.


F. As for the Government of the World before the Flood, I have already
acknowledged, that the Scrip^^res being silent in it, no man can affirm any
thing positively concerning it, whether it was Regal, Aristocratical, or
Paternal, neither is it any Proof, that because God thought fit for our
understanding the Age of the World, or the Genealogy of Noah, from whom all
Mankind now takes its Original to set down a Series of the Patriarchs from
Father to Son, or that because they were no obscure, unregarded Men, that
therefore they must all be absolute Princes, or Monarchs over their Families.
This is, as a Father said long ago, Divinare ^agis, quam scire. But I see, when
Prejudice once blinds our Reasons, we easily make good that old saying, Facile
credimus quod volumus. But as for your Quotation out of Josephus, I grant
indeed, that at the first sight it makes for you; but suppose it does, I cannot
see how a Man may can lay any stress upon it, since the Scripture, being silent
of any such Monarchy, or Principality in these Patriarchs, since this Author
writes his History above three sand years, after the time that these Patriarchs
lived, which he there mentions; and that we are sure there were no Authors then
extant, that writ of the Ante-Deluvian Patriarchs, but Moses only, Josephus
could speak no otherwise than by guess, or from some uncertain Tradi^ions
preserved amongst the Pharisees, of which Sect he was: To which Traditions,
when not warranted by Scripture* how little Credit is to be given, our Savior
himself teaches us. And also the many futilous Traditions of the Rabbis at
this day, do sufficiently show us: But I suppose that by this word (...), there
used by Josephus, (which is rendered by the Latin Version Principatus) is not
meant any Monarchical Power, but only that Principality or Eminency, or that
Reverence, and Respect which their Posterity paid them, either in regard of
their great Age and Experience, or of the Spirit of God, with which they might
be supposed to be endued, sufficient to make them to be taken notice of, and
reverenced above all other Men living in their time. I have likewise upon
better consideration, two other Reasons to add, why by the curam rerum,
mentioned in this place, cannot be meant a Regal Power, because Josephus
mentions no such thing of Adam the f^rst Father, and as you suppose Monarch of
Mankind; which sure he would have done had he believed him endued by God with
such a Power.

The second Reason is, that if you please to observe, he ascribes to
Mathuselab, Lamech, and Noah, as many years of Empire, as of Life: So that
either this place of Josephus signifies nothing at all, or else will make
nothing to your purpose to prove these Ancient Patriarchs to have been so many
Monarchs.

I come now to the next Period of time after the Flood, and whereof I grant we
may discourse with more certainty: But I could have wished you would have
repeated more particularly the words, whereby you suppose God granted to Noah
alone, an absolute Dominion over the whole Earth, and all the Creatures therein
contained: But I perceive you thought the words not very favorable for you, or
else you would have repeated, or read them to me, which since you omitted, I
pray give me leave to do it for you, and then I will leave it to your self to
judge whether there can be any thing drawn from this Text to countenance your
Opinion; Genesis 9.1, 2, 3.
the words are these: And God blessed Noah, and his Sons, and said unto them,
Be fruitful, and multiply, and Replenish the Earth. And the fear of you, and
the dread of you shall be upon every Beast of the Earth, and upon every Fowl of
the Air, upon all that moves upon the Earth, upon all the Fishes of the Sea,
into your hand are they delivered. Every moving thing that lives shall be meat
for you; even as the green Herb have I given you all things: Where you may
plainly see, that Noah has no Pre-eminence in this Grant above his Children,
who were (for as much as I can see) by this Text to be Tenants in Common with
him of the Earth, and all its Creatures* Nor is there much difference between
this Grant to Noah, and his Sons, and that made to Adam, and Eve, which I
proved extended alike to all Mankind, more than that the Brute Animals are here
granted to Noah, and his Sons for Food, which they were not before to Adam.

But I perceive you your self are sensible, that this is the most plain, and
obvious sense of these words, and therefore you have thought good to wrest them
so as may best serve your purpose; and indeed you deal very cunningly to say,
that this Grant may be best understood with a Subordination in Succession; T.
T. G. c. 4. p. 41.
It Is true indeed, it serves best for your purpose, that it should be so
understood, but that will be best understood by any body else, which best
agrees with the Plain, and obvious Sense of the Words. Nor will your reason
signify any thing, that the Blessing might be truly fulfilled if the Sons
either under, or after their Father enjoyed a private Dominion: Since that were
to say that a Grant whose express Words, give a joint Title in present (for the
Text says, Into your hands they are delivered) may best be understood with a
subordination, or in succession, because it is possible that in subordination,
or succession it may be so enjoyed, is all one as to say, that a Grant of any
thing in present Possession, may best be understood in Reversion, because it is
possible one may live so to enjoy it. And as for the other parts of this Grant,
they are so expressed, that they must needs be understood to belong to Noah's
Sons, not with a subordination, or in succession, but as full and equally as to
Noah himself: The fear of you, and the dread of you (says God) shall be upon
every Beast, etc. Can any body in reason say, that the Creatures were to fear,
and stand in awe of Noah only, and not of his Sons without his leave, or till
after his death? And are the following words, ( into your hands they are
delivered,) to be understood, (as you say) if your Father please, or they shall
be delivered into your hands hereafter? You do also as wisely to say, that if
Adam had a private Dominion given him by God, that he would not now abrogate
it: For I grant, that if he had given Adam any such private Dominion, that
there had been no reason for him now to have changed it. But I think I have
sufficiently proved at our last meeting, that he had no such private Dominion
given him any more than Eve, and those Children that were to proceed from them.
So that this supposition being false, there will be no such considerable
difference as you suppose, between these two Texts. For certainly, (though it be
not here expressed) Noah's Sons had as much Right to subdue or possess the
Earth, as the Posterity of Adam had before the Flood, and likewise to enjoy, or
eat the Products thereof; only here is granted to Noah, Ib. p. 47.
and his Sons, a Power to kill the Creatures for food, which was not granted to
Adam, or those that lived before the Flood: And though you will have this Grant
to be no diminishing of Noah's Title to a sole Propriety in all things, but
only an Enlargement of his Commons; yet methinks it is a considerable
Privilege not only to himself, but his Sons likewise, who are hereby empowered
to use the Creatures for food, as well as their Father, or else their Case had
been very hard, if when the Creatures were sufficiently multiplied, they might
not have killed so much as a Hare, or a Partridge without his leave. And if
they had a Right thus to use these Creatures, how this differs from an absolute
Propriety in them when ever they are taken, my dull understanding is not able
to comprehend.


M. Well, since you will not admit of this sole Dominion of Noah over all
things in the World: I shall not longer insist upon it, but will pass over to
those other Authorities I have to produce out of Scripture.


F. I pray Sir, do; and to let you see how fair an Adversary I will be, I will
for the present admit, that Noah was a Prince or Monarch over all his
Posterity; but then pray show me to whom this Power descended after his
Decease, for I can see nothing in Scripture, that favors your Divine Right of
Primogeniture, but that every one of Noah's Three Sons was a Prince alike over
his own Family, and had an equal share in the Earth, and all its Products, the
one as much as the other; so that here it is apparent your sole Monarchy of the
World dwindles into a sort of Gavel-kind where all the Sons inherit alike.


M. I cannot deny the matter of Fact to be as you have laid down, but then
there might be very good reason for it, which might render the sole
Principality of Noah's Eldest Son to be not only unlawful, F. O. G. p. 49.
but unpracticable, for in the first place Mr. Seldom in his Mare Cl^sum (in
the place aforecited) tells us, L. 1. c. 4.
from the Ancient Tradition of the Jewish Rabbis, That Noah himself, as Lord
of all, was Author of the distribution of the World, and of private Dominion,
and that by the appointment of an Oracle from God, be did confirm this
distribution by his last Will, and Testament, which at his Death he lef^ in the
hands of his Eldest Son Shem, and also warned all his Sons, that none of them
should invade any of their Brothers Dominions, or injure one another, because
from thence Discord, and Civil Wars would necessarily follow.

Nor do I see any reason why Noah might not emancipate his two Younger Sons
from the Dominion of the Elder, and likewise give them a separate share of the
Earth, and also an independent Power over their own Family, and Posterity. In
the second place, it might be impracticable for one Man to Govern all Mankind,
when in a little time it became so multiplied and dispersed over the Face of
the Earth, and the Languages so confounded by the Act, or Will of God, that it
was impossible for the Three Elder Sons, of these three great Patriarchs, to
govern them. But during the Life of Noah, B. P. P. 10.
we do not read that any of his Children, or Descendants, withdrew themselves
from him without his leave, Genesis 11.1, 2.
but rather the contrary; for it is said, The whole Earth was of one Language,
and of one Speech; and it came to pass as they journeyed from the East, that
they found a Plain in the Land of Shinar, etc By which words it appears they
kept well enough together; and the very reason why they began to build the
Tower, was left, (said they) We should be scattered abroad upon the Face of the
whole Earth: So that there was no disunion amongst them, nor so much as a
desire of it, whilst Noah lived.


F. I pray give me leave to answer what you have said concerning this
Distribution of the Earth by Noah's last Will, and also his making all his Sons
Lords, or Monarchs alike, both which favor so strongly of the Rabbinical
Liberty of Invention, that I wonder how any Learned Man can believe such idle
Stories, especially when the Scripture, and the most Ancient Histories, and
Records that are extant in the World, mention no such thing; and though Ios^phus
may in the place you have cited suppose that every one of the Patriarchs he
mentions, were Princes, or Monarchs, yet he does not say any thing like it,
concerning the Three Sons of Noah's being Monarchs, or of this Partition of the
Earth between them, but makes them to live together in those Mountainous
parts, till they descended from thence into the Plain; so that it was
impossible for Noah to make a Distribution of those parts of the Earth, which
were not yet discovered; and it is apparent by the Scripture it self, that a
considerable time after Noah's Death all Mankind lived together, and therefore
there was no impossibility (as you suppose) why Noah's Eldest Son could not
have commanded his Brethren, and their Descendants, they being not as yet
dispersed, or separated from each other, as you may see by the first Verses of
(...) of Genesis, which you cited but now. So that if Noah's Eldest Son was
disinherited of his Right of Governing his Brethren, and their Descendants,
that could not be the cause of it, which you assign; and if Primogeniture be a
Divine Right appointed by God himself, and unalterable by Humane Laws, as you
suppose, I cannot see how the Will of a Father* which is but a Humane
Institution, can ever alter it: For I remember you laid it down as a Maxim, at
our last meeting, That the Divine Right of the Right Heir never dies, can be
lost, or taken away; so that if there has been any such thing as a Divine
Right of Primogeniture belonging to the Eldest Son of Noah, it is not likely
that he would have permitted his two Brothers to have usurped it from him.


M. I shall not insist longer on this Tradition, concerning the Distribution of
the Earth amongst the Sons of Noah; but certainly it is not a thing to be made
so slight of as you do, since Cedrenus a Modern Greek Historian, is very
particular in it; besides, so many other Learned Men (and the great Seldom
among the rest) have given countenance to it. And though I grant that
Primogeniture is of Divine Right, yet that might very well be altered by Noah's
Will, especially, since his Children might be satisfied that he being a
Prophet, and Preacher of Righteousness, might make this Division of his
Paternal Power by a Divine Command.

But I shall not dwell longer upon this, but proceed to the next Period of
Time; ( viz.) that of the Confusion, and Dispersion of Tongues, in which there
are more evident Footsteps of this Right of Primogeniture, as also of the
Patriarchal Power I maintain: And therefore pray turn to the 10th of Genesis,
and there you will find (after the Recital of the Genealogy of every one of the
Sons of Noah, whose Des^endants are there particularly set down) these words in
the fifth verse; By these were the Isles of the Gentiles divided in their
Lands; F. P. P. 4.
every one after his Tongue, after their Families in their Nations: And
likewise in the 20th verse; These are the Sons of Ham, after their Families;
after their Tongues in their Countries, and in their Nations. And in the last
verse; These are the Families of the Sons of Noah, and their Generations in
their Nations; and by these were the Nations divided in the Earth after the
Flood. So that if we consider the first Plantations of the World, which were
after the Building of Babel, and the Confusion of Tongues, we may find the
Division of the Earth into distinct Kingdoms, or Nations, by several Families
and Languages, F. A. MM. p. 275.
whereof the Sons, or Grandchildren of Noah, were the Kings, or Governors, by
a Fatherly Right: And for the preservation of this Power, and Right in these
Fathers, God was pleased upon several Families to bestow a Language on each by
it self, the better to unite it into a Nation or Kingdom. So that it becoming
impossible (as I said before) for the Elder Sons or Descendants of these Three
great Patriarchs to Govern all Mankind, who now no longer understood each
other's Language, it was absolutely necessary that the Heads of the several
Families should take that care upon them, and their Children submit to them;
wherein they had the direction of God Almighty, who had commanded them to obey
their Parents, and a miraculous declaration of his Will for their Dispersion,
by the confounding of their Language, and that so ordered by God too, that the
Descendants of the same Person, and Family, spoke one Tongue; was not this a
declaring these Fathers Princes of these several Families, and Tongues by God
himself, who by his Providence had thus confounded their Tongues, and dispersed
them by Families, that they could no longer be governed by Three, or Four
Patriarchs, but must have as many distinct Governments, as there were different
Tongues, there being no means at present of any intercourse, or correspondence
one with another, or with their former Governors? So that however in this
Confusion of Tongues (by which, as Josephus supposes, there were Seventy two
distinct Nations erected) yet were they not confused Multitudes without Heads,
or Governors, and at liberty to choose what Governors, or Government they
pleased, but were so many distinct Families which had Fathers for Rulers over
them of the same Speech: B. P. P. 10.
Whereby it is manifest, that even in the Confusion, God was careful to
preserve Fatherly Authority, and Monarchical Power entire, by distributing the
diversity of Languages according to the diversity of Families; which shows that
God was still for Government, and that Paternal too, since it is evident that
every People followed their Ancestor, or Patriarch, as their Prince or Leader
in this Dispersion, who had a Patriarchal Authority over their Posterity; for
by what else can you suppose they could have made their Children, and
Descendants, to have followed them as far as the utmost Isles of the Gentiles?


F. I confess there are many difficulties as well in the time, as manner of
this Dispersion, according to our Common Chronology; for if you suppose, that
the Building of the Tower of Babel, fell out within two hundred years after the
Flood, as most of our Chronologers, who follow the Hebrew account, do, then it
is certain, that Noah, and his Sons, were still alive, who lived till above
four hundred years after the Flood; so that either Noah, and his Sons, did not
travel with the rest of their Descendants into the Plain of Shinar, where they
built the Tower of Babel, which yet seems contrary to the Text, which says, All
Mankind being of one Language, they traveled, etc. And if these Children, and
Grandchildren left their Ancestors at home, what become of their Monarchical
Authority, when their Subjects were gone? and you your self do assert, that
none of Noah's Posterity divided from him, as long as he lived; so on the other
side, if you suppose, that Noah, and his Sons marched along with them in this
Expedition, you must make them either to have quitted their Authority over
their Descendants, or else to have joined with them in this wicked, and foolish
Enterprise of Building a Tower, whose top should reach to Heaven, which is very
hard to conceive of Noah, a Preacher of Righteousness, or his Sons, whom the
Scripture no where mentions, or blames for having a hand in this Attempt.

But if you will lay the fault of Building this Tower upon Nimrod, as Josephus
does, who makes him a great Tyrant, and a wicked Man, L. 1. c. 4.
this will make against your own Hypothesis, which supposes no Rebellion, or
Usurpation to have been during the Life of Noah. So that to avoid these
Absurdities, and Difficulties that will follow by the placing the Building of
the Tower of Babel, within two hundred years after the Flood (as you must do if
you follow the present Hebrew Account) I think it were much better to embrace
the Account of the LXX. which by adding a hundred years to the Lives of each
Patriarch between Noah, and Abraham, makes the Confusion of Tongues to have
happened not till about five hundred years after the Flood, which takes away
those Absurdities I mentioned, of making Noah, and his Sons to have had a hand
in the Building of the Tower of Babel, or else that Nimrod did it, whether they
would or not; which is likewise as hard to suppose; all which Difficulties,
according to this Account, may very well be taken away; since then, Noah, and
his Sons were dead, before ever this Tower began to be built: And for the
further proof of this, I refer you to the Learned Isaac Vossius his Vindication
of the Translation of the LXX. and his Chronology accommodated to that account,
as most agreeable to the Ancient Hebrew Original; but this is only by the by.


M. I thank you, Sir, for your solution of this great Difficulty which I am
satisfied cannot be better solved, than by this Account of the LXX Version. But
I pray answer my Argument, which in my Opinion clearly makes out the Divine
Institution, as well as necessity of Patriarchal Power.


F. I was just coming to it, and therefore in the first place I must tell you,
that I cannot imagine how you can prove from this Text concerning the
Dispersion of Nations, and their following certain Leaders of their own Family,
and Language, when otherwise they could not have conversed together, that
therefore God must be careful in all this transaction to preserve your
Imaginary Patriarchal Power entire; of which the Scripture is altogether
silent; F. T. G. c. 11. p. 177.
and you might as well tell me, that because in Hannibal's, or Darius's Army,
there were whole Squadrons of different Languages, who were ranged under
Captains of their own Language or Country, that therefore Fathers, or
Grandfathers were Leaders of each Squadron, or that Darius, or Hannibal, were
careful to preserve Paternal Authority.

But suppose I grant you the utmost you can ask, yet, since God thought fit at
this Confusion of Tongues, that all those of one Tribe should speak the same
Language, which was not understood by any other, it is likewise very reasonable
to suppose, that they could not travel so far as the utmost parts of Asia,
without choosing, and following some Captain Leaders to be their Guides, and
Commanders in so long a Journey; and whom could the People sooner choose to
follow for this purpose than their Fathers, or Grandfathers, to whose natural
Affection, Wisdom, and long Experience, they had from their very Infancy always
paid a great respect, and submission: Yet does it not therefore follow, that
such Fathers, or Grandfathers, thus led, or commanded their Children, and
Posterity (now grown up to be Men and Women) by any Natural, or Divine Right,
or that they followed them otherwise than as an Army of Volunteers, or than as
a Caravan in the Deserts of Arabia does a Captain of its own choosing. But if
you will suppose any thing beyond this, you will find your self involved in
greater Difficulties, and Absurdities. For pray tell me, what great Care was
there to preserve a Patriarchal Authority in this Confusion and Dispersion, by
breaking it into so many parts? Indeed I am so blind I cannot see it. For as I
will not deny, but it was God's Will to confound the Language, and disperse the
Families of Mankind, both for a Punishment, and also for the better Peopling of
the World: So am I not convinced, that God in acting thus, was at all careful
to preserve the Patriarchal Authority, derived from Adam. For you cannot deny
but that at the same time he destroyed the true Supreme Fatherhood of the
Natural Monarch, or Heir of Adam, who could be but one Person, as you your self
have already asserted; or, can it be any reason to say, that God for the
preservation of Paternal Authority, let so many several new Governments, with
their Governors start up, who must all enjoy this Authority? And is it not
more reasonable to say, that God was careful to destroy this Paternal
Authority, when he suffered those of Noah's Sons, or Descendants then actually
in Possession of it, to have their Monarchy torn in pieces, and shared by so
many of their Subjects? And would it not be an excellent Argument for
Monarchical Government to say, when any Monarchy was shattered to pieces, and
divided amongst many revolted Subjects, that God was only careful to preserve
Monarchical Power, by rending a great settled Empire, into a multitude of
little Governments. So that it is altogether irrational to conceive, that if
any three, or more Right Heirs of Noah had Paternal Authority, or Sovereignty
by Right of Fatherhood over Mankind at Babel, that the next moment, (all they
yet living) seventy two others should have a like Sovereignty by Right of
Fatherhood over the same People, divided into so many distinct Governments;
either then these seventy two Fathers were actually Rulers, just before the
Confusion, and then they were not one People, but an Aristocratical
Commonwealth, and then where was your Monarchy? Or else these seventy two
Fathers had Paternal Authority, but knew it not, which is hard to suppose. And
if these seventy two Grandchildren of the Sons of Noah, had a Right to divide
this Supreme Paternal Authority of Adam into as many distinct Governments as
there were Heads of Families, why might not their Sons have done so in
infinitum? And then there could never be any Common Prince, or Monarch set over
them all, but by Force, or Conquest, or else by Election: Either of which
destroys your Notion of the Divine Right of Primogeniture.


M. It Is a very pleasant Notion, methinks, this of yours, that the Posterity of
the first Planters of the World, should follow their Ancestors, not as
Children, or Subjects, but as Volunteers, and from a Reverence (forsooth) and
Affection to their Age, B. P. P. 60.
Wisdom, and Experience. Indeed I am thus far of your mind, that these Children
followed their Fathers freely, and were not driven before them, nor dragged
after them with Chains: But to infer from hence, that they owed their Father
none of this Service, or Attendance, but out of mere good Nature and Gratitude,
which are due to Strangers that have obliged us, by being our Benefactors, is a
Notion that only becomes one, that owns no Right to be derived from
Patriarchal, or Paternal Power; and since there was none of these Patriarchs,
who were the Leaders of Mankind in this Dispersion, but might be one, or two
hundred years old, if not more; can any thing in Nature look more ridiculous,
than for the Children, and Descendants of these Old Men to elect them who begat
them to be their Leaders, and Governors, at a hundred years of Age?

And to give you an Answer why Governments might not upon my Principles crumble
into new ones, Ib. 63.
in infinitum, I think it may be sufficient to tell you, that First, God
prevented it, and that for the most part by Monarchs, ever since the Creation
of the World; and although he was pleased to permit many Divisions after this
time; yet he would never suffer Mankind to be crumbled into such small
Divisions as to make every distinct Household an Independent Government.
Secondly, Those Monarchs prevented it, who would be sure to reduce to their
Subjection, any person that should attempt to divide himself, or Family, from
the rest, and set up for an Independent State without his leave, and liking.
Thirdly, The necessity of Mankind prevented it, such small parcels of Men not
being able to preserve themselves, but by uniting with the rest, for their
Support and Protection: So that if you could never so clearly prove that here
was no Subordination to the Eldest Son, or Heir of Noah, yet this signifies
nothing, for God ordered it so to be; and if these Grand sons of Noah were
Independent Governors of their own Families, with any Subordination to the
Eldest Son's Son or Heir of Noah; yet were they still Sovereign Princes, and
much less had any dependence upon their own Children and Descendants. So that
hitherto the Multitude were kept under Subjection, and could not set up a
Commonwealth without rebelling against those Independent Governors.

Now if in this horrible Confusion of Tongues, the People by the Will of God
still fell under the Monarchical Government of these Fathers of Families, I
desire to know when they could obtain their Freedom, and in what Age it began?


F. I must confess you had some Reasons to look upon my Notion of the
Descendants of the Sons of Noah following their Ancestors in this Dispersion,
not as Children, or Subjects, but as Volunteers, to be as ridiculous as you are
pleased to make it, could you have any way proved at our last meeting, that the
Power of Parents over their Children, and Grandchildren to all Generations, is
as absolute, and perpetual, as that of a Master over his Slaves, and that a Son
and a Servant were all one at the first; but since you failed in that
Proposition, which is the groundwork of all the rest, I must beg your pardon,
if I cannot found the Descendants of Noah, following their Fathers, or
Ancestors in the Dispersion, upon any higher ground, than mere Gratitude and
Esteem: I mean for all such of them, who were themselves at that time Masters,
or Heads of separate Families; and I desire to know of you by what other
Motive, or Obligation, a Great Grandson (for Example) was obliged to follow
his Great Grand father to the World's end, as his Prince, or Leader, when
perhaps his own Father thought fit to lead him another way; and I desire you to
show me if they had (as they might very well have) commanded different things,
which was to be obeyed? And how Disobedience to a Man's own Father in this case
would have consisted with that Law of Nature, which you so much insist upon, of
honoring a Man's Father. But indeed all this mistake proceeds from your first
false Notion, which I see you cannot yet be quit of, in still supposing the
Obedience, and Subjection of Children to their Fathers to be absolute, and
perpetual: The contrary to which I have already made out at our last meeting:
And therefore I must tell you again, that this Notion of these Grandchildren,
or Descendants following their Fathers, or Ancestors, not out of Duty, but
Choice, is not so ridiculous as you are pleased to make it; and though I do not
suppose that they Elected these Ancestors of theirs for their Leaders by a
Balotting-Box, yet this much I am sure of, that they might prefer, if they
pleased, the following of their Father, or Grandfather, rather than their
Great Grandfather, if they perceived that he had doted through Age, or else by
Weakness, or Infirmities, was unable to lead them, or that his natural temper
was so Imperious, and Tyrannical, that there was no living under his
Government? Neither does the Scripture it self any where declare the contrary,
only says in general, that by these Grand-sons of Noah, the Isles, or Countries
of the Gentiles were divided, according to their Families, and Nations, without
particularly telling us, who were the Princes, or Leaders of each Tribe, or
Family. And to instance, if this Division happened in the time of Peleg, or
Phaleg, as the Greek LXX. makes it, then not Arphaxad the Great Grandfather,
or Selah the Grandfather, but Heber the Grandson was the Prince or Leader of
his Family at this Division: Since it is from him that Josephus supposes the
Hebrews not only to have descended, L. 1. c. 6.
but to have taken their Names.

Nor do you any better answer the other Difficulty, how all these Seventy two
Patriarchs, or Great Grandfathers, could all of them claim alike Regal Power
from Adam, or Noah, whose Right Heir could be but one Person. Indeed you tell
me, that God ordered it so, by appointing every Nation a distinct Language, and
to be led by the Ancestor of their Family: This is altogether gratis dictum;
for though it be true, that the Scripture says, That this Division of Tongues was
made according to the different Tribes, or Families of these Descendants of
Noah; yet does it no where mention their being led or commanded by Seventy two
Grandfathers Patriarchs, and there might be, for ought that you or I know, not
only Seventy two, but Seven-score such Captains, or Leaders of them, Nay, every
distinct Father of a Family, when this Monarchical Power came to be crumbled
into so many parts, might as well have claimed a share in this Regal Power,
they being by this Confusion wholly reduced again into a State of Nature.

Nor are your Reasons sufficient to convince me of the contrary. As for your
first Reason, that God has not suffered it to be so, signifies little; for
either he has hindered it by an express Command, or by the Ordinary Course of
his Providence: The former, I am sure, you can no where show me; and as for the
latter, when ever any Nation, or People, shall be pressed with the like
Necessity of separating themselves from the Government under which they were
born, as the several Families of Mankind had at this Division of Tongues: I see
no reason why they may not have a like Right of quitting their Country, and
becoming Subjects to another Government; or else of setting up one of their own
if they can.

As for your second Reason, that Monarchs would be sure to reduce to their
Subjection any person that should offer to divide himself, and Family from the
rest, and set up for an Independent State without their good leave, and liking.
This is a good Argument indeed, tha^ they might not be able to do it, but none
at all that they ought not to do it if they could, since this were but to
exercise that Supreme Paternal Authority with which God has invested them as
much as ever ^e did any of those Seventy two Descendants of Noah, who set up so
many New Governments without the Consent of Noah's Heir.

Your third Reason, I confess, is somewhat better: That the Necessity of
Mankind prevented it, but this also makes quite against you, and only proves,
that the Heads or Masters of Families being sensible they could not preserve
themselves, but by uniting with others for their mutual Safety, and Protection,
were fain to submit, (though b^ their own Consents,) to some Common Power, for
their own as well as their Families Preservation. So that I cannot see from any
thing you have said, that God had that great care you suppose of maintaining
your Patriarchal Power, much less this Divine Right of Primogeni^ure.


M. I see it is to no purpose to wrangle with you any farther about the
Patriarchal Power of these Sons of Noah, and therefore I shall proceed to the
Times after the Confusion of Tongues; F. P. c. 1. 8.
in which, the first Instance I shall give you is, that of Jacob, who when he
had bought his Brothers Birthright, Genesis 27.29.
Isaac blessed him thus; Be Lord over thy Brethren, and let the Sons of thy
Mother bow down before thee. By which is plainly denoted a Regal Power, or
Dominion over Esau his Brother, and the rest of his Brethren, if he had had
any. So likewise we find --


F. I pray give me leave to interrupt you alittle, for I have a great deal to
say to this Instance you have now brought of Jacob, and Esau, and therefore I
desire I may speak it before you proceed any further. And first by the way, I
cannot but observe, that this Divine Right of Primogeniture which you suppose
here to be meant by the word Birthright, was capable of being sold for a Mess
of Pottage, and all Esau's Heirs disinherited of their Right, because their
Father preferred his Belly, before his Honor or Interest. But if your
Principles are true, a Divine Right never dies, nor can be lost or taken away.

The second thing I must take notice of, T.T.G. c. 11. p. 145.
is your unfair dealing, in making Isaac to have presently after this Sale of
the Birth right, and as it were in confirmation of it, to have given Jacob his
Blessing, whereas it is apparent by this story in Genesis 25. that many years past
(perhaps twenty or thirty) between Jacob's buying of this Birthright, and
Isaac's conferring of the Blessing upon him, as any one that will but read the
26th of Genesis, may easily see. But if you had better observed this Text, you
would have found that this Blessing was nor intended for Jacob, but Esau for
whom Isaac then mistook him; but be it as it will, whether the Blessing was
given to Jacob, or Esau, it matters not; for from these words I can by no means
gather, that any Government, or Superiority, was thereby conferred on Esau over
Jacob, or Jacob over Esau. For first* as to Jacob this Blessing was never
fulfilled, as to be lord over Esau, who was Prince of Mount S^ir in Jacob's
life time; and as for bowing, or any other token of Superiority, we read indeed
that Jacob at his meeting his Brother Esau, bowed seven times toward him to
the ground, though he had before sold his Birthright to Jacob; and therefore
this Birthright cannot mean any Ruling Power, or Lordship over his Brethren;
since it is manifest from the Text, that Jacob had no more Brothers than Esau;
Ib. p. 146.
nor had Isaac any consideration of Jacob's having then bought this
Birthright; for when he thus blessed him, he took him not to be Jacob, but
Esau; nor did Esau understand any connection between the Birthright, and the
Blessing; for* says he to his Father, He has supplanted me th^se two times, he
took away my Birth right, and behold now he has taken away my Blessing.
Whereas, had this Blessing, to be Lord over his Brethren belonged to the
Birthright, Esau could not have complained of this second as a Cheat, Jacob
having got nothing* but what Esau had sold him long before.

So that it is plain Dominion was not then understood to belong either to the
Birthright, or Blessing. And therefore it is more rational to suppose, that
this word Birth right, only relates to the Right of Priesthood, which the Jews
supposed always to descend to the Eldest Son, before the Law was given: And
that by Blessing, is meant no more, than that double portion of Goods, which by
the Jewish Law was due to the Firstborn; and that this is the true sense of
this place, I desire you to look in Genesis 21.10. (if you please to give me your
Bible I will show you the place, and will read the words to you) where Sarah
taking Isaac to be Heir, says, Cast out this Bondwoman and her Son, for the
Son of this Bondwoman shall not be Heir with my Son: Whereby could be meant
nothing, but that he should not have a Pretense to any equal share of his
Fathers Estate after his Death, but should have his Portion presently, and be
gone: And Farther we read, T.T. G. p. 147.
Genesis 25.5, 6. That Abraham gave all that he had unto Isaac, but unto the Sons
of the Concubines which Abraham had, Abraham gave Gifts, and sent them away
from Isaac his Son, while he yet lived; that is, Abraham having given Portions
to all his other Sons, and sent them away, that which he had reserved, being
the greatest part of his Substance, Isaac as Heir possessed after his Death,
but by being Heir he had no Right to be Lord over his Brethren: For if he had,
why should Sarah desire to rob him of one of his Subjects, or Slaves, by
desiring to have him sent away?

So likewise, if you look into the first of Chron. chap. 5. v. 12. you will
find a place, that plainly confirms this Interpretation, where it is said; Ib.
p. 148.
Reuben was the Firstborn, but for as much as he defiled his Fathers Bed, his
Birthright was given unto the Sons of Joseph, the Son of Israel, and the
Genealogy is not to be reckoned after the Birthright; for Judah prevailed
above his Brethren, and of him came the Chief Ruler; but the Birthright was
Joseph's; though he was the Youngest Son; and that this Birth right was Jacob's
Blessing on Joseph, Genesis 58.28. tells us in these words; Moreover I have given
thee one Portion above thy Brethren, which I took out of the hand of the
Amorites with my Sword' and with my Bow. Whereby it is not only plain, that the
Birthright was nothing but a double Portion; but the Text in Chronicles is
expressly against your Opinion, and shows that Dominion was no part of the
Birthright; for it tells us, That Joseph had the Birthright, but Judah the
Dominion. So that unless you were very fond of this word Birthright, without
considering in what sense it is to be taken, you would never bring this
Instance of Jacob and Esau, to prove that Dominion belongs to the Eldest Son,
over his Brethren: For if this Blessing of Isaac upon Jacob signifies any thing
more than this, it could not relate to his own Person, who never Ruled over his
Brother at all; and therefore it is at most no more, than a Prophecy, showing
that the Jews, as being descended from Jacob, should in aftertimes Rule over
the Edomites, or Posterity of Esau, according to what Rebekah had been foretold
from God. Two Nations are in thy Womb, Genesis 25.23.
and two manner of People shall be separated from thy Bowels, and the one
People shall be stronger than the other People, and the Elder shall serve the
Younger. And so Jacob blessed Judah, and gave him (though not in his own Person,
but in his Posterity) the Scepter, and Dominion: From whence you might have
argued as well, that the Dominion belonged to the Third Son over his Brethren;
as well as from this Blessing of Isaac, that it belonged to Jacob, they being
both but Predictions of what should long after happen to their Posterities, and
not declaring any Hereditary Right of Dominion in either Jacob, or Judah.


M. I will not rigorously insist, that Primogeniture is such a Divine Right as
cannot be altered by any Humane Act, or Constitution; but yet I take it to be
such a Right, that without the Father orders it otherwise, B. P. P. 68.
in his lifetime, or that the Elder Brother does of his own accord depart from
his Right, he will have a good Title to his Fathers Government, or Kingdom, and
consequently to Command over the rest of his Brethren; and therefore Grotius
makes a great deal of difference, between Hereditary, and Patrimonial Kingdoms,
the former being to descend to the Eldest Son only, but the latter are
divisible amongst all the Sons, if the Father please: And hence I suppose it
was, that as Mankind increased, one petty Kingdom grew out of another. Ibid. 12.
Thus the Land of Canaan, which was Peopled by six Sons of Canaan, and
Philistim the Son of Mizraim, had eight or nine Kings in the time of Abraham,
and above thirty Kings in Joshua's time, which could proceed from no other
Cause, but the Fathers dividing their Kingdoms in their life-times, or at their
Death amongst their Sons, and Descendants; for we hear not of one Tittle of
Popular Elections in those early days. And I have proofs enough of this in
Scripture. Since thus we find it to have been among the Sons of Ishmael, F. P.
c. 1. v. 16. 6. v. 40.
and Esau, as appears by Genesis 25 and 26. where it is said, These are the Sons
of Ishmael, and these are their Names by their Castles, and Towns, etc. Twelve
Princes of their Tribes, and Families. And these are the Names of the Dukes
that came of Esau, according to their Families, and their Places by their
Nations. And hence it is, that in after Ages, Princes did often divide their
Kingdoms amongst their Children, of which you may see diverse Examples in
Grotius de I. B. L. II Cap. 7. which Divisions, 12.
when made and submitted to by the Eldest Son, I doubt not but were good. Yet I
think it cannot be denied for all this, that by the Law of Nature, or Nations,
where there is no Will of the Father declared to the contrary, the Eldest Son
ought to inherit. And this is the Judgment not only of Christian, but Heathen
Writers. Thus Herodotus the most Ancient Greek Historian, Herod. Polym.
lays it down for a general Custom of all People, or Nations, that the Eldest
Son should enjoy the Empire; and the Romans were likewise of this Opinion; and
therefore Livy, when he speaks of two Brothers of the All^broges, contending
for the Kingdom, says, The Younger was more strong in Force, than Right. And in
another place, he calls this Right of the Eldest Son, the Right of Age and
Nature; as also does Trogus Pompaeius in his Epitome of Iustine, Justin. L.XI.
when he calls it the Right of Nations; and in another place, a Right of
Nature, when he says, Justin. L.II.
that Artabazanes the Eldest Son of the King of Persia, challenged the Kingdom
himself, which the Order of his Birth and Nature it self appointed amongst
Nations. I could give you many other Authorities from more Modern Authors, but
I rather choose to give you these, because you cannot except against them, as
Writers prepossest by either Jewish, or Christian Principles. So that if this
Right of Primogeniture be not absolutely Divine, yet it is at least most
Natural, and Reasonable.


F. I see you are convinced, that this Divine Right of Primogeniture, is not to
be proved out of Scripture, and therefore you are contented to fall a Peg
lower, and to take up with the Right of Eldership by the Law of Nature, or
Nations, which howsoever you are pleased to confound them, are for all that two
distinct things; for if the Succession of the Eldest Son were by the Law of
Nature, it were no more to be altered by the Will of a Father, than the Law of
God it self; and therefore notwithstanding all your Quotations, your Right of
Primogeniture amounts to no more than this, that it has been a Common, and
received Custom in many Kingdoms, or Nations to observe it; and therefore
Herodotus, whom you have now quoted, calls it very rightly a Custom of Nations,
that the Eldest Son should enjoy the Empire: Which yet is not true amongst all
Nations, or People by your own confession: For then there would have been no
difference between Hereditary, and Patrimonial Kingdoms; but the Eldest Son
should have inherited alone in the one as well as in the other. Unless you can
suppose (as sure you will not) that some Kingdoms are to be disposed according
to the Law of Nature, and others not. But if you would have considered Grotius
(whom you have now made use of) he would have instructed you better. For in the
Chapter you have now cited, he makes the difference between them to depend upon
the manner of acquiring the Kingdoms he speaks of; if you please I will show
you the words; Sed in Regnorum Successione distingui debent Regna quae pleno
modo possidentur, G. I. B. Lib. II. Cap. 7. 12.
and in Patrimonio sunt, ab his quae modum habendi accipiunt ex populi
consensu, de quo discrimine egimus supra. Prioris generis Regna dividi possunt
etiam inter Mares, and foeminas ut in Aegypto, and Britannia: olim factum
vidimus. -- Nullo discrimine Sexus, Lucan.

Reginam scit far Pharos,
ait Lucanus; de Britannis Tacitus, Neque enim Sexum in imperio discernunt. But
look a little farther, and you will find the reason of the difference bebetween
them: At ea Regna quae populi libero consensu facta sunt haereditaria, 14.
ex praesumbia populi voluntate deferuntur. Praesumitur autem populus id
voluisse quod maxim expedit: And of this you may see he gives diverse
Examples, which we need not particularly recite: But this much is apparent,
that Patrimonial Kingdoms are divisible among all the Children, because they
are supposed to be wholly in the Father's Power, either by Conquest, or the
first Plantation of them: But Hereditary ones that descend to the Eldest Son,
can only become so, by the free Consent of the People by whom they were
Instituted; and therefore both Ishmael, and Esau, whose Territories were wholly
Patrimonial, might very well divide them alike, amongst all their Sons; but
then your Natural Right of Primogeniture is quite destroyed. The like may be
said of other Kingdoms, where this Custom took place: And therefore those
places which you have cited out of the Greek and Roman Authors of the
Succession of the Eldest Son to be by the Law of Nature, is to be understood
according to the sense of those Authors, who often confounded the Law of
Nature, or Reason, properly so called, with those commonly used, or received
Customs among Civilized People; which they called the Law of Nations, which yet
were not Laws properly so called, since they may without any transgression of
the Law of Nature be practiced different ways.

And therefore, though I allow Primogeniture, as well in Families, as Kingdoms,
to have had a just Pre-eminence by the Practice of many Civilized Nations, and
look upon it as an excellent sort of Natural Lot (where the Elder Brother is
fit to Govern) that he should succeed before the Younger, to avoid Strife among
such Relations, and Civil Wars in Kingdoms: Yet that this is still to be
understood, according to the Custom of the Country, or Will of the People, that
Instituted the Monarchy, I desire to go no farther, than that Example that you
have but now brought of Artabazanes, who was the Eldest Son of Artaxerxes, but
born before he was King, and Xerxes his Younger Son, but born after his
obtaining the Crown; the matter being referred to the People, they determined
it in favor of Xerxes; as you will find in Herodotus and Justin, whom you have
but now quoted. And though I grant, that when afterward in the same Kingdom the
like Controversy was started between Cyrus and Arsicas (who was afterward
called Artaxerxes Mnemon) i^ was judged just the quite contrary way, whether by
Right, or Favor, I will not determine; yet this may let you plainly see, that
this Ancient, and Wise Nation, had no settled ^aw, either Natural, or Municipal
concerning this matter. I could give you several other Instances of the same
kind, which you may consult at your leisure in Grotius, and other Authors; only
this much may be certainly gathered from what your self, as well as I have said
concerning it, that there is no certain Rule, or Law, either of Nature, or
Nations concerning this matter: And therefore your Instances of the Sons of
Esau, and Ishmael, are so far from making out your Hypothesis, that if their
Fathers could divide their Kingdoms into as many parts as they had Sons,
without any Subjection to the Elder Brother, I can see no reason why every one
of their Children, or Descendants, might not have done the like if they had
pleased, till their Principalities had become as small, as those of the Princes
Ashalt, or Dukes of Saxony are at this day; so that I cannot see, to what
purpose you have brought these last Instances out of Scripture, unless it were
to make against your self, and to prove, that there were then, as there are now
in the World, a sort of Princes, who may be lawfully so, without claiming any
Title from Adam, or Noah, much less by any Right of Primogeniture.


M. It is sufficient for my purpose to be able to show you from these Examples
of the Sons of Esau, and Ishmael, that as well Hereditary as Testamentary
Kingdoms, did Anciently commence according to the Law, or received Custom
amongst Nations without any consent of the People, or Descendants of those that
were to be Governed by them, and as long as the Succession to such Kingdoms
were by any certain, or known Rule constantly practiced among Mankind, the
matter is not much whether the Eldest Son succeed to his Father alone, or that
his Brethren shared with him in the Inheritance. For since it was God's will to
institute Civil Government amongst Mankind, it must be also his Will to make
the Succession to it clear, and certain to all the Subjects that were to submit
to it, as he has done, whether one Brother or many succeed, since the Will of
the Father is as certain a Rule of Succession, as that by Inheritance and
therefore what you have said in answer to my last instances of the Sons of Esau
and Israel signifies not much.


F. I did not then deny, but grant at your last meeting, that Families might at
first grow up into Kingdoms, but yet I do still (as I did then) assert that
such Governments could not be instituted by any Father, or Grandfather alone,
without the express or tacit consent of his Children and Descendants, supposing
them once Married and separated from their Fathers or Ancestors Families; but
it is needless to repeat what I then said only, give me leave to mind you, that
at the beginning of this Discourse, you maintained that not only Kingly Power
in General, but also the succession to it by the Eldest Son, or his next
Brother is of Divine Right or Institution, or else all that you urged
concerning the Natural right of Dominion of Cain over Abel was to no purpose;
But now you insist that succession by a Testament, or Will of the Father, is
also as much by the Law of Nature as the other, in which I think you are very
much mistaken, since the right of bequeathing Kingdoms, or any thing else by
Testament is neither prescribed by the Revealed Will of God, nor the Laws of
Nature, since all settled Property in Lands or Goods, before the institution of
a Civil Government, proceeding only from occupancy or possession, must cease in
the State of Nature, with the life of the occupant or possessor. Therefore in
that state a Testament cannot take place by the Testators Death; since as soon
as he Dies, his right in the thing bequeathed is quite lost and extinguished;
so that the Dead not having an interest in any thing, the Legatee cannot
sustain the person of the Testator, whose Right ceases before that of the
Legate can take place? And therefore the Testament or Disposition of such
things, may then without any Crime be neglected or altered by the Survivors,
unless all those who pretend an interest in it do agree to it, or swear to see
it fulfilled, during the Testators Life time: And for this cause we find
Abraham binding his Servant that ruled over his House with an Oath not to take
a Wife for his Son of the Daughters of the Land; Genesis 24.2, 3.
And Jacob taking an Oath of Joseph, Genesis 49.29.
not to bury him in Egypt, because they doubted whether they could oblige their
Sons or Servants to do it by their Testaments; So that it appears evident to me
that the Power of making Testaments, and bequeathing Lands or Goods, is but a
consequence of that Propriety, in Lands, Goods, or Dominions, which arises from
compact or common consent in a Kingdom or Commonwealth, after it is instituted
as I think I am able to prove whenever you please to discourse with me farther
about it. But as for the Right of bequeathing Crowns or Kingdoms by Testament,
as I will not deny, but that some Kingdoms may have been bequeathable by their
Original Constitution, and others become so by Custom, yet I cannot grant that
this Right belonged to the Prince or Monarch by the Laws of God or Nature; but
proceeded p^rely from the received Law or continued Custom of that Kingdom, so
that you must either confess, that there is no such thing as a Divine Right of
Succession, or else it is such a one as signifies as much as nothing, since
humane Laws or Constitutions can alter it or take it away. So that after all
this Pother about this Divine Right, it is not so good as an old Estate Tail,
which formerly no fine could bar; And I must farther tell you, that I cannot
assent to your opinion, that succession by a Will or a Testament is so certain
as that by Inheritance, since all such Testaments must depend upon the Credit
of the Witnesses, whose Credit may often be questioned by the Subjects, and who
may very well for their own ends make a Younger Son to have the whole, or at
least a share in the Kingdom to whom his Father never intended any; and which
was likewise more easy to be done before such time as Written Wills or
Testaments, solemnly published according to forms of Law, came in use.

But because you suppose that the Natural Laws of Succession to Kingdoms are so
plain and certain, that I may a little convince you of your mistake in this
matter, I shall for the present suppose that the Succession of an Elder Son or
Brother is sufficiently easy to be known; Yet I doubt it will not prove so in
many other Instances; And therefore to let you see, I do not make this Scruple
without cause, suppose Abel (for example) to have left a Son or a Daughter
behind him, when his Brother murdered him, pray tell me who was to succeed
after the Death of Adam, this Son or Daughter of Abel, or Seth their Uncle?


M. We do not read of any Children that Abel had, and therefore I cannot tell
what to say to it.


F. Well but since it is probable he might have had Children pray tell me
(supposing he had) whether this Child were it Son or Daughter, or Seth the
Uncle was to succeed?


M. Since you will needs have me speak my opinion in a thing so uncertain, I
think this Child were it Son or Daughter ought to have succeeded before the
Uncle.


F. Pray Sir, tell me by what Law or Rule you thus Judge; Whether by the Law of
God or Nature?


M. I must confess God has prescribed nothing expressly concerning it; more
than what he says, Numb. 27. that if a man dies leaving no Sons, ver. 8.
ye shall cause his Inheritance to pass unto his Daughter, with diverse other
Rules of Succession to Inheritances there specified, and besides it is more
suitable to the Laws of Nature, that the Children of the Elder Brother should
inherit before their Uncle, there being no reason that they should be punished
for their Misfortune in having their Father Dye before he could succeed to the
Government.


F. I doubt the place of Scripture you have cited does not reach this Case of
Kingdoms, for first this being a Municipal Law of the Jews, could only concern
that Commonwealth; and secondly, it only relates to Private Inheritances: and
that this is so, may be proved from the next verse, where it is said, that a
Man's Brethren shall be his Heirs, that is, all of them were to be Heirs alike,
only the Eldest was to have a double portion; And if this Law concerning
Daughters were to reach the Succession of Kingdoms at this day, the Laws of
France and other Countries, where Women are barred from succeeding to the
Crown, would be against the Laws of God and Nature: And the like may also be
said concerning the Succession of the Nephews before their Uncles, or of Uncles
rather than the Nephews, whose Fathers never enjoyed the Crown; diverse Nations
having different Customs, and that with a like appearance of reason concerning
it. For on the one hand, if the Son of Abel might have pleaded, that he was the
first born of the Eldest Son of Adam, and so ought to represent his Father;
Seth the Uncle might likewise with as good reason urge, that he was more nearly
related in Blood to Adam, as being his Son, than the Son of Abel who was but
his Grandson, and besides being older than he, was endued with more Wisdom and
Experience, and consequently was ^itter to Govern; But if Abel left only one
Daughter or more, I doubt not, but the question would have been harder to be
decided, since if Women are not permitted to Govern in Private Families, they
will not (especially amongst Warlike Nations) be admitted to Govern Kingdoms,
especially since it would be left in her Power, not only to govern her self,
but by marrying to choose a King for her Subjects, whom they do not approve of.
And therefore we read that in diverse of the Ancient Kingdoms of the World,
Women were excluded from the Succession.

Nor are these the only questions, that either might then, or else have in
latter Ages been started concerning Succession in Kingdoms, TT. G. c. 11. p.
157, 158.
and Principalities, and have been the cause of great disputes between
Pretenders to Crowns, where a King Dies without Lawful Issue, as whether a
Grandson by a Younger Daughter, shall inherit before a Granddaughter by an
Elder Daughter? Whether the Elder Son by a Concubine before the Younger Son by
a Wife? From whence also will arise many Questions concerning Legitimation, and
what by the Laws of Nature is the difference betwixt a Wife and a Concubine?
All which can no ways be decided but by the Municipal or Positive Laws of those
Kingdoms or Principalities. It may further be enquired whether the eldest Son
being a Fool or Madman, shall inherit this Paternal Power before the Younger a
Wise Man? And what degree of ^olly or madness it must be, that shall exclude
him? and who shall be the Judges of it? Also whether the Son of a Fool so
excluded for his Folly shall succeed before the Son of his Wiser Brother who
last Reigned? Who shall have the regal Power whilst a Widow Queen is with
Child by the Deceased King, until she be brought to Bed? These and many more
such difficulties might be proposed about the Title of Succession, and the
Right of Inheritance to Kingdoms, and that not as idle speculations, but such
as in History we shall frequently find examples of, not only in our own, but
likewise other Kingdoms. From all which we may gather, that if the Laws of God
or Nature had prescribed any set rules of Succession, they would have gone
farther than one or two cases; as concerning the Succession of Elder Sons or
Brothers, where an Elder Son dies without Issue; and would also have given
certain infallible rules in all other Cases of Succession, besides these, and
not have left it to the Will, or particular Laws of diverse Nations, to have
established the succession so many several ways, as I am able to show have been
practiced in the World.


M. I must confess you have taken a great deal of pains to perplex the
Succession to Adam, which seems designed for nothing else, but to make me
believe, that if Adam, or any of his Sons were Kings or Princes, it must have
been by the Consent, or Election of their Children, or Descendants: which is
all one as to say that those Ancient Princes derived their Titles from the
Judgment or Consent of the People, the contrary to which is evident as well out
of Sacred as Civil History.


F. Since you appeal to History, to History you shall go, and to let you see,
that I have not invented these doubts about Succession of my own Head, and that
there might have very well been a real dispute about the Succession to Adam in
the Cases I have put, may appear by the many disputes and quarrels, that have
been in several Nations concerning the Right of Succession between the Uncle
and the Nephew, of which Grotius is so sensible, G. I. P. L. 11. c. 7. 30, 31.
that he confesses in the latter end of the Chapter last cited, that where it
could not be decided by the Peoples Judgment, it was fain to be so by Civil
Wars, as well as private Combats, and therefore he is forced ingenuously to
confess, that this has been practiced diverse ways according to the different
Laws and Customs of Nations: and he gives us here a distinction between a
direct Lineal Succession and a transversed; and acknowledges that amongst the
Germans, as also the Goths and Vandales, Nephews were not admitted to the
Succession of the Crown before their Uncles; the like may be said of the Saxons
and Normans, and therefore we find in our Ancient English History, that before
the Conquest the Uncle, if he were Older, always enjoyed the Crown before the
Nephew, which I can more particularly show you if you think fit to question it.
The like manner of succession was also amongst the Irish-Scotch for above 200
years after ^^rgus their first King. The like Custom was also observed among
the Irish as long as they had any Kings amongst them, and is called the Law of
Tanistry. The same was also observed in the Kingdom of ^astile, where after the
death of Alphonso the fifth, the States of that Kingdom, admitted his Younger
Son Sancho to be King, putting by Ferdinand de la Cerda the Grandson to the
late King by his Eldest Son, though he had the Crown left him by his
Grand-Father's Will. So likewise in Sicily upon the Death of Charles the
Second, who left a Grand Son behind him by his Eldest Son, as also a Younger
Son named Robert* between whom a difference arising concerning the Succession,
it being referred to Pope Clement V. He gave Judgment for Robert the Younger
Son of Charles, who was thereupon Crowned King of Sicily; and for this reason
it was that Earl John Brother to King Richard the second was declared King of
England by the Estates, before Arthur Earl of Britain Son of Ieoffrey the
Elder Brother, and Glanvil, who was Lord Chief Justice under Henry the second,
in that little Treatise we have of his, makes it a great question who should be
preferred to an Inheritance, the Uncle or Nephew.

But as for Daughters, whether they shall inherit at all or not, or at least be
preferred before their Uncles is much more doubtful, since not only France,
but most of the Kingdoms of the East at this day, from Turkey to Iapan do
exclude Women from the Throne: And it was likewise as much against the Grain of
the Ancient Northern Nations, and hence it is that we find no mention of any
Queen to have reigned amongst the Ancient Germans, or Irish-Scots, and never
but two among the English-Saxons, and those by Murder or Usurpation, and not by
Election as they ought to have done. And upon this Ground it was that the
Nobility and People of England put by Maud the Emperess, and preferred Stephen
Earl of Blois to the Crown before her, for though he derived his affinity to the
Crown by a Woman; yet as being a Man he thought himself to be preferred before
her. So likewise in the Kingdom of Aragon, Mariana in his History tells us that
Anciently the Brother of the King was to inherit before the Daughter, examples
may also be given of diverse of the other instances, but these may suffice.


M. I Pray give me leave to interrupt you a little, for by these examples you
would seem to infer, that these Laws about settling the succession of Crowns in
several Kingdoms depended upon the Will of the People, whereas I may with
better reason suppose, that if such Laws and Alterations have been in such
successions they were made by the sole Will of the first Princes, in which the
People had no hand, for in the most Ancient Monarchies, B. P. P. 71.
there was a time, when the People of all Countries were Governed by the Sole
Wills of their Princes, which by degrees came to be so well known in several
instances, that inferior Magistrates needed not resort to them in those cases,
and the People being for a considerable time accustomed to such Usages, they
grew easy and Familiar to them, and so were retained, tho the Memory of those
Princes, who first introduced them was lost, and after Kings, finding it better
to continue what was so received, than to run the hazard and trouble of
changing them, were for their own ease, and the good of their Subjects
contented they should be still from Age to Age so continued. Which custom may
hold as well in Laws about Succession as other things: And therefore we find
that even in those Monarchies, where the People have nothing to do in making
Laws Women are excluded, which could proceed at first from nothing else, but
the declared Will or Law of the first Monarchs. So likewise the Original of the
Salique Law is wholly ascribed to Pharamond the first French King, and Mariana
(whom you lately cited) tells us that Alphonso King of Arragon made a Law, that
where Heirs Male were wanting, the Sons of a Daughter should be preferred
before the Aunt, which Law is wholly attributed to the King, for he adds
presently after, Sic saepe ad Regum arbitrium jura regnandi commutantur.


F. Granting all this true that you have said, you cannot but confess that the
Laws of God and Nature have established nothing in this matter, or else it
could not be in the Power of Kings to make or alter Laws concerning the
succession, as your last Quotation intimates they may; yet even in the most
absolute Monarchies, the Laws about the Succession of the Crown, must wholly
depend upon the Consent of the People, who are to see them observed, or else
every Monarch might alter these Laws of Succession at his pleasure, and the
Great Turk, or King of France (now the Assembly of Estates is lost) might leave
the Crown to a Daughter if either of them pleased, and disinherit the next Heir
Male.

But as for the Original of this ^alique Law in France, you will find your self
much mistaken if you suppose that that Law was made by the Sole Authority of
Pharamond, Vid. Hotoman Franco-Gallia. cap. 1.
for the Ancient French Histories tell us that the Body of Salique Laws which
are now extant, were made by the Common Consent of the whole Nation of the
Francs, who committed the drawing of them up to three Judges or Commissioners,
and which Laws Pharamond did only confirm; and any one that will but consult
those Histories may see, that Kings were so far from having the Sole
Legislative Power in their own hand, that they were frequently Elected by the
Estates, nor is it truer that you suppose from Mariana, that the Kings of
Arragon had Power alone to make Laws, it appears quite contrary from the
Constitutions of that Kingdom* where the King could do nothing of this kind
without the Consent of the Estates, and was not admitted to the Crown without
taking an Oath to the Chief Justice in the name of the People, that he would
observe the Laws and Constitutions of the Kingdom, otherwise that they would
not be obliged to obey him.

But at once to let you see, that about the Succession of the Sons or
Descendants by Daughters, the Cases are much more nice and intricate, and that
when such Cases happen in limited Monarchies where there is an Assembly of
Estates, P. N. M. Ib. 55.
they are the Sole Judges of such differences, may appear by two famous
examples in modern History; The first is in Scotland, about four hundred years
ago, VI. Hect. Boeth. L.
when after the Death of King Alexander III* who died without Issue, when two
or three several competitors claimed a Right to the Crown, as descended from
several Daughters of David Earl of Huntington, great Uncle to the last King,
the Chief of which being John Bayliol, and Robert B^u^^, the Estates of the
Kingdom not being able to decide it, they agreed to refer it to Edward I. King
of England, who adjudged the Crown to Bayliol; yet did not this put an end to
this great controversy, for not long after Bayliol being deposed, Bruce
revived his Title, and the States of Scotland declared him King, whose
Posterity enjoy it at this day.

A like Case happened in the last Age in Portugal, after the Death of Henry,
surnamed the Cardinal without Issue, when no less than four Eminent
Competitors, put in their Claim; some claiming from the Daughters of Don
Durate, youngest Brother to the last King Henry: But the King of Spain, and
other Princes as Sons to the Sisters of the said King; Henry dying without
Issue, Vid. Marian Hist. Hisp.
left ten Governors over the Kingdom to decide together with the Estates the
Differences about the Succession, who quarrelling among themselves, as also
with the Estates before it was decided, Philip the second King of Spain raised
an Army, and soon conquered Portugal: And yet we have seen in his Grand son's
time, that the Estates of Portugal declared this Title void, and the Crown was
settled in the Posterity of the Duke of Braganza, who still enjoy it.

And how much even Kings themselves have attributed to the Authority of the
Estates in this matter, P.N.M. Ib. p. 59.
appears by the League made between Philip the Long, King of France, and David
King of Scots, Vid. Mezeray in the Reign of Philip de Long.
wherein this condition was expressed; That if there should happen any Difference
about the Succession in either of these Realms, he of the two Kings, which
remained alive, should not suffer any to place himself on the Throne, but him
who should have the Judgment of the Estates on his side, and then he should
with all his Power oppose him, who would after this, contest the Crown. To
conclude, I cannot see any means, how if such Differences as these had arisen
in the first Generation after Adam, I say, how they could ever have been
decided without a Civil War, or else leaving the Judgment thereof to the Heads
or Fathers of Families, that were then in being: Which how much it would have
differed from the Judgment, or Declaration of the States of a Kingdom at this
day, I leave it to your self to judge.


M. I shall not trouble my self to determine how far Princes may tie up their
own hands in this matter of the Succession, and leave it to the States of the
Kingdom to limit, or determine of it, but from the beginning it was not so; and
therefore give me leave to trace this Paternal Government a little farther: F.
P. C. 1. 7.
For though I grant that when Jacob, and his twelve Sons, went into Egypt
together with their Families, they exercised a Supreme Patriarchal
Jurisdiction, which was intermitted because they were in Subjection to a
stronger Prince: Yet after the return of these Israelites out of Bondage, God
from a special care of them chose Moses* and Ioshuah successively to Govern as
Princes in the Place, and ^^ead of the Supreme Fathers: And after them likewise
for a time, he raised up Judges to defend his People in time of Peril. Yet that
all these were endued with Regal Authority, may appear in that Moses is called
in Deuteronomy, a King in Ieshurun, (that is, Deuteronomy. 33.5. B. P. P. 35. Numb.
27.16, 17.
over Israel) And when Moses saw that he was to die, he besought God, to set a
Man over the Congregation, that the Congregation of the Lord be not as Sheep
which have no Shepherd. And as for the Judges, it is apparent from the Book
that bears their Name, that they had Power of making Peace, and War, and of
Judging in all Cases of Appeal, insomuch that whosoever would not hearken to
the Priest, Deuteronomy. 17.11, 12.
or to the Judge, even that Man should die. But when God gave the Israelites
Kings --


F. I pray give me leave to interrupt you a little, for I have a great ^eal to
say against your Notion of the Government of the Israelites before they had
Kings actually nominated by God; for notwithstanding all you have said, it does
not appear to me that either Moses, Ioshuah, or the Judges, were any more than
figuratively, or in a larger sense to be styled Kings: For as for Moses his
being called King in Ieshurun, he only calls himself so Poetically, in that
excellent Hymn of Blessing, which he bestows upon the Twelve Tribes: For
certainly God did not suppose him to have been a King, when in Deuteronomy. 17.14. he
speaks of the Children of Israel setting a King over them, as a thing that was
to happen many years after, and there lays down Rules how he should Govern
himself, which had been needless if they had had a King already: And that Moses
was not a King, Josephus himself shows us in his Antiquities, Lib. 4. where he
makes Moses to have instructed the Children of Israel at the time of his Death
to this purpose; Aristocracy is the best Form of Government, and the life that
is led under it the most happy, and therefore let not the desire of any other
sort of Government take Possession of you, owning no other Master than the
Laws, and doing every thing according to it. For God is your King, and that is
sufficient for you; and if Moses was no King, then certainly Joshua was none
neither.


M. Pray give me leave to answer, what you have now said against the Kingly
Power of Moses, and Joshua; for if you will please to remember, B. P. P. 36.
that though the Sanhedrim had been constituted before this time, yet Moses
esteemed them as Sheep without a Shepherd, if a Man was not set over them which
might go out before them, and which might lead them out, and bring them in; and
God approved his desires, and appointed Joshua to succeed him, and the People
received him accordingly, and told him; All that thou command us we will do
and whithersoever thou sendest us we will go, Josh. 1.16, 17.
according as we hearkened unto Moses in all things, so will we hearken unto
thee. If this were not Kingly Power, then is there no such thing. So that this
Discourse which Josephus puts into Moses his Mouth, seems directly contrary to
Moses his Thoughts, and Practice. And whereas he makes Moses to have opposed
Obedience to the Laws to Kingly Government, it is a pure Greek Notion: For
whilst the Grecians lived under Kings, they had ^ew, or no Laws; but when they
set up Commonwealths, they then found the necessity of having Laws, and then
the Dominion of Laws was opposed to the Government of Princes: But this was
contrary to the Practice of Israel; for they were to live according to their
Laws as well under Kings as without them, in all Estates and Conditions; and
their Kings were bound to Govern them by the Law, and not by their Wills
contrary to the Law. So that in this Josephus clearly made the Ancient Customs
of his Country to comply with a Greek Notion that had no being for some
hundreds of years after Moses was dead.

And as for the time of the Judges, even in the Intervals between them, when
every one did that which was right in his own Eyes, even then the Israelites
were under the Kingly Government of the Fathers of the particular Families over
whom the Prince, or Head of it had likewise a Supreme Power.


F. But pray give me leave to speak a little farther; Let me ask you, what is
an Aristocrac^ if this be not? ( viz.) an Assembly of the Elders, or Chief
Fathers of Families of each Tribe meeting, consulting, and resolving of the
Public Affairs of the Commonwealth, under their Head or President the Chief
of the Tribe; and this is the Government for which Josephus makes Samuel so
much afflicted, when the People would quit it for a Monarchy.


M. I think you are much mistaken in this Point, for it is no where declared
that these Fathers of Families Governed their own Families independently; for
then there would have been no Public Government at all: Nor yet is it said,
that these Fathers Governed by Majority of Voices chosen out of themselves, B.
P. P. 31.
for then I grant it would have been a Democracy; nor yet does it appear, that
a few of the better sort of Fathers of every Tribe Governed it by a Counsel,
and Magistrates, or that there was such Counsel of the several Tribes; but on
the contrary, every Tribe was Governed by the Prince, or Head of it; and these
Princes Moses calls the Heads of the House of their Fathers, in Numb. 7.2. and
who were over those that were numbered and made their Offerings. And Moses
tells us particularly what every Man's Name was; V. 12.18.
as Nashon the Son of Aminadab of the Tribe of Judah, and Nathaniel the Son of
Zuar, Prince of Issachar, etc. Now if there was in those days any Government at
all in Israel, then were these Princes the Governors of the several Tribes,
and so every Tribe was under a Monarch, though the whole State of Israel was not
under any one Person, or constant standing Council, and consequently was a
System of little Monarchies.


F. I am not at all better satisfied with your last Reply; For in the first
place I have Josephus on my side, who must needs know what the Government of
his Country had been, better than you or I; and he expressly calls it an
Aristocracy, in which the Judge (when there was one) was only in the nature of
a General, or Statholder, to whom the last Appeal was to be made in all Causes;
and it is also as plain, that neither Moses, Joshua, nor the Judges had
Monarchical Authority: F^r though it be true, the two first could make War, and
Peace, yet this was also with the Consent of the Princes of the Congregation,
as plainly appears by the Story of the Peace made with the Gibeonites, which
the Princes of the Congregation confirmed by an Oath: Josh. 9.
Neither could they raise Taxes upon the People, or take any thing from them
without their Consent; 1 Samuel 1.3.
and therefore Samuel appeals to them how little he had oppressed them, whose Ox
or whose Ass have I taken? whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? Neither
could they, nor the Judges their Successors, make any new Laws for the People;
God himself being their King, and Legislator; and therefore what you urge as to
the Regal Power of Moses, and Joshua, after the Sanhedrin had been constituted,
amounts to no more, but that both of them were Heads, or Captains of the
People, to lead them out to War, and bring them back again, which is expressed by
going in and out before them, and their Obedience to their Military Orders, as
also to such things, which God has expressly commanded, is understood by these
words; All that thou command us, we will do; and whithersoever thou sendest
us, we will go: Yet still this was with respect to their obtaining the Land of
Canaan, for otherwise if either Moses, or Joshua should have gone about of
their own Heads to have Led them again into Egypt, I suppose you will not say,
the Israelites were bound either to have followed them, or submitted to them;
but rather might have resisted them in such cases.

And therefore Josephus his Speech which he makes Moses to deliver, is not so
ridiculous as you are pleased to make it; for the Laws here mentioned by him,
and here set in opposition to Monarchy, were not such Laws, as were made by the
Greek Commonwealth, as you suppose, but the Law given from God by his hand,
and these he might well think were sufficient with such Power, as he and Joshua
enjoyed, without having any recourse to a Human Monarchical Government, since
God himself was their King; and as for the Judges that succeeded them, they had
much less Power, than either Moses, or Joshua: Since it is apparent by the
Story of Deborah and Barak, Judges the 4th, who were the Princes or Generals of
the Tribes of Zebulun, and Naphtali, that they had no power to force the People
to go out to fight against the Canaanites, whether they would, or no. And
therefore you will find in the next Chapter, in the Song of Victory, which they
sung, that many of the Tribes came not in to their Assistance; therefore it is
there said, That for the Divisions of Reuben there were great thoughts of
heart; therefore they ask, Why abidest thou among the Sheepfolds, etc. And
presently after it is said, Gilead abode beyond Jordan: and why did Dan remain
in the Ships? Asher continued on the Seashore, and abode in his breaches. And
so they conclude with Curse ye Meroz, curse ye bitterly the Inhabitants
thereof, because they came not to the help of the Lord against the Mighty. So
that I am persuaded, it was the want of this Power in the Judges of making
Laws, of imposing Tributes, or Taxes, and of forcing Men to serve in the Wars
against their Enemies, (which they did before only as Volunteers,) that made
the Israelites the more desirous to have a King over them, like those of other
Nations, who were endued with these Prerogatives. And therefore the best
Commentators do interpret the Prediction of Samuel concerning the manner of the
King, 1 Samuel 8 11, 12.
that should Reign over them, and would take their Sons for his Chariots, and
his Horse men, and to be Captains over thousands, etc. to relate to his Royal
Power of enrolling, and making them serve in his Army, either as Officers, or
Soldiers, and the taking of their Fields and their Vineyards, and the Tenth of
their Seeds etc. to give his Officers, and Servants; to signify no more than
his Power of imposing Public Tribute, and Impositions on the People, to
maintain his Royal Splendour, and the Necessities of the State, as other
Neighbouring-Kings were wont to do; all which they not being used to before,
they should cry unto the Lord by reason of them as a great oppression: And that
Saul, when he came to be King used this Prerogative of forcing the People to
come, and serve in the War, in a higher manner than Samuel, or the Judges had
done before, appears by the 11th Chapter of this Book, when Nahash the Ammonite
came to make War against Iabesh, Saul took a Yoke of Oxen, and hewed them in
pieces, and sent them throughout all the Coasts of Israel by the hands of
Messengers, saying, Whosoever comes not forth after Saul, and after Samuel, so
shall it be done unto his Oxen; and the fear of the Lord fell on the People,
and they came out with one Consent.

And it seems evident to me that the Power which Samuel* had before the
Children of Israel desired a King was not Monarchical, but mixed of Aristocracy
and Monarchy together, in which Samuel as Judge had a Judicial Authority, and
likewise a Supreme Military Power of leading them out to War against the
Philistines and other Enemies, and yet notwithstanding, the Supreme Power in
all other things remained wholly in the Principal Heads or Fathers of the
Tribes, which whether they were chosen by the People, or enjoyed it by Right of
Inheritance, I confess the Scripture is silent, and therefore I am not at all
satisfied with your Notion, that the Government of these People when they had
no Judges, consisted of Twelve petty Monarchies, under the Heads or Princes of
the Tribes, for there is no Authority in Scripture to countenance any such
opinion, the place you bring for it out of the 1st and 7th of Numbers, not at
all proving it. For though I grant, there were twelve Princes of the Tribes whose
names are there set down, and who are called Heads of the Houses of their
Fathers, yet is it no where said, that these were endued with Civil Power, or
were Chief Rulers over the Tribes: for it is apparent all Civil Power remained
then in Moses and the Sanhedrim, who under him decided all controversies: So
that it is most natural to suppose that these Heads of the Tribes were not
Civil Magistrates, but the Military Leaders or Captains of each Tribe, when
they went out to War, and are the same who in this Chapter, are called the
renowned of the Congregation, etc. and Heads of the Thousands of Israel.

Nor does it follow, that because there were such Officers in Moses his time,
that they must continue the same after, under the Judges, so many Slaveries and
oppressions that this People had undergone, or that if they did still continue,
that their Power was Monarchical; or that they could do any thing without the
consent of the Heads, or Fathers of Families, of each Tribe, in whom I suppose
the Supreme Authority was in the Intervals of the Judges; and therefore we find
in the ninth of Judges, that the men of Shechem, and all the House of Millo
made Abimelech King, that is, not over all the Tribes of Israel, but over
Ephraim and half Manasses only, which is to be understood by Israel in this
Chapter, where it is said v. 18. by Iotham the Son of Gideon speaking to the
Men of Shechem, that they had made Abimelech the Son of a Maid Servant, King
over the Men of Shechem, because he is your Brother.

So likewise after Abimelech was Dead, the Children of Ammon made War against
the Children of Israel, as appears by the 10th of Judges, and they encamped in
Gilead, which was a Country on the other side of Jordan, which was inhabited by
the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the other half of Manasses, who by themselves
consulted for their own safety; for it is said in the last verse of this
Chapter, And the People and Princes of Gilead said one to another, What man is
he that will begin to fight against the Children of Ammon? He shall be Head
over all the Inhabitants of Gilead. From which assembly and consultation, it
plainly appears that they looked upon themselves to have a Right of setting a
Prince or Head over them, distinct from the rest of the Tribes of Israel; And
in the next Chapter you will find that Iephtha was made Prince, or Judge by the
Elders of Gilead, and though it is said that Iephtha went with the Elders of
Gilead, and that the People made him Head and Captain over them, yet that
cannot be meant of all Israel, but only of the two Tribes, and a half, which
inhabited the Land of Gilead, for we find chapter the 12. the Men of Ephraim
making War upon Iephtha, because he had not called them out to sight against
the Ammonites, and you will find verse the 4th. that Iephtha gathered together
the Men of Gilead, and fought with Ephraim, and that the Men of Gilead smote
Ephraim. In all which story it appears, there was none concerned in this War
but the Gileadites only: that is, those Tribes that inhabited that Region.

I have likewise another Authority for this separate Power of each Tribe, when
there was no common Judge over them, as may appear from the Story of the
Danites in the 18th chapter, who wanting a Country to dwell in, it is there
said the Children of Dan, sent five men of their Family to Spy out a Country
for them; which thing could not be done, without an Assembly of the Chief of
the whole Tribe: Neither is there any mention in all this Story of any such
Chief or Prince of the Tribe, as you suppose, only that six hundred men went by
common consent, who made War, and Conquered the City and Country of Laish,
which they called Dan.

But that all the Children of Israel, during the Intervals of the Judges, did
meet in one Common Council or Assembly, upon any great accident or emergency,
appears by the twentieth Chapter of this Book of Judges* where after the Rape
and Murder committed upon the Levite's Wife, it is said in the two first
verses, Then all the Children of Israel went out, and the Congregation was
gathered together as one man from Dan even to Beershebah, with the Land of
Gilead, unto the Lord in Mizpeh. And the Chief of all the People, even of all
the Tribes of Israel, presented themselves in the Assembly of the People of
God, four hundred thousand footmen that drew Sword: Who being thus met, the
Levite, the Husband of the Woman that was slain, having told them the Story,
concludes thus, Behold ye are all Children of Israel, give here your Advice and
Counsel, and the result is, All the People arose as one Man, saying, We will
not any of us go to his Tent, neither will we any of us turn into his House,
etc. Now if this were not as Democratical an Assembly, as you can any where
meet with in either the Roman or Greek Hist. I leave it to you your self to
Judge: though I grant the chief of the People, or Tribes of Israel might preside
in it. To conclude, I think I may with very great reason maintain with
Josephus, that the Government of the Tribes of Israel, was Aristocratical
before their setting a King over them: for had Samuel been endued with an
absolute Monarchical power (as you suppose) it had been a very needless request
of the Children of Israel, to ask him to make them a King, to Judge them, as
other Nations.


M. You have made a very long (I had almost said a tedious) discourse, to prove
that the Government of the Children of Israel was not Monarchical, before the
time of Saul: and though I cannot now well remember all the particulars of your
discourse, yet this much I can gather from it, F P. C. 2. 10.
that you are fain to confess that during the Intervals of the Judges, and when
there was no King in Israel, but that every Man did that which was Right in his
own Eyes: Even then, the Israelites were under the Kingly Government of the
Fathers of particular Families; For in the Consultation after the Benjamitical
War, Judge. 21.16.
you mentioned, for providing Wives for the Benjamites, we find the Elders of
the Congregation bare the only sway: To them also were Complaints to be made,
as appears by Verse 22. And though mention be made of all the Children of
Israel, all the Congregation, and all the People; yet by the Term of all, the
Scripture means only all the Fathers, and not all the whole multitude, ver. 1,
2.
as the Text plainly expounds it self, in the second of Chronicles, where
Solomon speaks unto all Israel, viz. to the Captains, 1 King. 8.12. 2 Chronicles.
5.2.
the Judges, and to every Governor the Chief of the Fathers; So the Elders of
Israel are expounded to be the Chief of the Fathers of the Children of Israel.

But I am less edified with your Notion, in making any of the Tribes to have
set a Judge or Captain over themselves distinct from the rest of the Tribes of
Israel. For the example you quote of Abimelech makes directly against you, it
being said, verse the 22d of that Chapter, that Abimelech Reigned three Years
over Israel, and in the next chapter it is said, there arose to defend Israel,
Tola the Son of Puah, and that he Judged Israel, that is, all the twelve
Tribes, twenty years; and if Gideon the Father of Abimelech was Judge over all
Israel, as it appears by the Story he was, it will likewise follow, that
Abimelech his Son succeeded (tho by Force and Murder) into the same power. It
is likewise as plain (notwithstanding what you have said to the contrary) that
the Elders of Gilead did not alone make Iephtha their Head or Captain: For though
I grant Jephthah tells them, that if he fought, and delivered them from the
Children of Ammon, that he would be their Head; Yet it is plain by the 11th
verse of that Chapter, that Jephthah went with the Elders of Gilead, and it was
the People (viz. of all Israel) made him Head and Captain over them: and it
appears that Jephthah uttered all these words before the Lord in Mizpeh, where
it appears by the seventeenth verse of the former chapter, the Children of
Israel were then assembled and encamped.

Nor am I yet satisfied, but that though God out of a special love, and care to
the House of Israel, did choose to be their King himself, yet did he Govern them
at that time, by his Viceroy Samuel, and his Sons; And therefore God tells
Samuel, They have not rejected thee, but me, that I should not reign over them;
It seems they did not like a King by Deputation, but desired one by Succession,
like all the Nations. All Nations belike had Kings then, and those by
Inheritance, not by Election, for we do not find the Israelites Prayed that
they themselves might choose their own King; they dreamt of no such Liberty, and
yet they were the Elders of Israel gathered together: If other Nations had
elected their own Kings, no doubt but they would have been as desirous to have
imitated other Nations as well in the electing, as in the having a King: And
therefore I am sure there is nothing to be found in Scripture that Countenances
your Notion of the Peoples having a Right to Elect their own King. But this
only by the by.

But to prosecute the matter in Hand, when God gave the Israelites Kings, F. P.
c. 1. 7.
he re-establisht the Ancient, and Prime Right of Lineal Succession to Paternal
Government. And whenever he made choice of any special person to be King he
intended that the Issue also should have benefit thereof, as being comprehended
sufficiently in the person of the Father, although the Father only was named in
the Grant. Which Lineal Right of Succession continued in the Family of David
until such time as his Successors by their Idolatry so far provoked Gods anger
as to deliver them up to the King of Babylon, under whose and his Successors
Power, they, and their Posterity continued Subjects for many Ages.


F. I shall not dispute any farther with you (since I see it is to no purpose)
concerning the Government of the Israelites, whether it was Monarchical or
Aristocratical before the Reign of Saul; nor yet shall I positively assert,
that Abimelech or Jephthah and other of the Judges were Rulers of some
particular Tribes only. Yet Vid. Io^an. Marshami Chron. Can. Sect. XI. p. 291,
292, and 293.
very Learned Men are of this Opinion, since they can find no other way, but by
a Synchronism in the times of the Judges, as also of the years of Rest, and
Servitude, as may appear from Judge. 10. v. 6, 8. compared with Judge. 13.1. to
reconcile that great Difference that will be found in the Sacred Chronology,
from the time of the Children of Israel's coming out of Egypt, to the fourth
year of Solomon, in which the Temple was begun to be built, which does amount
to four hundred and eighty years; 1 Kings 6.1.
whereas if you please to take the pains to cast up the years from the Children
of Israel's coming out of Egypt, to the beginning of Readiness Reign, according to
the common Account of the years of the Judges, reckoned with the Reigns of
Saul, and David, to that time, etc. it will amount to 600 years, which is more
by 120 years than all the time from the said Epoch to the fourth year of
Solomon taken altogether.

But as for the several Tribes alone consulting and ordering their own affairs,
it is so plain from the Examples of the People, and Princes of Gilead, as also
from that of the Danites, that you have nothing to object against it: And so
likewise in the Instance of all the Children of Israel meeting, and consulting,
what to do with the Benjamites, where since you cannot deny the matter of Fact,
you have no way to evade it, but by supposing I know not what Kingly Authority
in the Fathers of particular Families, whom you do suppose to have then bore
the only sway, because it is said in that Chapter you quoted, that in the
consultation after this War, the Elders of the Congregation proposed it to
them, saying; How shall we do for Wives for them that remain, seeing the Women,
are destroyed out of Benjamin? And then follows the result of the Congregation
in the next verse; And they said, (viz. all the Congregation agreed) that there
must be an Inheritance for them that be escaped out of Benjamin, etc. all which
amounts to no more, than what I granted at first, that the Heads, or Elders of
the Tribes presided in this Assembly, and put the question to them: Which is so
necessary in all great Assemblies, that without such Officers they cannot come
to any resolution; and therefore you should do well to prove the Monarchical
Power of these Elders by some better Authority than this Text.

But if the Judges had Monarchical Power as you suppose, notwithstanding all
you have said, against the Peoples Electing them, it plainly appears by the
Examples of Abimelech, and Iephthah, that the People did often Elect a Judge,
or Captain over them, without any Nomination by, or Inspiration from God.

But to return to that which is most material, your supposed Restoration of
Patriarchal Government under Moses, and Joshua, after the Israelites returned
from the Egyptian Bondage, I cannot but here by the way take notice, that the
Truth will sometimes slip from you before you are aware; for if it be true what
you at first asserted, at our last meeting, That a Servant, or Slave, and a
Subject, were all one at the first; and also that all Monarchs are endued with
Fatherly Power, then if Pharaoh was a Monarch, the Children of Israel were not,
according to your Principle, brought into Bondage by Pharaoh, but they were
only Adopted into another Fatherly Power. But you should have done well to have
shown more clearly than you have hitherto done, that this Patriarchal
Jurisdiction was exercised by Abraham, Isaac, or Jacob before the Descent into
Egypt, since all the Instances you have yet given of such a Power, have proved
very unlucky: For though I read in St. Stephen's Speech in the Acts, Acts VII. 9.
that the Patriarchs moved with Envy sold Joseph into Egypt; yet is it no where
mentioned, (nor I believe will you your self affirm) that these Patriarchs ever
had a Monarchical Power. For till Jacob went into Egypt, that Power was solely
in him, according to your Principles, and after that in Pharaoh as King of
Egypt: So that though I can find the word Patriarch (but once) in Scripture, yet
I can see no ground for your Patriarchal Authority, or Jurisdiction; and
therefore that could suffer no intermission, which never had any beginning in
Nature.

But after this you tell me, that God chose Moses, and Joshua successively to
Govern as Princes, in the place of those Supreme Fathers, or Patriarchs; which
is easily, I confess, affirmed, only it wants proof. For though you endeavor to
prove that all Paternal Power was Regal, yet it still remains unproved that all
Regal Power is Paternal. It is true that God did appoint Moses, and Joshua, to
be the Rulers of his People under him, but that does not at all make out that
they succeeded in the stead of Supreme Fathers, much less that they succeeded,
as Heirs, or Successors to the Patriarchal Power of Adam. For Moses, and
Joshua, being chosen by God to be Rulers of his People, TT. G. p. 201.
will no more prove that Government belonged to Adam's Heir, as to his
Fatherhood, than God's choosing Aaron of the Tribe of Levi to be Priest, will
prove that the Priesthood belonged to Adam's Heir, or the Prime Fathers, since
God could choose Aaron to be Priest, and Moses Ruler over Israel, though neither
of those Offices, were settled on Adam's Heir, or the first Patriarchs. So
likewise for what you say concerning God's raising up the Judges to defend his
People, proves Fatherly Authority to be the Original of Government just after
the same rate; and cannot God raise up such men unless Paternal Power give a
Title to the Government?

But to come to your darling Instance, the giving of the Israelites Kings,
whereby you suppose God re established the Ancient Prime Right of Lineal
Succession (...) Paternal Government. This I can by no means understand; for if
by Li^^^l Succession you mean to Adam, I desire to know how you will make it
out that either Saul, or David could be Heirs of Adam's Power? or how the Power
that those Kings were endued with by God, was the same Power, which Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob enjoyed before. For if you please to consider it, your
Hypothesis consists of two Propositions; the first is, that all Paternal Power
is the same with Regal Power; which if it be proved not to be true, the other
convertible Proposition (which is but the Conversion of this) will likewise be
as false; viz. that all Regal Power is Paternal. Nor is what you said last of
all any truer than the rest, that whenever God made choice of any person to
be King, he intended that the Issue (I suppose you mean his Issue) should have
the benefit thereof: For either Moses, and Joshua, and the Judges, were no
Kings, (though you have asserted the former to be so) or else they had not the
benefit of this Grant: But certainly Saul was a King, and yet his Issue never
succeeded; but you speak very warily to suppose this Grant to be made to the
Issue in general, without specifying in particular, who should enjoy it,
because I suppose you are sensible, that Solomon, whom God expressly appointed
to be David's Successor, and Iehoahaz, 2 Chronicles. 26.1.
whom the People of the Land made King in the room of Josiah, were neither of
them Eldest Sons of the Kings their Fathers. To conclude, I desire you would
show me, what Relation or Title all Kings, or Princes nowadays have, or can
claim as Heirs to Adam, or Noah; or how that Power with which God endued those
Fathers of Mankind, is the same which you say all Princes, or Monarchs, may now
claim to be given them by God: For I confess I can see no likeness, or Relation
at all between them.


M. It may indeed seem absurd to maintain, that Kings now are the Fathers of
their People, since Experience shows the contrary. It is true, F. P. 8.
all Kings are not the Natural Parents of their Subjects, yet they all either
are, or are to be reputed the next Heirs to those first Progenitors, who were
at first the Natural Parents of the whole People, and in their Right succeed to
the exercise of Supreme Jurisdiction; and such Heirs are not only Lords of
their own Children, but also of their Brethren, and all others that were
subject to their Fathers. And though I have all along supposed, that Paternal
Government was at first Monarchical; yet I must likewise grant, that when the
World was replenished with People, that this Paternal Government by Succession
ceased, F. D. O. p. 67.
and a new kind of it started up either by Election Conquest, or Usurpation;
yet this was still Paternal Power, which can never be lost, or cease, though it
may be transferred, or usurped; or it may be ordained a new in a person who
otherwise had no Right to it before. Thus God, who is the Giver of all Power,
may transfer it from the Father to the Son, as he gave Saul a Fatherly Power
over his Father Kish.

So that all Power on Earth is either derived, Ib. p. 70.
or usurped from the Fatherly Power, there being no Original to be found of any
Power whatsoever; for if there should be granted two sorts of Power without any
subordination of one to the other, they would be in perpetual strife, which
should be Supreme for two Supremes cannot agree; if the Fatherly Power be
Supreme, then the Power of the People must be subordinate, and depend on it; if
the Power of the People be Supreme, then the Fatherly Power must submit to it,
and cannot be exercised without the License of the People, which must quite
destroy the frame and course of Nature.


F. If this be all you have to say for the proof of so weighty an Hypothesis, I
confess I wonder how you, or any rational Man can lay so great stress upon it:
For though I should grant you, that some Fathers of Families at first became by
the tacit, or express Consent of their Children, and Descendants, to be Kings,
or Princes over them; does it therefore follow that all Kings Govern by Right
of Fatherhood at this day?

It Is true you tell me, that all Kings, tho they are not now the Natural
Fathers of their People, Yet are still to be esteemed as such by them, as
Succeeding either as Heirs, or Successors to those that were so. I grant indeed
if any Kings now adays could prove themselves right Heirs to Adam, or Noah,
this were somewhat to the purpose, but to talk of a Paternal Power proceeding
from Election, Conquest, or Usurpation, is perfect Iargon to me; for pray tell
me, can a Man become endued with Paternal Power over me, by my Electing him to
be my King? or can a Man by Conquest, or Usurpation oblige me to yield him a
Filial Duty, and Obedience? for if this were so, if a Father of a separate
Family (such as Abraham was) should be conquered by the head of another
separate Family, nay tho he were a Thief, or a Robber, if once the true Father
were Killed, or destroyed, all the Children, and Descendants of the Family must
pay the same Duty, and Obedience, to this unjust Conqueror, or Robber, as to
their true Father; and the same may be said in Usurpations, in case, after the
death of such a Father of a Family, a Younger Brother or Nephew, should get
possession of the House, and Estate, and force all his Brethren, and Kinsmen to
Submit to him, they must then all own him to be endued by God with the same
Paternal Power, which their Father, or Grandfather had; and consequently must
Honor and Obey him as their true Father: Both which examples, being contrary
to the Common sense, and reason of Mankind, may show you, how absurd this
Hypothesis is; whereas indeed Fatherhood being a Relation of Blood, and the
Duty and Respect we owe to him, that is our Father, proceeding from that Piety,
and Gratitude we owe him both for our Generation, and Education; how can this
Relation, or these Obligations be ever transferred to, or usurped by any other,
so that any other man can become my Father, or I owe him that Filial Duty, and
Respect, as to him that begot me and brought me up?

And though I grant that God may confer a Regal Power on whom he pleases, either
by his express Will, or the ordinary course of his Providence; yet when such a
person who was not a King before, does become so, I utterly deny that the Power
he has then conferred upon him, is a Paternal Power in relation to his
Subjects; which is evident from your own Instance of Readiness becoming a King
over his Father Kish. For though you say that God then conferred a Fatherly Power
on Saul over his own Father, this is a great mistake: For then Saul would have
been immediately discharged from all the Duties of Piety, and Gratitude, which
he owed his Father; and they were all transferred from Kish to Saul; so that
after he became King, he might have treated his Father with no more Respect, or
Deference, than any other Subject; which is contrary to God's Commandment, that
bids all Men, Honor their Father, and Mother. And I know not how Kings can be
excepted out of this Precept. So that your mistake arises from this
preposterous confounding of Paternal Authority with Regal Power: And because
Adam, Noah, or any other Father of a separate Family may be a Prince over it in
the State of Nature, that therefore every Monarch in the World is also endued
with this Paternal Power: Which that they are distinct may farther appear from
your own supposed Monarchical Power of Adam, who though granting him to have been
a Prince over his Posterity, yet did not this discharge any of his Descendants
from their Duty and Obedience to their own Father: And though I confess you
talked at our last meeting of a Fatherly Power to be exercised in subordination
to the Supreme Fatherly Power of Adam; yet this is a mere Chimera: for Filial
Honor, and Obedience, being due by the Commandment only to a Man's own Natural
Father, can never be due to two different persons at once, since they may
command contradictory things, and then the Commandment of Honor (that is,
obey) thy Father, cannot be observed in respect of both of them; and therefore
granting Adam, or Noah, to have exercised a Monarchical Power over their
Children, and Descendants, it could not be as they were Fathers, or
Grandfathers, when their Sons, or Grandchildren were separated from them, and
were Heads of Families of their own, for the reasons already given; so that if
they were Princes in their own Families, whilst their Sons, or Grandchildren
continued part of them, it was only as Heads, or Masters of their own Families,
but not by any such Patriarchal, or Paternal Authority as you suppose. But as
for the Conclusion of your Discourse, it being all built upon this false
Foundation, that all Power on Earth is derived, or usurped from the Fatherly
Power; I need say no more to it: For if that be false, all that you argue from
thence concerning the subordination of all other Powers to this, will signify
nothing.


M. I think I can yet make out my Hypothesis, notwithstanding all you have said
against it: For though I grant the Paternal Relation it self can never be
usurped, or transferred; yet you may remember, I at first affirmed, F. P. A. P.
that Adam was not only a Father, but a King and Lord over his Family, and a
Son, a Subject, a Servant, or a Slave, were one and the same thing at first;
and the Father* had power to dispose of, sell, or Alien his Children to any
other; whence we find the Sale, and Gift of Children, to have been much in use
in the beginning of the World, when Men had their Servants for a Possession,
and an Inheritance, as well as other goods; whereupon we find the Power of
Castrating or making Eunuchs much in use in old times. And as the Power of the
Father may be lawfully transferred, or aliened; so it may be unjustly usurped.
And though I confess no Father, or Master of a Family, ought to use his Children
thus Cruelly, and Severely, and that he sins mortally if he does so; yet
neither they, nor any Power under Heaven can call such an Independent Father,
or Monarch to an account, or punish him for so doing.


F. I am glad at last we are come to an Issue of this doughty controversy, and
tho I forced you at our last meeting to confess, that Fatherly Power was not
despotical, nor that Fathers upon any account Whatsoever, were absolute Lords,
over their Children and all their Descendants in the State of Nature: Yet now I
see to preserve your Hypothesis, You are fain to recur to this Despotical Power
of Fathers in the State of Nature: Because without supposing it, and that it
may be transferred, or usurped, Princes at this day (whom without any cause you
suppose to be endued with this Paternal, Despotick Power) could never claim any
Title to their Subjects Allegiance. And then much good may do you with your,
and Sr. R, F's excellent discovery: For if, as you your self acknowledge,
Princes are no longer related in Blood to their Subjects, any nearer than as we
all proceed from Adam our Common Ancestor, that relation being now so remote,
signifies little or nothing, so that the true Paternal Authority being lost (as
you confess) the Despotick Power of a Lord over his Servants, or his Slaves
only remains; since therefore you make no difference in Nature, between
Subjects, and Slaves, then all Subjects Lie at the mercy of their Kings to be
treated in all things like Slaves, when ever they please; And they may exercise
an absolute Despotick Power over their Lives, and Estates as they think fit: So
that I can see nothing that can hinder them from selling their Subjects, or
castrating them as the King of Mingr^lia, does his Subjects at this day; and as
the Great Turk, and Persian Monarchs do use those Christian Children whom they
take away from their Parents to make Eunuchs for their S^raglio's, and then I
think you have brought Mankind to a very fine pass to be all created for the
Will, and Lust of so many single Men, which if it ever could be the Ordinance
of God, I leave it to your self to judge.


M. I was prepared for this objection before, and therefore I think it will
make nothing against this Absolute Power, with which I suppose God to have
endued Adam, and all other Monarchs at the first: So that I am so far from
thinking that this Doctrine, will teach Princes Cruelty toward their Subjects,
that on the contrary nothing can better inculcate their Duty toward them: B.
C. P. 3.
For as God is the Author of a Paternal Monarchy; so he is the Author of no
other. He introduced all but the first Man into the World, under the Subjection
of a Supreme Father, and by so doing has shown that he never intended there
should be any other Power in the World, and whatever Authority shall be
extended beyond this is accountable to him alone, so that Princes are bound to
treat their Subjects as their Children with Mercy, and Lenity as far as they
are capable of it, and not as their Brutes. And granting that Subjects and
Servants or Slaves were at first all one, yet I think even they ought to be
treated only as Younger Children, yet as Children still: Nay even conquered
People that are in some Countries treated as Slaves, and but a little better
than brutes, have certainly a very good appeal to the Tribunal of God against
their Princes, who will undoubtedly right them in another World if they suffer
patiently in this. If it be the Character of a good Man that he is merciful to
his Beast, I doubt not but the very Brutes have a Right to be Governed with
mercy and Justice, and that God who is their Creator as well as ours will
punish cruel men if they Tyrannize over them, and much more if any man shall
exercise Cruelty on another man who is of the same, not only Nature, but Blood.

Whereas all other Hypotheses leave the Prince at Liberty to make his Bargain
with his Subjects, as well as he can; and if they be brought by force, or
fraud, to an entire Submission at Discretion, they may then be treated
accordingly, and must stand to their Compact, be the terms never so unequal,
and then the Case of a Man, and a Brute, may differ very little; and if the
Subject may resist, the Prince may take care to prevent it, and the War may be
just on both sides, which is impossible.

I could likewise show you many other Benefits that would accrue both to
Princes, and Subjects, were this Hypothesis but once generally taught, and
believed by both of them.


F. I pray Sir, spare the giving your self that trouble, for I will not dispute
how honestly this Hypothesis may be designed, or what mighty Fea^s it might do,
were it once universally received. But this neither you, nor I can ever expect
will come to pass* because neither Princes, nor People will ever believe it to
be true: For in the first place, the People will never be convinced of it, it
being above a vulgar understanding, that their Princes whom they are very well
assured are not their Fathers, nor yet right Heirs to Adam, or Noah, should
notwithstanding lay claim to a Paternal Authority over them. In the next place,
Princes can never believe that they are Fathers of their People for the same
Reason: I grant indeed, that they may be very willing to believe one half of
your Hypothesis, that they are Absolute Lords, and Masters over them, and so
would be willing upon that account, to use their Subjects like Slaves, but that
they should look upon themselves as Fathers of their People, and the Heirs or
Assigns of Adam, or Noah, I think no Prince in Christendom can be so vain to
believe. So that whatever Power Adam, or Noah, or any other Father might be
entrusted with by God, because of that Natural Affection which they were
supposed to bear toward their Children; yet sure Princes at this day, can lay
no claim to it, since none but true Fathers can be endued with this Paternal
Affection.

And whereas you suppose, that Princes ought to treat their Subjects, nay even
those that are conquered like Children, and not like Slaves, or Brutes: This
can have very little effect upon them, who can as little believe it, as the
People, for if Monarchical Power is not Paternal (as I think I have clearly
made out) then there can lie no obligation upon Monarchs, to treat their
Subjects like Children, and therefore Since the Despotical or Masterly Power
only remains, which is ordained Principally for the good, and Benefit of the
Master, and not of the Servant, or Slave: Who can blame Princes, if they exact
the utmost of their due Prerogatives, and so treat their Subjects like Slaves,
whenever it serves their humor, or interest so to do; nor are they any more to
be blamed for thus exerting their Power, than a Master of Negroes in the
West Indies is for making the best of the Service of those Slaves whom he has
bought with his Money, or are born in his House: Whom tho I grant he is not to
use like Brute Beasts, for the Reasons you have given: Yet does it not
therefore follow, that he is obliged to use them like his Younger Children; for
then sure he could not have a Right to keep them for Slaves as long as they
lived, and to let them enjoy nothing but a bare miserable Subsistence; and
there is very good reason for this, for almost every Planter in Barbados knows
very well, the difference between the Relations of a Father, a Master, and a
Prince, and that the one is not the other; and it is from your jumbling
together these three different Relations of a Son, a Slave, and a Subject, that
has led you into all these mistakes. For though it should be granted, that the
right of a Master over his Slaves, may be acquired by Conquest, or assigned to,
or usurped by another; yet certainly the Authority, or Relation of a Father,
and the Monarchical, or Civil Power of a Monarch can never be acquired by
Conquest, nor yet usurped without the Consent, and Submission of the Children,
and Subjects.

And therefore to conclude, I do not think your Hypothesis one jot the better,
by your founding it upon an Imaginary Paternal Power, rather than upon Compact,
which I am sure can never be made upon so unequal term^, as to render the Case
of a Man, and a Brute, very little different; since it would be to no purpose
for any Subject to make a Bargain with their Monarch, or Conqueror; and yet to
leave themselves in as bad, or worse condition than they were in the State of
Nature: So that however convenient your Hypothesis may be either for Prince, or
People, it signifies no more than the Popish Hypothesis of the Infallibility of
the Pope, and General Council, which because they suppose necessary, and is
indeed very beneficial for the Church; therefore God has conferred it upon
them: But how false a way of reasoning this is, has been sufficiently
demonstrated. The Application of this Comparison is so obvious, that I leave it
to you to make.


M. I cannot but think, for all you have yet said, that God has endued all
Princes with a Paternal Authority, and for this, I have the Church of England
on my side, which in its Catechism, in the Explanation of the Duties contained
in the 5th Commandment, Honor thy Father, etc. does comprehend under that
Head, F. P. 10. F. O. G. p 254.
not only to Honor, and Succor our Fathers and Mothers, but also to Honor,
and Obey the King, and all them that are put in Authority under him; as if all
Power were originally in the Father: So that this Command gives him the Right
to Govern, and makes the Form of Government Monarchical. And if Obedience to
Parents be immediately due by a Natural Law; and Subjection to Princes but by
the Mediation of an Human Ordinance, what reason is there, that the Laws of
Nature should give place to the Laws of Men? As we see the Power of the Father
over his Child, gives place, and is subordinate to the Power of the Magistrate.
And that this is not the Doctrine of Christianity alone, but was also believed
by the best Moralists amongst the Heathen, may appear by this remarkable
passage out of Seneca de Clementia, which is so put to this purpose, Lib. 1.
Cap. 14.
that I took the pains to translate it into English in my Common-place-book:
Some of which I will now read to you. What is the Duty of a Prince? That of
kind Parents, who use to chide their Children sometimes sweetly, and at other
times with more sharpness, and sometimes correct them with blows. And after
having shown that a good Father will not proceed to disinherit his Son, or
inflict any more severe punishments upon him till he is past all hopes of
amendment; He proceeds thus. No Parent proceeds to Extirpation, till he has in
vain spent all other Remedies. That which becomes a Parent, becomes a Prince
who is styled without flattery, The Father of his Country; in all our other
Titles we consult their (i. e. the Emperors) Honor. We have called them the
Great, the Happy, the August, and heaped upon ambitious Majesty, all the Titles
we could invent, in giving th^se to them: But we have styled him, The Father of
his Country, that the Prince might consider the Power of a Father, was given
him: Which is the most temperate of all Powers, consulting the Welfare of the
Children, and preferring their Good before its own.

And as for your Objection, why Princes should not be loved, and reverenced, as
if they were our Fathers, because not being our Natural Fathers, they may
possibly want that Natural, and Fatherly Affection to their Subjects, and
consequently may Tyrannize over them; I think this is easily answered: For

First, God, who is, and ever was the True Disposer of Kingdoms, has in his
hands the hearts of all Princes, and endows them with such Affections, as he
thinks fit not only toward the People in general, but toward each particular
person: And therefore as he was the Author of all Government, and is still the
Preserver of it; so no inconvenience can happen, but he is able to redress it.

2. That there was as great, or rather greater Inconveniences which sprung at
first from the too great Lenity of these Natural Princes, for want of Power, or
Will to punish the Disorders of their Subject Children, as have ever sprung
since, from the Tyranny, and Cruelty of the worst Princes: And I believe to
this was owing that excessive wickedness, which forced as it were God Almighty,
to put an end to the first World, by that time it had stood about 1600 years.
And we see afterward Eli, and Samuel, good men, and severe Judges toward
others, were yet too indulgent to their own Children; which shows the weakness
of your Reasons, and the greatness of the Wisdom of God, in making all
Government to spring from Paternal Power, which is the mildest of all Powers,
and to descend by degrees to Hereditary Monarchies, which are the Divinest, the
most Natural, and the best of all Governments, and in which the People have the
least hand.


F. I see plainly that you think the Laws of Nature, or Reason are not on your
side and therefore you are forced to recur not to the express words of
Scripture, but to the Paraphrase, or Explanation of them in our Church
Catechism, which certainly never was intended to have that consequence drawn
from it, which you have made, for tho you are pleased to omit one part of the
Commandment, with an, etc. Yet the Words are as you your self must acknowledge.
Honor thy Father, and thy Mother; and if from Honor thy Father, you will
gather that all Power was Originally in the Father, it will follow by the same
Argument, that it must have been as Originally in the Mother too: Father, and
Mother, or Parents, being mentioned together, in all Precepts in the Old, and
New Testament, where Honor, or Obedience is enjoined on Children; And if these
Words, Honor thy Father, must give a right to Government, and make the form
also Monarchical, (...), if by these Words must be meant Obedience to the
Political Power of the Supreme Magistrate, it concerns not any Duty we owe to
our Natural Fathers, who are Subjects: Because they by your Doctrine are
divested of all that Power, it being placed wholly in the Prince, and so being
equally Subjects, and Slaves with their Children, can have no Right by that
Title to any such Honor, or Obedience, as contains in it Civil Subjection. But
if Honor thy Father and thy Mother, Signifies the Duty we owe our Natural
Parents. (as by our Saviors interpretation Matthew. 15.4. and all the other
places it is plain it does,) then it cannot concern Political Ob^dien^^, but a
Du^y that is owing to Persons who have no Title to Sovereignty, no^ any
Political Authority as Monarchs over Subjects. For Obedience to a Private
Father, and that Civil Obedience which is due to a Monarch, a^^ quite
different, and many times contradictory, and inconsistent with each other. And
therefore, this Command, which necessarily comprehends the persons of our
Natural Fathers and Mothers, must mean a Duty we owe them distinct from our
Obedience to the Magistrate, and from which the most absolute Power of Princes
cannot absolve us. And to make this yet plainer, suppose upon your Hypothesis,
that Seth, as Eldest Son of Adam, was Heir of all his Patriarchal Power, how
could all his Brethren, and Sisters Honor, that is, Obey Eve their Mother at
the same time, supposing Seth, and her to have commanded them things
contradictory at the same time^

So that, though I grant the Compilers of our Church Catechism, did intend in
this Explanation to comprehend all the great Duties toward our Governors: Yet
it is plain, they never dreamed of this far-fetched inference, that you have
drawn from their Explanation of it, for tho under this Command of Honor thy
Father, and thy Mother, they do indeed comprehend Obedience, and Honor to be
due to the King, etc. this no more proves that they believed all Kingly Power
to be Paternal, than that because they likewise there Infer from this Command,
a Submission to be due to all Governors, Teachers, Spiritual Pastors, and
Masters, that therefore all these Parties, here named, do likewise derive their
Authority from Adam's Fatherhood, or that because under the Command against
bearing False-Witness we are taught to refrain our Tongues from Evil Speaking,
Lying, and Slandering, that therefore all Lies, and Evil Speaking whatsoever is
downright bearing False-Witness against our Neighbor, Since nothing is more
certain than that a man may commit either of the formerr without being guilty
of the latter. And to Answer your Query, if Obedience to Parents be immediately
due by a Natural Law, and Subjection to Princes but by a Humane Ordinance, what
reason is there that the Laws of Nature should give place to those of Men? I
can easily reply, that the Power of a Father over his Child gives place, and is
Subordinate to the Supreme Powers, because they are both ordained so by God, in
the Law of Nature, it being highly reasonable, that the good of a private
Family should give place to the common good of the Commonwealth, which is a
sufficient reason, and extends to all Nations, which never so much as heard of
the Ten Commandments.

But to come to your Quotation out of Seneca, I think this has a great deal
less weight in it, than your Argument from the Fifth Commandment: For though this
Philosopher writ to the Emperor, to persuade him to Clemency; yet this I am
sure of, that as he never dreamt of this Notion of Adam's Sovereignty, or
believed that every Prince was endued with Paternal Authority, because amongst
other Titles, he was styled Pater Patriae. And therefore what this Author here
says, is to be looked upon, only as a Rhetorical flourish, or at the most, to
be understood but in a Metaphorical sense, the Arguments of this Author not
being to be always taken strictly as a Logician, but only as an Orator, who was
to make use of all appearances of Reason to persuade a young Prince to Mercy,
and Clemency; and yet all this was not sufficient, as Seneca himself found
before he died, by woeful experience. And Seneca very well knew, that Tully was
styled Pater Patriae by the Senate, though he was never endued with your
Imperial, or Paternal Authority.

But, to reply a little to your Answer, against my last Argument, that Princes
not being our Natural Fathers, must often want that Natural, and Fatherly
Affection toward their Subjects, and therefore may Tyrannize ove^ them: I
think the first part of your Reply will make nothing in confutation of what I
have said: For though I will not deny, but God, who has the hearts of Princes in
his hands, may sometimes endue them with such Affections, as he thinks fit, not
only toward the People in general, but toward each particular person; yet
this may be as well evil as good Affections: As God is said in Judge. 9. To have
sent an evil Spirit between Abimelech, (one of your usurping Monarchs) and the
Men of Sichem, his Subjects: And therefore God may as well send the one for the
punishment, as the other for the benefit of a Nation: And that God is more
likely to incline the hearts of Princes to such evil, than good Affections
toward their Subjects, may appear from Mankinds more often deserving God's
Anger, for their evil deeds, than Favors for their good ones.

And I desire you would show me in how many Absolute Monarchies now in the
World, God Almighty is pleased to declare this wonderful Operation of these
Fatherly Affections toward their People. I pray deal ingenuously, and tell me,
is it to be found in our European Monarchies, where most Princes do not only
miserably harass, and oppress their Subjects, by intolerable Taxes, and
standing Armies, till they reduce them to the Lowest condition of Beggary, and
Desperation; and where for the least differences in Religion they take away
their Subjects lives by that Cruel Tribunal of the Inquisition, without any
Fair, or Legal Trial, or else where notwithstanding all Edicts, Oaths, and Vows
to the contrary, they seize upon, and spoil their Subjects of their Estates,
and imprison, and torment their persons by those Booted Apostles the Dragoons;
because Faith is not to be kept with Heretics; or else in another Country,
where the Prince took upon him a Prerogative to dispense with all Laws at his
pleasure, and to imprison, and turn men out of their Freeholds, contrary to the
known Laws of the Kingdom? Or to conclude, must we look for these Divine
Operations amongst the Eastern Monarchy, where they treat their Subjects like
Slaves, and allow them no Property either in Lands, or Goods, farther than they
think sit, and to have their persons, and lives wholly at their mercy to be
castrated, made Slaves of, or killed, as often as it shall please their humor,
or passion? And I doubt, if you will but read Ancient, as well as Modern
Histories, and also survey the State of Mankind in all the Absolute Monarchies
between France, and Iapan; you will find more frequent Examples of the evil,
than good Affections of these your Artificial Fathers toward their Adopted
Children.


M. I cannot deny, but you have given a very Tragical Account of the Tyranny,
and Oppressions under diverse Absolute Monarchies now in the World; yet this is
not the fault of the Government, but of the Evil Principles, b^d Education, or
Temper of those Monarchs, as also often times from the unquiet, and rebellious
disposition of their Subjects, from the distrusting of which, B. C. P. 3.
they place all their security in standing Armies, and Guards, so that I must
grant, that all those Governments that are maintained by Armies too strong for
the Subjects in general, are (...) and degenerate into Despotick Monarchies,
and are unsafe both to the Princ^ and People. And to let you see, that it is
not my intention (...) maintain, F. P. 6.
or defend Oppression, or Tyranny, I must freely assert, with Sir R. F. (whose
Principles I here take upon me to maintain) that all Princes are bound to treat
their Subjects as their Children, and that it is contrary to the Nature of
Mankind, to make their Offspring Slaves; and that all Kings, (nay Conquerors
too) are bound to preserve the Lands, Goods, Liberties, and Lives of all their
Subjects not by any Municipal Law, but by the Natural Law of a Father, which
binds them to ratify the Acts of their Fore fathers, and Predecessors in
things necessary for the public good of their Subjects: But yet you have not
done fairly, not to take notice of the great Oppressions, that are exercised in
some Commonwealths likewise, toward their Subjects, which if you would please
to consider, and weigh the fewness of these against the great number of
Monarchies now in the World, I believe you will have good cause to confess,
that there are many more good Monarchs, B. P.P. 12, 13.
than Equal Commonwealths; and I do believe there was as much Tyranny
exercised in these Three Kingdoms during our late Civil Wars, and afterward
under the Government of the Rump, and Cromwell, till the return of the late
King Charles, as in all the Absolute Monarchies between France and China, or
from the North to the South Pole. And it is very remarkable, that when Oliver
Cromwell set up the most Absolute, and Tyrannical Government, that ever was in
this Island, there was yet no noise of any Fears, or Jealousies of it in all
his times.


F. I am very well pleased to find you so heartily agree with me, in condemning
of Tyranny, and oppression in all sorts of Governments whatever, and I do
assure you, I do as little approve of it, if it be any where exercised in
Commonwealths, as you can do in Monarchies, only I must needs tell you, I am
not at all of your Opinion, that the Oppressions, or abuses committed by the
Magistrates in Commonwealths, are to be compared with the Tyrannies, and
Cruelties exercised by absolute Monarchs, and their Subordinate Ministers. For
though I grant they often lay very severe Taxes, and impositions, upon their
Subjects, especially such as they have acquired by Conquest, and so act like
absolute Monarchs over them, Yet are these oppressions not at all to be
compared to those under Arbitrary Monarchies; for though perhaps diverse
Commonwealths may impose greater Taxes upon their Subjects than some
Neighboring Monarchs; yet does it not follow that their Government is more
severe for all that; since the People having an opportunity by free Trade and
Liberty of Conscience in such Commonwealths, to acquire a greater share of
Riches, are also thereby enabled to Contribute more to the maintenance of the
Government, by which they reap so great Benefits. Thus we see a Citizen of
Amsterdam is able to pay six times the Taxes of one of Antwerp, and Therefore I
dare for all that, appeal to any Common Subject (though a Papist) of the United
Provinces, whether he had not rather live under the States of Holland, than
under the French King, or to any Subject of the Common Wealths of Venice,
Genoa, or Luca whether he does not prefer his Condition, as bad as it is, to
that of any of the Subjects of the Pope, Duke of Florence, or any other Italian
Prince, not to go over into Turkey, and those other Eastern Monarchies, where
the Yoke of Slavery lies yet more heavy upon the Subjects, than in Europe.

And as for what you say in the comparing of those Illegal Arbitrary
Proceedings, that were exercised in England, during the late Civil Wars, and
afterward till the Kings coming in, I must beg your pardon if (besides the
great Hyperbole in your expressions on that occasion, which I am sure are very
far from Truth) I impute those Miscarriages not as the fault of this or that
^ort of Government, but rather to a Powerful Faction Backed by a Standing Army,
which was more like a Tyranny or corrupt Oligarchy, than any Settled
Government. Nor is what you say concerning Oliver's Government more true than
the former, for all men except his own Faction, were not only afraid, but
really sensible of the lo^s of their Liberties under his Tyrannical Usurpation:
Though indeed there was a very good reason, why there should be fewer fears, or
Jealousies of it than in his late Majesty's time, when his Government began to
grow uneasy through the Peoples fear of Popery, and Arbitrary Government,
which the former People had no Jealousy of in Cromwell's time, and as for the
latter they had no occasion to fear that which was already happened.

But that you may not mistake me for a Commonwealths Man, I must so far agree
with you, that to condemn Monarchy as such, were to repine at the Government of
God himself, so that I also grant that the fault lies not in the form of
Government but in the Frail Nature of Men, which can rarely administer that
great Trust committed unto them, as becomes what they take upon them to be,
God's Vicegerents upon Earth, And I must own, that I esteem Monarchy limited by
known Laws, as the best, and most Equal Government in the World; and under
which both Prince, and People may live most happily, and easily, if each of
them will be but contented with their due share.

But I beg your pardon for this digression; and to come to a conclusion, I must
freely tell you, it is not a Straw matter, what yours or Sr R. F's Principles
are concerning the Fatherly Power of Princes, for as long as there is no ground
for it in Scripture, or Nature, you cannot expect that either Princes or People
will ever believe you; neither is it true that Princes as Fathers are bound to
treat their Subjects in all things like their Children, for then Princes ought
to maintain their Subjects, and not Subjects their Princes; since it is the
Apostles Rule, That Children ought not to lay up for the Parents, but the
Parents for the Children: And though you pretend not to plead for Tyranny, 2 Corinthians. 12.14.
or Arbitrary Government, yet I cannot at all understand, why if it were not
for this end, you should assert not long since, in your answer to me, that God
thought fit to change Paternal Government, into Hereditary Monarchy, because of
the excessive Wickedness of Mankind before the Flood proceeding from tho too
great Lenity of those Patriarchal Princes, in not punishing the disorders of
their Subject Children, which is a very bold assertion; Since you know no more
than I, what that wickedness was in particular for which God drowned the World,
much less what was the occasion of it. And therefore if God thought fit to
change Paternal Power into Hereditary Monarchies which (as I have proved) do
not at all proceed from Paternal Power, it will also follow that the Government
of your Patriarchs was not sufficient for the well-being, and happiness of
Mankind, or else God would never have thought fit to have altered it, for a
more Cruel and severe way of Government.

But as for what you say, concerning those Princes that place all their
security in Guards, and Armies too strong for the Subjects, that they are
uneasy, and degenerate into Despotick Monarchies, (you might better have said
Tyrannies) and that they are unsafe both for Prince and People, is very true,
and I altogether agree with you in it. But those of your Principles have no
reason to find fault with Princes for so doing; for since they do but use their
just Prerogative over their Slaves, or Vassals, it is but fit that they should
be made to undergo that Yoke, whether they will or no, which they would not
bear willingly, and as long as Princes look upon themselves to be (what they
really are upon your Principles) the Masters and not the Fathers of their
People, as they suppose the Goods, and Estates of their Subjects to be wholly
at their disposal, So can they never command them as they please, without the
Assistance of Standing Armies; nor have you any reason to complain of those
Princes for keeping them too strong for the Subjects, since upon your
Principles be they Strong, or Weak, the Subjects are not to resist them; but if
Princes, without your extraordinary fondness of using their People like
Children, would but always use them like Subjects, with ordinary Justice, and
Moderation; and not oppress them with excessive Taxes, and unnecessary Penal
Laws about Religion, you would find there would be no need of Standing Armies
to keep the People in awe, who would themselves be the best defense not only
against Domestic, but Foreign Enemies, and this I Will assure you is a much
better receipt against Rebellion, than all your new Recipe's of Paternal Power
in Monarchs, which is not only without all ground of reason but above common
apprehensions.


M. You have made a long Speech in answer to my Hypothesis, which since you are
not satisfied with, I can likewise show you another very good reason, why the
People should love, and reverence their Princes, and that is those great
Liberties, and Concessions, that all the Monarchs of Europe have granted their
Subjects, which are now past into the settled Laws and Customs of those
Kingdoms with which the People ought to be very well contented; nor ought they
to rebel or resist, though they may sometimes out of wantonness, and necessity,
infringe, or entrench upon those Privileges which they or their Ancestors have
conferred upon them; since they can never forseit that Power they have
originally over them.


F. I do not very well understand what you mean; for I have hitherto supposed
that all Subjects have a Property in their Estates, and a Freedom for their
Persons by the Laws of Nature; and which no Civil Power whatever could deprive
them of, without their Consent: And therefore I desire you would show me, that
if Children, Subjects, and Slaves, were all one at the first, how we in this
side of the World, came to be in a better condition, than those in Asia, and
Africa? Or that we Englishmen can claim a Property in our Estates, and a Right
to our Lives, which the Prince cannot take away but according to some known
Laws?


M. I think I can easily do this, not only in Relation to England, but any
other Kingdom, which is now governed by known Laws and that upon Sir R. F's
Hypothesis; which I shall do as near (as I can remember) in the words of that
excellent person the late Earl of Clarendon in his Survey of Mr. Hobbs
Leviathan, Chap. 20. p. 69, 70.
who suppose^ according to this Hypothesis, That some one of Noah 's
Descendants was an Absolute Monarch, at first over all his Posterity, which
might continue in his Line for some Ages, till at last their Relation by Blood
to their Subjects was removed at so great a distance, that the Account of their
Kindred, or Relation to each other, was scarce remembered, whereby they who had
the Sovereign Power, still expressed less Paternal Affection in their Government,
looking upon those they Governed as mere Subjects, and not as their Kinsmen or
Allies, till by degrees, according to the Custom of Exorbitant Power, they
(considering only the extent of their own Jurisdiction, and what they might,
rather than what they should do) treated them who were under them, not as
Subjects, but as Slaves, who having no Right to any thing, but what they
permitted them, they would allow them to possess nothing, but what they had no
occasion to take away; Estates they had none, that they could call their own,
because when their Prince called for them, they were his; their Persons were at
his command, when he had either occasion, or appetite to make use of them; and
their Children inherited nothing but their Fathers Subjection; so that they
were happy, or miserable, as he who had the Power over them pleased to exercise
it with more, or less Rigor, or Indulgence; yet they submitted alike to both;
acknowledging his Dominion to be naturally as absolute as their Subjection, and
Obedience.

These Princes might for some Ages have pleased themselves with this Exorbitant
Exercise of their Power, which though it had been always the same, yet the
exercise of it had been very moderate, whilst there remained the tenderness, or
memory of any Relation. But these Princes began at lest to discern, and be
convinced that the great strength they seemed to be possessed of, would in a
short time degenerate into weakness, and the Riches they seemed to enjoy, would
end in want, and necessity, as well in themselves, as in their Subjects; since
no Man would build a good House, that his Children could not inherit, nor
cultivate their Land, with any good husbandry, and expense, since the profit
thereof might be given to another Man; And that if the Subjects did not enjoy
the Conveniences of Life, they could not be sure of their help, and affection,
whenever they should have War with another Prince, as absolute as themselves;
but they would rather choose to be subject to him under whose Government they
might live with greater Liberty, and Satisfaction. And lastly, That if they
ingrost all the Wealth, and Power into their own hands, they should find none
who would defend them in the possession of it: And that there was a great
difference between that Subjection, which Love and Duty pays, and that which
results only from Fear, and Force, since Despair often puts an End to that
Duty, which Reason, and it may be, Conscience, would otherwise have persuaded
them still to continue: And therefore, that it was necessary that their
Subjects should find ease, and profit in Obeying, as well as Kings pleasure in
Commanding; these wise, and wholesome Reflections might prevail with Princes,
for their own, as well as Subjects benefit, to restrain their Power, and to
make it less absolute, that it might be more useful, and, to give their
Subjects such a Property in their Goods, and Lands, as should not be invaded,
but in such cases, and on such occasions as the necessities of the Government
really required. But as they found the benefit arising from these
Condescensions, highly tend to the Improvement of the Riches, and Civillity of
their Subjects, with all those additions of pleasure, and industry, which
render Man's Life, as well as the Government easy, and pleasant, they still in
several Generations enlarged these Graces, and Concessions to their Subjects,
yet reserving all in themselves that they did not part with by their voluntary
Grants or Concessions. And if we take a View of the several Kingdoms of the
World, we shall see another face of things, both of Power, and Riches in those
Governments, where these Cond^scensions and Concessions have been best
observed; than in those Kingdoms where the Sovereigns either retain, or resume
to themselves all those Rights, or Prerogatives, which are invested in them
from the Original Nature of Government; so that there still remains enough in
the Princes hands to be made use of, for the preservation of his own Power, and
the defense of his Subjects, for whose benefit it was entrusted with him by
God. So far the late great Chancellor.

And these Privileges, and Condescensions, being once past into constant, and
standing ^aws, by the Princes that gave them, and also solemnly sworn to by
their Coronation Oaths, do for the future bind, not only those Princes that
granted them, but also their Successors, to their observation: And I then look
upon them bound, under pain of Damnation, not to break, or infringe them,
without very great necessity.

But however, if they shall happen so to do, since they were matters of mere
Grace, and Favor at the first, and not of Right, the Princes that thus
transgress them, are only accountable to God, and punishable by him, and not by
their Subjects, for any Breaches, or Infringements of such Liberties, and
Immunities: And this may serve against the Fancies of all those who think
Princes have nothing, but what the People have given them; and likewise against
such as Mr. Hobbs, who maintain so much is conferred on them, that they have a
Right to leave no body else any thing to enjoy, that they have a mind to take
from them. And this I take to be a much better Security for the Peoples
Liberties, to leave it to the Honor, and Conscience of their Princes, and that
Fear they ought to have of the Divine Vengeance, in case they oppress their
Subjects contrary to Law, than your heady, and violent Methods of Resistance
for the Oppression, or Tyranny of Princes, which would but give the common
people a pretense of taking Arms, and Rebelling against their Princes upon
every slight provocation.


F. You have made a very plausible Discourse, whether of your own, or from the
Author you quote, is not much material; for I doubt when it comes to be
examined, it will appear much more like a Romance than a true History: And
therefore granting at present your Principles to be true, (though they are not) I
desire you to show me, how you can make it out, either from Sacred, or Profane
History, that any Limited Kingdom now in the World, ever had its Original from
those gracious Condescensions, or Concessions of Princes, as you here mention:
For by all that ever I can read, or observe, either from our own, or Foreign
History, all the Liberties, and Privileges which Subjects enjoy at this day,
proceeded at first, either from the Original Contracts, Customs, or
Constitutions of those Kingdoms, or Nations, at the first Institution of their
Government; or else were forced from Princes by their Subjects, who would no
longer endure the severity of their Yoke, or else were granted by some of them,
who believing they had worse Titles than their Competitors to the Crown, were
willing to* engage the People to their side, by granting them greater
Privileges, than they before enjoyed.

And though I grant the Reflections you make upon the exercise of Arbitrary
Power, and the Miseries it brings both upon the Prince, and People, are very
true: Yet I am sure the practice of most Absolute Monarchs throughout the whole
World, has run quite contrary to your suppositions. For Princes are so far (by
what I ever read, or observed) from being willing to part with any of their
Power, that they have still endeavored by degrees to enlarge it, and render it
more absolute than it was left them; as you may observe in the Government of
France, Spain, Denmark, and Sweden in this last Age; and what Encroachments
were made in this Kingdom by the Prerogative upon the Peoples Liberties, during
the Reigns of our last Princes, he is a stranger to the History of the Country,
that has not read of, if he do not remember them. And how much higher they
would have been carried, if this strange, and sudden Revolution had not put a
stop to it, I had rather you and I should understand in Idea than by Experience.

But if such grave Reflections as these of yours, were able to work upon the
first Monarchs, I desire to know the reason why those of Turkey, Persia,
Russia, and the African Emperors of Morocco, and of the Abissines (who sure
have been as wise as any you can name) should not in so many Ages as they have
Governed, see these Inconveniences you mention, and restrain their Exorbitant
Power within some moderate Limits: Nay, to the contrary, one of the most
ambitious and aspiring Monarchs in Europe, is making what haste he can to
reduce his Kingdom into the same Model. And what do you think would the
Princes, and Counselors of these Empires say to such a one as you, or I, who
should offer to preach this strange Doctrine to them, That they ought under
pain of Damnation to use their Subjects as their Children, and not as Slaves,
or mere Vassals? I doubt they would make us pay dear for publishing such false
Doctrine in their Dominions, or at least would despise us for half-witted
fellows, without any true Notions in Politics, since they believe, that the
true Security, and Glory of a King, consists in vast Standing Armies, Great
Fleets, and a power to take from their Subjects, and Neighbors, whatever they
please, thereby to enjoy their own pleasures and humors in all their hearts
can desire, and to extend their Empires (per fas and nefas) as far as ever
their Conquering Swords will give them leave. And if you should tell them, that
their Subjects could not love them, nor live happily, nor contentedly under
such a Government; I suppose their Answer would be (if they could speak Latin)
Oderint dum metuant, or in the Language of their own Country, that they would
rather trust a Standing Army, than the Affections of their People; and that it
is better to take from their Subjects what they have a mind to* than to leave
it to their good will what they will give them. These are all the Ancient, and
Modern Politics that I can observe in most Absolute Monarchies, or in those
Kingdoms, where Kings have taken upon them so to Govern their Subjects, at this
day: But I defy you to show me any one Kingdom in the World, where the People
owe all their Liberties, and Privileges merely to the good will, and favor of
their Princes* who granted them only out of those wise considerations you have
now mentioned.

But as for the Expedient at the latter end of your Speech, that these
Privileges, and Condescensions, when once granted by Kings to their Subjects,
and past into constant, and standing Laws, and also solemnly sworn to by
Princes at their Coronation, do not only bind those Princes that granted them,
but also their Successors under pain of Damnation; I so far agree with you,
though I must beg your pardon if I cannot think this a sufficient Security, for
several Reasons I can give you at a more convenient time when I shall, when you
please, more fully discuss this point.


M. I must freely tell you Sir, I am not yet satisfied neither with the
Instances you have brought, nor yet with your replies to my answers, and I
think I can show you as to this Kingdom, that they are false in matter of Fact.
For if that the first and most ancient Kingdoms and Monarchies began by
Conquest at first, and that perhaps for the most part by Wars unjustly made, as
I may also Instance in England, if this were a proper season for it, so that
indeed the greatest Liberty in the World, (if it be duly considered) is for a
People to live under a Paternal Monarchy. It is the Magna Charta of this
Kingdom, all other shows, or Pretexts of Liberty are but several degrees of
Slavery, and a Liberty only to destroy Liberty.

So that I think I may very well keep my first opinion, that Paternal
Government is the Foundation of all other, and I have ever thought God's Love,
and Kindness to Mankind did never appear in any thing more, (except in Man's
Redemption) than in Creating only one Man, and out of him only one Woman: So
that Adam was a kind of a Father to his Wife* That Marital as well as all other
Power might be founded in Paternal Jurisdiction. That all Princes might look
upon the meanest of their Subjects, as their Children: And all Subjects upon
their Prince as their Common Father: And upon each other as the Children of one
Man; that Mankind might not only be United in one common Nature, but also be of
one Blood, of one Family and be habituated to the best of Governments from the
very Infancy of the World.

Were this well considered as there could be no Tyrants, so neither would there
be any Traitors; and Rebels: But both Prince and People would strive to outdo
each other in the offices of Love, and Duty: And now do you, or any Man living
read Sir R. F's Patriarcha or other works, and see if either he, or I have
ascribed one Dram of Power to Princes which will not Naturally Spring from this
Supream-Paternal Power.

So that upon the whole, I think reason it self would conclude, that this way
of Solving the first Rise of Government is true, and that it is the Duty of
all, who by the Blessing of God are under Paternal Monarchies, to be very
thankful for the favor, and to do the utmost that in them lies to preserve,
and transmit that best form of Government to their Children after them. And
surely there is no Nation under Heaven has more reason for this than the
English, who are under a Paternal Monarchy, which has taken the best care, that
can be to secure them not only from oppression, and wrong, but from the very
fear of it.


F. Since you lay the chief stress of your assertion, upon the Original of most
of the Kingdoms and Monarchies now in the World, and of our own in particular,
I think I may safely join issue with you on both points, and in the first place
affirm that an unjust Conquest gives the Conqueror no right to the Subjects
Obedience much less over their Lives, or Estates, and if our Norman William and
his Successors had no more right to the Crown of England than mere conquest, I
doubt whether they might have been driven out, after the same manner they came
in: But I believe you will find upon second thoughts that Unjust Conquests and
Usurpations of Crowns be no firm Titles for Princes to rely on; lest the Old
English Proverb be turned upon you, viz. That which is Sauce for a Goose, is
Sauce for a Gander; but I Shall defer this discourse concerning Titles by
Conquest, and in particular that of our Kings to this Kingdom to some other
time when I doubt not but to show, that it is not only false in matter of fact,
but also that it will not prove that for which it is brought.

And therefore what you say in your conclusion in exaltation of God's Love, and
Kindness to Mankind, in Creating one Man, and out of him only one Woman; that
Adam might be a kind of Father to his Wife, is a very pretty and indeed
singular Notion, and you would do very well to move the Convocation next time
it sits, that this explanation may be added to the fifth Commandment, that
Women may be taught in the Catechism that Obedience to Husbands, is due by the
Precept, of Honor thy Father and thy Mother.

And therefore I need give no other Answer to all the rest you have said
however Specious the Hypothesis may seem (as you have dressed it up,) for
Princes, and People; yet till you have proved that all Paternal Power is
Monarchical; and that all Monarchical Power is derived from Fatherhood, it
signifies nothing.

Nor can these Piae Frauds do any more good in Politics than Religion: For as
Superstition can never serve to advance the True Worship of God, but by
creating false Notions of the Divine Nature in Men's Minds, which does not
render it, as it ought to be, the Object of their Love, and Reverence, but
Servile Fear: So I suppose this asserting of such an unlimited Despotical Power
in all Monarchs, and such an entire Subjection as Sir R. F. and you, your self
exact from Subjects, can produce nothing but a flavish Dread without that
esteem, and affection for their Prince's Person, and Government; which is so
necessary for the quiet of Princes, and which they may always have, whilst they
think themselves obliged in Conscience, and Honor, to protect their Lives and
Fortunes from Slavery, and Oppression, according to the just and known Laws of
the Kingdom, and not to dispense with them in great, and Essential Points,
without the Consent of those who have a hand in the making of them: And all
false Notions of this Supreme Power as derived from I know not what Fatherly,
(but indeed Despotick) Power are so far from settling in Peoples Minds, a sober
and rational Obedience to Government, that they rather make them desperate; and
careless, who is their Master, since, let what Change will come, they can
expect no better than to be Slaves.

Nor are Subjects put in a better condition by this Doctrine of Absolute Non
Resistance, since all Princes are not of so generous a Nature, as not to
Tyrannize, and Insult the more over those whom they suppose will not, or else
dare not resist them; and therefore I cannot see how such a submission can
soften the hearts of the most Cruel Princes in the World, as you suppose, much
less how Resistance in some cases can inrage the mildest Princes to their
Peoples Ruin, since all Resistance of such mild, and merciful Princes I grant
to be utterly unlawful; nor do I hold Resistance ever to be practiced, but
where the People are already ruined in their Liberties and Fortunes; or are
just at the brink of it, and have no other means left but that to avoid it.

To conclude, I so far agree with you, that I think it is the Duty of all that
are born under a Kingly Government Limited by Laws, to be very thankful to God
for the Favor, and to do the utmost that in them lies to preserve and transmit
this best Form of Government to their Children after them, without maintaining
such unintelligible Fictions as a Paternal Monarchy derived from Adam, or Noah.
And though I own that some of our former Kings have taken the best care they
could, to secure this Nation from Popery, and Arbitrary Power; yet whether the
Method of our three last Kings have been the readiest way to secure us from the
fears of it, I leave it to your own Conscience (if you are a Protestant) to
judge.

But since you defy me to show you out of Sir R. F's Patriarcha, that he has
ascribed one Dram of Power to Princes, which does not naturally arise from a
Supreme Paternal Power, and that this is no Exorbitant height; I think I am
able to prove from many passages in his Patriarcha, as well as other Works,
that no Author has made bolder Assertions to render all Mankind Slaves,
instead of Subjects, and all Princes Tyrants, instead of Kings; and that his
Principles are so far from being safe, that if they are duly looked into and
weighed, they will prove destructive as well to the Rights of Princes, as to
the Liberties of the People.


M. I should be very glad to see that proved, for I must always believe till
you show me to the contrary, that this Excellent Author lays it down for a
Ground, that Princes being as Fathers to their People, are bound to treat their
Subjects as Children, and not as Slaves; and therefore waving this last
Controversy, which we have argued as far as it will go; pray make out what you
say from his own words, and I will give up the Cause.


F. I wonder how you can be so partially blind, as not to see this, since you
your self have already made use not only of a great deal of his Doctrins, but
also of his very words: And therefore pray see his Obedience to Government in
doubtful times, as also in his Preface to the Observations upon Aristotle's
Politics, where you will find he asserts, page 4th.
That Adam was the Father, King and Lord over his Family; a Son, a Subject and
a Servant, or a Slave were one, and the same thing at first: The Father had
power to dispose of, or sell his Children, or Servants: Whence we find, that at
the first reckoning of Goods in Scripture, the Manservant, and the
Maidservant are numbered among the Possessions, and Substance of the Owner, as
other Goods were. So that then, if the Power of a Father, and of a Monarch be
all one, and that all Monarchical Power is Despotical, the Consequence is also
as evident, that all Subjects are also naturally Slaves, unless their Princes
shall please to lay an easier Yoke upon them.


M. Perhaps Sir R. F. may have carried this matter a little too far; yet if you
please to look into his Patriarcha, Chap. 3. Par. 1. you will find, that he
has this passage, which plainly speaks the contrary: The Father of a Family
Governs by no other Law, than by his own Will, not by the Laws and Wills of his
Sons, and Servants. There is no Nation that allows Children any Action, or
Remedy for being unjustly Governed; and yet for all this, every Father is bound
by the Law of Nature to do his best for the preservation of his Family; but
much more is a King always tied by the same Law of Nature, to keep this general
Ground, That the Safety of his Kingdom be his Chief Law. Whence you may
observe, that though he takes away all Remedy from Children against their
Parents, for being ill Governed, yet does he not set the Father free from all
Obligation to preserve the Good of his Family, of which sure a Man's Children
are a principal part.

And if you please to look back to the second Chapter, Par. 3. you will find
these words. To answer in particular to the first Text, it may be said the
sense of these words, By the Law of Nature all Men are born free, must needs
mean a Freedom only, that is opposite to such a Subjection as is between
Father, and Son. This is made manifest by the Text of the Law: For Ulpian in
this place speaks only of Manumission, which is a setting at Liberty of
Servants from Servitude, and not of Emancipation, which is the freeing of
Children from the Fathers Tuition. Servitude, as the Law teaches, is a
Constitution of the Law of Nations, by which a Man is subject to the Dominion
of any other Man against Nature. So not every Subjection is Servitude, but
Subjection contrary to the Law of Nature. Yet every Man is born subject to the
Power of a Father. This the Law it self says; In Potestate nostra Liberi
nostri sunt. So that you see here be makes a difference between Servitude, and
that Subjection that is due to Fathers.


F. Give me leave to answer these two Instances before you proceed any farther,
and I shall in the first place make bold to answer your last Instance first,
because I shall be much shorter upon it. But pray take notice by the way, that
this Author is very high, and rigorous for the Absolute Power of Life, and
Death in all Fathers, over their Children in the State of Nature, and that they
may exercise it for very slight Offenses; and therefore in this Chapter you
have last quoted, he seems very well satisfied with the Example of Cassius* who
threw his Son out of the Consistory for publishing the Agrarian Law, for the
Division of Lands; and I think this was no such great Crime, for which a Father
might justify the putting his Son to Death. And in the Section before this, he
justifies the Power of Fathers amongst the Romans, as being ratified, and
amplified by the Laws of the XII Tables, enabling Parents to sell their
Children two or three times over. So that these things considered, I cannot
see, how this Distinction of Sir R. F. out of the Civil Law, will do him any
service. For though I grant indeed that Manumission, and Emancipation are two
different words, yet do they both signify the same thing; and though for the
greater respect which they would show to the Condition of Children, above that
of Slaves, they were pleased to make use of different expressions; yet, whoever
will look more closely into the Nature of the Subjection, that Children were
in, under their Parents, by the Roman Law, will find, that the Condition of
Children, was no better than that of Slaves. For First, The Father had such an
Absolute Power over the Person of the Son, that he could sell him three times,
whereas he could sell a Slave but once. Secondly, He had such an Absolute Power
over his Life, that he could take it away whenever he pleased. Lastly, A Son
could have no Property in any Goods without his Fathers Consent, till he was
emancipated, or made free: So that if his Father were harsh, and ill natured,
the Condition of a Son was worse than that of a Slave, as long as his Father
lived.

And therefore I am still of the Opinion of the Ancient Civil Lawyers, which
assert the Natural Freedom of Mankind, according to the Maxim you have now
cited. And they acknowledge that the Servitude, or Absolute-Subjection of
Children to their Fathers, was not by the Law of Nature, but by the Civil or
Roman Law, peculiar to themselves; as I have already proved at our last meeting.

But to come to your first Quotation, whereby you would justify Sir R. F. for
maintaining any unjust Severity in Fathers, or Tyranny in Princes, because they
are both to endeavor the Common Good of the Family, and Kingdom, it is very true
he says so; but of this Common Good they themselves are the sole Judges: So
that if the Father please to sell one or two of his Children, whom he least
loves, to provide Portions for the rest, he may lawfully do it for any thing I
see to the contrary. So likewise immediately after he asserts the Superiority
of all Princes above Laws, because there were Kings long before there were any
Laws. And all the next Paragraph is wholly spent, in proving the Unlimited
Jurisdiction of Kings above Laws, as it is described by Samuel, when the
Israelites desired a King: So that it signifies little what Laws Princes make,
or what Privileges they grant their Subjects, since they may alter them, or
abrogate them when ever they please.


M. But pray take along with you, what he says in the next Paragraph you quote;
where you may see these words; It is ^here evidently showed, that the scope of
Samuel, was to teach the People a dutiful Obedience to their King, even in
those things which themselves did esteem Mischievous and Inconvenient: For by
telling them what a King would do, he indeed instructs them what a Subject must
suffer; yet not so, as that it is Right for Kings to do Injury, but it is Right
for them to go unpunished by the People if they do it: So that in this point it
is all one, whether Samuel describe a King, or a Tyrant; for patient Obedience
is due to both: No Remedy in the Text against Tyrants, but in crying, and
praying unto God in that day. And that Sir R. F. is very far from justifying
Kings in the unnecessary Breach of their Laws, may farther appear by what he
says, Chap. 3. Par. 6. of this Treatise, where pray see this passage. Now
albeit Kings who make the Laws, be (as King James teaches us) above the Laws;
yet will they Rule their Subjects by the Law; and a King Governing in a Settled
Kingdom, leaves to be a King, and degenerateth into a Tyrant, so soon as he
leaves to Rule according to his Laws; yet where he sees the Laws rigorous, or
doubtful, be may mitigate and interpret them. So that you see here he leaves
the King no Power or Prerogative above the Laws, but what shall be directed,
and employed for the general Good of the Kingdom.


F. But pray, Sir, read on a little farther, and see if he does not again undo
all that he has before so speciously laid down, and if you will not read it, I
will: General Laws made in Parliament, may upon known respects to the King, by
his Authority, be mitigated, or suspended upon Causes only known to him. And
although a King do frame all his Action to be according to the Laws, yet he is
not bound thereto, but at his good Will, and for good Example: Or so far forth
as the General Law of the Safety of the Commonweal does naturally bind him;
for in such sort only, Positively Laws may be said to bind the King, not by
being Positive, but as they are naturally the best, or only means for the
preservation of the Commonwealth.

So that if the King have this Prerogative of mitigating, interpreting, and
suspending all Laws, in Cases only known to himself, and that he is not bound
to the Laws but at his own good will, and for good example. I desire to know
what greater Prerogative a King can desire, than to suspend the Execution of
any Law, as often as he shall think fit. For though I grant the Suspension of a
Law differs from the Abrogation of it, because the former only takes away the
force of it in this or that particular case, whereas the latter wholly annuls
the Law; yet if this Suspension be general, and in every case, where the Law is
to take effect, it amounts to the same thing with an Abrogation of it; as may
be plainly seen in the late King's Dispersing Power. For though it be true he
pretended to no more, than to dispense with this, or that Person, who should
undertake a public Employment, either Military, or Civil, without taking the
Oaths, and T^st; yet since he granted this Dispensation generally to all
Papists, and others, that would transgress this law, it amounted to the same
thing during his pleasure, as an Absolute Abrogation of it. And therefore I do
very much wonder why diverse who are very zealous for the Church of England, and
the King's Prerogative, should be so angry with him for erecting that Power,
which not only this Author, but all others of his Principles have placed in
him: And if the King may suspend this, and all other Laws, upon Causes only
known to him, I do not see how he differs from being as Absolute and Arbitrary
a Monarch, as the Great Turk himself, and may when he pleases, notwithstanding
all Laws to the contrary, take away Men's Lives without any due Forms of Law,
and raise Taxes without Consent of Parliament.


M. But pray read on a little farther, and you will find that he very much
restrains this Absolute Power, in these words: By this mean, are all Kings,
even Tyrants and Conquerors, bound to preserve the Laws, Goods, Liberties and
Lives of all their Subjects, not by any Municipal Law of the Land, but by the
Natural Law of a Father, which binds them to ratify the Acts of their
Forefathers and Predecessors in things necessary for the public good of their
Subjects.


F. Were I a Monarch limited by Laws, I would desire no greater a Power over
them, than this you have here brought out of this Author. For he says* Positive
Laws do not bind the King, but as they are the b^st or only means for the
preservation of the Common Wealth. In the next place you see that all Kings are
bound to preserve the Lives and Estates of their Subjects, not by any Municipal
Law of the Land, but by the Natural Law of a Father, which binds them to
ratify the Acts of their Predecessors in things necessary for the public good
of their Subjects. Now this Paternal Power is large enough of all Conscience to
discharge Princes from any Obligation to the Laws farther than they please. For
it before appears that the Father of a Family governs by no other Law than by
his own Will, and not by the Laws and Wills of his Sons or Servants; therefore
if the Power of the King be wholly Paternal, he may alter this Will of his as
often as he please: Nor can his Subjects, who are all one with Sons and
Servants, have any reason to find fault with it For he says, There is no Nation
that allows Children any Remedy for being unjustly Governed. And though it be
true, that he restrains this Prerogative both in Fathers and Kings to the
public good of their Children and Subjects; yet as long as he is left the sole
and uncontrollable Judge of what is for the public good, all these fine
Pretenses will signify nothing. For he is bound to observe or ratify no Laws
or Acts of his Predecessors, but what he is satisfied tend to this End: So that
if he thinks fit to Judge, that Magna Charta, for example, for the Statute de
Tallagio non concedendo, or any Liberty we enjoy, are not necessary, or
contrary to the common good, he is not tied to observe them: And upon this
Principle it was that the Judges in the Reign of King Charles the First founded
the King's Prerogative for Ship money: For they supposed that the King in case
of necessity (that is, for the public good of the Subjects) might lay a Tax
upon the Kingdom, though without Consent of Parliament. So that upon this
pretense* the King being the sole Judge of the Necessity, he might quickly have
raised what Taxes, and as often as he had pleased

But, lest our Kings should think themselves too strictly bound by their
Coronation Oaths, to observe the Laws, pray see in the next Paragraph, how this
Author endeavors to help the King to creep out of that Obligation too.
Therefore pray read on. Others there be that affirm, that although Laws of
themselves do not bind Kings, yet the Oaths of Kings at their Coronations tie
them, to keep all the Laws of their Kingdoms: How far this is true, let us but
examine the Oaths of the Kings of England at their Coronation, the words
whereof are these: Art thou pleased to cause to be administered in all thy
Judgments indifferent, and upright Justice, and to use Discretion with Mercy,
and Verity? Art thou pleased, that our upright Laws, and Customs be observed;
and do thou promise, that those shall be protected and maintained by thee?
These two are the ^rticles of the King's Oath, which concern the Laity, or
Subjects in general; to which the King answers affirmatively; being first
demanded by the Archbishop of Canterbury: Pleases it you to confirm, and
observe the Laws, and Customs of Ancient Times granted from God, by just and
devout Kings unto the English Nation, by Oath unto the said People, especially
the Laws, Liberties and Customs granted unto the Clergy and Laity, by the
Famous King Edward? We may observe in these words of the Articles of the Oath,
that the King is required to observe, not all the Laws, but only the upright,
and that with Discretion and Mercy. The word upright cannot mean all Laws,
because in the Oath of Richard the Second, I find Evil, and Unjust Laws
mentioned, which the King swears to abolish; and in the Old Abridgment of
Statutes set forth in King Henry the Eighths days* the King is to swear wholly
to put out Evil Laws, which he cannot do, if he be bound to all Laws.

Now what Laws are Upright, and what Evil, who shall judge but the King? since
he swears to administer Upright Justice with Discretion, and Mercy; (or as
Bracton has it) aequitatem praecipiat, and Misericordiam. So that in effect
the King does swear to keep no Laws but such as in his Judgment are Upright,
and those not literally always, but according to the Equity of his Conscience,
joined with Mercy, which is properly the Office of a Chancellor rather than of
a Judge: And if a King did strictly swear to observe all the Laws he could not
without Perjury give his Consent to the Repealing, or Abrogating of any Statute
by Act of Parliament, which would be very mischievous to the State.

But let it be supposed for truth, that Kings do swear to observe all the Laws
of their Kingdoms; yet no man can think it reason, that Kings should be more
bound by their voluntary Oaths, than common persons are by theirs. Now if a
private person make a Contract, either with Oath, or without Oath, he is no
farther bound than the Equity, and Justice of the Contract ties him; for a Man
may have Relief against an unreasonable, and unjust Promise, if either Deceit,
or Error, Force, or Fear induced him thereunto; or if it be hurtfuls or
grievous in the performance; since the Laws in many Cases give the King a
Prerogative above common persons, I see no reason why he should be denied the
Privilege which the meanest of his Subjects does enjoy.

I need not make any long Paraphrase upon these words; it is sufficient that
the King is here left sole Judge of what Laws are Upright, and what Unjust, and
consequently what Laws he pleases shall be observed, and what not* So that no
Laws, though thought never so just, and necessary by the Parliament at the time
of making of them, shall signify any thing, if he thinks sit afterward to
judge otherwise. And lest this should not be sufficient, he has found out
another way whereby Princes may absolve themselves of this troublesome
Obligation of Oaths; and therefore he would have them no more bound up than
common persons, who because they may have Relief in Public Courts of Justice,
against an unjust Promise, if either Error, Deceit, Force, or Fear, induced
them thereunto; nay more, if it be hurtful or grievous in the performance,
Kings who have a Prerogative above common persons, and who acknowledge no
Tribunal above themselves, may absolve themselves of their Oaths whenever they
think good; by saying it was extorted from them by Deceit Force, or Fear; or if
they cannot satisfy themselves without it, they might have had formerly the
Pope's Dispensation for Money, which we read King John, and Henry the Third
obtained to be absolved of the Oaths they had taken to observe Magna Charta;
but this Author has found out a shorter cut, and has made Kings both Judges,
and Parties, and to absolve themselves by a Fundamental Right of Government.
And what has proved the Conclusion of such Princes who have taken this Authors
Liberty of breaking their Coronation Oath at their pleasure? it has only
taught their Subjects to imitate their Example, and to make as light of their
Oath of Allegiance.


M. I will not deny but perhaps Sir R F. may have carried the Prerogative in
this point a little too far; yet that he meant honestly toward the Common
weal, in all this, I pray see the 8th Section of this Chapter, where you will
find these words: Many will be ready to say, It is a slavish, and dangerous
Condition to be subject to the Will of any one M^n, who is not subject to the
Laws But such Men consider not, 1. That the Prerogative of a King is to be
above all Laws, for the good only of them, who are under the Laws, and to
defend the Peoples Liberties, as His Majesty graciously affirmed in his Speech
after his last Answer to the Petition of Right; howsoever some are afraid of
the name of Prerogative, yet they may assure themselves the Case of Subjects
would be desperately miserable without it. So that you see here he asserts no
Prerogative in the King to be above all Laws, but only for the good of the
people, and to defend their Liberties, which I think is a sufficient restraint
of Prerogative.


F. But read a little lower, and the People will have no such great cause to
thank him, as you may see by these words: In all Aristocracies the Nobles are
above the Laws; and in all Democracies the People. By the like reason in a
Monarchy the King must of necessity be above the Laws; there can be no
Sovereign Majesty in him that is under them. That which gives the very being to
a King, is the Power to give Laws; without this Power he is but an Equivocal
King.

And most part of what follows in this Treatise is only to prove* that the
Parliament, or Assembly of Estates was a Creature wholly of the King's Creation,
and consequently that he alone makes the Laws in it. And he has also written a
whole Treatise called, The Freeholders Grand Inquest, to prove that it is the
King's Authority alone, that makes the Laws, and therefore that he can
interpret, and dispense with them at his pleasure. So that Richard the Second,
had this Author lived in his time, might have made him a Judge as we^l as
Tre^illian and Belknap, since they all maintained the same Principles. But,
lest we should mistake him, see what he says at the conclusion of this
Treatise: For the confirmation of this Point, Aristotle says, That a perfect
Kingdom is that wherein the King Rules all things according to his own Will;
for he that is called a King according to the Law, makes no kind of Kingdom at
all. This it s^ems also the Romans well understood to be most necessary in a
Monarchy; for (...) they were a People most greedy of Liberty, yet the Senate
did free Augustus from all necessary of Laws, that he might be free of his own
Authority, and of absolute Po^^r over himself, and over the Laws to do what he
pleased, and leave undone what he li^t, and this Decree was made while Augustus
was yet absent. Accordingly we find that Ulpian the great Lawyer delivers it
for a Rule of the Civil Law; Princeps Legibus solutus est* The Prince is not
bound by the Laws.

So that upon these Principles all Kings are not only discharged from the
Penalty, but also the very Obligation of observing Laws farther than they shall
think sit. And indeed this Author carries this Prerogative beyond what the most
moderate Roman Emperors ever pretended to, as I can easily show you from your
own Civil Law Books; and therefore pray reach me down your Volume of the Code,
and fee here what the Emperor declares on this matter de Testamentis. L. 3.
Lib. 6. T. 23.
Ex imperfecto Testamento nec Imperatorem haereditatem vindicare posse, sape
constitutum est, licet enim Lex Imperii Solennibus juris Imperatorem solverit;
Nihil tamen tam proprium Imperii est, quam Legibus vivere. See likewise in the
Theodosian Code, these words; Digna vox est Majestate Regnantis, C. de Legibus
l. 4. Lib. 1. T. 14.
Legibus alligatum se Principis prositeri, aded de Authoritate juris, nosira
pendet Authoritas, and re vera majus Imperio est submittere Legibus
Principatum, and oraculo praesentis Edicti quod nobis licere non patimur, aliis
indicamu^, (viz. Successor^bu^ Theodosio and Valentino.)

So that you may here see, that even the Roman Emperors were more modest than
to declare themselves discharged by their Prerogative, or thought of any of
these subtle distinctions of this Author from their obligation to the Laws,
however they were from the Penalty; which is the true sense of this phrase of
being Legibus solutus.

But God be thanked, most of our own Kings have been more conscientious than to
maintain that they were not bound by their Coronation Oath farther than they
pleased. For you may see in the Preamble to the Statute of Provisours made in
the 25th of Ed. 3d. Rastal, s. 99.
where it is declared and acknowledged by the King himself, and both Houses of
Parliament, that the Right of the Crown of England, and the Law of the Realm is
such, that upon the Mischiefs and Damages which happen to the Realm, he ought,
and was bound of his said People in his Parliament thereof to make Remedy, and
Law, in voiding the Mischiefs which come thereof: And the King seeing the
Mischiefs, and Damage aforesaid, and having regard to the said Statute ( scil.
the former Statute of Provisours) he here farther acknowledges, that he is
bound by his Oath to do the same to be kept, as the Law of his Realm, though by
sufferance and negligence it has been hitherto attempted to the contrary.

So likewise King Henry the fourth declares in full Parliament, (as appears by
the Parliament Roll) that whereas the Commons in Parliament had granted, Rot.
Parl. H. 4. n. 108. Act pour garder, les leys.
that the King should be in as great Liberty as any of his Noble Progenitors:
on which our said Lord of his Royal Grace, and tender Conscience, has granted
in full Parliament; that it is not his intent, nor will he alter the Laws,
Statutes, and good Usages, nor take any Advantages by the said Grant, but will
keep the ancient Laws, and Statutes ordained, and used in the times of his
Noble Progenitors, and do Right to all People in Mercy and Truth Selon^ son
Serment, i. e. according to his Coronation Oath.


M. I will not affirm, but Sir R F. observing how much the Kings Prerogative
was run down by the long Parliament and how the least Slips, and Miscarriages
in Government were aggravated by the Demogogues that then Domineered, as open
and violent breaches of his Coronation Oath, might be willing to make the best
defense he could for such Miscarriages, and this Treatise of Patriarcha being a
Posthumous piece, perhaps he would have altered many things in it, had he lived
to publish it himself; but I doubt not, but he was a very honest Man, and meant
well to the Kingdom for all that. And therefore I hope you will not be too
rigorous in your Censure of him.


F. I Will assure you Sir, I shall not, because he has been dead many years, and
therefore I had much rather censure his Writings, than his Person, which I
never knew. But, if I may Judge from his Works, he was certainly no Friend to
Parliaments, or the Power of the Laws above the Prerogative: But that I may
also show you how dangerous, and Derogatory his Opinions likewise are to the
Titles of all Sovereign Princes, and Monarchs, now in the World, however he may
seem to write in their defense; pray turn to his Patr. Chap. 1. Par. 9. and to
a Question, (...) becomes of the Right of Fatherhood in case the Crown escheat
for want of an H^ir; he thus replies, which pray read. It is but the
Negligence, or Ignorance of the People to lose the Knowledge of the true Heir:
For an Heir there always is; If Adam himself were still living, and now ready
to dye, it is certain there is o^^ Man, and but one in the World, who is next.
Heir, although the Knowledge who should be that one man be quite lost. The which
he likewise repeats to the same Effect, in his Treatise of the Anarchy of a
limited, or mixed Monarchy. Pray see the place, and read these words. It is a
truth undeniable, Miscel. p. 273.
that there cannot be a Multitude of Men whatsoever, either great or small,
though gathered together from the several Corners, and remotest Regions in the
World; but that in the same Multitude considered by it self, there is one Man
amongst them, that in Nature has a Right to be the King of all the rest, as
being the next Heir to Adam, and the other Subject unto him; every Man by
Nature is a King, or a Subject. So that I think no Kings in the World being
able to deduce their Pedigree from Adam (of whom there can be but one Right
Heir) they all (or at least all but one) are only Kings de Facto, and not de
Iure, and Usurpers upon this Heir of Adam. So that, if God would but be pleased
to reveal, who this next Heir is, all the Kings of the Earth were bound in
Conscience to lay their Crowns at his Feet: though he were but a Cobbler, or a
Link-boy. How ridiculous a Notion this is I leave it to any indifferent Man to
Judge.


M. I hope this opinion is like to have no very ill effect, unless any Prince
by virtue of this Title of Adams Right Heir should pretend a Right to an
Universal Monarchy, and then I think it were but reasonable, he should be put
to make out his Title; but seeing no body does so, to the best of my Knowledge,
it is but reasonable that all Princes should in the mean time enjoy what they
are in lawful Possession of, till this Heir of Noah has made out his Title,
and then they may consider farther of it.


F. And it is very well, that this Right Heir is not to be found, for if he
were, all Princes would be Usurpers, who did not immediately resign to him. But
this Doctrine is of more fatal consequence than you imagine: For it does not
only concern Princes in respect of Adam's Right Heir only, but also of any
other Right Heirs to Princes, who have lost their Right to a Crown, never so
many Ages ago: For look into his Directions for Obedience in doubtful times,
and read this Passage: By humane Positive Laws, a Possession time out of Mind
takes away, or Bars a former Right, to avoid a general Mischief of bringing all
Right into a Disputation not decideable by proof, and consequently to the
overthrow of all Civil Government in Grants, Gifts, and Contracts between Man
and Man; but in Grants, and Gifts that have their Original from God, or Nature
(as the Power of a Father has) no Inferior Power of Man can limit, nor make
any Law of Prescription against them. Upon this ground is built that Nullum
tempus occurrit Regi, no time Bars a King. And a little before, he gives us
this reason of it. For though by humane Laws a long Prescription may take away
Right; yet a Divine Right never dies, nor can be lost or taken away. By which
Principle, he renders the Titles of most (if not all) of the Princes of Europe
at this day very weak and disputable; whenever any other Person shall set up a
Title against them.


M. But Sir R. F. has found a very good Expedient for this, for he tells us,
in the last cited Discourse that the Paternal Power cannot be lost, though it may
either be transferred, or usurped; and in his Anarchy of a limited Monarchy,
page 273.
he thus more at large expresses it. Many times by the Act either of an Usurper
himself, or of those that set him up, the true Heir of a Crown is dispossessed,
God using the Ministry of the wickedest Man for the removing, and setting up of
Kings, in such Cases, the Subjects Obedience to the Fatherly Power must go
along, and wait upon Gods Providence, who only has right to give and take away
Kingdoms, and thereby to adopt Subjects into the Obedience of another Fatherly
Power. And Lastly in his Discourse of Obedience, etc. he more clearly f^^tleth
this Point in answer to an Objection there made, that most Kings now in the
World have no other Titles to their Crowns but Conquest, or Usurpation; he
replieth, That though all Kings were Usurpers, yet still the first Usurper has
the best Tale, being in Possession by the Permission of God; and where an
Usurper has continued so long, that the Knowledge of the Right Heir is lost by
the Subjects; in such case the Usurper in Possession is to be taken and reputed
by such Subjects for the true Heir, and is to be obeyed by them as their
Father. And I think you your self will not deny, but that Kingdoms may be
transferred from one Prince to another by Conquest, or a long Usurpation; and
that when there is no other, better Title extant, the King in Possession, or
his Heirs may have a good Title by a long Possession, though it began by
Usurpation at first.


F. I have not now time to answer all that your Author has as falsely, as
incoherently said concerning this Subject of Usurpation; and I should be glad
to hear you, or any man else that will undertake to defend him, make him
consistent, not only with reason, but with himself in this Discourse you quote,
concerning Obedience to Government in doubtful times. For to pass by his
unintelligible Notion of supposing two supreme Paternal Powers subsisting at
once, and each of them laying claim to the Obedience, and Submission of the
Subjects, the former that of the Usurper, W^o being in Possession of the Crown
by the permissive Will of God, who has thought fit to adopt the Subjects into
a Fatherly Power, and the latter, that Paternal Right which he supposes still
to remain in the expulsed Prince, and his Heirs for ever. By which means the
Allegiance of the Subjects is so divided and perplexed, that they can never be
able to tell, when the Allegiance to the Right Heir is to take place before
that of the Usurper.


M. But if you had been pleased better to observe this Discourse, you would
find that Sir R. F. has very well obviated this Objection, as appears by these
Words. Ib. p. 68.
The Right of Fatherly Government was ordained by God for the Preservation of
Mankind; if it be usurped, the Usurper may be so far obeyed as may tend to the
Preservation of the Subjects, who may thereby be enabled to perform their Duty,
to the true and right Sovereign when time shall serve, in such cases to obey an
Usurper is properly to obey the first and Right Governor, who must be presumed
to desire the safety of his Subjects. The Command of an Usurper is not to be
obeyed in any thing tending to the Destruction of the Governor, whose Being in
the first place is to be looked after.


F. This is I confess a very pretty distinction to make the Usurper, who
governs, whether the right Heir will or no, yet to do it by his Consent, and
that the Subjects when they Act thus do but still obey their rightful
Governor, which supposition would be contradictory to what your Author has
already laid down of the Subjects being adopted into the Obedience of another
^atherly. Power by the Usurpa^ion; for if it be as he now makes it, they still
remain under the Paternal Power of the former Prince and the Usurper governs
only as his Deputy which is a very choice refined Notion: By which all men had
been obliged in Conscience to yield as full an Obedience to Cr^mwell and the
Rump in all things that did not tend to the Destruction of ^he (...) Kings
Person, as to him himself, which I suppose you high Royalists will by no means
admit of.

But this is not the main matter, that I have to except against, for if the
Principles I have read out of that Treatise be true, That the Right of a Lawful
Monarch, and his Right Heirs is a Divine Right, and that no length of time or
Prescription can bar it, because a Divine Right never dies, can be lost, or
taken away; till the Knowledge of the Right Heir be lost by all the Subjects;
and till when U^urpers and their Heirs can never acquire an absolute, and
indefeasible Right in the Kingdoms they possess; it will certainly follow that
the Title that most Princes of Christen^om have to their Crowns, will be hereby
rendered disputable, and uncertain, for since this Author acknowledges, that the
Titles of most Kings at this day begun by unjust Conquests or Usurpations at
first: The Right Heirs of many of which expulsed or deposed Princes are still,
or wore lately in being, they might upon this pretense make War upon the Prince
in Possession, and his Heirs, to the Worlds end; and though I grant, he says,
that an Usurper is to be fully obeyed when the Knowledge of the Right Heir is
lost by all the Subjects, it is extremely uncertain, and doubtful, what he
means by it: For if he means a personal Knowledge, few ordinary Subjects, but
those that have personally known all the Royal Family, can thus know who was
the Right Heir; and so consequently, as soon as ever his Father, or Ancestor
that held the Throne, is turned out, or dead, few private Subjects can have any
personal knowledge of this Heir. But if he means a Moral, or Traditional
Knowledge, such as is conveyed down to Posterity by History, Authentic
Records, or Genealogies; I know not how such a knowledge can ever be said to be
lost, as long as such Histories or Memorials remain in being: And that this is
so, is apparent, many Princes in Europe having upon this ground better Right to
the Crowns of some Neighboring Kingdoms, than those that wear them: And we
know that by virtue of such an old Title from Charles the Great, the King of
France looks upon himself to have a good Title to Alsatia, Flanders, and all
the Low Countries, and as much of Germany as he can get: So that I will leave
it to your self to judge whether these Principles do not only render the Titles
of most Princes doubtful, and uncertain, but the Subjects Allegiance too.


M. I cannot deny but Sir R. F. may have carried this Point of Obedience, and
Submission to Usurpers, and of a concurrent Right in the Lawful Monarch, and
his Heirs, a little too far. For I think it were much better to suppose with
Grotius, and other Writers, that after the third Generation, or Succession of
the Crown in the Family of the Usurper, they may have a good and perfect Title
to their Crowns against the Right Heirs of the Lawful Monarch;) and this I take
to be highly reasonable for the Peace, and Welfare of Mankind (than that they
should not be always divided in their Allegiance between two opposite Princes;
but till then I suppose the Subjects are bound to assist, and stand for the
Lawful Heir, and his Posterity, as far as is possible, without their own
apparent Destruction.


F. I confess this supposition is much more reasonable, than the former, but I
should be glad to know by what Law of God, or Nature, the peaceable possession
of a Crown by an Usurper, and his Heirs, just for three Generations, or
Successions, should give a Prince a better Title than Three, or Four years
Possession; for God may have declared his Will as sufficiently in that time, as
in three or four hundred: And if your reason be good, that it is for the Peace,
and Safety of Mankind, that the Title of the Right Heir, should be lost, and
extinct after such a time; I cannot see why it should not be more for the Good
of Mankind, that their Allegiance should be settled, and ascertained in a far
less space, that is, as soon as the Conqueror, or Usurper is quietly settled in
the Throne, and has received the Consent or Submission of all the Subjects.
But I do not desire at present to enter any farther into this knotty Dispute,
about Conquest, or Usurpations, but I rather desire to refer it to our next
meeting.


M. Well, since you will have it so, I yield to it, but in the mean time, I
cannot but smile at your great partiality to the People, who upon your
Principles, if they have but once given their Consent to the Usurper, he shall
presently have as good a Title as the most Rightful Monarch in the World: So
that Cromwell having had this Consent of the People in his Mock-Parliament, had
as good a Title as King Charles II. So that notwithstanding whatever you may
pretend to the contrary, you are no such Enemy to Usurpers, as you would make
your self: But however, you have no reason in the World (even by your own
Principles) to except against this Author's Hypothesis of transferring the
Subjects Allegiance by a Conquest, or Usurpation.


F. I do not deny what you say, but then the Conquest must be in a Just, or
Lawful War, or else if the Great Turk, or French King, should without any
provocation given, make War upon, and Co^quer this Kingdom, and use the People
with the highest Tyranny, and Cruelty, they must be all bound, in Conscience,
not only to become, but continue absolute Subjects, nay Slaves to such a
Conqueror, without any Resistance. But let the Power of Usurpers, or
Conquerors, be what it will, I am sure it cannot be that of Paternal Authority,
for the reasons already given, nor can it be the Usurpa^ion, or Acquisition of
the Power of a Master of a Family, for then the Subjects not being the Children
of the Conqueror, or Usurper, must be all Slaves instead of Subjects: So that I
must again tell you, that it is from your want of distinguishing between
Paternal, Masterly, and Rega^ Authority, which has led you into all these
mistakes in this matter: For the Relations of a Father, a Master, and a King,
are all really distinct, and different, so that one of them is not the other,
as any Man may easily perceive that does but hear the three names pronounced to
him, and consider their signification: And therefore quitting this Subject for
the present, if you have any better Arguments to prove your Divine Institution
of Monarchy, pray produce them, for it grows late.


M. I shall readily obey your Commands, but pray Sir, in the mean time
remember, that we reassume this Question the next time we meet. But to come to
the matter in hand, I think there are yet some material Arguments behind, to
prove Monarchical Government of Divine Institution. For in the first place you
may please to remember, that you your self have acknowledged, that all Civil
Government proceeds from God. Secondly, You have likewise admitted, that the
Government of Fathers, or Heads of Families, was the first and most Ancient
Government of any in the World after the Fall; when some Government became
necessary for the punishment of offenses, and the restraining of the inordinate
Appetites, and Passions of Mankind. And lastly, That this Government having
absolute Power of Life, and Death, in some cases over the Wife, Children and
Servants of the Family; and that if this Power is conferred upon them by God
(which you likewise granted) and does not depend upon the consent, or compact
of the Wife, Children, and Servants: If these things were so, I leave it to
your self to consider, from the Premises, whether this Power in Heads, or
Fathers of Families (call them which you please) is not a Monarchical Power, or
the Government of one Man, and that ordained by God; and that this was the only
Government in the World, before the Institution of Commonwealths, you your
self cannot deny.


F. I shall show you plainly, that you would impose a Fallacy either upon your
self, or me in this Argument, and such a one which I have likewise already
answered at our last meeting. For I then told you, that the Government of such
Heads or Fathers of Families, was only an Oeconomical, and not a Civil Power;
and this I proved by diverse Arguments against what you then argued to the
contrary; and therefore I think I may yet safely affirm, that Kingly, or
Monarchical Power, cannot be proved to be of Divine Institution, by this
Argument: And I have a greater Man than Sir R. F. viz. the Judicious Mr. Hooker
on my side, who makes a plain distinction between such a Head, or Master of a
Family, and a King, as appears by these words in his Ecclesiastical Policy,
which I desire you would read with me; It is no improbable Opinion therefore,
Hooker's Eccl. Pol. lib. 1. 10.
which the Arch-Philosopher was of, That the Chief person in every Household was
always as it were a King; so when numbers of Households joined themselves in
Civil Societies together, Kings were the first kind of Governors amongst them;
which is also as it seems the reason why the name of Fathers continued still in
them, who of Fathers were made Rulers; as also the Ancient Customs of
Governors to do as Melchisedeck, as being Kings to exercise the Office of
Priests, (which Fathers did at the first) gr^w, perhaps by the same occasion.
Howbeit this is not the only kind of Regiment, that has been received in the
World; the inconveniences of one kind have caused sundry others to be divised.
So that in a word all Civil Regiment, of what kind soever, seems evidently to
have risen from the deliberate Advice, Consultation, and Composition, between
Men judging it convenient, and helpful, there being no impossibility in Nature
considered by it self, but that Man might have lived without any Public
Regiment. So that you may see, that tho he places the Original of all
Governments in the Heads, or Fathers of Families (which Opinion I shall not
oppose;) yet it is plain* that he makes a clear distinction between Oeconomical
Government, and that Politic or Civil Power which arises from Compact between
Men. So that this will not serve the purpose you bring it for. You may now
proceed to what other Arguments, and Instances you please; but pray do not make
use any more of the Examples of the Patriarchs either before, or after the
Flood; since they are either altogether uncertain, or else as to those after
the Flood* I have proved them to have been not Kings, but only Masters of
separate Families. And you may likewise omit Moses, Ioshuah, and the Judges, as
Instances of Monarchical Power by Divine Institution; since I have so lately
proved their Authority, not to have been at all Absolute, or Regal.


M. I shall not any longer insist upon them, since you will not admit of those
Instances, though I think there may be a great deal of weight in them. But this
much I suppose you cannot deny, as well from the Testimony of Sacred, as
Profane History, that Monarchy is the first and most ancient Government in the
World, as appears by those remains we have left concerning the Egyptian, and
Assyrian Monarchies. And as for the Government of Gods own People the Jews, he
was pleased to be King over them himself, though to Govern by his Viceroys, till
such time as he was pleased to make Saul, and David Kings over them. Now what
can be a greater argument than this for the Divine Institution of Monarchical
Government.


F. I suppose you will not urge the Antiquity of a Government to be a mark of
its Divine Institution; it may indeed be an argument to prove that Monarchy was
the most Natural Government, because the most simple, and easy for Men to
light on; and so no doubt it was, in the first Ages of the World, before
Ambition, Avarice, and Luxury had debauched the Minds of Monarchs, the best
sort of Government. And so on the other side, there is this to be objected
against it, that the setting up of so many Commonwealths upon the Ruins of
Monarchies, showed that Men found great Mischiefs, and Inconveniences in that
sort of Government when once it grew Tyrannical, or else they had never
departed from it. And this made them, as Brutus said, at the beginning of the
Roman Commonwealth, to invent other sorts of Government which might partake of
all the Benefits without the Inconveniences of Absolute Monarchy.

But as for your Instance of God's being himself King over the People of
Israel, this touches not the Question in hand, since that being a Theocratical,
and not a Civil Commonwealth, could concern no other Nation but themselves.
And as for your other Instance of God's making Saul King, I hope you will not
bring that for an Argument of his Approbation, which it appears he was so angry
with the Israelites for desiring. And though it is true, he did, at their
Request, make them a King; yet it is apparent, God would have been much better
pleased, had they still continued without one. So that I think there can no
Conclusive Argument be drawn from any Examples in the Old Testament, to prove
Monarchical Government to be of Divine Institution.


M. Well; However slight you make of my Authorities out of the Old Testament;
yet I hope I shall be able to show more cogent ones out of the New, to prove,
that Monarchy is the only Power Instituted; or so much as taken Notice of by
our Savior Christ and his Apostles. And therefore when he would Command the
Pharisees to yield Obedience to the Supreme Power then in Being, He bids them,
upon their showing him a Piece of Money, To render to Caesar the things that are
Caesar' s. Not taking any notice of the Senate, Matt. 22.21. F. P. O.
or People, whose Authority these Caesar's had Usurped. And if St. Paul, in his
Epistle to the Romans, had only said, Let every Soul be subject to the Higher
Powers, and said no more; then Men might indeed have disputed, whether St.
Paul, by Higher Powers, had not meant as well other Governors, as Kings, or
other Forms of Government, as Monarchy. But the good luck is, St. Paul has
been his own Interpreter; for, after the General Doctrine of Obedience to be
given by all Men to the Higher Powers, he proceeds next to charge it home upon
each particular Man's Conscience, under pain of Damnation, saying, Will thou
not be afraid of the Power? which Power he expounds in the Singular number,
restraining it to one Person; He is the Minister of God to thee, etc. It is
not, They are the Ministers: And then again* He bears not the Sword in vain;
And a third time, in the same Verse, lest we should forget it, he says, for he
is the Minister of God, etc. So St. Peter also does the like; for the self-same
word that St. Paul uses for higher, in St. Peter is Translated Supreme: So
that though in our English Bibles the words differ, yet in the Original they
are both the same; And St. Paul might have been Englished, Let every Soul be
subject to the Supreme Powers; or St. Paul might have been also Translated,
whether to the King as to the Higher. Yet there is this difference; That
whereas St. Paul uses the word in the Plural number, St. Peter has it in the
Singular, and with Application to the King only, without taking any notice of
any Governors but Kings, and those sent by them. And it is farther to be
noted, that St. Peter and St. Paul Wrote their Epistles at a time when the
Roman Senate had some share in the Government; and that it was (in appearance
at least) a Commonwealth. So that some Authors suppose, that notwithstanding
the Emperors, by strong hand, had Usurped a Military Power, yet a great share
of the Government was, for a long time, nay even then in the Senate and People.
But for all this, neither of the two Apostles take any Notice of any such
Popular Government. No nor our Savior himself, who divides all between God
and Casar, and allows nothing, that we can find, for the People, or
Commonwealth.


F. I think your Quotations out of the New Testament will prove of no more
weight than those from the Old, and that they will not make out Monarchy to be
of Divine Institution, any more than the former. For our Savior's Answer to
the Jews signifies no more, than that Tribute, and all Lawful Dues were to be
paid to Caesar, as the Supreme Power then in being; to Answer those Jews, who
doubted, whether any Obedience were to be given to a Foreign Prince of another
Religion than their own. The like Answer may be given to what St. Paul says in
the Romans Let every Soul be subject to the Highest Power; which was chiefly
directed to the Newly-converted Jews, who might doubt as well as their
Countrymen in Judea, whether they were bound in Conscience to be subject to
Heathen Magistrates; As also against the Sect of the Gnostics (then newly
sprung up) who, though they called themselves Christians, yet looked upon
themselves to be thereby discharged from all Subjection or Obedience to Civil
Powers; being those whom St. Jude expressly speaks against, Jude 8.
Who despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities. And therefore when St. Paul
speaks of such Higher Powers, it is not in the Plural, but Singular Number;
Terming him, the Minister of God; because, that at that time, there was no such
thing as a Common wealth (as he knew of in the World) the two greatest Empires,
the Roman, and the Parthian, being then Governed by Monarchs. The like I may
say to that other Text you have quoted out of St. Peter; which may very well be
reconciled with that place of St. Paul, though the one called the Higher
Powers, the Powers ordained of God; and the other calls them, an Humane
Ordinance, or Creature (as it is in the Original) since they certainly derive
their Authority from God, though by the Mediation, or Consent of Men.

And I believe you will prove mistaken, in affirming, that the Senate, or
People had any Power when St. Peter and St. Paul Wrote these Epistles. For it
plainly appears that whether these Epistles were Written in the Reigns of
Claudius or Nero the Government was then wholly in the Roman Emperors; For
though I grant, that during the time of Augustus, the Senate had some shadow of
Power, and that diverse Provinces were under their Government; yet by that time
Tiberius had Reigned but a few years, he quite took away all Power from the
Senate, and made them no more, than what the Parliament of Paris are to the
French King, mere Ministers of his Tyranny, and obliged to verify all his
Edicts; and the Compliance and Flattery of these Senators was so servile, that
they passed whatsoever Decrees he sent them, without the least Hesitation; till
it became so fulsome even to himself, that it made him cry out, O Gens in
servitute^^ natapunc; So that all you have said on this Subject, signifies no
more, than that our Savior and his Apostles did not come into the World to
dissolve, or alter the Civil Governments, or the Policies of Kingdoms, but to
Command Obedience to them* as they found them settled in the World, as the
Moderate Mela^cthon very well observes, Christus non venit mutare Politias.

And I doubt not, but if our blessed Savior had thought sit to come into the
World about half an Age sooner, and to have been Born, and Preached the Gospel
in the time of the Roman Commonwealth, but he would have commanded the Jews to
have paid Tribute to the Senate, and People of Rome, as well as he did to
Caesar. And S. Peter would have enjoined all Subjection, and Obedience to be
given them; and might have said with greater Reason of them, than of those
Subordinate Magistrates they sent to Govern their Provinces, that they were the
Ministers of God* And if your Arguments for the Divine Right of Kings be true,
it would be no Rebellion at this day for Subjects to rise up, and destroy the
Supreme Powers in all Commonwealths, because they are not Monarchical; And
consequently those in Relation to whom God has left us no Rules of Obedience.
Which Doctrine, if any Man (...) offer to Preach in the Territories of Venic^,
or Holland; I think, in the (...) the Preacher might very deservedly be sent to
the Galleys: and, in the lat^^r, they would, at least, send him a pair of
Shoes. But if you have any thing fa^ther to urge for the Iure Divinoship of
Monarchy, pray will you let me hear it, for I am weary with Answering such
Trifles.


M. I confess I have not much to object against what you have now replied (...)
therefore I shall insist no farther upon it; only thus much I am satisfied of;
That God, by his own Example, as well as Institution among the Jews, seems more
particularly to have approved of Kingly Government (and that absolute too) than
any other; not that I will condemn all Common wealths, as unlaw^^^ but that as
being Sovereign Powers, they may be also Ordained of God.

But I have another Objection to make against your Hypothesis, and that is, you
have in your former Conversation supposed a Natural Property in things,
Precedent to Civil Government, which can scarce be understood. For by what
Rig^t can any Man lay claim to any Property, but by the Laws of the Government
in which he lives? S. P. P.
And how can there be any such Laws before there was some Supreme Legislator to
make them? So that the only way (I know of) to solve this difficulty, is to
suppose. That the Sole Dominion of things was in Noah after the Flood; And that
whatsoever Property, in any thing, his Posterity possessed in Several, they
enjoyed it by his Grant and Allotment; and, in virtue thereof, Transmitted the
same to their Posterity, without waiting for the Election, or Consent of the
People, or entering into any Articles of Capitulation with them, whom they were
to Govern; as you suppose was necessary for the Institution of Civil
Government. And the Texts, in the Tenth of Genesis, Verse. 5.32.
seem to import as much. By these were the Isles of the Gentiles divided in
their Lands, every one after his Tongue, after their F^^ilies in their Nations.
T^ese (...) the Families of the Sons of Noah, Verse. 32.
after their Generations in their Nations; and by these were the Nations
divided in the Earth after the Flood. That is, not only the Nations themselves,
but the Isles or Countries of the Earth were divided by these Patriarchs,
amongst their Posterities, into particular States and Territories.

And so likewise in all the Absolute Monarchies in the World; all the Property
that Men enjoy either in Goods or Lands, is either Actually in the Prince, or
else was at first derived from him; though I do not deny, but when such a
distinct Propriety in Goods, or Lands, is once Instituted by the Monarch in any
Kingdom, that he cannot again alter it, or take it away without manifest
Violence and Injustice.

And hence it is that our Common Lawyers maintain, That all the Lands in
England are held of the King, either mediately, or immediately. For upon the
Conquest by William the Conqueror, all Men's Estates were thereby Vested in
him: So that there is no way so natural, and easy to solve all those
Difficulties that do arise concerning the Original of Civil Government and
Property, than to make them begin together in the Persons of Adam, and Noah,
and thence derived to all their Posterity. So that whatsoever absolute Dominion
Princes or States have claimed in those Countries, and Places which they have
either seized upon themselves, as the first Occupants, or else have Conquered
from others, they enjoyed them merely as they represented Adam or Noah, the
First Monarchs of the World. Nor can we other way avoid these several other
intolerable Inconveniences, and Absurdities that will follow from supposing an
Original Community of things, or that every Man at first might take what
quantity of Land he pleased, without the Authority or Assignment of any Supreme
Power.

As to what you say, concerning God's approving Monarchy above all other
Governments, by his Instituting it among the Jews; that way of Arguing is very
uncertain and fallacious; since one may, by the same reason argue, That the
Ceremonial part of the Mosaical Law was the best that God could have contrived,
because he was pleased to prescribe it to the Jews, during the time they should
be under the Government of it: no doubt God prescribed them such a Government
both in Church and State, as he thought fit for their present occasion, and
Inclinations; but whether that were the best, or of perpetual Institution, is
no where said. But as for the other part of your Argument;


F. I thought you had been very well satisfied by what I said at our first
Meeting, That neither Adam, nor Noah, had by Grant or Donation from God, a Sole
right to the Earth and all things therein. But since you are not yet satisfied
with what I there said, I shall Answer this Objection more particularly, and I
doubt not but I shall make it so plain to you, that you your self shall
confess, That there is no such great Mystery, or Difficulty in the Tracing of
Property, as also Civil Government to their first Origina's, without supposing
any such Absolute Dominion, or Property in Adam and Noah, or in any other
Supreme Power, as their Successors. I shall therefore first of all remove the
main Obstacle you have laid in the way, and show you, that the places of
Scripture you have cited to this purpose, do not prove the thing you intend
them for: I did before show you, That there was no manner of Ground for Sir R.
F's. Opinion, That none of Adam's Sons could have a Property in any thing,
without Adam's Assignment; nor that any of Noah's Sons, when separated from
their Fathers Family, could have any Property in any thing but by their Fathers
Donation; Scripture and Ancient History being altogether silent in these
matters. And therefore you are fain to lay hold of the first place of Scripture
that you think might serve your turn, which will not do the Business neither.

For supposing I should grant you, that in the Dispersion, or Division, that
was made of Mankind after the Flood, over a great part of the World, the People
that then followed their Ancestors, or Leaders, after this Dispersion (though
the Text does not mention any such thing) followed them as Princes or Monarchs.
Yet this will not prove what you would have, That these Fathers of Nations made
this Division of the Earth, in Right of that Dominion, which God conferred at
first on Adam and Noah. Since (as I have already proved) if this Division had
been made in Right of the Dominion that descended upon Noah, it ought to have
been performed by the Authority of only one Man, and him the Eldest Descendant
of the Eldest Son of Noah: And I have also sufficiently showed you the
absurdity of this Fancy of such a Divine Right. And besides, it plainly
contradicts its self; for either this Division you talk of, was made in the
days of Noah, or it was not; if the latter, then it is apparent, that from the
time of Noah to that of Heber, there was a Community of things, and Properties;
though you have asserted the contrary: If the former, and that the Earth was
divided before, Then to what purpose was this Division in the days of Peleg*
And though I grant, that about that time, every Language, or Nation, might,
under the Conduct of their Prince, or Leader, seize upon some Territory, or
Island, sufficient for them to Inhabit in; Yet does not the Text tell us,
whether the Country they lived in was by them divided into particular shares,
or whether they made use of it in common, as the Indians of America do at this
day, where the Quantity of Land does far exceed that of the Inhabitants that
live in it.

Nor lastly, Supposing that a Division was made of these Countries, they then
inhabited, does it tell us, whether it was done by the Sole Authority of their
Prince, or Leader, claiming as his own the whole Dominion of it; so that no Man
could have Right to a foot of Ground in it, but himself; or whether this
Division was made by the Joint Consent and Agreement of all the rest of the
Heads of Families, and other Freemen that went along with him. The Scripture is
silent in these Circumstances, that only telling us that the Great Grand-sons
of Noah mentioned, Genesis 10. The Isles of the Gentiles were divided in their
Lands, every one after his Tongue, after their Families in their Nations. And
that this Division was in the days of Peleg, but no where declares whether
every particular Region, or Country was then divided into distinct Shires, or
not.

And as for what you say, that all Princes and Conquerors of Territories, and
Countries, have the like Absolute Dominion and Property in them as Adam, and
Noah had over the whole World, if it were no more than that, I doubt it would
be very little, since I have already proved, and I think you must grant, that
no Monarch at this day can claim his Crown as the Right Heir of Adam, or Noah,
or as their Representatives, and it will, I think, be much harder to prove,
that the Sole Property of an acquired Country, or Kingdom, must be in them by
virtue of any such Right: But as for your Instance of William the Conqueror's
having a Right to all the Lands in England by Conquest; since it requires
somewhat a longer Answer, than the time will now afford, I shall refer speaking
farther of it, till another opportunity: But pray Sir, at present, make me see
a little plainer what those Inconveniences, and Absurdities are, that will
follow from my Hypothesis, that God at first gave the World, and all Creatures
therein to Mankind, to be used and enjoyed in common if they thought fit.


M. I shall show you some farther Absurdities that will follow from it, than I
have done already; For though Grotius and Seldom indeed maintain, that a
Community of things was by the Law of Nature, F. O. G. p. 48.
of which God is the Author, and yet that such a Community should not be able
to continue, seems to derogate^ from the Providence of God, to ordain a
Community of things, which could not continue. And it seems also an Act of high
presumption in the Descendants of Noah, to abrogate the Natural Law of
Community by introducing that of a Propriety in things.


F. I pray give me leave to interrupt you, that you may not run on in a
mistake; for let Grotius, or Seldom assert what they please, I am not tied to
submit to it; and therefore when I say, that God gave the World, and all the
Creatures therein to Men to be used in common if they please, I thereby
understood, that God has by the Laws of Nature commanded nothing in this
matter, but has left the Earth, and all things therein, to be used in common,
or in several, as may best consist with the Convenience, Necessity, or Customs
and Laws of each particular Nation, or Commonwealth, who God designs should
live peaceably together, and make the best use of the Country where they
inhabit, and the things therein contained, for their own common maintenance,
and safety; according to the expression of the Royal Psalmist; But the Earth
has God given to the Children of Men, i. e. all the Descendants of Adam.


M. Well, suppose it were so, the prime Duties of the Second Table are chiefly
conversant about this Right of Propriety, but if this Propriety were introduced
by Human Laws, Ib.
or Agreements, as Grotius, and you your self suppose, then both the Moral, and
Divine Law would depend upon the Will of Men, so that there could be no Law of
Nature against Adultery, or Theft, if Women, and all things else had been in
common.


F. This Objection wholly proceeds from your not having any distinct, or true
Notions of the Nature and true Original of Propriety; and therefore if you
please to hear my Account of it, I hope you will grant (when I have done) that
your Objection against the Community or things, will be to no purpose; I do
therefore in the first place distinguish between a Natural and a Civil
Propriety: By the former M^n might be guilty of The^t, before Civil Propriety
was instituted; But as for Adultery* that was always unlawful both by the Laws
of God, and Nature, which abh^rs Community of Women, and Promis^uous
Copulations; and God has particularly, ordained that the Man and his Wife
should be one Hesh, and no Man that maintains a Natural Community of things,
ever supposed that Women were amongst those things that were to be in common,
or that a Man had the same kind of Propriety in his Wife, as in his Horse, so
that the Command against Adultery might very well consist with the Community of
things.


M. Suppose I grant this, I do not understand how there can be a Natural
Propriety, and yet a Community in things as you suppose.


F. I wonder you should not be able to apprehend this, and have been so often
at an Ordinary, and a Playhouse* at the former you know, though a Man has a
Right to his Dinner, yet all the Meat at the Table being in common* he cannot
call any part of it his own, till he has cut it, or divided it from the rest.
And at the latter, a Man has a Right to a Place, either in the Box, or in the
Pit, and yet he cannot tell where it is, till he has placed himself in it, or
sent some body to keep it for him.


M. I do apprehend what you mean, but pray explain to me the manner of this
Natural Propriety, ^ little more at large.


F. I would readily do it, since if that were well done, I grant it would be a
great step to the clearing of the Original, and Nature of all Civil Power. I
would readily do it, were it not now too late to enter upon so long a Subject,
and therefore I think we may both be sufficiently (...) with Talk, so as to put
it off until another opportunity, when I shall give you my thoughts of the
(...) Original of Civil Government, in what sense it proceeds from God, and yet
how far the Consentus the People is necessary to make it obligatory on the
Consciences of the Subjects; which when it is once well settled, I hope there
will be little need of disputing farther whether this great Alteration has
been brought about by Lawful means or not.


M. I thank you for the pains you have taken to inform my understanding in this
matter: And therefore since it is now very late, I desire we may Adjourn our
conversation to another time: And then I desire that you would prepare your
self to discourse with me of the second important Question* we agreed on, viz.
the irresistibility if all Supreme Powers by their Subjects, not only because
Resistance in any case whatsoever (...) inconsistent with Supreme Power, and
destructive to the Peace of Civil Society, but chiefly as they derive their
Authority immediately from God, and are only to render an Account to him of
their Actions.


F. I will not deny but what you have said is true in some sense, That all
Sovereign Power is derived from God, and is also as such irresistible by
Subjects. But to affirm generally and absolutely (as most of your Opinion do)
that all Commands and Acts of Men end^^d with this Supreme Authority, whether
good, or bad, lawful or unlawful, are part of that Authority derived from God,
and therefore irresistible in any cas^, or upon any necessity whatsoever, is so
dangerous a Proposition, that I know none that has contributed more to the
encouragement of the R^ng and the Popish Faction we favored, to make all those
Breaches upon our Laws* Religion and Liberties which we have suffered since the
beginning of his Reign.


M. I am so well pleased with the Freeness* and Ingenuity of your Conversation,
that I desire nothing more than to discuss this important Question with you at
our next meeting: But I beg your pardon, if being taken up by Come Business to
morrow* I adjourn our next meeting to the Day after, when, if you please to
come at the same hour at you did to night, you shall here find me ready to wait
on you. In the mean time I must bid you good night.


F. Your Servant Sir, I wish you heartily good night, I will not fail to meet
you at the time appointed.


FINIS.
Bibliotheca Politica: Or a DISCOURSE By way of DIALOGUE, WHETHER Resistances,
of the SVPREAM POWER by a whole Nation, Or People, in cases of the last
Extremity can be Justified by the Law of Nature, or Rules of the Gospel.

Collected out of the most Approved Authors, both Ancient and Modern.

Dialogue the Third.

LONDON, Printed for R. Baldwin in Warwick Lane, near the Oxford-Arms; where
also may be had the First and Second Dialogues. 1692.

The Subject of the Third Dialogue.
AUthors whose Words, or Sense, are made use of in this Discourse, and how
denoted in the Margin.

1. Dr. Hicks's Iovian, or Answer to Julian H. I. 2. Mr. Bohuns defense of Sr.
R. Filmer. B. D. F. 3. Two Treatises of Government. T. T. G. 4. A Pamphlet,
Entitled, Vindiciae Iuris Regii. V. I. R. 5. Dr. Sherlocks Case of Resistance.
S. C. R. 6. Plato, Redivivus. P.R. 7. Mr. L'Estrange's Observator. L. O.
Advertisement to the READER.
THE Author in relation to this, as well as the subsequent Dialogue, desires
you to be so Candid as to believe, that though under the Name, of Freeman, he
has argued against an Opinion, now, or lately much in vogue, viz. That an
absolute Irresistibility, is an insepable Prerogative of all Sovereign Powers,
as well Monarchies, as Commonwealths. Yet no man more abhors all unnecessary
Resistance, or Rebellion against Supreme Civil Magistrates, and is more for an
Absolute Submission by all particular Persons, whether Private, or Public in
case of the highest Injuries and Oppressions done to themselves alone, and
where the Common Good of the Community is not immediately concerned, than
himself: And this he owns to be their duty, not only out of a generous regard
to the Peace, and Tranquillity of the Commonwealth, whereof they are Members,
(and which ought not to be disturbed to revenge, or redress a few Private
Injuries,) but also from the express Command of Gods Will Revealed in the Holy
SS. expressly forbidding, not only all Revenge, but self-defence too, whilst the
Supreme Powers act legally, though perhaps contrary to the Strict Rules of
Justice, and Equity, in such Particular cases. Yet for all this, the Author
must still declare, he doubts whether those Precepts do extend to all
Resistance whatever, viz of any whole Nation, or great Body of Men, whose
Preservation or Freedom from an intolerable slavery, and Oppression may render
it necessary for the good of the Common Wealth, and is no other way to be
procured but by a Vigorous Resistance, or else joining with some powerful
Neighbor Prince, or State, who shall interpose for their deliverance; So that
if such a Resistance be ever Lawful, it can be upon no less momentous an^
account, than that of a General Invasion, either of the Lives, Liberties,
Religion, or Properties of a whole, or major part of a Nation, as they are
established by the Law of Nature, or the Fundamental Constitutions, and
municpial Laws of those particular Kingdoms, and Commonwealths, where such an
Insupportable Tyranny and Oppressions are then exercised: And if this be not
Lawful in such extraordinary cases, it would seem as if God had preferred the
unjust Power, or Force, and the outward Grandeur of the Governors before the
good and Happiness of the Governed, which is contrary to the main ends of all
Civil Government, viz. the common good and Happiness of Mankind, even as those
who are most against all Resistance whatever must allow.

But whether such Resistance be not in these Cases a Lawful (nay only means)
for the safeguard; and deliverance of such assaulted, or Oppressed Nations, the
Author leaves it to the Judgment of the Impartial Reader to determine, upon the
perusal of this, and the subsequent Discourse (since all that could be urged on
both sides in this important Question, could not be comprised, within the
limits of one Evenin^^ conversation which the Author had prescribed to himself)
yet will he not be much concerned on which side you give your sentence.

Since however Criminal some Men have endeavored to render the Doctrine of
Resistance even in the cases proposed; yet the Author must believe (till he is
better convinced to the contrary) that the Question being only Moral, or
Political, and not about any point of Faith, or Law, may be safely maintained
by either party, without any guilt, either of Heresy, or Treason.

The Author farther desires you to take notice, that though he has in both these
subsequent Dialogues, made one of his Disputants to make use, not only of the
Arguments, but the very expressions of two Learned, and Reverend Divines, in
some late Treatises on this Subject, yet that he has not acted thus, out of
any design of Writing against them, or those Opinions there laid down, as they
are theirs, (since it is well known the same Arguments, and Texts of Scripture
have been made use of by other Writers on this Subject long before). But as it
must be confessed that none have managed this controversy with better Reason,
and greater Eloquence, so he hopes that neither they, nor any friend of theirs,
will take it amiss, if out of a just value of their Learned Writings, he has
put that part of the Controversy in their Works, as the best be could meet
with, and which he dares not pretend to alter, and as for the Answers, he has
put them, either in his own, or else in the expressions of one or two late
Writers, who have undertaken to answer what they formerly had Written on this
Question.

To conclude, since the Author does not take all that those have laid down on
either side, for clear, and unquestionable demonstrations, (for then there
would be no need of publishing any more than the Arguments of one side) he
hopes neither party will take it ill, if he has here fairly represented the
strongest and most plausible Arguments, that are brought on both sides for what
Doctrine soever is true, such Truth will not look the worse, or lose ground if
it appears in its true natural dress) though set against its opposite Error: But
if a great deal of what has been laid down by Persons too Violent on either
side, appear upon a strict examination to be mere Precarious Opinions; whose
best Authority is the great Names of some that have broacht them; He hopes no
indifferent Person can take it ill, if he endeavors to discover these
mistakes, since all men are liable to Errors, and as none can be more sensible
of this, than himself, so whenever either of those Learned, and Reverend
Persons, or any other shall convince him of any weak or false reasonings in
this discourse, he promises to retract them, with he first Opportunity.

THE Third Dialogue BETWEEN Mr. MEANWELL a Civilian AND Mr. FREEMAN a Gentleman.
F. You are welcome, Sir, I see you are a punctual Man to your Word. Will you
be pleased to sit down by the fire, and drink a dish of Tea.


M. I thank you, Sir, I assure you, I love to be punctual in small things, as
well as in great ones, when I am not hindered, or prevented by business.


F. Before we come to the Question, we the last time resolved to make the
Subject of our present Entertainment, it will, I think, be convenient for me to
look back, and see what I have already proved, at our two former Conferences,
viz. 1. That Adam had not, either by Natural Right of Fatherhood, or by
Positive Donation from God, any such Authority over his Children, or Dominion
over the World, as you pretended. 2. That if he had, yet his Sons, or Heirs,
had no Right to it. 3. That if his Heirs had, there being no Law of Nature, nor
Positive Law of God, that determines who is the Right Heir in all Cases that
may arise, the Right of Succession, and consequently of bearing Rule, could not
have been certainly determined, without the Judgment of the rest of the
Children, or Descendants of Adam. 4. That the knowledge of the Right Heir of
Adam, (supposing still there was one,) being now long since lost, no Prince or
Monarch in the World can graft any Title upon this Paternal Dominion of Adam or
Noah. 5. That all Authority of inflicting Punishments of Life and Death, or
other less Penalties for the Breach of the Laws of Nature, or the Transgression
of the Civil Laws of the Commonwealth is originally derived from God, as being
that Power with which God in the State of Nature has entrusted, all Masters,
or Heads of separate Families, and this not as Fathers, but as Masters. 6. That
since all Kingdoms and Commonwealths at this day do owe their Original either
to the Election of the People, or to Usurpation, or Conquest; God does not now
by the ordinary Course of his Providence confer this Divine Authority on any
Persons whatsoever, so as to give them a Right to the People's Allegiance
without the People's Consent first had, or else an Owning of their Titles by a
Subsequent voluntary Submission to them.



M. I grant indeed, that you have with great labor, and some appearance of
reason too, endeavored to prove those Principles you have here laid down; yet
however, though the five first of them should be true, I have a great deal still
to except against the last, if you please to hear me. For I think, I can show
you a great many evil Consequences, that will follow from this Principle of
making the Consent, or Submission of the People at all necessary to the
Conveying of a Supreme Power, or of that Divine Authority which you grant to be
derived from God himself on all Monarchs, and Supreme Magistrates in
Commonwealths.


F. I pray give me leave a little to interrupt you. I know very well what this
evil Consequence is, of supposing the Consent of the People as a means at all
necessary, for the Conveying of this Divine Authority, that is, in plain
English, because it will destroy your darling Doctrine of PASSIVE OBEDIENCE and
NON-RESISTANCE; therefore if it be so, pray let us rather fall presently to the
Question it self, than argue by Consequences, which if we should go that way to
work, I have my Consequences likewise to urge; some of which I have given you
already. Therefore, if you please, let us begin a fairer way, and hear me
propose those Heads, in which I doubt not but we do both agree, and then I will
bring it to the main Case or Question, in which perhaps we differ.


M. I confess, I had somewhat more to say, which would have tended to prove
this Doctrine of Non-resistance, but since you are pleased to propose another
Method, which you better approve of; I am ready to comply with you. Therefore,
Sir, go on, in what way you think fit.


F. I shall then in the first place lay it down for a Principle, (which I
suppose you will not deny) that all Civil Power being from God, it was
principally instituted by him, for the Peace, Happiness and Safety of Mankind;
that is, of all the Subjects who are to live together in a Commonwealth, or
Civil Society.

2: That all Kings, or Supreme Magistrates, are likewise secured by Gods
Authority in those due Rights and Prerogatives which are necessary, for their
well discharging this great Trust or Duty which God requires of them, and in
Consideration of which the People at first Elected, or Submitted themselves to
them.

If therefore you grant, as I suppose you will, these two reasonable
Propositions, the Question will amount to no more than this, whether, if the
Supreme Power in any Kingdom, or Commonwealth, so far abuses this Trust, which
God by the People has committed to them, and instead of preserving and
defending the Lives, Liberties, and Estates of their Subjects, they manifestly
go about to destroy, or grievously to oppress them, by making them, instead of
Subjects, mere Slaves, and Vassals; the Question, I say then, is, whether, if
such violence or oppressions be committed upon the whole People, or so
considerable a part of it, as that the safety and well-being of the whole
Commonwealth cannot in any likelihood subsist without it, the People, or such a
considerable part of them, may not, (in Case their Lives, Liberties and Persons
are unjustly assaulted, and oppress't by the Officers or standing Armies of the
Prince, or other Supreme Powers) for their own defense take up Arms to defend
their Lives, Liberties and Estates against such an armed force, and violence.
Where, by the way, I desire you to take notice, that I do here asolutely
disclaim all Resistance of, or Self defense against Civil Authority, or the
Officers Commissioned by it, by any private single Person, whether such Power
be exerted according to Law or not, or else abused in some cases to the hurt or
destruction of such single Person only: So that I suppose this Resistance to be
lawful only in case of a general Destruction, or intolerable oppression of the
whole People, or at least a very considerable part of them, and those that are
in the chiefest places of the Administration.


M. I confess the Doctrine of Resistance, as you have put it; seems at first
somewhat plausible, and to tend to the Common Good, and preservation of the
People, or Civil Society. But let me tell you, I am of opinion, that when ever
it comes to be put in practice, it proves (like the other Speculations of
Commonwealths-men) more hurtful than beneficial to the Common Safety, and
Preservation of the People; and consequently more destructive to the main ends
of Government, than conducive to the Good and Happiness of Mankind; and last of
all, that such Resistance cannot well be maintained, or executed without the
deposing, or absolute Destruction of the Prince, or other Supreme Magistrates,
whatever may be pretended to the contrary. And indeed it is almost impossible
to suppose, that any Monarch or Supreme Magistrates, should ever (unless they
were stark mad) purposely go about to kill or destroy their Subjects, in the
Multitude and Safety of whom, consists his chief Strength, and Riches. And you
may as well tell me, that a Shepherd, whilst he is in his right Wits, should go
about to kill, or destroy his Flock, as that a Monarch should wilfully intend
to kill, or destroy his People.

To conclude, since the People must be in all Cases of Tyranny, or Oppression
their own Judges, and Executioners too, there is no Rebellion so rank, and
wicked, that this pretense of a Self-defence of Men's Lives, Estates, and
Liberties may not justify; whereas indeed, it is contrary to all Natural, and
Civil Justice, for the injured party to be his own Judge, and Executioner too.
For then the other side may pretend to the like Right, and the Trial must be
referred to Force, and Arms, in which Contention, if the People are overcome
they are certainly reduced to a worse Condition, than they were before: But if
the Prince, or Supreme Magistrates have the worst on it, the Civil Power then in
being is absolutely ruined: So that whether the People, or Magistrate overcome,
the state of both of them is very deplorable; besides diverse other evil
Consequences of this Doctrine, which I shall defer, till I hear what you can
say, to what I have now urged against your Opinion.


F. You have made a very plausible Speech, in setting forth the dreadful
Consequence of this Doctrine of Resistance in any Case whatsoever; and I
confess, if what you lay down be true, viz., that such Resistance always brings
along with it greater Misery upon a People, than what the utmost Violence and
Oppression of Princes can produce, then your Consequence would be also true,
that such Resistance is never to be practiced upon any account whatsoever. So
on the other side, if that be not true, neither will your consequence signify
anything.

I suppose you will not deny, but that there may be such a thing as a Tyrant,
and that that part of Mankind who live under him may be sensible of his
Tyranny, or else the Definition which King James I* gives us of a Tyrant in a
Speech which he made to the Parliament in 1603, would be altogether in vain.
But the words are so fit for this purpose, that I will read them to you out of
his Works. I do acknowledge, that the special, and greatest point of difference
that is between a Rightful King, and an Usurping Tyrant, is this: That whereas
the Proud, and Ambitious Tyrant does think his Kingdom, and People are only
ordained for the satisfaction of his desires, and unreasonable Appetites, the
Righteous and Just King does by the contrary acknowledge himself to be ordained
for the procuring of the Wealth and Prosperity of his People. And so likewise
in another Speech he made to the Parliament, he has this memorable passage,
That a King governing in a settled Kingdom, leaves to be a King, and
degenerates into a Tyrant, so soon as he ceases to rule according to the Law.
So that since it is plain, that the People may judge, when they have a Tyrant,
instead of a King to rule over them; and that under such a Tyrant, the
Condition of the People may be very deplorable; the Question still remains,
what is best for them to do in this Case: Whether it be better for them, or
they be obliged, by the Laws of Reason, and Nature, patiently to submit to it,
or else, if they can, either by their own force, or the Assistance of a
Foreign Prince, to cast off the Yoke. And I think I may still maintain, that
they may do it, notwithstanding what you have yet urged to the contrary.

In the first place therefore, though you count it an almost impossible thing to
suppose, that a Prince or Monarch would ever go about to murder, or destroy his
Subjects, yet as incredible as it is, I can give you several examples out of
History both Ancient, and Modern, that some Tyrants have been so brutish as
not only to endeavor it, but actually to put it in practice. Of the first kind
is that of Caligula, whom Suetonius mentions, to have wished, that all the
People of Rome had but one Neck, that he might cut it off at once. The other is
of Nero, (in the same Author, as also in Tacitus) who set the City of Rome on
fire, and consequently would have burnt all the People in it to please his
humor, and that he might sing his Ballad of the Destruction of Troy the more
naturally whilst it burnt. A third example, I find related in Mocquet's Travels
into the East Indies, of a certain King of Pegu, Vid. Mocquets Travels, Lib. 4.
p. 333.
about an hundred years ago, who, by the persuasion of some of his Diabolical
Priests, or Magicians, took such an aversion to his Subjects, that he was
resolved to destroy them, and therefore forbid them to sow their Lands for two,
or three Years, by which means a great part of them died of Famine, or were
forced to devour each other. And in such Cases as these, I suppose, the Laws of
Nature, and Reason will justify Self-defence in the People, and sure it had
been Lawful for the People of Rome to have resisted Caligula's Guards, if he
had gone about to put his wicked Wish into Execution, or likewise to have
resisted, or put to death those Incendiaries they found firing the City, though
they might have had the Emperor Nero's Commission for it. So likewise sure it
would have been as lawful for the People of Pegu, to have resisted those whom
the Emperor might have sent to hinder them from Ploughing, and Sowing their
Lands. And that I am not the only Man of this Opinion, I desire you to consult
what Barclay has in his Treatise, contra Monarchomachos which he writ against
Buchanan, de Iure Regni apud Scotos, and the Author of Vindiciae contra
Tyrannos; where, tho'he be a most Zealous assertor of the unlimited, and
irresistible Power of Prince^, Yet in his third Book chap. 8. he speaks to
this effect, the sense of whose words, as near as I can, I will give you in
English.

Now if any one should say, But must the People always yield their Throats to
the Fury, and Cruelty of Tyranty ^ Must they patiently permit their Cities to
be destroyed by Hunger, F^e or Sword, and their Wives and Children to be
exposed to the lust of a Tyrant, and also themselves to be brought into the
utmost dangers, and Miseries of Life? Must that be denied to them which is the
Right of all Animals by Nature, that is, that they may repel force with force,
and defend themselves from Injury? To this it may easily be answered, that
Self-defence, which is of Natural Right, ought not to be denied to the People:
And therefore if the King does not only exert his hatred against some Single
persons, but also shall go about to destroy the body of the Commonwealth, of
which he is Head, that is, shall exert his Hatred against the whole People, or
some considerable part of them by an horrid, and intolerable Cruelty, or
Tyranny, There is a Power in the People in this Case, only of Defending it
self, but not of Invading the Prince, or of Revenging the Injury given, neither
of departing from their due Reverence, because of the Injury received; in short
it has Right only of repelling a Present force, but not of revenging a past
injury, for one of them indeed is from Nature, that we should defend our lives,
and Persons from injury, and therefore the People may be able to prevent an
Evil before it be done, but cannot revenge it upon the King after it is done.
Therefore the People has this Right more than a Private Man, that he has no
other Remedy left him but Pat^ence; Whereas the People, if the Tyranny be
intolerable, may still resist, though with Respect.

In all which this Author has there said we may easily understand his meaning,
unless it be in this of resisting force with Respect, and Reverence. For I
cannot understand how a Man may sight against his Prince with Reverence, or
give his Guard, a Knock over the Pa^e, or a Cut in the Face, with Respect to
the Prince's Authority. But the reason is plain why the people may act thus,
because when a Prince once Goes about to destroy, and make War upon his
People, he does not act then, as a Monarch, but like a Cutthroat, and Enemy to
the Commonwealth; And no man can imagine, a Will to destroy, and to protect
the people, can at once subsist in the same Person.


M. But pray give me leave to interrupt you a little, I grant indeed that by
the Political Laws of any Government, which are made to Secure the Rights of
the Subjects in their Lives, and Fortunes, No Prince, can, H. I. chap. 10. p.
203.
or ought to, take away his Subjects Lives, or Es^ates contrary to Law; Yet by
the IMPERIAL LAWS in every Government, and by the Laws of the Gospel, which (As
I shall hereafter show) establish those Laws in all perfect Governments (and
particularly in the English,) all these Rights Legally belong to the civil
Sovereign especially to be accountable to none, but God, to have the Sole
Power, and disposal of the Sword, and to be free from all Coercive, and
Vindicative Power, and from all Resistance by force. It is by these Common Laws
of Sovereignty, that the Gospel requires Passive Obedience, which is but
another name for Non-Resistance, these Laws are in eternal force against the
Subjects in defense of the Sovereign, be he Good, or Evil, Just, or Unjust,
Christian, or Pagan, be he what he will, no Subject^ or number of Subjects
whatsoever, can lift up his or their hands against the Sovereign, and be
Guiltless by these Laws. Therefore for the Subjects to bear the Sword against
their Sovereign, or to defend themselves by force against him, or his Forces,
is against the Common Laws of Sovereignty, and by consequence Passive Obedience
even unto Death, becomes a duty in Sovereign Governments, by virtue of those
Laws, and we are not to resist them upon any pretense whatsoever, but therefore
all Subjects are bound to Suffer Death wrongfully, rather than to resist them
upon any pretense or account whatsoever. So that let Popish Writers (though
never so moderate) say what they please, concerning the Lawfulness of
Resistance in some Cases, Yet We of the Church of England have learned better
things from the Scripture and the Examples of the Primitive Christians, which
we think our selves obliged most strictly to observe. And therefore in relation
to our own Government, and the present State of Affairs, I shall reduce all
that I have to say against Resistance of the King, or those commissioned by him
into this Syllogism. Not to be resisted by the Subjects is an Inseparable
Right of all Sovereign Power. But the King is here the only Sovereign Power.
Ergo the King is upon no pretense whatsoever to be resisted by his Subjects. So
that not to quarrel any longer about words, Non-resistance is the same thing
with Passive Obedience and Submission, and by consequence these are required by
the IMPERIAL LAWS of the Government. Therefore, Whatsoever the Imperial Laws of
the Government require of its Subjects, if it be not contrary to God's Laws,
they are bound to perform it. But Passive Obedience, or Patient Suffering of
Injuries from the Sovereign, is not forbid by God's Laws, And therefore
Subjects are bound to perform it, where it is required by the Imperial Laws.


F. I Shall forbear to say any thing, as yet, concerning what Doctrines the
Scriptures teach, or the Primitive Christians practiced concerning this matter,
because I desire to discourse that Question apart from this of the Laws of
Nature, or Reason, which We are now upon, Therefore I must tell you, that though
this new Fingle-fangle Term of Imperial Law of Non-resistance may sound very
prettily to their Ears who mind words more than sense, Yet I must freely
confess, that I am altogether a Stranger to this Notion of Imperial Laws, as
also of the distinction you make between the Imperial and Political Laws of
this Kingdom; and if by Imperial Laws you mean those of the Roman Empire: I
never knew that those Laws had any thing to do in England before, but always
supposed the Politic Laws of our Country to be the only measure of the King's
Prerogative, as also of the Subject's Obedience and Subjection. Nor do your own
Civil Laws, by as much as I know of them, make any difference between the
Imperial and Political Laws of the Empire, for by the one, as well as the
Other, the Civilians understand such Laws, or Edi^ts, of the Emperors which
with the Approbation of the Senate were made for the Peace and Well government
of the Commonwealth, but I never yet heard of any Imperial Laws whereby the
Emperor declared, that he had a Right to plunder, or murder all the Citizens
of Rome, or that they believed they were obliged to Suffer by your Imperial
Laws without any Resistance. I am sure, the Senate and People did not believe,
that the Emperor had any such Authority, when they declared Nero, and Maximin,
for their intolerable Cruelty, not only Enemies of the Commonwealth, but of
Mankind. But if by these Imperial Laws of Non-resistance you mean no more than
what you laid down in your Syllogism, That it is an inseparable Right or
Prerogative of Sovereign Powers, not to be resisted by their Subjects, when you
have proved this Proposition, by the Laws of Nature and Reason, I shall then
believe it. But as for your Conclusion, it being founded upon these Premises,
it needs no Confutation, for if the Imperial Laws of Government do not require
your Passive Obedience; then Subjects are not bound to perform it. And to show
you the Falseness and absurdity of this Assertion that Whatsoever the Imperial
Laws of any Government require of its Subjects, if it be not contrary to God's
Laws, they are bound to perform it. In stead of Passive Obedience, or Patient
Suffering of Injuries, let us insert, to give up to the Sovereign all our Civil
Properties and Estates, if demanded by him, is not forbid by God's Laws, and
therefore Subjects are bound to perform it when ever it is required by the
Imperial Laws: For certainly the absolute disposal of the Estates of the
Subjects is as unseparable a Prerogative of Sovereign Power as Irresistibility
it self, as I think I am able to prove, if you think fit to dispute that
Question.

But at present I shall only confine my self to confute the Major in your
Syllogism. In the first place therefore, though I do grant what you lay down for
a Ground to be true, That it belongs to Sovereign Powers to be accountable to,
or punishable by, none but God, Yet, I suppose, Resistance of their Violence
and Tyranny may very well be performed by the People, without calling them to a
Judicial Account or erecting a Tribunal for that purpose; Calling to an
Account, and Punishment are acts of Authority of Superiors over Inferiors,
But Resistance for self-defence is a Right of Nature, and which no Man, by
entering into Civil Government, ever parted withal, but out of Consideration of
a Greater Good to be obtained thereby, ( viz.) his own greater Security
together with the Common Good of that Civil Society, whereof he is a Member;
which, when by the Prince's violence it is once like to be wholly lost, his
Natural Right of Self-defence for the Preservation of himself, and Family again
takes place; Nor does he then resist the Supreme Powers as such, but as
Murderers, and Cutthroats, who by going about to destroy the People have
already loft all that Right, they formerly had: And of this opinion is that
moderate Romish Author, Barclay before cited, Who in the 16 Chap. of the Book
last quoted, has this Remarkable passage.

What then? Can there no Cases happen in which it may be lawful for the People
by their own Authority, to rise up, and resist a King governing Tyrannically?
His Answer to this Question is, there are certainly none as long as he
continues King: for the Scriptures forbid it; which say, Honor the King, and
he who resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God; Therefore the
People can have no Power against him, unless he commits something, by which
he may cease to be King; for then he himself abdicates his Kingship, and
becomes a private Man, and by this means the People being made Free, that Right
returns to them, which they had before the King was made; But there are but few
Facts of that Nature, which can produce Such effects; And I cannot, when I
think of it, find more than two Cases, in which a King does ipso facto make
himself no King, and thereby depriveth himself of all Honor, Regal Dignity,
and Power, (which also Winzerus takes notice of.) One of these is, if he
destroys his Kingdom; and then gives us the Examples of Nero, and Caligula as I
have already done; And next proceeds to this purpose that when any King
designs, and does seriously endeavor, to put this in practice, he casts off
all care, and desire of Governing; And therefore thereby loses his Empire over
his Subjects, as a Lord of a Servant loses his Dominion over him, by giving up
all Care, and Government of him. And of this Opinion likewise are Lib. 1. cap.
4.. 7.11.
Grotius, and P^ffendorf Lib. vii cap. 8. 6 7.
the two best, and most learned Writers on this Subject. Who do not think it
inconsistent with the Rules of the Gospel, for Subjects to resist the King, if
with a Hostile mind, He seeks the Destruction of his People, for, says the
former, the Will of commanding and destroying cannot consist together; And
therefore he who professes himself an Enemy of the whole People, does thereby
abdicate the Kingdom, but that can Scarce seem to happen in a King in his right
Wits, and who commands only one Kingdom. But if he commands more Kingdoms, it
may so happen, that he would destroy the People of one Nation, to gratify the
other, that he may there make Colonies of them. And this, I suppose, Grotius
spoke in relation to the King of Spain who (they say) had declared, that if he
overcame the Dutch, then in Arms against him, he would fell the People for
Slaves into America, and people the Country with Spaniards.


M. You very much mistake me, if you think, by Imperial, I meant the Roman
Laws, but only the Common Laws of Sovereignty, which, though they destroy no
Man's Natural, H. I. Ib.
or Civil Rights, Yet both grant, and confirm unto the Legal Sovereign in every
Government the Essential Rights of Sovereignty, of which I take Non-resistance,
not only for Wrath, but Conscience lake, to be one of the Chief. And therefore
it were much better to venture the utmost that a Tyrant can do toward his
People by destroying them, than to give the least inlet to Rebellion, by
Supposing the People may in any case whatsoever resist their Prince; For
granting the worst that may happen, that a Prince once in 1000 years to be so
wicked and Malicious, as to go about to destroy his People, yet he could scarce
find means and hands enough to bring it about; and admit he should destroy by
his Mercenary forces, 30, or 40000, of them, it were better all these should
perish, than that the Nation should be involved in Civil War, and the Prince's
Person and Government destroyed by Resistance; And therefore in all Governments
whatsoever, whether Monarchies or Commonwealths, there must be an absolute
Trust placed by the People in one, or more persons, which Trust they can
neither recall when they will, nor yet resist upon the Nonperformance of it.
And therefore it is a mistake, when you affirm with those Authors you have
quoted, that a King, or other Supreme Powers can ever lose their Right, by
going about to destroy the People, much less when they only think their
Liberties, in danger; and I have several reasons to give you for my Assertion.

As first from the Common Notion of a Trust, For what is more generally
understood by trusting another, V. I. R. p. 6.
than that we lodge our concerns with him, and put them out of our disposal?
When I trust a Man with my life, or Fortune, all men agree, that I put it in
his Power to deprive me of both, For to deliver any Property to another with a
Power of Revocation is to trust him (as we say) no farther than we can see him.
He that can recover a Sum of money he has deposited, when he pleases, to speak
Properly, has it still, in his Custody, and trusts his Friend no more, than he
does his own Coffers, and therefore if we consule our own Thoughts, we shall
find, that a Trust Naturally Implies an Entire Reliance upon the Conduct, and
Integrity of another, which makes us resign up our Liberty, or Estate to his
Management, imagining them Safer in his hands, than in our own. In short, a
Trust, where there is no Third person to Judge of the performance, (as in these
Pacts between Subjects, and Sovereign, there is not,) I say, such a trust
includes a Translation of Right, and in respect of the irrevocableness of it,
is in the Nature of a Gift. So that there seems only to be this difference
between them, that a Gift ought to respect the Benefit of the Receiver, whereas
a Trust is generally made, for the advantage of him who Conveyed it.

And in every Civil Society or Government under Heaven that does not depend
upon another, B. D. F. p. 8.
there must be an absolute, and unco^troulable Power fixed somewhere, which may
irresistibly dispose of the E^ves, Estates, and Persons of the Subjects within
that Civil Society, or Government; For if every Man be left at Liberty to
dispose of his own Estate, and person, as he pleases himself, then can he
promise himself no Protection, but what his own natural force will afford him,
and that will certainly be over powered at one time, or other, by others.
Without this Trust, there can be no Justice administered within the Civil
Society, For if every particular man may be Judge in his own Case, the Right
will certainly be asserted on both sides, though it really can be but in one, No
Malefactor will ever condemn himself, nor Submit to Justice if he can, and may
resist; and if a War happen, every man will be for saving his own Goods, from
the expense, as his own person from the Danger of it, and the Consequence must
be, that that Civil Society must perish either by internal disorders, or
internal Force.

Therefore this Power is, and must be in one Person, or body of men in every
Civil Society, Id. page ^.
and is also indivisible; For supposing that it should be divided to the same
Civil Society into two, or more Parts, as between two men, and two Senates, or
Councils, without any dependence upon each other, or any Third power, the
Consequence must needs be, that they differing, and opposing one another, and
having no Lawful Power fixed in either of them to oblige the other to submit,
must have recourse to Force, and Arms; So that this Civil Society can never
rest, till this Supreme Sovereign Power be reduced again into one. And if you
suppose this Power of Judging, and Resisting in the People, or Multitude* the
matter is ten times worse, that being a blind, and heady Monster, easily
provoked upon flight occasions, commonly judging false, even in its own
Concerns, and as impl^cable in its Rage, as un^atiable in its Revenge.

To conclude, whether this Supreme Power be in a Single person, or in a few, or
in all, where ever it is lodged, none must oppose, none must resist it, nor can
any Man assure himself of more Justice, or better usage from a Senate, or a
Multitude, than from a Prince, or Single Person. So that this inconvenience of
being liable to have our Lives sometimes taken away, our persons injured, and
our Estates oppressed, by the Evil management of our Governors, is one of those
humane miseries that by the Corruption of Men's nature from the Fall took
possession of the World, and can never be purged out of it till the Final
Conflagration. And therefore the Advice of Cerialis in Tacitus is always to be
remembered, that Tyrants, and evil Princes are to be born with, as Immoderate
Rains, and unkind Seasons, and amends may be made by a better Successor: Since
Resistance will not Cure, but only inflame the Distemper.


F. You have made a long Speech, wherein I see you have heared together, all
that Wit, or Interest can produce on the behalf of Tyranny, though I must
confess, I did not expect to find you of any Man, so Zealous an Advocate for
it. But I forgive it, as long as I really believe, that only a mistaken
Conscience, and not any Private Interest prompts you to it. But that I may take
your Speech to pieces in order to answer it: In the first place, as to what you
say concerning a Trust, I think you are under a very great mistake. For no Man,
either in a Civil State, or in that of Nature, ever yet so trusted another, as
that, if he abused his Trust, he had not reserved to himself a Right of Appeal;
Under all Civil Governments this is Notorious, since it is one of the main
Businesses of Supreme Courts of Justice, upon Complaints, or Appeals, of
Breaches of Trust, to call the Trustees to an Account, and force them to make
Restitution for the wrongs they have done: And whereas you say, that in the
State of Nature, where there is no third person to judge of the Performance,
such a Trust includes a Translation of a Right (as in these Pacts between
Subjects, and Sovereigns:) This is likewise a mistake, though it be true, that in
that State, if I trust a Man with my Life, and Fortune. I put it in his Power
to deprive me of both, and that this Trust naturally implies a Reliance upon
the Conduct, and Integrity of another; which makes me resign my Liberty, or
Estate to his Management; Yet does it not therefore follow, but that upon the
abuse of this Trust, I may have a Remedy against him, who thus breaks this
Trust I have so reposed in him. And when there is no third Person to Judge
between me, and my Trustee. I my self am the Sole Judge of the Wrong he does
me, and may not only turn him out of his Trust, if I find he abuses it; but may
also force him to make me Satisfaction for the Wrong he has done: So that, if
in the State of Nature I trust a Man with a Bag of Silver to keep for me: If he
either Imbezels, or runs away with it, I may certainly force him to make me
Restitution* or else enter into a State of War with him, till he do; And where
there is no Common Power over us to whom we can Appeal, this Difference can no
way be Decided but by the Sword. And therefore no Trust (as in those mutual
Pacts between Subjects, and Sovereigns) can be Irrevocable, or include a
perfect Translation of a Right, and no Trust can ever be supposed to be given
but with this tacit Condition, that the Trustee does not abuse it: And you your
self have made a sufficient Difference between a Trust, and an Absolute Gift,
but granting that a Gift respects, the benefit of the Receiver, whereas a Trust
is for the Advantage of him who convey's it; From whence it must necessarily
follow, that if this Trust be for his Advantage; he has still an Interest in
the thing Trusted, and consequently may call the Trustee to an Account in the
State of Nature, and upon Satisfaction denied, Appeal to God himself by Battle,
or Combat. So that if the Supreme Powers are but Trustees of the People, they
may be Resisted, when by going about to Destroy them they break their Trust.

But as for the Second part of your Argument, that in all Civil Governments
under Heaven, there must be an absolute and uncontrollable Power fixed some
where, that may irresistibly dispose of the Lives, Persons, etc. of the
Subjects. This, though it seems a better Argument than the former, yet is all one
in Effect, for the Question is still, Whether the People ever reposed such an
absolute Power in their Supreme Magistrates, or not. I grant indeed, that as
far as they act, as the nature of Civil Power, requires, they are not by any
means to be resisted, but the Question still is, whether, when a Prince makes
War upon the People, or goes about to destroy them, there is then any Civil
Power in being; and whether the Government be not already dissolved, since the
main Ends of Government, viz. the Good and Preservation of the Subjects, are
quite destroyed. And now pray tell me, which is most suitable to that prime Law
of Nature, the endeavor of the good, and happiness of mankind, that a whole
Nation should be enslaved, or destroyed by the boundless Will of a Tyrant, or
that Rulers should be sometimes resisted, when they grow intolerably
Tyrannical, and abuse their Power to the total destruction of the Lives, and
Properties of their Subjects. So then, if such an absolute Arbitrary Power, in
Princes, or States, can never consist with the main Ends of Civil Society, the
Peace and Happiness of the Subjects, it is plain that when ever they are
reduced to such a State, they will look upon themselves, as again in the State
of Nature, nor would they have ever quitted their Natural Freedom, and tied
themselves up from providing for the security of their Lives, and Properties by
such means as they might before have justly exercised, had it not been to
obtain these Ends with much greater certainty by entering into Civil Society,
and by Stated Rules of Right, and Wrong to secure their Lives and Properties,
with their future peace, and Quiet, by surer means, than they could hope for in
the mere State of Nature.

For it cannot be supposed that the People would ever confer such an Arbitrary
unlimited Power on one Man, or many, over their Lives, and Estates that they
might take them away without any just cause. For this were to put themselves
into a worse Condition, than the mere State of Nature, wherein they had a
Liberty to defend their Just Right against the Injuries of others, and were
upon equal Terms of Force to maintain it, whether invaded by a single Man, or
many in a Combination. T. T. G. part 2. p. 359.
Whereas, by supposing they have thus given up themselves to the absolute
Arbitrary Power, and Will of a Single Person. They have wholly disarmed
themselves, and only armed him to make a Prey of them, whenever he pleases. He
being in a much worse Condition, that is exposed to the Arbitrary Power of one
Man, who has the Command of 100000 Men than he that is exposed to the
Arbitrary Power of 100000 single Men, no body being secure that his Will who
has such Command is better, than that of other Men, though his force be 100000
times stronger.

To conclude, granting a Supreme Power to be placed somewhere, either in a
Single Person, or in many, yet it can by no means be absolutely Arbitrary and
Irresistible over the lives, and Fortunes of the People. For their Authority
being (as I have already proved in the former Conference) no more than that
Power which God has granted to every particular head of a Family, and other
Freemen at his own dispose, for the security of their own Persons, and the
Common Good of those whom God has entrusted to their Charge, they cannot
confer upon the supreme Magistrate any more Power, than what God has conferred
upon them before, and so can be no more than those Persons had in the State of
Nature; before they entered into Society, and before they gave up their Power
to these Supreme Magistrates; viz. that only what God had before trusted them
withal. Now (according to your own Principles) no Man is trusted by God in the
State of Nature, with an absolute Power over his own life, much less to
destroy, or take away the life, Id. p. 355.
or Property of another, and therefore cannot convey any such Power to those he
would entrust with it. So then if a Man cannot Subject himself to the Arbitrary
Power of another, neither has he in the State of Nature such an Arbitrary
Power over the life, Liberty or Possessions of another, but only as much as the
Law of Nature gave him for the Preservation of himself, and the Common Good of
Mankind; This is all he does, or can give up to the Commonwealth, so that if
it can have no more than this. Its Power in the utmost bounds of it is still
limited to the public good of the Civil Society.

All which if duly considered, the rest of your weaker Arguments are easily
answered. For supposing but one Prince in a 1000 years so wicked as to go about
to destroy his People, it will then, whenever it happens, be as much their
Right to defend themselves, as if it were to happen every year. And though you
assert he could scarce find means, or hands to bring it about. Yet that makes
nothing to the Purpose, for if he has no Right to destroy 30, or 40000 of the
Subjects, as you suppose he may, by his Mercenary forces, then that 30, or
40000 may defend themselves if they can: For when once a Prince has thus
entered into a State of War with his People; who can tell when or where it will
end, or can assure himself, that he shall not be the next man that shall be
d^stroyed, and it is very pleasant, that you allow the Prince this Power of
murdering to avoid Civil War, as if there could be no War begun, unless there
be fighting on both Sides; Whereas Mr. Hobbs himself acknowledges, the very
assaulting, or setting upon any Man, to be entering into a State of War with
him; And sure I think to fall upon the People without Cause, and Killing 30, or
40000 of them is entering into a State of War, or else nothing is. And therefore
you mistake the question, when you argue, from the Indivisibility of the
Supreme Power, that it must not be resisted. For the Question is not here,
whether it be divisible or not, but whether it be not absolutely dissolved by
thus entering into a State of War with the People, whom all Civil Magistrates
are supposed to protect when they assume the Government. Nor does this give any
countenance to Male factors, or other single Persons to rise in Arms, and
defend themselves against the supreme Powers when they have offended against
the Laws, or that they think themselves injured by the undile execution of
them; Since such abuses of Power cannot suddenly, or upon every slight occasion
disturb the Government. And in the Case of Malefactors, the Supreme Power is
still sure to have all the People on its side, for their own Security, and in
case of some Murders, or oppressions committed by such Supreme Magistrates, on
the Lives or Estates of some Private Persons, though I suppose that even such
private Men have a Right in the state of Nature to defend their Lives, and to
recover by Force, what by unjust Force is taken from them, yet this Right must
still give place to the Public Place, and Safety of the Commonwealth whereof
they are members, which must not be disturb^d for the sake of a few, and of
this the People themselves are so sensible that it is almost as impossible, Ib.
429.
for a few oppressed men to disturb the Government, where the Body of the
People do not think themselves concerned to it, as for a Ra^ing Madman or
Heady Malecontent to overturn a well settled Sta^e, the People being as little
a^t to follow the one, as the other. So on the other side, when over the People
are once convinced that their Governors, instead of Protecting, go about to
destroy them, it is as impossible for any Man to persuade them not to take up
Arms, and defend themselves against them, if they are able to make Sufficient
Resistances. And therefore though I so far agree with you, that some oppressions,
and violences may be practiced in all Civil Governments whatsoever, since such
abuses will continue as long as Men are Men, yet does it not therefore follow
that the Supreme Powers, must always be born withal, and never resisted, no not
when they go about to destroy the whole Body of the People.


M. But pray tell me, is it not a very mischievous, and unjust thing, that
Subjects should be both Judges and Parties too in their own Case. Since they
may pretend, that the King goes about to destroy them, when really he does not
design any such thing; and would not this bring all things into Anarchy and
Confusion? I showed you the fatal consequences of this at the Beginning, but
you have not yet thought fit to answer them.


F. I beg your pardon, Sir, I have been so taken up with answering the main
Arguments, that you have proposed against this Right of Resistance, that I have
not had time to consider this Objection, which is but a Consequence thereof.
And therefore in the first place give me leave to ask you this Question.
Suppose you were Master of a separate Family in the Indies, and a Neighboring
Prince, or Cacich of the Indians, should come to Kill you, or to drive you out
of your Plantation, might you not defend your self, because you are both Judge
and Party too in your own Case? or suppose you should so far abuse this Power
of self defense, as to pretend this Neighboring Prince was coming to assault
you, when he realy was nor, and should therefore (to prevent it) set upon him
first, and Murder him, and his Followers, must your abuse of this Right which
you have by the Law of Nature be a sufficient Argument, that neither you, nor
any Man else in the State of Nation, should ever for the future exercise this
Right? no more will the abuse of either of these be^ sufficient Argument
against the Right of Self-defence against the supreme Powers.


M. I grant indeed they are not in the State of Nature, but it is much
otherwise after People are entered into a Civil Society, or Commonwealth and
that upon your own Principles. For then they have given up all that Equality
which you suppose between men, in the State of Nature. For supposing what you
affirm should be true, That Civil Government at first began from the whole
Body, or major part of the Peoples making over all their Right of Governing
themselves to one Person, or more, upon Conditions of being Protected in their
Lives, and Estates, they must likewise make over all their Right of Judging for
themselves, what means are necessary for their Common Good, and Preservation;
after which transferring of their Power, they can never have any Right to meet
again in a body either by themselves, or their Representatives to Judge of
these Breaches, or the Transgressions of those Conditions which they at first
Proposed, and agreed upon with such Princes, or Governors. And when the People
come once to multiply into a Nation, it in absolutely Impossible for them ever
to meet altogether again, and give their Judgment of the Good or Evil
Consequence of the Monarchs actions, or to come to any resolution upon them; So
that their opinion can never afterward be known otherwise, than by the Murmurs
of particular Persons, which none can certainly know neither, unless they could
speak with every Individual Person of that Kingdom, which is impossible. But if
you will say, this oppression needs not to be known by Words, or Votes, but
actions, viz. by the Peoples actual taking up Arm', this must either be by the
whole People altogether at once, or at least the major part of them, or else of
some particular Bodies of Men much less than the whole, or major part. Now the
whole, or major part of a People of a Nation to rise and take up Arms all at
once a^ one Man, is morally impossible. And if any part less than this whole,
or Major part (as suppose a whole Province, or City) every such party or Body
of Men so rising, must be guilty of Rebellion and disturbing the Public Peace
of the Commonwealth as being but private single Persons, which you your self
granted, and condemned as unlawful. And therefore I desire to know, who shall
Judge when this Body, or Major part of the People, are thus assaulted, so that
they may justly defend themselves? But indeed this License of taking up Arms is
not only unpracticable, but unreasonable too: For it supposes, that after the
People have given up all the Power they had of Judging what was bad or good for
the Public, they have this Power still left in them, which would make them at
once both Subjects and Sovereigns, which is a Contradiction.


F. Had you been pleased but better to have observed what I said the last time
I spoke, a great part of this Objection had been saved. For I there expressly
asserted, that the Security of men's Lives, Liberties and Estates, being the
Main Ends for which men entered at first into Civil Society, and likewise
desired to continue in it, as being the only means why Civil Government is to
be preferred before the State of Nature, the People neither did nor can give up
their Right of Judging, when these are invaded, or taken from them. And
therefore you are very much mistaken to believe, that at the Institution of
Civil Society, Men must have given up their Common senses, and reason too of
Judging, when they are like to be murdered, or made Slaves of, or their
Fortunes unjustly taken from them, by those, whom they have ordained to be
their Governors; and I suppose you will not say, that they thereby acquire a
Power of altering the Nature of things, or of making War, Slavery or Beggary
the means of procuring the Welfare, and Happiness of the People, any more than
they can enact, that hunger, or diseases should conduce to the preservation of
any man's life; And therefore as the Judgment of these things was obvious, and
natural to every man's senses, and understanding in the State of Nature, so it
is as plain, they never intended wholly to give up all their Right of Judging
concerning their own Preservation and Happiness, and all means necessarily
tending thereunto, but only in such Cases, and concerning such matters as are
beyond the Power, or above the Knowledge of every ordinary private subject:
thus in a disease, though I give up my self to the skill, and Judgment of a
Physician, yet I do it not so absolutely, but that I still reserve to my self a
Right of Judging, whether he gives me Poison, instead of a Purge. and if
Princes or Supreme Magistrates were thus absolutely invested with an Arbitrary
Power of doing whatsoever they pleased with the Lives, Liberties and Estates of
the People, they would then be in a much worse condition under Civil
Government, than they were in the State of Nature, as I have already proved,
And therefore there is no need of any such general Meetings, or Assemb^ies of
the whole Body, or Representatives of the People, to Judge when these
Fundamental Conditions of all Government are notoriously violated and broken:
Since it will be apparent to every man's sense and reason that is thus assaulted
or injured.

And as for the other part of your Objection, how the People can know, when the
whole Body, or Major part, of them, is thus assaulted, or oppressed, and being so
assaulted, or oppressed, what number are necessary to justify this Resistance?
To this important Question, I thus answer; that if such a War, or assault be
made upon such a considerable part of the People, as may justify their
Resistance to be much better for the Good of the Commonwealth, than that so
many People should be destroyed, Resistance certainly is then Lawful; And the
reason why every particular person, when unjustly assaulted by his Princes
Order, or his Estate taken away by his unjust Edicts, or Decrees, ought not to
make any public disturbance only to save the one, or recover the other, I have
given you before, viz. because the public peace is to be preferred, before
that of any private Person: Yet even then such a private Person may very well
defend himself, if unjustly assaulted by Assassinates, whom the Prince, or
other Supreme Magistrates shall send to take away his Life without any just
Cause, or Legal Trial* though I grant he may not solicit others to rise with
him, and take his part or help him to defend his Life, or Estate. Yet (as a
Reverend Dignitary of our Church very well observed. S. C. R. p. 59.
) No Man can want Authority to defend his Life against him, who has no
Authority to take it away. But much more when this assault, or oppression is
either made upon the whole People in general, or upon so considerable a Part,
or Member thereof, as the Commonwealth could not well subsist without, if it
were destroyed, in all such cases, I suppose the People thus assaulted, or
oppressed have a sufficient Right to defend their Lives, and free themselves from
that slavery, and oppression they lie under; and thus the People of Rome might
very well have justified their Resistance of Nero's Incendiaries, when he sent
to Burn the City, though they had been his own Guards. We read likewise in the
Hist. August. that the Emperor Caracalla, the People happening to laugh at him
(for his Folly) in playing the Gladiator in his Circus Maximus, sent his Guards
to kill them; So likewise in Herodian, that, upon another supposed affront, he
sent his Pretorian Bands to Murder most of the Inhabitants of Alexandria, who
came out to meet him with a Solemn Procession. And, I suppose, no rational Man
will deny, but that, if the Citizens of Rome, or Alexandria, had had Arms in
their hands, they might have Lawfully defended their Lives against these
Murdering Guards. For I think it was much better that those should be destroyed
who were the Aggressors, than that so vast a Body of Innocent People, should be
made Sacrifices to the undreasonable Passion, or Revenge of a Cruel Tyrant. So
that when the oppression, or Violence to Men's Liberties and Properties is
general, and notorious, and affect the whole Body of the People, I do then
suppose that any Part of them, that are sufficient to defend themselves, may do
it, till they can find Assistance either from the rest of the People, or else
from some Foreign Prince, or State, who will vindicate their cause, and come
in to their Assistance. And thus we read the Town of Brill in Zealand, Vi.
Meterani Histor.
under the Conduct of the Count of Mark first revolted from the Tyranny of the
Duke of Alva, which example was afterward (though not immediately) followed by
most of the Cities of Holland, and Zealand, and the Courage, and Resolution of
this Count, as also of the Citizens of this Town, is highly commended by the
Historians of that time, for so nobly venturing their Lives, and Fortunes to
^^diem their Co^utry from that slavery it then lay under till at last they were
relieved, and assisted by Queen Elizabeth to whom the United Provinces owe that
Freedom they now enjoy.


M. I shall not now dispute with you what Right the States of the United
Provinces, might have to resist the Tyranny of the Duke of Alva, then Governor
for the King of Spain, since Grotius, and most Writers which are not of the
Spanish Faction, suppose, that King to have had a Conditional Right of
Governing those Provinces according to their own Laws, and Privileges from the
very first Institution of the Government; And therefore not being an absolute
Monarch over them, he might well be resisted upon the Breach of those
Condition^: But this is not the Case now in hand: since we are now discoursing
of absolute Monarchies, or Commonwealths, who being invested with the Supreme
Power by the Consent of the People (as you suppose:) And therefore may have by
their Consents (whether forced or Voluntary it matters not) according to your
own Principles a Supreme Unaccountable Power over them; And in the first place
I can show you, how a Man may make over all the Power he has in his own Person
irrevocably to another; As when a Man sells, or grants himself for a Slave to
another by his own Consent; who when he has once put himself into this
Condition, his Master has an absolute Property in his Person, and an
indefesible Right for ever to his Service. So that notwithstanding all the
Cruel, Harsh, and unreasonable Usage, he may meet with from his Master, he can
never regain his Freedom without the Consent of his Lord. And this I take to be
an uncontested Truth agreed on by the Law; of Nations, and established by the
Law of God. Thus St. Peter charge those, who are in this State of Servitude:
Pet. Ep. 1. chapter 2. v. 18.
To be subject to their Masters with all Fear, not only to the Good, and
Gentle, but also to the Froward. So likewise St. Paul in both his Epistles to
the Ephesians, and Colossians, Ephesians. 6. v. 5. Col. 3.22.
Commands Servants to be obedient to them that are their Masters according to
the Flesh, etc. And that this particularly respects Slaves, appears by the 8.
verse of the 6. Chapter of the former of these Epistles.

So that if a Man may thus make himself a Slave, or perpetual Servant to
another by his own consent, I cannot see any Reason why a whole Nation may not
do the same, and deliver themselves up to one Man, or more to be Governed, and
treated both for their Lives, Liberties, and Fortunes, at his or their
Discretion. So that, though he may perhaps abuse this Power to the severest
Tyranny, or Oppression: Yet have they no Right to shake off this Yoke, or to
resist him; since their Lives, and Fortunes are wholly at his disposal, by
their own Act, and Consent. And that whole Nations may justly surrender
themselves for Slaves or absolute Subjects, I can give you two Examples
approved of by God in the Scriptures: The first is, that of the Egyptians, who,
when they had sold all their Goods and Lands to Pharaoh for Bread, to keep
themselves alive in the seven years of Famine we read of in Genesis. You Will
find they were afterward such absolute Servants or Slaves to Pharaoh. Genesis
47.21, 22.
That as for the People he removed them to Cities, from one end of the Borders
of Egypt even to the other end thereof, only the Land of the Priests bought he
not, etc. The other is, that of the Gibeonites, of whom we read, that they
accepted of their Lives from Joshua, and the Elders of Israel: Though on the
Condition of the greatest slavery, rather than they would venture to be
destroyed. So that if absolute Monarchy were not Lawful, but contrary to God's
Will and Institution, most of the greatest Kingdoms in the World would be
governed contrary to the Laws of God and Nature; and the Subjects of all the
Kingdoms from France to China, (not reckoning those of Africa) might
immediately, if they were able, rebel against their Monarchs, and set up what
sort of Government they thought fit: Since none of the Subjects in those
Kingdoms hold their Lives, Liberties or Estates by any other Tenure, than the
Good Will or Pleasure of the Monarch, who may take away all or any of them as
often as he pleases to do it, and that without any right of Resistance in all,
or any of their Subjects, let them use them never so severely.


F. I cannot deny, but what you say is so far true, that one Man, or many
together may grant, or sell themselves for Slaves by their own Consent; and
that the Persons who thus make over themselves, have afterward no Right, or
Property in any thing, more than a bare Subsistence, yet that servitude is not
by the Law of Nature, but only brought in by Custom* or the Law of Nations, as
all Writers agree, and is so far lawful, because it tends to the Good, and
Preservation of Mankind, that Prisoners taken in War should rather be kept as
Slaves, than immediately slain, or that Men compelled by extreme necessity,
should sell themselves, or their Children, rather than both should perish; and
therefore it is no wonder, that the Apostles who were not sent to after the
State of things in the World, or to entrench upon any Man's civil Righ^s,
should command Servants, or Slaves, to be Subject to their Masters, though
unbelievers: Yet does it not therefore follow, that when men are forced to give
themselves thus up to the Power of another, they likewise give him an absolute
Right over their Lives, so as that their Masters may take them away, whenever
they please; for that was more than they ever had over themselves. Nor does God
confer any such Power upon Masters, and therefore, if the Master has no such
absolute Right, or Property in the Persons of his Slaves, as he has in his
Sheep, or Cattle; I see no reason, why even Slaves, if their Masters go about
to take away their Lives for no other Cause, but to satisfy their own humor,
or passion, may not, (if they cannot otherwise escape) resist their Masters,
and save their Lives if they can. For all Writers agree, that if a Master does
so inhumanely abuse his Slave; that he can no longer endure it without danger
of his Life, he may in that Case Lawfully run away, and escape from him; and
why he may not as well resist him to save his Life, when his Master goes about
thus unjustly, and without any Cause to take it away; I can see no reason to
the contrary: Since it was only for the saving his Life, that such a Man could
ever be supposed to yield himself a Slave to another; and which Condition being
broken on the Masters part, the Servant is again in the State of Nature, and
the relation of Master and Servant so far ceases; or is at least suspended,
during that Violence.

This being the state of particular Men, I cannot think that God has put whole
Nations in a worse Condition; nor can I ever imagine, that any whole Nation,
unless urged by some extreme necessity, would ever give up themselves so
absolutely for Slaves, as not to have any Right to defend their own Lives, or a
Property in any thing they can enjoy; and if ever they could be supposed to
have done so, I think I may boldly affirm, that such a Nation are not Subjects,
but Slaves, and the Prince not a Monarch or Civil Governor, but only a Lord of
a Great Family, or Master of a public Workhouse.

For I take the difference betwixt Subjects, or Slaves, and Princes and Masters
of Families to consist in this, that the Power of a Prince, is chiefly ordained
for the Good, and Preservation of his Subjects, though I grant his own may
likewise be included in it, as an Encouragement, and Reward for his Labor; yet
not as the principal End of his Institution: Whereas in a Family of Slaves,
they are chiefly ordained for his profit, or Benefit that maintains them; but
their Happiness, and Preservation is only accidental, and as it may conduce to
that. The main End also of Civil Government is to institute and maintain a
distinct Property in men's Estates, and which the Prince, or Commonwealth can
have no Right to take away. And therefore, though I grant that in those Despoti^k
Monarchies you mention, the Monarchs do exercise an Absolute, Arbitrary Power
over the Lives, Liberties, and Estates of their Subjects: Yet that this is by
Divine Right, or Institution I utterly deny, or that it was always so in all of
them from the beginning; for most of those Empires you mention can no otherwise
subsist than by a Constant maintaining vast standing Armies, or Guards to keep
their Subjects in Obedience.

Nor can any Governments be of Divine Institution, which are exercised with a
sole Respect to the personal Power, and Grandeur of the Prince, rather than the
Good and Preservation of the People. So that if you will but survey the
accounts that Travelers give us of those Eastern Parts of the World, you will
find, that there are no known settled Laws or Properties in those Countries,
except at the Arbitrary Will of the Monarch, or his Viceroys; and thus all
those rich, and fruitful Countries of Egypt, and Asia, which formerly
flourished in all Arts, Knowledge and Civility, and abounded in Multitudes of
People, are now in most places reduced to mere Deserts, and do not breed a
Tenth part of that number of People, as they did in former Ages: Which proceeds
from no other cause but the Cruelty, and Injustice of the Government, quite
different from what it was in the time of the Roman Emperors, who though, I
confess, they were in some sense absolute too, yet governed by, and were
obliged to observe Known Laws* and the People had a settled Property in their
Estates, which the Prince had no Right to take away. I shall not enquire how
all these Monarchs came to be so Arbitrary at first, and thus to abuse their
Power. But the Generality, or Antiquity of this abuse can be no more a Plea for
its Right, than that because Idolatry was generally practiced throughout the
World within three or four hundred Years after the Flood, till three or above
four hundred Years after Christ, therefore, Idolatry was the True and Ancient
Religion of the World.

Now, though I will not condemn this sort of Government* where the Subjects enjoy
no settled Property in Lands, or Goods, as absolutely unlawful, and directly
contrary to the Laws of God, or Nature: Yet in those Kingdoms and
Commonwealths, where Civil, or Hereditary Property is once introduced, I think
it is not Lawful, nor indeed in the Power of the Prince or Commonwealth to
destroy, or take it away. And therefore if the Roman Emperors should have
endeavored by any Laws, or Edicts of their own making to have d^stroyed all
Civil, or Hereditary Property in Lands and Goods, and to have reduced all the
Estates of their Subjects into their own Possession: I think they might have
been Lawfully disobeyed, and resisted by the People, since they went about to
destroy one great End of Civil Government, viz. the Instituting, and
Maintaining of Civil Property.

To conclude, I freely grant that in all Countries which are governed, either
by absolute Monarchies, or Commonwealths, the Sovereignty, is so fully in one
Person, or Body of Men, that it has no other Bounds or Limits under God; but
its own Will, or Commands: Provided they do not apparently tend to the absolute
Ruin, and Destruction of the People; for that being inconsistent with the
Notion, or End of governing them, they are, and ever will be Judges of it. And
therefore even amongst the Turks, and Tartars themselves, if they should once
find their Prince go about wil^ully to destroy them, or sell them for Slaves;
you would soon find (notwithstanding this servile Subjection,) That they would
quickly be rid of them, as the Ianisaries have served their Emperors of late
Years, for far less faults.


M. I cannot deny but you have spoken reasonably enough on this Subject, and
perhaps if you had restrained this Power of Resistance only to such Cases,
where the Prince, or Monarch makes open War upon his People, or does otherwise
actually go about to destroy them, it might have been a tolerable doctrine that
they may lawfully resist the Forces he shall send against them, but this is a
Case that so seldom happens (if ever at all) that it can never be supposed, and
no Prince, unless he were Mad, can be guilty of it; and therefore when ever he
Acts thus, I think he may not only be Lawfully resisted, but tied up for a
Madman. But this is seldom, or never the Case between Monarchs, and their
People, for most of the Rebellions, and Insurrections that I have ever read of,
or observed in the World, have not proceeded from any necessity that the People
had to rise up in Arms, and Rebel against their Supreme Magistrates, because
their Lives, or Estates were assaulted, or in danger to be taken away, but for
the most part they arose either from the too Great Cruelty, or severity of the
Supreme Power toward some particular Private Men, who by themselves, and their
Friends and Relations have gone about to revenge those Injuries, that they
supposed had been done them. And of this, all Histories are to full, that I
need give no particular Instances of them; all which abuses may be reduced to
these Heads. First, when a Prince does commonly himself violate the Chastities
of the Wives, or Daughters of the Subjects, which though it has been the ruin
of diverse Princes, yet is he able to do this only to some few particular
Persons, and though if he should permit his Soldiers, or Officers generally to do
this, without any Punishment; yet even this, can hardly, if ever, extend to all
the Wives, Daughters, or Women in a whole Country: And therefore both these
Cases are to be born withal, according to your own Principles, since it does
not tend to the Slavery, or Destruction of the People, I mean, as to their
whole complexed Body. A Second is, when an absolute Prince or Monarch goes
about to alter the established Religion of his Country, and to introduce a
different one by his own sole Authority, whilst the Major part of the People
continue of another Opinion. In this Case, I suppose you will not affirm, that
the Subjects have a Right to resist their Prince for so doing. For then the
Romans might justly have rebelled against Constantine, when he shut up the
Heathen Temples, and forbad all public Sacrifices to their Gods, and thereby
made the Christian Religion the established Profession of the Empire.


F. But pray Sir, give me leave to interrupt you a little, might not
Constantine have a Right to do this, because the Christian Religion is the only
true one; and that the Idolatry the Romans then practiced, was against the Law
of Nature?


M. Whatever weight there may be in this answer, yet you have no reason to put
this Question now; since you have already, viz. at our first Conference
asserted, that, an Erroneous Conscience gives men a Right to follow it, during
the time they are under this Ignorance of the Truth: And therefore if the Roman
Emperors had not a Right to do this by their own Authority without any
resistance, the Subjects, whilst they believed the Worship of their God to be
thereby destroyed, might, nay, ought to have resisted the Emperor, rather than
to have suffered him to have altered the ancient Religion of the Empire, and to
have brought in another, which they looked upon as an upstart; and it is very
natural for Men to do so, since nothing ought to be more dear to them, than the
Worship and honor of God.


F. I do not desire at present to Embark my self in this tedious, and
troublesome dispute about the Authority of the Supreme Powers in matters of
Religion; and therefore I shall say no more to it at present, but if your
Assertion be true, that an absolute Monarch may set up what Religion he
pleases, without being resisted by the Subjects, whom I suppose to be of
another persuasion, it will then follow, that if the French King, or Emperor
of Musc^vy, should turn Mohammedan, and should set up that Superstition by
force, for the Public, and National Religion of the Country, though with the
Destruction of all that should oppose it, none of their Subjects might resist
them in so doing; and if so, I desire you to consider, what you have gained to
Religion by thus asserting such an unlimited Prerogative to all Monarchs. But
laying aside this Dispute till another time, I pray go on to the rest of those
Cases in which the People do take upon them to resist the Supreme Powers.


M. I shall comply with your desires, and therefore a Third Pretense of
Subjects to rebel, is, when the Supreme Powers shall think it necessary to levy
upon their People more heavy and grievous Taxes, and Impositions, than the
People are willing, or, it may be, able to pay. Now, if your Principle be true,
that they may rise in Arms, and resist the Supreme Powers, whenever they think
themselves thus intolerably oppressed, and if they shall be sole Judges of this
oppression, then all the Rebellions that ever were made in England, or
elsewhere, by reason of such excessive Tributes, or Taxes, whould be Lawful.
Which would be a perpetual Ground of Anarchy, and Confusion: For private
Subjects, not being admitted into the Privy Councils of Princes, or States, can
never be supposed to understand, whether the necessities of the Commonwealth
may require them, or not. And indeed the People do so often repine and murmur
at the Government, when the Public Necessities require to impose greater
Taxes, or Gabels than they think they can well bear, that the Mobile of any
great City or Province for Example, who think themselves thus oppressed, beyond
what they are able, or perhaps willing to bear; may rise in Rebellion and throw
off all Obedience to Civil Authority, and they may have a very good Pretense
for it, according to your Principle, because they may look upon themselves as a
very considerable, nay, necessary part of the Commonwealth. And thus the
Common People of Kent might have justified their Rebellion in Richard the
seconds time under Wat Tyler, and Jack Straw; and the People of Devonshire, and
Somersetshire might likewise have justified their Insurrection in Henry the
sevenths Reign under Flammock the Black smith. And I could mention others of
the like Nature, but I forbear, because you may say they were upon account of
Religion. And lastly, this Principle might very well justify the Insurrection
of the People of Naples under Massaniello, which besides the vast spoil it made
upon the Goods and Palaces of the Nobility, ended at last (whatsoever they
pretended at first to the contrary) in delivering up themselves to the King of
France, who refusing to protect them they were soon reduced to their former
Obedience to the King of Spain.

In short, if the People should take upon them to Resist, or Rebel, whenever
they thought themselves intolerably injured, and oppressed in their Estates by
immoderate Taxes, there would be no End of such Rebellions, especially
considering the advantage which Wicked, Crafty, and Ambitious men would thereby
take to excite the People to rise and depose their Lawful Governors, and set
up themselves in their Room upon Pretense of better Government, and greater
Liberty. And how prone the Common People have been to receive such Impressions,
He is but meanly a^^d^ed in Ancient, and Modern History, who is not convinced
of it.


F. To answer this Objection, before you proceed farther, my opinion in short
is, that though such Taxes may often prove an Universal Damage, and a great
impoverishment to the Subjects; yet if they are such as may be born with less
trouble, than can follow from a Civil War, or the change of the Government,
there is no just or sufficient cause of Resistance of the Sovereign Magistrates
commands, or Edicts concerning them. As for Example, such great Taxes as the
Subjects pay, and perhaps may bear it well enough in Holland and other
Countries; since there may be a necessity for such Taxes, and of this I grant
the Supreme Authority of the Nation can be the only Judges. And how far this
may extend, I cannot positively determine. For suppose you should ask me, if
the Supreme Powers should borrow all the Ready Money the Subjects had, for the
necessary uses of the State, so that they would give them Leather, or Brass
Money instead of it, to go at the same value, for the necessary uses of
Commerce, yet if they did not take away their Property in their Lands, Corn, or
Living Stock; which are the necessary means of their Subsistence, I do not
think it were a sufficient Cause, to take up Arms against their Governors for
so doing; because the Subjects cannot tell, but that the necessities of the
State, (for their necessary defense against a Potent Foreign Enemy) may
require it. And sure, it is a much greater Evil to fall into a Civil War, or to
be subdued by Strangers, than to part with their Money; since by such a War, or
Conquest they might not only lose that Money, but also their Liberties, and
Estates.

Yet, on the other side, I would not be understood to give the Supreme
Magistrates, a Power to invade the Properties, and Estates of their Subjects to
what degree they thought fit. For then they might Tax them to that extremity as
might force them to sell themselves, and their Wives and Children for Slaves,
or else being unable to pay, must be forced to run away and leave their
Habitations, (as the Peasants often do in France;) whereby whole Villages, nay
Towns, may become depopulated, as they are in diverse parts of Italy, and
Turkey, by such extraordinary Severitles, and therefore in absolute Monarchies,
where there is no Nobility, Gentry, nor Yeomen, who can claim any Property in
their Estates, which with us make up the best and most considerable part of the
People; and where the Government being wholly Military, and is exercised, over
the People, only by force of Arms; I doubt not but such a People reduced to
this extremity, may not only quit the Country, where they are thus in^olerably
oppress't, but that, if they are not of themselves strong enough to make
Resistance and cast off this intolerable Yoke by force, they may (if an
occasion be offered) ^oyn with any Neighbor Prince, or State, tha^ will
undertake their Quarrel, and upon this account, I think* we may very well
justify the Revolt of the Greek Christians from the Ottoman Yoke, and putting
themselves under the Protection of the Venetians, both in the Morea, and other
places; and also upon the same Principles, I conceive, the Common People of
France, who are reduced to the like extremities, might also with a safe
Conscience revolt from the Present King, and put themselves under the
Protection of the Prince of Orange, our now present Sovereign, or the States of
Hotland* if ever they should be successful enough to make any considerable
Invasion upon that Kingdom.

And therefore I must confess, that there can be no certain and stated Rule set
down to what Proportion absolute Princes or Commonwealths may Tax their
Subjects, since in some Countries the People can better part with a Shilling,
than in others they can pay a Penny. And as I grant it must be left to the
Mercy, and Discretion of the Governors what Taxes to impose without thus
ruining and destroying their People, as it is left to the Judgment of the owner
of the Beast, how much burden it is able to bear. So if he, by laying too great
a weight, breaks the Back of his Horse or Beast, he not only has the Loss, but
makes himself the Laughing Stock of all his Neighbors: So that, though I confess
the People ought to have Patience, and rather to suffer many Oppressions, and
hardships, than to put themselves in this miserable State of War; Yet there is
a midst in all things, and the People may be so Cruelly Oppressed by Taxes, and
other Impositions, as it is impossible for them longer to Subsist or provide
Necessaries for themselves, and their Families: And since you have already
granted, that the People may Judge when their Prince makes War upon them, and
goes actually about to destroy them by the Sword, I cannot see, why they may
not have the same Right of Judging when they are like to be destroyed by Famine
too. And who can be Judge of this, but those who feel it?

But indeed it is Morally impossible for the People to be mistaken in so plain
a Case. For, though this many-headed beast (as you commonly call them,) the
People cannot argue very Subtly of the future Consequences of things, yet
they have a very Nice and Tender Sense of feeling, and can very well tell, when
they are so injured, and oppressed: that they can bear it no longer, for then
sure, they may be allowed to have as much Care, and Sense of their own
Preservation, as Camels, and Dromedaries, which (as Travelers Relate) though
they are taught by their Masters to Kneel down, and to receive their Loads,
which they will patiently endure as long as they are able to bear them, Yet
when once their Masters do over-exceed that weight, neither fair means nor
foul, can prevail upon them to rise, or they will throw off those Loads if
risen, that they feel will otherwise break their Backs. But I have Discoursed
long enough on this Head, and therefore if you have nothing more material to
except against it, I pray proceed to the rest of the Causes, that Subjects may,
as you think, pretend to have, to take up Arms against the Supreme Powers.


M. I have somewhat more to urge, toward proving that this Liberty which you
allow the Subjects, wholly tends to Anarchy, and Confusion; but I shall reserve
it to the last, when I shall Sum up all that I have farther to urge upon this
Subject, and therefore I shall proceed to the other Pretenses that Subjects in
absolute Monarchies may make to Rebel; and the next may be, that the Monarch
looking upon his Subjects as his Slaves, may either use them so himself, or
Sell them to other Nations for that purpose, as Monfieur Chardin tells us, Vi.
Sir Jo. Chardins Travels L. 1.
the King of Mingrelia often does diverse of his People to Raise Money, And
though I will not be so Ridiculous as to suppose That such a Monarch can Sell
away all his People at once; for then he should be left alone without any
Subjects, and Consequently become no King. Yet in such Monarchies as diverse of
the Eastern, and African are at this day, where (as you your self own) the
People having no Settled or Hereditary Property in their Estates, the Monarch
may dispose of their Particular Persons as he thinks fit; I cannot see any
reason, why, the Monarch may not in these Countries without any blame exert his
Prerogative if he pleases, and take as many of his Subjects, or their Children
to serve him as Slaves, as he thinks necessary for his Service.

And therefore whatsoever People or Nation have thus Subjected themselves to
the Absolute Power, or Dominion of one Man, they have no more Right to Regain
their Natural Liberty, than I should have of taking away any thing by Force
which I had before given or granted to another: For this Sort of Civil
Servitude, is not so Repugnant to Nature as some Imagine, or that because
Subjects were forced to consent to it for the avoiding of some Greater Evil,
they can afterward have any Right to shake it off again when ever they will.
For, though I grant, that God has not Instituted any such Servitude, yet when
once it is introduced in any Country, Men are not at Liberty to cast off the
Yoke when ever they please, but to observe St. Paul's Rule, If thou art a
Servant, care not for it, but if thou are free, choose it rather, That is,
Freedom is to be preferred before Servitude or Subjection. But where Providence
has made Men Absolute S^rvants, or Subjects; they are bound to continue in
that State, unless the Supreme Powers, they are under, think fit to Release
them from it. And therefore this can be no good Pretense under Absolute
Monarchies for Subjects to take up Arms against their Prince, for such a State
of Liberty which they never enjoyed.


F. I shall not trouble my self to Dispute, what Right an Absolute Monarch may
have over the Persons of his People in a Country, where they have no Property,
nor Written Laws, and where they look upon themselves as no better than Slaves
to their Prince, and perhaps may take a Pride in it, (as I have read the
Russians do.) And therefore if they have so wholly Submitted themselves, I grant
what you assert, is true, and that they have no Right to Resist, according to
the Old saying, Volenti non fit Injuri^. And yet even in these Despotick
Monarchies, though the Prince may pick out here and there some of his Subjects to
sell for Slaves, or else to use them as such himself; yet I do much question,
if he should go about to make any Considerable Number, (as suppose to take 20,
or 30000 all at once for Slaves,) I say, I do much question whether these
People would be so Convinced of your Principles of Passive Obedience, and
Non-Resistance, as to let their Monarch's Guards drive them into Slavery, like
Sheep to the Market, but would, if they were able, make a Vigorous Resistance,
and knock their Drivers on the Head. Whether Iure, vel injuria, I shall not
dispute.

But for all this, even in Absolute Monarchies, where the People have a Settled
Legal Property in their Lands, and Estates, and consequently where their
Persons are free, I doubt not, if their Princes should go about to make all his
Subjects Slaves; but that they might Lawfully Resist him, or those he imploys
in so doing. And though it be true, he could not make all his People Slaves at
once, Yet if he asserted it as a part of his Royal Prerogative, and also
exercised it on particular Persons, as often as he thought sit, or could, I
doubt not but the People might make it a common cause; Since none can know
whose turn it may be next: For sure Liberty from Servitude is as necessary to
Man's Happiness and Well-being, as Life is to his Existence: Which would seem
no great Benefit to those. Martial.
who being Born Free, were reduced to Slavery; it being well said by the Poet,
Non est vivere, Sed-valere vita.

And though the Roman Emperors did exercise an Absolute Power over their
Subjects, yet I never read, that they durst presume to make Slaves of Freeborn
Romans, nor indeed of any of those Nations they Subdued; For they had too great
a Sense, and Love of Liberty themselves, ever to Impose such a Yoke upon the
People they Conquered, which was so Destructive to the Common Happiness and
Preservation of Mankind. And suppose if the French Grand Seigni^ur, as absolute
as he is, or pretends to be, should go about to Sell his Subjects, (especially
the Nobility) for Slaves, all that the Jesuits (those Instruments of Slavery)
could do, would not, I believe, be able to Keep that People from Rising against
him. But if you have nothing farther to object against what I have now said; I
pray proceed to the next Flead, if you have any more Instances to make.


M. I am now come to the last Pretense, that Subjects may make to Rebel. And
that is, Supposing the Monarch, should at once, or by Degrees turn the Subjects
out of their Legal Hereditary Properties in their Estates; And of this you your
self grant, there can be no Dispute in those Despotick Monarchies, where there
is no Hereditary Property allowed; And as for all other Governments, since you
do own that all Legal, and Civil Property in Lands did chiefly proceed, or at
least is Established by the Civil Power, I cannot see, why, those Powers in any
Kingdom (if they think it would conduce to the Good of the Commonwealth,) may
not Destroy this Civil Property, and either make all Estates equal, or else
ordain, that they shall be enjoyed (as in all absolute Monarchies) at the Will
of the Prince; since, if the Supreme Powers are the Author of this Property,
sure they may alter, and Abrogate it again as often as they think fit.


F. I shall not Dispute with you concerning such Kingdoms, where there is no
Civil Property yet Instituted, or where the People do own themselves Slaves to
the Prince: But if such a Monarch, has remitted any thing of this Right; and
has Instituted a Legal Hereditary Property in Estates; such a Law being once
made, I do not think it is in the Prince's Power to revoke it, any more than it
is for a Master to Reduce his Slaves again to Servitude after he has once set
them free; Since both Men's Liberties, or a Settled or Hereditary Property an
Estates do equally conduce to the Happiness and Propagation of Mankind, and the
Good of that People, or Nation, wherein it is introduced. And I doubt not, but
Pharaoh, though he was Lord of all the Lands of Egypt, by the Grant of the
Egyptians, yet might lawfully have been Resisted by them, if he had gone to
take away those Four Fifth parts of the profit of the Lands, which he had left
thern free by his own Concession.

So that even in such Absolute Empires, the Monarchs have Power to Dispose of
the Estates of the People, only as far as the Compact* or Concession at first
made by them or their Predecessors do allow: But it is also not much otherwise
where the Subjects do not acknowledge their Estates as the Gift, or Benefit of
the Supreme Powers, and that may happen chiefly two ways, Either 1. When any
Free People, under the Conduct of a Captain or Leader, Created by themselves,
have Conquered any New Territory, and Habitation; or else, 2. When Diverse
Fathers, or Masters of a Family, who had Estates of their own before have
agreed for their Mutual Security, and the quiet Enjoyment of what they were
already possess of, to join together into one Commonwealth, under the Command
of one, or more Men, or else of others that will bring their Estates, and join
themselves to such a Government already Constituted, and will Subject
themselves to this Supreme Power, according to the Conditions already agreed on
amongst them. A third Case may be, when an Hereditary Property in Land was
Established before the Monarchy began, as in the Roman Commonwealth, this
Property was Established before the Government was changed from a Republic to
a Monarchy, so that the People did not owe their Property to the Emperors
Grant, or Donation.

In the former case, if such a Free People Conquer a Country under the Conduct
of a Captain or Leader, though, I grant, such a Country may be Assigned by him to
all the People by Lot, or in Proportion to the greater Merit, or Service of his
Fellow Adventurers, or Soldiers, (though it may seem that the Property of
Particular Men, may have proceeded, not from their own Right, or Possession,
but from the Assignment of their Chief Captain or Leader,) Yet are not the
Estates which such particular Men enjoy, to be looked upon only, as the mere
Grace, or Favor of such a Prince, since most of those who followed him in this
Conquest, or Expedition, did it not, as Subjects, but as Volunteers, and
without whose Assistance, he could never have Conquered at all: So that they
have thereby acquired to themselves a certain Portion, or Share in the Land so
Conquered, though for avoiding Dissentions, and Qu^rrels amongst them, it was
left to the Disposal of this New Prince, as a public Trustee, to Distribute to
each person what share he should have. But in the other Case, when Fathers, or
Masters of Families, before Free, and Possessed of Hereditary Estates, do submit
themselves to the Command of one Man Voluntarily, or by Election. Those Estates
do much less depend upon the Will or Favor of that Prince. And therefore, if
such a Prince should without their consents go about to take away their
Property in their Estates, he might very Justly be Resisted by them, since a
quiet enjoyment of these in Peace, and Safety, was one of the chief reasons,
that made them choose him for their Prince, and was certainly one of the
Original Compacts of the Government.

And that in Absolute Monarchies, where the Subjects were not Slaves, they
looked upon themselves to have such a settled Property in their Persons, and
Estates, by Compact, That Seneca boldly pronounced, Errat, siquis existimat
sutum ^sse ibi R^gem, ubi nihil a Regetutum est; Securitas Securitate mutua
paciscenda est. And Mr. Hobbs himself, as much a Friend as he was to the
Arbitrary Power of Monarchs, and an Enemy to the Natural Rights of Subjects,
yet is forced in his Leviathan to confess, that the Riches, Power, and Honor
of a Monarch, arises only from the Riches, Strength, and Reputation of his
Subjects, for no King can be Rich, Page 96.
nor Glorious, nor Secure, whose Subjects are ^^^her poor, or contemptible.
Though how this Riches, and Strength of Subjects can consist with that Absolute
Power which he gives his Sovereign over the Persons, and Estates of his
Subjects, I cannot understand; since he will not allow of any Compacts, or
Conditions between him and them. But that their Propriety may very well consist
with the Power of the Prince; Seneca shows us; Iure Civili (says he) omni^
R^gis sunt, and tamen illa quorum ad Regem pertinet universa possessio in
singulos Dominos descripta sunt, and unaquaeque res habet possessorem suum.
Itaque dare Regi, and donum, and mancipium and pecuniam possumus, nec donare
illi de suo dicimur. Ad Reges enim Potestas omnium pertinet, ad singulos
Proprietas. And the Earl of Clarendon in his Survey of the Leviathan makes this
excellent remark upon this Passage of Seneca: cap. 24.
And that Prince who thinks his Power so Gre^^, that his Subjects have nothing
to give him, will be very unhappy, if he has evern n^ed of their Hands, or
their Hearts. So that notwithstanding this Universal Power, or Supereminent
Dominion of the Emperor over all things, which Seneca there supposes, yet, if
he should have gone about to have Invaded all Men's Properties, and reduced all
Men's Estates into the Public Treasury, I doubt not but he would soon have had
not only his own Legions, but the whole Empire about his Ears. And though I have
heard that the French King, does by his Ex^roitant Taxes, and Gabels raise more
M^ney out of the Kingdom of France, and the Territories annexed to it, than the
Ottoman Emperor does out of that vast Empire (of which he has the Sole
Propriety of the Lands in himself) Yet if the French King should endeavor by
the Power of his Standing Army to take away all Men's Hereditary Properties in
their Estates, and make them all to be holden at Will, I doubt not, but he
would not only be Opposed by his Subjects, and perhaps ruined in the Attempt;
but also, if he should Succeed in it, would be so far from being the Richer, or
more Powerful, that he would become the Poorer, and Weaker, when he had done:
Since no Man would take the Pains to build, till, or improve their Estates, any
more than they do in Turkey, when they were not sure (...) soon they might be
turned out of them; or at least could hold them no longer, than for their
Lives, or a few years. So prevalent a thing is this empty shadow, and bare Name
of Property that is now left in France (being often charged with (...) to above
half the value of the Estates) to encourage the People to beautify, cultivate,
and improve a Country abounding with all those Riches, that Nature, or Art can
produce.

And to let you see, I am not at all partial, I think I may safely affirm the
same of the Legislative Power in this Kingdom, so that, if it should happen
(which though highly improbable, yet it is not impossible) that the Lords and
Commons Assembled in Parliament should so far abuse the Trust reposed in them,
as to give up all their Civil Properties in their Estates into the Kings
F^ands, to be disposed of as he should think fit, and that the King should
thereupon go about to turn all the People out of their Estates, I doubt not,
but they might in that case resist the King if he went to do it by force,
Notwithstanding this Act of Parliament, and my reason it, that a (...)
Hereditary Property in Estates, being an Ancient, if not more, than Parliament
themselves in this Nation, must consequently be a Fundamental Law of the
Government, and so cannot be altered by its Representatives. For though it be
true, the People have given them a Power to dispose of what part of their
Estates they should think (...), yet did they not make it absolute, to extend
either to their Liberties (I mean in respect of Slavery) or their whole
Properties in their Estates. And if the King may be resisted, if he invade them
by his own Sole Authority, the reason would be the same why he might be also
resisted, though backed by an Act of Parliament: Since the ta^^ing away of Civil
Property would prove as dist^uctive to the People^ Liberties and Happiness in
the one case, as in the other, and as great an abuse of the Trust reposed (...)
them; that were designed to protect it.


M. I cannot except against your distinction between those Governments where a
Property in Estates, did precede the Institution of the Government it sell; for
there, I grant, that such a Property may be a Fundamental Law of the
Government, but in those Monarchies that have begun by Conquest, under the
Command of a King; or absolute Prince, over an Army of his own Subjects, in
that case upon the Conquest of a Kingdom, or foreign Nation, not only the
Prey, or Goods of the (...), but also their Estates were forfeited to the
Conqueror, who had a Right either to retain them for himself, or else to
distribute them as Rewards amongst his (...), and Soldiers: And that this is
the Right of all Conquerors, whether Commonwealth, or Monarchs, by the Law of
Nations, and was exercised amongst the Ancient Greeks, and Romans, as well as
other Nations, I referr you to your own Authors Grotius, and Pufendors. And
therefore, since it appears from History, that most of the Kingdoms now in
Europe, and particularly this of England, began from Conquest, under the
Conduct of their first Kings, if then whatsoever was so Conquered was acquired
for them, and they alone had a Property in it, it will necessarily follow that
all Estates which the Subjects of all sorts now enjoy, must have proceeded from
their Grants or Concessions; And hence it is, that not only in England but also
in Scotland and France, they are all held either mediately, or immediately, of
the King: as being at first all derived from him; and we read in the ancient
Laws of Scotland, that the King had the whole Property of the Country, till the
Reign of Malcolm Conmor, who, as we read in the Ancient Histories of that
Country, granted all the Lands in Scotland to his Nobility, and Gentry,
according to that old Maxim in their Law, Rex distribuit totam Toram Scotiae
hominibus juis: And therefore if Hereditary Property in Estates were only from
the Gift and Bounty of our Kings without any Fundamental Contract between them,
and their Subjects, as you suppose; I cannot see any reason (granting the worst
that can happen, which is highly improbable) if the Kings of this, or of our
Neighboring Nations, should go about by force to destroy, and take away this
Hereditary Property they now enjoy, That the People should have any Right to
resist them; But that it would be not only Ingratitude, but Rebellion so to do.
For though I own that Kings were guilty of Perjury in the sight of God if they
did it, yet that being an ^ffence only against God, the Subjects could have no
more right to resist, than Sons in the State of Nature had to resist their
Father, if he should go about to take away those Estates, which he had before
bestowed upon them.

And as for what you say concerning the Roman Commonwealth, I grant indeed,
that the Government of the People did there precede that of the Emperor, yet
if you please to Remember, Monarchy was the first, and most Ancient Government
of that People. And I doubt not but all the Property the Romans had in their
Estates, though they preceeded from Conquest of their Arms, yet it was wholly
owing to the Grace and Bounty of their first Kings, and when upon the Ex^ulsion
of Iarquin, the Supreme Power became divided between the Senate and People, the
Property of all the Lands that were Conquered devolved upon them, who often
divided them to particular Private Men as they thought fit, though I confess the
Not dividing of these Lands amongst the Common People, was afterward the Cause
of great Tumults, and Commotions amongst them; Yet notwithstanding the Senate
and Nobility still maintained their Power, and to the last refused to make a
Division of those Lands, they had formerly Conquered; So that the Roman
Emperors succeeding in the Power of the Senate, and People, they were likewise
restored, as it were ex pos^liminio, to the Prerogatives of the first Kings,
and consequently, as Seneca himself confesses in the place you have quoted,
though the particular Propriety of Estates was in Private Men, yet you see he
grants the Universal Possession, or Dominion of them was in the King, or
Emperor, from whom they were Originally derived.

I would not be thought to speak thus, as if I were an Enemy to Men's Liberties,
and Properties, or that I either Fear, or desire any Change in them, from what
we now enjoy, but since I think it a thing Morally Impossible to alter them,
and that therefore no King will be so ill advised, as to go about to Seize them
into his own hands; but only by way of discourse, supposing the worst that can
happen, I think we are not only Obliged in Conscience, but also that it were
much better for the Common Peace that the Ring should take all we have, than
that we should involve the Nation in Civil War, and confusion, and our
Consciences under the Guilt of a Mortal Sin, by such Resistance, and Rebellion.


F. I am very sorry to see, that by your Principles all the Free Nations of
Europe lie at the Mercy of any Prince to be made as arrand slaves as any are in
Turkey, when ever their Monarch please, or that they think that they can make
more of their People by taking away their Estates and Liberties, than by
let^ing them enjoy them, which would render Civil Property in all Kingdoms like
private Estates, which every Man may let to his Tenants a^ Will, upon a Rack
Rent, or for Years, or Lives as they shall think fit. But I think I may very
well differ from you in both your Propositions: For, omitting any farther
discourse of th^se Eastern Monarchies, where I grant the People are little
better than Slaves; Yet I think I can easily prove, out of the Ancient
Histories of those Kingdoms that are now in Europe, that though most of them
began by Conquest, yet was it not under the Conduct of Absolute Monarchs, but
under such Princes, or Leaders, whose followers (as I said before at our last
meeting,) were not properly Subjects nor Mercenaries, but Volunteers, under
those that Commanded them. And therefore would never have gone out of their own
Countries, but to advantage themselves, and to enjoy those Privileges, which
their Countrymen had at home, of which, Liberty in their Persons, and Property
in their Estates, were the Chief; and this is apparent in the French Nation,
who whatever their Condition may be now, yet Anciently called themselves
Francs* in opposition to that Servitude, which they supposed their Neighboring
Nations amongst the Germans were in to the Romans at that time: And though I
grant, that these Nations of the Goths, Vandals, Francs and Saxons from whom
most of the Kingdoms in Europe are now derived, might Vest, or entrust the
Lands of the Countries they had Conquered, in him whom they had made their
King, yet still it was with this Trust, that retaining a sufficient part to
sustain the Royal Dignity, they should distribute the rest to all their
Officers, and Soldiers, according to each man's Valor, or Merit; And if they
had refused to have done this, can any Man believe, that so free a People, as
the Ancient Histories relate them to have been, would ever have suffered it,
without pulling down those Kings they had set up, which was then very common
among them for much slighter occasions? And to go no higher than William (whom
you call the Conqueror) can any Man believe, that if he had retained all the
Lands of England to himself, not only his own Norman Lords and Soldiers, but
those of other Foreign Nations, who assisted him in this Expedition, would
ever have suffered him to have reigned in quiet over them, if instead of a
Limited King, he had set himself up for an absolute Monarch, and have granted
them no Estates but at his Will, and Pleasure: which would have reduced the
Conqueror, and the Conquered to the same condition* But as for your Example of
Malcolm Canmor, I cannot believe that the Kings of Scotland were so lately as
his Reign possessed of the whole Hereditary Property of all the Lands in that
Kingdom, so as that no Man had any settled Interest in them before that time,
and therefore I must beg your pardon, if I think this Passage in their
Historians to be very suspicious, if not false: But I speak this only by the
by, and I reserve what I have more to say on this Head, for another time,
wherein, I doubt not but to be able to show you, as evidently as can be done
after so many Ages, that all the Kingdoms in Europe which are descended from
the Gothic or German Nations commenced at first from Compact, with their first
Kings, and have thereby an unalterable Right, in their Lives, Liberties, and
Estates; And if so, have likewise Right to defend them, if generally, and
Universally invaded by their Princes.

But granting for the present, what you have asserted to be true, that all this
Property, which is now in Europe, proceeded wholly from the Grants, and
Concessions of Princes; yet will it not follow, that by the Law of Nature, or
Nations, if any King should go about generally, or at once to invade the
Liberties, and Properties of their People, they might not Lawfully be re^isted,
for, as I said before, even a sl^ve when Manumitted by his Patron, may Lawfully
d^fend his Liberty against him, if he goes about to take it away, and reduce
him again into slavery; So likewise in the same State of Nature* if a Prince
freely grant his Subjects a settled and Hereditary Property in their Estates,
they have likewise a Right to defend them, against him, or any other that would
endeavor by force to take them away; For he that in this State grants any
thing to another, grants him likewise a Right to Keep it, whether the Donor
will, or not, or else it were indeed (...), For he, that in the State of Nature
grants another Man any thing to be possessed, or enjoyed only as long as he
himself, or his Heirs, shall think fit, does in effect grant him as good as
nothing; since he may alter his mind to morrow and demand it again, and take it
away the very next day. So that if you will grant, that Subjects have such a
Right to their Estates, as that the Prince cannot without manifest violence, or
injustice take them away, you must likewise grant, that they have also a Right
to defend them.

But I suppose you will not deny that Right, that all Men have to their Civil
Properties in all our European Kingdoms, T.T. G. c. 19.
and Commonwealths, though never so absolute: But your Objection against the
subjects defending it by force, if it be invaded, is, that it may cause
Rebellion, and Confusion; I grant indeed, it may sometimes occasion Civil Wars,
or Intestine Commotions, if the People finding their Liberties and Properties
notoriously invaded, shall oppose the unjust violence of those who, contrary to
the trust reposed in them, do thus violently invade them: therefore, (forsooth)
if this Doctrine be allowed, it may prove destructive to the Peace of Kingdoms,
and Common Wealths and Consequently to the good, and happiness of Mankind: But
methinks you might as well have argued, that honest Men might not resist
Robbers or Pirates, because it may occasion Disorder, and Bloodshed; If any
mischief come in such cases, sure it is not to be charged upon him, who defends
his own Right, but on him that invades another. If the Innocent honest Man
must quit all he has for quietness sake to him who will lay Violent Hands upon
it, I desire it may be considered, what a kind of Peace there will be in the
World, which would consist only in Violence, and Rapi^^, and which would be
maintained only for the benefit of Public Robbers, and Oppressors.


M. But pray, do you make no difference between a knot of Thieves and Robbers
and the Civil Government of a Monarch, or Commonwealth, which I suppose may
very well be maintained without any Hereditary Property in Lands as you have
granted? And it were much better in my mind to forego these outward things,
than resist the Civil Government which is the Ordinance of God, as you your
self acknowledge.


F. I think the best way to end this controversy, will be, to desire you to
give a Definition of Civil Government, that we may know what we mean by it,
therefore, pray, will you give me an easy and plain Definition of it.


M. Well Sir, I shall comply with your desires; I then take Civil Government
to be an Authority conferred by God, on one, or more Persons, to make Laws for
the benefit, and Protection of the Subjects, and to inflict such Punishments
for their Transgression, as they shall think fit, and by the Subjects
Obedience, and Assistance to protect them against Foreign Enemies, and also to
appoint what share of Civil Property each Person in that Commonwealth shall
enjoy.


F. Sir, Though your Definition be somewhat lame, yet I am pretty well contented
with it, only I will show you by and by wherein it is deficient: The first and
therefore chiefest Branch, or Office of Civil Magistrate^, (...), to make Laws
for the Benefit, and Protection of the Subjects: Is it then a Branch of this
Power, to send Soldiers, or Dragoons, to take away their Liberties, Lives or
Estates* This sure is directly contrary to their Duty, and that Trust which God
has conferred upon them. Let us go on to the next Branch: The inflection of
Punishments for the transgr^ssion of such Laws; Is this a part of Civil
Government not only to send their Soldiers, and other Officers to take away
their Subjects Lives and Estates, but also to let the most Capital Offenders or
Robbers pass unpunished when they have done; if you maintain these to be the
Prerogatives of Civil Government, or that to be Civil Government where these
things are commonly practiced, you may, even with Mr. Hobbs set the great
Leviathan Free from all obligation to his Subjects, any further than he shall
think fit for his own interest, and make them always in a State of Nature, that
is, (as he supposes) of War with them, and then pray tell me, whether such a
State, can be the Ordinance of God, or not? But to come to the last Branch of
your Definition (and in which alone I think it deficient) the appointing what
share of Property each person in that Commonwealth shall enjoy; Though I grant
it may be the Prerogative of Civil Governments to appoint this at first, Yet
are they likewise obliged to maintain this Property when it is once Instituted;
and the People have as much Right to it as any King can have to his Crown, viz.
the Civil Law of that Country, or Consent of the whole Nation: And therefore,
if, according to King James the First his Rule, a King of a Settled, (or
limited) Kingdom will break all the Laws thereof, and Degenerate into a Tyrant;
unless such Tyrant be the Ordinance of God, he may certainly be so far Opposed,
for what can Pirates, or Robbers do more than his Officers, and Guards by his
Commission? The former can but Murder Men, Ravish their Wives, burn their
Houses, and take away their Estates; and if the latter may do so too, pray
where is the Difference? Or what satisfaction is it to me, that I am Ruined by
one Man having the King's Commission, or by another that Ruins me without it?
Since I am sure, God has given the one no more Authority to do it, than the
other; if then this unlimited Power be neither conferred by God, nor Man upon
the Civil Magistrates, I would fain know any Reason, why Thieves, and Pirates
may be Resisted, but their Instruments may not, that do the same things; And
why, when Civil Authority exceeds its utmost Bounds, the State of Nature, or
Self-defence, may not take place; Since the Civil Government is as much
Dissolved by such Violent Actions, as if a Foreign Enemy had broke in, and
Conquered the Country?

But to Answer your Query, whether I think a Civil Government may not be, where
there is no Settled Property in Estates, and whether the Eastern Monarchies are
not Civil Governments? To this I answer, that I have Aristotle on my Side, who,
not without Reason Affirms, that the Government of one Man, where there is no
Civil Property, and where all Men are Slaves, is not Civil Government, but that
of a Master of a Great Family over his Slaves: And though I grant, that they may
have some show of Civil Government among them, as in a Plantation, where one of
the Slaves may complain to the Master against another for any Injury or Wrong
done him, yet is not this Property Civil Government any more than that of the
Master of a Separate Family who looks upon himself as Absolute Lord over all
his Slaves, and they allowed him by God, only for his Benefit, and Grandeur,
and not he instituted, (as all Civil Powers are) for the Good, and Preservation
of the Subjects.


M. But methinks you seem herein to Condemn the Government of Gods own People
the Jews, which no doubt was an Absolute Monarchy; And that restrained by no
Laws, except what God had expressly prescribed them; And yet you see
notwithstanding Samuel told them, that their Kings should take away their
Fields, and their Vineyards, and give them to his Servants, and take their Sons
and Daughters to be his Servants, or Slaves; Yet God leaves them no Power to
Resist them, for so doing: But all the Remedy left them, 1 Samuel 8.18.
is, that they should Cry out in that day, because of the King which they had
chosen, and the Lord would not hear them, that is, there was no Remedy left
them but Patience.


F. I have already given you my Sense of that Place, and I shall speak more
particularly to it, when you shall come to those Texts of Scripture, that you
said you would produce for Absolute Subj^ction, and Non-Resistance: And
therefore at present: I shall only here show you what the Earl of Clarendon in
the above mentioned Survey of the Leviathan, cap. 19. has very prudently as
well as honestly said concerning this Text: page 74.77.
They who will deduce the extent of the absolute and illimited Power of Kings,
from that Declaration by Samuel, which indeed, seems to leave neither Property
nor Liberty to their Subjects, and could be only intended by Samuel to terrify
them from that Mutinous, and Seditious Clamor; as it has no Foundation from
any other part of Scripture, nor was ever practiced, or exercised by any Good
King, who succeeded over them, and was blessed, and approved by God. So when
those State Empiricks (of what degree, or Quality soever) will take upon them
to prescribe a new Diet, and Exercise to Sovereign Princes, and invite them to
assume new Powers, and Prerogatives over the People, by the Precepts, Warrants,
and Prescriptions of the Scriptures: they should not presume to make the Sacred
Writ Subject to their own private Fancies. So likewise in a Leaf or two before,
he speaks much to the same Purpose. That what Samuel had said was rather to
terrify them, from pursuing their foolish Demands, than to Constitute such a
Prerogative as the Kings should use, page 74.
whom God would appoint to go in and out before them; which methinks is very
manifest, in that the worst Kings that ever reigned over them, never
challenged, or assumed those Prerogatives Nor did the People conceive
themselves liable to those impositions; as appears by the application they made
to Rehoboam upon the Death of Solomon, that he would abate some of that Rigor
his Father had exercised toward them, the rough Rejection o^ which request,
contrary to the Advice of his Wi^est Counselors, cost him the greater part of
his Dominions: And when Rehoboam would by Arms have reduced them to Obedience,
God would not suffer him, because he had been in the fault himself. From whence
you may conclude, that this Great Man did not think all Resistance unlawful, in
Case of General, and Intolerable Oppressions.


M. I shall give you my Opinion farther, of what you have now said, when you
have told me more plainly in what Cases you allow Resistance of the Supreme
Powers, and in what not. For till you have been more clear in this matter, I
cannot tell what Judgment to make of your Tenets.


F. I thank you for putting me upon so fair a Method, And therefore that you
may not mistake me, and suppose that I would go about to allow Subjects to
Resist, and take up Arms against the Supreme Power upon any less Occasion than
an Absolu^^ Necessity, and apparent Danger of being Destroyed, and Ruined in
their Lives, Liberties, and Estates; first therefore, considering that the
Corruption of Humane Nature is such, that no sort of Government whatsoever can
continue long, without some Inconveniences, and Mischiefs, to particular Men,
not that any Man either Prince, or ^ubject was ever Master of such perfect
Wisdom, and Goodness, as always to peform his Duty so exactly, as never to
Offend; I do in the first place, grant, that it would be both Undut^ful* as
well as Unjust for Subjects to Rebel against their Prince for his Personal
Failings, or Vices; Undutiful, Since the Prince may be often times an ill Man
in his private Capacity, and yet a good Governor, in respect of the Public;
and also Unjust, since neither do we our selves exactly perform our Duties
toward the Supreme Powers (or to one another) as we ought: And therefore it is
highly reasonable for Subjects to endure* and pass by the personal Faults or
Failings of Princes, in consi^eration of that Protection, and Security, in
their Lives, and Fortunes, which they do enjoy under them* since it has been
found by experience with how great a Slaughter of People, and how great a
confusion, and danger of the whole Commonwealth, Evil Princes have been
resisted, or turned out of their Thrones: And therefore I grant the Private
Injuries of Princes are to be past over, in consideration of that great Charge
they undergo, and for those greater Benefits we receive from their Government,
but chiefly for the public Peace of the Common Wealth, or Civil Society; And
therefore I own it is very well said by that Master in Politics, Tacitus, That
the ill Humors or Dispositions of Kings, are to be born withal, and that often
Mutations of Governments are of dangerous Consequence. And he wisely introduces
Ceriales speaking to this purpose to the Rebellious Treveri: That they ought to
bear with the Luxury and Avarice of Rulers, as they do with immoderate showers,
and other unnatural Evils, since there will be Vices whilst there are Men, yet
neither are these continual, but are often recompensed by the Intervention of
better.

But I will now particularize those Cases wherein I do absolutely disallow, and
disclaim all Resistance in Subjects against the Supreme Powers.

1. I deny all Resistance to Subjects against their Princes, or Supreme
Magistrates, in all such Actions, or Prerogatives which are absolutely
necessary to the Exercise of their Supreme Power, viz. of Protecting and
Defending their People, as also against those who are Commissioned by them for
the Execution of such Powers.

2. I Condemn all Rebellion against Princes, or States, merely on the Score of
Religion, or because they are not of the Religion of their People, or Subjects,
if there be no positive Law Extant, Disabling or Forbidding Princes, or other
Magistrates of different Religions than that of their People, from being
admitted to the Throne, or Government.

3. I look upon it as Rebellion in the People, Tumultuously to rise up in Arms
to alter, or reform the Religion of the Nation, or Kingdom already established
by Law, without the Consent of the Legislators.

4. I Disclaim all Resistance, or Self-defence in Subjects, upon the account
that the free, or public Exercise of that Religion they profess, is not
allowed them by the Legislative Power of the Kingdom, or Nation, provided that
such Supreme Powers do not forbid, or hinder the People professing such a
different Religion, to Sell, or Transport their Estates, and Persons into any
other Country where they please.

5. I Deny Resistance to Subjects against their Princes or Governors upon
Pretense of any Personal Vices, as because they are wicked, Atheisti^al, Cruel,
Lustful, or Debauched, provided they generally Protect their Subjects in their
Lives, Liberties, and Properties.

6. I Deny this Right of Resistance to any particular person less than the
wh^le Body, or Major part of the People, or at least such a considerable
Portion of a Nation, as are able, when Assaulted, or Oppressed in their Lives,
Liberties, or Estates to constitute a distinct, and entire Kingdom, or
Commonwealth of themselves.

7. I look upon it as Wicked, and Rebellious for any private Subjects to
Assassinate, Murder or Imprison their Monarch, or other Supreme Governor,
since no private Person whatever ought to lay Violent Hands upon his Prince,
whose person ought to be Sacred, and in no wise to be Violated, unless he put
off the Character of a Prince, and Actually make War upon his People. But if in
this Case, he happen to be Resisted, and Perish in the Attempt, he falls not as
a Prince, but as a Common Enemy, by breaking the Original Compact with his
People; and entering into a State of War against them: As a Father who unjustly
makes War upon his Children, may be, (as I have already proved at our first
conference) Resisted by them in the State of Nature.

But as for all other Grievances, or Oppressions, if they are of that Nature as
may Ruin the whole Commonwealth, yet not suddenly, but after some time, and
often Repeated, I cannot allow such Grievances, or Oppressions, as a Sufficient
Cause of Resistance; For as on the one hand, there is no Inconvenience so
small, but in process of time it may turn to the Ruin of the Commonwealth, if
it be often Repeated, and excessively Multiplie^; so on the other side, length
of time produces so great Changes, that the Nature of these Encroachments, or
Injuries are not sufficient to justify Resistance, and the Breach of that
Peace and Unity in a Common Wealth, which must necessarily follow by entering
into a State of War.

To conclude, I do not in any Case whatever allow of Resistance; but only in
these three necessary ones: When the Lives, Liberties, or Estates of the whole
People, of the greatest part of them, are either actually Invaded, or else
taken away, and when they are Reduced into so bad a Condition, that a State of
War is to be preferred before such a Peace; and when the End of Civil
Government being no longer to be obtained by it, the Commonwealth may be
looked upon as Dissolved.


M. Though you have been pretty long in treating of this Matter, yet I did not
think it Tedious, since I confess you have given me honestly enough, (and so
far I agree with you) all those Cases wherein you say it is U^lawful for
Subjects to take up Arms, or Resist the Supreme Powers: But I wonder you have
not added one Case more, which Diverse Authors, that are high enough against
Non-Resistance, in other things, do yet allow to be a sufficie^s Cause of
taking up Arms, and Resisting their Prince; And that is, when he Actually has,
or goes about to Alie^ate, or make over his Dominion and Subjects to some
Foreign Prince, or State.


F. I am not ignorant of what you say, but I thought it not worth speaking ot,
because in absolute Monarchies, (which we are now treating of;) if such
Kingdoms are Patrimonial, and that the Monarch has such an absolute Dominion
over his Subjects, as neither to let them enjoy any Liberty in their Persons,
nor Properties in their Estates, but at his Pleasure; I cannot see any reason,
why such a Prince may not alienate his Dominion, over such a Kingdom, and
People, as well as any private-Man, may his Property in his Estate: Nor have
the People any Cause to be concerned at it, since they can then likewise be but
Slaves, and enjoy nothing but at their Princes Pleasure, as they did before; so
that whether He, or a Stranger govern them* it is all one as to their
Circumstances; But yet under such Governments, as are absolute, where the
People enjoy their personal Lib rites, and Properties in their Estates, the
Case may be much otherwise; since they may not be sure, that the Foreign
Prince, to whom their own Monarch, or other Supreme Powers has assigned them,
will maintain their Liberties, and Properties as the former did: And therefore
not being Slaves before, they cannot be Alienated without their own Consents,
and consequently they may take up Arms, and defend themselves if they are able;
^nle^s the Prince, or State to whom they are so Alienated will give them the
like assurance to preserve their Lives, Liberties, and Properties, as their
former Governors did; and therefore I do conceive, the People of the Islands
of Cyprus, and Candy, might very well have refused to become Subjects to the
Grand Seignior, in case the Venetians should have Sold, or Alien'^ their
Dominion over them, before he had actually conquered them. But in Limited, or
Hereditary Kingdoms, which are so by their fundamental Constitution, I suppose,
the Prince cannot upon any account whatsoever, make over his Dominions, to a
Foreign Prince without the consent of his People, and next Heir: And therefore,
(granting the Story to be true;) I doubt not but the People of this Kingdom
might very well have opposed King John, if he had gone about to have subjected
it, to the Dominion of the Emperor of Morocco, upon Condition that he would
Assist him with an Army of Moors to subdue h^s Barons, and Nobility then in
Arms against him.


M. I confess it is not worth while to dispute about that which so seldom
happens, and is indeed almost impossible to be put in practice, and therefore I
shall not much oppose you in what you have said upon this Case; yet, that I may
be as good as my word, and give you my Judgment concerning what you have lately
said, I must freely tell you, that as it may happen, that a Prince, or State
may sometimes abuse their Power, so as to take away the Liberties, and Estates
of all their Subjects, as you have set forth, (and which I confess is a very
great mischief) yet upon second thoughts, I think it were much better that this
Inconvenience should be suffered, rather than the work mischief of leaving
Subjects to be the sole Judges, when their Liberties, and Estates are invaded,
or like to be taken away; nay, every private Subject would be first Judge of
it, or else the whole People could never come to pass their Judgment upon it,
which would leave too great a latitude for ^urbulent, and Rebellious Spirits to
make disturbances in Kingdoms, and Commonwealths: especially if there be any
small Grievances, on the Subjects, especially too, (...) they touch at those
things they account their Hereditary Liberties, and Properties: these, (though
never so small) if the People are suffered to be their own Judges (as you make
them to be in their own Case) will soon be aggravated, and blown up to
intolerable Oppressions of, and Invasions upon their Liberties and Properties,
when indeed they are not: This is a pernicious Doctrine, for it will be a
perpetual Cause of Quarrels, Civil Wars, and Rebellions, which would turn all
Commonwealths, tho never so well Constituted, into Anarchy, and Confusion. So
that as you have stated this Question, you have broached a Principle highly
destructive to all Civil Government; for if All, or Any of the People, may
Resist, or Rebel, (call it what you please) whenever they think themselves
oppressed in their Liberties and ^s^ates, L. O.
this is for them only to be obedient, when they think themselves well
governed; but stubborn, and Rebellious when they believe they are not, which
would be to make all Government Precarious and Conditional, and the People not
only Parties but Judges, and Executioners too in their own Case; how far these
Conditions are observed on the Governors part, and then the Regularity, or
Irregularity of the Administration will no longer be the Question, but the
Validity of the Power to Command* And there wants no more to dissolve such a
Government, than for Dick, or Tom, and every Rascal of the Mobile to say, This
or That, is destructive to the Peoples Liberties, and Properties, and therefore
an insupportable grievance, and oppression. And if you will once allow any
number of the People, though never so many, to Judge This, or That Law, or Order
of the Government, not to be for their Good, and that they may likewise Resist,
and Right themselves by Arms, when ever they thus fancy, they will quickly come
to say, that the Government it self is not for their good neither; and upon
this ground all the Rebellions ^a^sed by an Incensed, and mistaken Multitude
against the Government in all Ages, may easily be justified, and Wa^* Tyler,
and Mass^an^llo shall be so far from being Rebels, that they may pass in future
Ages for Heroes, and Noble Assertors of the Peoples Liberties; and I hope you
will believe, I do not speak this out of any liking, or Approbation of Tyranny,
or that I desire, that Princes should stretch their Power to the utmost, to
Invade their Subjects Liberties, or Estates; but only to let you see, how far
your Principles may serve the Pretenses of wicked Men to set whole Kingdoms
together by the Ears, whenever they find the People so far discontented with
the Government, as to believe their Malicious and wicked Insinuations; of all
which those long, and cruel, Civil Wars, and Rebellions which for several Years
tormented, and almost ruined these three Kingdoms, are too late, and sad
Examples.


F. I confess Sir, you have made a very Pathetick speech, and exerted, I
suppose the utmost Strength of your reason and Eloquence on this Subject, for
you have made the Consequences of this Principle, viz. ( That the People may
judge when their Liberties, and Properties are invaded) to seem very dreadful,
but after all, it is no more than what you have urged in great part already,
and the main Strength of your Argument lies here, that if the People should
take upon them but once to judge, when they were notoriously injured, or
oppress't, and thereupon take Arms, to right themselves; they would soon make
bold to put this Power into use and Practice, when they had no occasion for it
at all, or at least not sufficient to make any open Insult. But to show you,
that there is no need, of such an infallible Judge, as you suppose, to be
necessary in a Commonwealth any more than there is in the Church; pray, tell
me, Sir, would it not have been very convenient, if Christ had appointed, an
Infallible Judge, (be it the Pope, or General Counsel, or both together, ^ to
decide all Controversies in Religion, and to whose Judgment all People ought to
submit?


M. I cannot deny, but it would have been a very ready way to end all Disputes
about Religion, but since God has not thought fit to appoint any such Judge,
it were very great Presumption in us to set up one to please our humor, since
such a one could have no Infallibility, unless it were given him from above.


F. You Judge very well; and does it not therefore follow, that since there is
no such infallible Judge, all Men ought to Judge for themselves of the Truth of
their Religion, and also in the Christian Religion, what Doctrines are
agreeable to the Word of God, and what not, and yet you see that from the ill
use of this Liberty have sprung all the Different Sects, and Heresies in the
World? Does it therefore follow, that Men must not make use of this Liberty,
because they may abuse it? So likewise, must Subjects judge in no Case
whatsoever, when the Supreme Power Tyrannizes over them, beyond what they are
able to bear? and must they never resist, or endeavor to cast off this
insupportable Yoke, because they may happen one time or other to be wanton, and
believe themselves oppress't when indeed they are not?


M. I grant your Parallel would have some what in it, were the Consequences of
every Man's judging for himself in Matters of Religion, as fatal to the Peace,
and Happiness of Mankind, as your Doctrine of the Subjects judging, when it is
fit for them to resist the Supreme Powers; for I do not at all debar them from
the Right of Judging, when they are oppress't, or ill used by them, for that
may very well consist with the Public Peace, but I utterly disallow all manner
of Resistance by Force, because it tends, not only to dissolve all Civil
Government, but to disturb the Common Peace, and safety of Mankind.


F. Notwithstanding your Distinction, the Parallel with hold in both Cases, for
are not differences in Religion as fatal to the Peace, and Unity of the Church,
as the Subjects judging, when they are oppress't, and thereupon taking up
defensive Arms, can be to that of a Civil State? And do not more Wars, and
Quarrels arise about Men's differences in Religion, than from any other Cause
you can Name? So that if the Peace of the Church were a sufficient Cause for
supposing a certain, or Infallible Judge in Religion, there would be the same
Reason to suppose it in Civil Matters too. And therefore your Argument, from
the abuse of this Liberty of the Subjects judging, when they may resist, is of
no more force in one Case, than the other; for I grant it may so happen in a
Civil State, as well as in an Ecclesiastical, that the Subjects may rise up,
and resist their Civil, as well as Spiritual Governors, without any just
Cause: does it therefore follow, that God has wholly delivered up Mankind to
the domineering humors of Men in Power, let them abuse it never so grossly? And
therefore we must not be wiser than God Almighty himself, and when he has not
appointed any certain, and Infallible Judges either in Civil or Spiritual
matters without any Contradiction, or Resistance, we ought not to suppose a
necessity of such Judges, merely because of some Inconveniences, which may
perhaps often happen from the abuse of that Christian Liberty he has given us.
For then I doubt you will find the Remedy would be much worse than the Disease,
as if to avoid Heresies, we should set up the Pope for an Infallible Judge. So
would it be likewise if to avoid Civil Wars, and Rebellions we should set up
the Supreme Magistrate (as Mr. Hobbs has done) for a certain, and Irresistible
Judge of whatsoever Means are necessary for the People's Quiet and
Preservation, since I have already proved, that an Insupportable Tyranny is not
Civil Government, and that the Supreme Powers can no more alter the Nature of
things, but their own Laws, or Edicts, than they can ordain Poison to be used,
in stead of wholesome Food, by the People.


M. I confess what you have now said, carries some weight with it, and my own
Carnal Reason does very much incline me to your Opinion, were it not for two
things, the one (as I said) is the Horrid Rebellions, that have, and may again
arise in these Kingdoms from this Principle; which has made God so strictly
forbid, all Resistance of the Higher Powers, upon any account whatsoever; And
therefore you are much mistaken, when you assert, that Resistance, though for
Self defense, is one of the Liberties, that God has left us; since certainly
he would never so severely have forbidden it, but that he not only knew how
prone Men's Corrupt Natures were to Rebellion, but also foresaw the fatal
Consequence of it.


F. If God's Commands in Scripture be the greatest Argument, you have against
all Resistance whatever, I doubt not but to show you, (when We come to it,)
that you as well as others are mistaken in that Strict Interpretation of those
places of Scripture; and as for the Evil Consequences you suppose may follow
from this Doctrine, I doubt not likewise but to convince you, that much worse
will follow from the Irresistible Tyranny of the Supreme Powers, than ever have
happened from the Dreadfullest Rebellions. And therefore I desire you to take
Notice, that what I have now said, is not out of any design to Justify so
Horrid a Crime, as I grant Rebellion to be, or to incite Subjects to be Guilty
of it; but only to hinder Civil Government from being destroyed, and Mankind
from being made Miserable.

For I have first Asserted, that no Resistance whatever is to be made in
Absolute Governments; but in those Cases in which the main Ends of Civil
Government are Visibly destroyed, or so near it, that there is no other means
left but Resistance to prevent it. And then when things are once brought to
this Pass, it is not the People, that make this War, but the Governors, who by
their Tyranny have brought the Commonwealth into this Anarchy, and Confusion
you so much Dread; so that it is not the People, but they that are the
Aggressors.

And as for the ill use that may be made of this Doctrine, to stir up the
People to Rebellion, when they have no just, or sufficient Provocation to
Re^^st. This will not prove of that Dangerous Consequence, you imagine if you
will but consider, that I do not allow this Resistance in any Case; but when
the Violence, or Oppression of the Governors is so Evident, and Insupportable
to all the People, that groan under it, that no indifferent Man in his Senses,
will be able to deny it; for as long as there remains, any Disputableness
whether, or no the People are sufficiently Oppressed* in their Liberties, or
Estates, the Trust Reposed in the Supreme Magistrates makes them the Sole
Judges of the Necessity of such Exorbitant Actions, as being Entrusted by the
People as Men supposed, to be both Wise, and Good, and themselves Ignorant in
Diverse Cases of the true means of their own Preservation, and the Supreme
Powers remain the Sole Judges, as long as the Case is Doubtful, or Uncertain.

But since you have already acknowledged, that the People might Judge (if such
a Case should happen) whether the Prince, or other Supreme Magistrate makes
Actual War upon them, I would very fain know, why the People cannot as plainly
distinguish when he sends his Guards, or Dragoons to take away their Lives and
Liberties, or to turn them out of their Estates: And (...) this be done, and
the Tyranny so evident, and general, and insupportable, that it is past all
question I grant that the People ought to have Patience, and rather suffer many
Oppressions, and Hardships, than put themselves into a State of War. So that I
think it is Morally impossible, that the People can be mistaken in (...)
evident a Case: Nor I believe can you scarce show me one Example, either out of
Ancient or Modern History, of any whole Nation, or People, or the Major part of
them, that did ever rise in Arms to cast off either a Foreign, or Domestic
Yoke, which pressed too hard upon them; but when they had the most unavoidable,
and justest causes so to do. And I believe I can show you Ten Examples out of
Histories, (if the Question were to be decided by them) for one you can show me
to the Contrary. It Is true, some private Men may sometimes make Disturbances,
or Rebellions; but it is commonly to their own Just Ruin, and Perdition; for,
till the Mischief be grown General, and the Violence of the Rulers become
Evident, and their Attempts to Destroy, or make Slaves of them, are most
sensible to all, or the greatest part of the People; they are commonly more a
great deal disposed to Suffer, than to Right themselves by Resistance, well
knowing the Mischiefs of War, and how Destructive it will prove, not only to
their Lives, but to the Welfare of their Families and Posterities, as well as
Private Concerns. So that the Example of some particular Injustice, Oppression,
nay, or Absolute Ruin of here and there an Unfortunate person, moves them not.
But if once they find their Lives, Liberties, and Estates Universally
Assaulted, and about to be taken away, who is to be blamed for it: The
Magistrate, or the People? for the former might have avoided it if they had
pleased, either by not urging them to that Extremity at all, or at least
Redressing those Grievances, and Oppressions before they became so General, and
Insupportable, as not to be any longer endured.

So that, though I grant, the Ambition, or Turbulency of private Men have
sometimes caused great Disorders in Commonwealths, and Factions have been
fatal to States, and Kingdoms, Yet whether this Mischief has oftener begun from
the People's Wantonness; and desire to cast off the Lawful Authority of their
Rulers, or from the Rulers Insolence, and Endeavors to get, and Exercise a
Tyrannical Arbitrary Power over their People, that is, whether Oppression, or
Disobedience gave the first Rise to the Disorder, I leave it (as I said) to
Impartial History, to Determine.

But this I am sure of, whoever (either Ruler, or Subject) goes about by force
to Invade the Rights of either Prince, or People, and lays a Foundation for
overturning the Original Constitution, and Frame of any Civil Government, he is
Guilty of the greatest Crime, I think a Man is capable of, being to Answer for
all those Mischiefs, Bloodshed, Rapine, and Desolations which the breaking to
pieces of Governments does bring on a Country* And he who does it is justly to
be esteemed a Common Enemy, and is to be treated accordingly.

But as for the Instances you give of Wa^ Tyler, and Massianello, I grant
indeed it may so happen, that a Great part of the Common People, or Rabble may
sometimes upon sudden, or false Apprehensions, occasioned by some Real
Grievances or Oppressions, such as are great Taxes, or Gabels imposed by the
State, take up Arms, and Rebel against the Supreme Powers; Yet these Examples
do not reach the Question in Hand, these Insurections, or Rebellions you
mention being of a much less number, than the whole People, or the Major part
of them, and in which I still include the Nobility and Gentry, and other
Land-holders, as the most considerable part. And so those Insurrections were in
no wise Justifiable, especially in such a Government as ours, where no Man can
be Taxed but by his own Consent included in his Representatives, whereas all
these Rebellions were chiefly (if not altogether) made by the meaner sort, or
Scum of the People, of one, or a few Countries, whom I can never allow to make
Disturbances, since they, having very little to lose, ought in all Civil
Governments whatsoever, to be directed and Governed by those, in whom the
Balance of the Government in Lands, and other Riches does reside and on whom
they chiefly depend for their Protection and Subsistence, and consequently
ought to make no Alterations in the State without their consent, and
Approbation.

But as for your other Instance of the Wars raised in these Three Kingdoms,
against King Charles the First, upon the Pretense of our Religion, Liberties,
and Properties being Invaded, it is not proper to be Treated of in this place:
Since we are now Discoursing of the Power of Princes, and the Right of Subjects
under Absolute, and not limited Monarchies; And I grant that some Resistance
may be Rebellion, under Absolute Monarchies which would not be so under limited
ones: Yet I do still suppose that it may be Lawful under such limited Monarchy
for the People to take up Arms, and make Resistance in defense of those Just
Liberties, and Privileges which they Lawfully enjoy either by the Original
Constitution of the Government, or by Acts of Grace, or Concession of the
Prince; but this requires a more large, and accurate Discourse which at another
time, I am ready to give you. Therefore granting at present, that those Wars
were down Right Rebellion against the King, and also that they were made under
Pretense of the Principle I now assert, yet does it not at all overthrow the
Justice of that Cause, which I now maintain; since (as I have already more than
once intimated) the abuse that may be sometimes made of a Natural Right, by
some Wicked, Factious, or Hypocritical Men ought not in the least to preju^ice
the Exercise of that Right to all the rest of Mankind; who may lie under a Real
Necessity of making use of it.

To conclude, if the People may nev^r be trusted to Judge when their Liberties
and Properties are actually Invaded, because they may happen one time or other
to be mistaken, and so enter into a State of War without cause to the
Destruction of Mankind, this Argument would serve as well against all Princes,
and Commonwealths, who, being in the State of Nature with each other, should
never make War for any Cause or Provocation, how great soever, because being
Judges and Executioners too in their own Case, they may more easily happen to
be mistaken, I suppose you your self will grant, that one, or a few Men are
more apt to be in an Error, than 100000, and I have already proved, that where
the People have never wholly given up their Liberties, and Properties unto the
Absolute Will of the Supreme Powers, they are as to that still in a State of
Nature, and do reserve to themselves a Right of Judging when they are Violently
and Insupportably invaded and Consequently of vindicating themselves from that
Oppression. And therefore granting what you have said to be true, that the
People may sometimes happen to abuse this Natural Right of Judging, and
resisting by exerting it, when there is no real and absolute necessity: so on
the other side, if they are wholly debarred from it, because they may happen
sometimes to abuse it, the Freest People in the World, viz. (our selves for
Example) may easily be reduced into a Condition of absolute Slavery and
Beggary, and that without all Remedy, by any Humane means that I can think of,
and which is the worst mischief of these two, I leave to your self, or any
indifferent Man to Judge.


M. If you will have my Opinion in this point^, I must freely tell you, that it
is a hard matter to find out a mischief so destructive to the People, and which
they should exchange for this miserable State of War, which you suppose may
prove so beneficial to them, and yet I doubt, if it be thoroughly looked into,
not only the Doctrine it self, but also the lasting Wars, and miseries it may
produce, would sufficiently prove the contrary since the cruellest Tyranny,
Slavery, and loss of Estates, or any thing else almost may be better born with
in Peace, and Unity than a Civil War, with the greatest Liberty, and Plenty:
seeing all such comforts would quickly be devoured like Pharaoh's Fat Kine, by
such a Cruel M^nster feeding in their bowels: And therefore since Civil War is
one of the greatest Calamities, and Punishments that God uses to send upon a
Nation, it seems evident to me, that the Welfare of any State, or People
requires them to be Obedient unto the Supreme Powers, though they be never so
great Oppressors, or Cruel Tyrants. For when once they enter into this dismal
State of War, who can tell whether it will have an End, without almost the
total destruction of the Nation, or at least by bringing them into a far worse
Condition of Slavery and Suffering, than they were before, since the State of
Princes, or other Supreme Powers can never be so mean, and inconsiderable in
the World, as not to find, when like to be Oppressed by such insurrections, and
Rebellions of their Subjects, sufficient assistance from Neighboring Princes
or States, who making the Cause of such a Prince their own, will be sure to
assist him to the utmost of their Power, it being found true by experience as
Tully long ago observed: Cicero orat. pro Lege Manil.
That the afflicted State of Kings do easily draw the help and Pity of many
others, especially of those, who are either Kings themselves, or do live in a
Kingdom, the Regal Name being by them esteemed to be great and Sacred. And
farther* how ready a way it is to subvert the State of any such distract^d
Kingdom, and to bring it under the Subjection of Foreigners, we need not seek a
plainer Proof, than by an Example no farther off than Ireland, where Derm^t
King of Leinster being forced by his Rebellious Subjects to ^rave the Aid of
King Henry the II. for his Restoration to his Kingdom, his assistance to
recover his Right produced that effect, which we now see, viz. That the Irish
lost their Domi^ion, and became Subject to the Crown of England even to this
day.

And supposing, that the Subjects might likewise be assisted by some Foreign
Prince who would undertake their deliverance, they would not be in a much
b^tt^r condition since if he were an Absolute Monarch himself, he would be
(...), for example sake, as well as for their own security to carry as strict a
hard over t^em, and use them more severely than their own Prince had done
before: and I doubt not, but if Lewis Prince of France, had been Crowned King
of this Kingdom, as he was very near it, toward the latter end of King John's
Reign, but that he would have been more cruel, and Tyrannical than ever King
John had been before: So that they would have got nothing by the bargain, but a
change of Masters, and a heavier Yoke imposed upon them by a Foreigner.

And so much the Viscount Melun confessed upon his Death bed to many of the
English nobility, which was the reason of their returning again to their
Allegiance to Henry the third. So that I think, it had been much better for the
Barons and Nobility of this Kingdom never to have stirred, or Rebelled at all
against their Lawful Prince.


F. You seem so in Love with slavery, and all the Consequences of it, that it
is an hundred pities but that you should feel the smart of it a little while,
provided no body was to suffer by it but your self, and those of your Opinion;
But could you see the miserable Condition those poor People are in who live
under Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government, I doubt not but you would be of
another mind, and prefer a War, though never so Violent, before such a Peace,
for when Men are once reduced to so desperate a Condition as neither to be
secured of their Lives, Liberties, or Estates, they may have some hope to
redress themselves by Resistance, but need not fear to be reduced to a worse
Condition than they were before, and therefore I cannot understand how all the
Comforts of a Civil Life, would then be lost by a Civil Wa^, when I have
already put-it as a chief part of the Case, that Subjects are never to make
such a Resistance but when the Supreme Powers are just about to begin, or else
have actually entered into a State of War against their Subjects: For what can
any foreign Enemy do more if he Conquers them, than take away their Lives,
Liberties, and Estates? So that this is so far from being a State of Peace,
that indeed the People are already exposed to all the Calamities of War: but a
War, which you suppose may be made without any resistance, whilst the Subjects
(forsooth) are bound to keep the Peace but much such another Peace, as would be
in a House unto which Thieves having broken, and the Inhabitants retiring into
some upper Rooms, there stand upon their Guard; and make Resistance; whilst the
Thieves having Seized upon all they have below, one of them should make such a
speech as this; I pray Sirs, come down, and submit your selves to us, for we
assure you we intend not to Kill you, but only to Bind you, and take away all
you have; And is not slavery and loss of Goods better with Peace and safety,
than by assaulting us to provoke us to fire the House, and Kill you all; for if
you once enter into a State of War with us, it is very likely to end, with your
total destruction, For if you continue to resist us, or think to call in
Company to your Assistance, we can likewise call in many more of our Party to
come, and help us, and then e^p^^t no mercy. Now pray tell me, would not this
be a very rational Argument to move these People to come down, and surrender
themselves to these Thieves, and partake of the benefits of this excellent
Peace they proposed? and whether they would not tell them that by shooting,
they would also call in the Neighboring Town, who might be too strong for all
their Fellow Thieves? Now if you will but take these honest People of the next
Town for such Neighboring Princes, or States who may Join in the Assistance of
such an Oppressed People, this Simile will fully answer your Argument of those
Neighboring Princes, that may take Part with an Oppressing Tyrant. And as for
the Consequence of such Assistance, on the one side, or the other, that it may
happen to bring them into a worse Condition, than they were before, viz. a
Subjection to Foreigners, (as I have put the Case,) it can be no cause to det^r
the People from Resisting, for if they were (as I suppose) reduced to a
Condition of slavery before, and had lost all their Liberties, and Properties,
how can we Imagine them in a worse Case, than they are already? And it is all
one to such a People, whether their own, or a strange Prince did Tyrannize,
over, and oppress them: Nay, were I to take my Choice, I had much rather be
Tyrannized over, and oppressed by a Foreigner than from my own Natural Prince;
since the former con^ing in by force, and without any precedent Promise, or
Compact, I lie wholly at his Mercy, who has no Obligation upon him, and I had
much rather, if I were to be ^ slave be so to a Stranger, than to my own
Father, if I were assured, that both the one, and the other would use me with
like severity. And to answer your Instance of your Irish King; I think that
Nation has been so far from losing any thing by their Subjection to the
English Government, that they have gained far greater Privileges, and
Liberties both for their Persons, and Estates, than ever they enjoyed under
their own Princes: So that they are rather the better than the worse by the
Change. And as for your other Example of Prince Lewis, it is uncertain whether
the Condition of the English Nation would have been either better, or worse
under a French King, but thus much I am sure of, that had King John Proceeded
in that Tyrannical Course against his Barons and the rest of his Subjects, they
could scarce have been in a worse Condition under the French, nay the Moors
themselves, ha^ King John, actually surrendered his Crown to the Sarrac^n
Emperor, as the Historians of those times relate he offered to do.

Nor can I be of your Opinion, that i^ had been much better for the Barons, and
Nobility of this Kingdom never to have stirred, or resisted the King at all;
since if they had not, they had never obtained the GREAT CHARTER of our
Liberties from him, and if they had not, as Vigorously defended it, when they
had once got it, I doubt not but the People of England had been long before
this time in the same Condition, at to their Liberties, and Properties, as some
of our Neighboring Nations; all which is sufficient, I think, to prove, that
Resistance in desperate and unavoidable Cases is not attended with those
mischiefs and Inconveniences you suppose.


M. I shall not say much more in answer to your lost discourse, since it would
be to little purpose, but only take Notice that Similes are not Arguments, and
therefore your Comparison between Thieves, and Honest Men, does not hold as to
Princes* and Subjects; since sure there is a great deal of difference between
those, that are to be Obeyed as the Ordinance of God, and those who are Obliged
in Conscience to be subject to them, and Thieves who act directly contrary to
Gods Will, and Honest Men who having no obligation to them may justly resist
them. So that if that be false the rest of the Comparison will signify
nothing; And as for what you say concerning MAGNA CHARTA, I think it is not
much for its credit, to have been extorted by Force, and afterward defended by
Rebellion; though I will not go about to Impeach the Validity of it, since so
many of our Succeeding Kings, have so solemnly, and voluntarily confirmed it;
only pray take notice, that it is wholly derived from the Grace, and Bounty of
our Monarchs* and therefore we are not to resist, though it may happen to be
sometimes, and in some Particular Cases broken, and infringed by the King, for
some great Occasions or Necessities of which we are not compet^^t Judges.

But to come to the rest of those evil Consequences that may attend your
Doctrine of Resistance; I think the Benefits, would be much greater to the
People by strictly adhering to those Doctrines of Absolute Subjection, and
Non-resistance than by propagating yours of Rebellion. For if the former were
constantly taught, and inculcated, as most beneficial for them, and if they
were once really persuaded of the Truth of it, and would both constantly
profess, and practice it, it would make all Princes, much more Gentle, and mild
to their Subjects, than otherwise at some times they are. For now they are
still fearful, that they will take the first opportunity, they can to take up
Arms against them: And upon the least Grievance, or Mis-Government, to resist
their Authority, for then Princes not needing to keep any such constant Guards,
and standing Armies, might afford to lay much easier Taxes, and impositions
upon them, for the maintenance and support of the Government, than now they do,
and in short, would have much fewer Temptations to Tyranny and Oppression,
could they be once assured of their Subjects absolute Obedience, and
Subjection. Whereas when they are under those constant fears, and suspicions of
Insurrections, and Rebellions against them, upon the least occasion, it is no
wonder, if they are tempted, sometimes to abuse this Power for their own
Security. And therefore we read in our Histories, that William the Conqueror
never thought himself secure from the English, whom he had newly Conquered,
till such time as he had turned most of the Nobility, and Gentry, out of their
Offices and Estates, lest they should have any Power left either in his Life
time, or after his Death to turn him, or his Posterity out of the Throne, as
they did the Heir of the Danish King Cnute, who with his Danes had before
Conquered England, as King William did afterward with his Normans: So that
upon the whole matter it seems to me much more to conduce to the main design of
Civil Government, viz. The Happiness and Peace of Mankind in General, that
Princes and other Supreme Magistrates, should be suffered (I will not say
authorized) by God, sometimes to abuse their Power to the general oppression,
and enslaving of the People, without any Resistan^e on their side, expecting
their d^liverance WHOLLY from him who can bring it about in his good time; and
by such means as shall seem most meet to him* than that Subjects should take
upon them to be both Judges, and Executioners too, in their own Case, and
thereby introduce not only all the Mischiefs of Civil War, and all those cruel
Revenges which the Wrath of an Incensed Prince may justly inflict upon such
Rebels in this Life; but also the Wrath of God, and those Punishments that he
has denounced in the Holy Scriptures in the Life to come against such
Rebellious Subjects, as dare resist the Supreme Powers ordained by God.


F. Before I answer the main part of your last discourse, give me leave first
to justify my Simile, for though I grant Similes are no Arguments, yet they
often serve to expose the absurdity of several things which either the ^alse
colors of Eloquence, or the too great Authority of learned men might otherwise
have hid from our Eyes, and therefore if the Supreme Powers have no Authority
from the Revealed Will of God, or the Law of Nature, nor by the Municipal Laws
of any Country to invade their Subjects Lives, Liberties or Estates, they may
be so far compared to Thieves and Robbers, when they do; nor are such violent
Actions of theirs to be submitted to as the Ordinance of God. And I suppose you
will not deny, but that a Prince or State that does thus, Acts as directly
contrary to Gods Will, as Thieves themselves; and consequently all honest men
or Subjects having so far no obligation to suffer or obey, may justly Resist
them; So that if this be true, all the rest of the Comparison, currit quatuor
pedibus.

But as for your reflections upon MAGNA CHARTA it is you your self, not I, that
asserted it to have been extorted by force, and d^fended by Rebellion, for it
is very well known to those who are at all Conve^sant in our English Histories,
and Laws; that there was nothing granted in that CHARTER, which was not the
Birthright of the Clergy, Nobility, and People long before the Conquest, and
were comprised under the Title of King Edwards Laws, and which were after
confirmed by William the first, as also more expressly by the Grants of his Son
Henry the first, and King Stephen, as appears by their Charters still to be
seen. And therefore these fundamental Rights, and Privileges were not extorted
by force from King John, as you suppose; The War commencing between him, and
his Barons, was not, because he would not grant them fresh Privileges, which
they had not before; but because he had not kept, nor observed the Fundamental
Laws of the Land, and those Rights and Privileges which before belonged to the
Clergy, Nobility, and People, as well by the Common Law of the Land as the
Grants of former Kings. And therefore if King John by his apparent breach of
them forced the Nobility and People to defend them, it was no Rebellion for so
doing, nor was it ever declared to be so by any Law now extant.

But to come to the main force of your Argument: I confess it were an admirable
expedient not only against Rebellion, but also the Tyranny of Princes to PREACH
that they should not oppress their People, nor yet that the People should rebel
against them, but the preaching of these Doctrines, or getting as many as you
can to believe them, will no more make Princes leave keeping standing Armies,
or laying great Taxes upon their People, than Constant Preaching against
Robbery, or Murder, will take away the necessary use of Gallows out of the
Nation: Since we know very well, that as long as the Corruption of humane
Nature continues; so long must likewise all Powerful Remedies against it. And
therefore your Instance of William the Conqueror will signify very little, for
I believe had all those learned Divines (who have of late so much Written and
Preached for Passive Obedience and Non-resistance) been then alive, and had
exerted the utmost of their Reason, and Eloquence to prove them necessary, nay
farther, I do not believe, though all the People of England, should have given it
under their hands, that they would not have Resisted, or Rebelled against King
William, that yet he would have trusted them the more for all that, or have
kept one Soldier the less for it; nor have remitted one Denier of those great
Taxes he imposed, for he was too cunning and Politic a Prince not to
understand humane Nature; which cannot willingly endure great and intolerable
Slavery, and Oppression without Resistance, if men are able, and therefore, he
very well knew that after the forcible taking away of so many of the English
Nobilities Estates, there was no way but force to keep them in Obedience: And
as Princes can never be satisfied that their Subjects have been thoroughly paced
in these difficult Doctrines, so they can never be secure, that they will not
play the Iades, and Kick, and fling their Riders, when they spur them too
severely, and press too hard upon them. And therefore, I doubt such Princes,
whose Government is severe will always find it necessary to Ride this Beast,
(as you call it) the People, with strong Curbs and Cavessons. But besides all
this, there is likewise another infirmity in the Nature of Mankind, and of
which Princes may as well be Guilty, as other men, that they are more apt to
oppress, and insult over those whose Principles, or Natural Tempers may be
against all Resistance, and for this I appeal to your Example of the Primitive
Christians who were not one jot the better used by the Roman Emperors, though
they expressly disclaimed all Resistance of those Emperors for Persecution in
matters of Religion; and though some neighboring Princes are thought to have
their Subjects in more perfect Subjection, and that either their Religion, or
Natural Tempers makes them less apt to resist the Violence and Oppression of
their Monarchs, than the English, or other Nations: Yet I desire you to enquire
whether Taxes, and all other oppressions do not Reign as much under those
Governments; however sensible the Princes may be of their Subjects Loyalty, and
Obedience.

Therefore to conclude, I shall freely leave it to your Judgment, or that of
any indifferent Person, which is most agreeable to the main Ends of Civil
Government, viz the Common good of Mankind, and the Happiness, and Safety of
each particular Kingdom, or Commonwealth, that the Violence, and Tyranny of
Princes, should be sometimes Resisted, than that the People under the Pretense
of this irresistible Power, should be liable to be made beggars, and Slaves
whenever any Prince, or State had a Mind to it. And I appeal to your own
Conscience, if the supposed belief of the Passive Obedience of some of our
Church, was not one of the greatest encouragements which the King, and the
Iesuited F^ction had, to bring in the Popish Religion under the Color of the
dispensing Power, Ecclesiastical Commissioners, and force of a standing Army,
from which Unavoidable mischiefs, nothing under God but this wonderful
Revolution, could have rescued us: And therefore, I think it becomes any honest
man to thank God for it, and join with his Highness the Prince of Ori^^ge, as
the only means (now miracles are ceased) which God has been pl^ased to ordain
by the course of his Providence for our Deliverance.


M. I must confess, I am somewhat staggered with those Reasons, and Arguments
you have now given me against those Principles, which as I have always, and
must still esteem as sacred, till I am convinced, I am in an Error* and
perhaps, if I were to consult my own (...) Reason, and natural Inclinations, I
should come over to your opinion: But since, it has pleased God to lay much
higher restraints, and stricter Rules of Obedience, and Subjection on us by his
Revealed Will in the Scripture, beyond what can be discovered by the Light of
Nature; and that under the highest Penalty, viz. Damnation: I can see no
reason, why God Almighty, may not grant Eternal Life upon what Conditions he
pleases, though never so hard and uneasy for Flesh, and Blood to perform. So
that, if our Savior Jesus Christ has commanded us to take up his Cross, and
follow him, that is, to suffer all sorts of Injuries, and Afflictions, nay
Death it self, (as he himself did,) rather than to Resist the Supreme Powers
under which He lived, I cannot see any Reason why he should not Propose his own
Example, for our Imitation. And as he has enjoined, and expects from us
greater Degrees of Chastity, Charity, and Humility than ever he did from the
Jews, or Pagans, so I see no reason, why he may not likewise exact from us a
greater, and more perfect Obedience, and Submission without any Resistance to
all Sovereign Princes, and States, than ever he did either by the Law of Moses,
or that of Nature; not but that there are sufficient Proofs in the Old
Testament, for the absolute Power of Princes against all Rebellion, or
Resistance in Subjects: Though I confess, this Doctrine is more plainly proved by
the Example of our Savior, and the Precepts of his Apostles in the New
Testament, as also from the Example of the Primitive Christians in Obedience
thereunto.


F. I perceive you begin to distrust your Arguments drawn from Natural Reason,
and the Laws of Nature, and when you are pressed with the absurdity of this
Doctrine of yours, you fly from Gods Natural, to his Revealed Will, and take
refuge under the Covert of the Holy Scripture, to impose an Opinion contrary to
the Common sense, and Natural Notions of Mankind, not corrupted with the
Prejudices of Education; and therefore, give me leave at present to tell you,
that I think, I shall be able to prove, that the Passive Obedience as you call
it, of the Primitive Christians, and their sufferings for the Name of Christ's
will not at all contradict that Natural Right, which I suppose all Freemen to
have, as well under Civil Government as in the State of Nature, for the defense
of their Lives, Liberties, and Properties, unless where the Common good, and
Peace of the whole or Major part of the People require the contrary. And
therefore, the same Reasons, which oblige particular private Persons to be
quiet, and not to disturb the public Peace of the whole Society, for their own
private Safety, and Advantage, when the whole Body of the People, or the Major
part of them is thus violently assaulted in their Lives, Liberties and Estates,
the same considerations of the Public good of their Country, (whereof every
Man is a Member.) does then as strongly persuade, I may say enjoin them to take
up Arms, and defend themselves for the Preservation of the whole People or
Community, whose Natural, and Civil Rights being now attack't, can no otherwise
be restored to the same State they were in before, but by that last Remedy that
can be used in this Case, viz. Kim vi ^topellere.


M. I confess, that of all Commonwealth-hypotheses, yours is most reasonable,
being coherent with it self, and also most likely to be swallowed by the
People, because it flatters our corrupt Natures, to which this Christian
Doctrine of Passive Obedience, is so directly opposite, as also because it
gives them a full Liberty, I mean, not only the Representative Body, but the
Major part of them, to reassume that Power which you pretend, they never parted
with, and so consequently all necessity of suffering (except when they please
to think they have justly deserved it) is taken away, and the Sufferings of the
Primitive Christians will be rendered only a tame Madness, and that St. Paul
was very much overseen to enjoin this Subjection to the Romans, under the
Government of one of the most cruel Tyrants that ever swayed that Scepter; but
we have not so learned Christ's; And therefore, I am firmly persuaded, that we
ought to be strictly obedient without any Resistance to those Civil Governors,
that God has been pleased to set over us, let them abuse their Power never so
Tyrannically.


F. I am beholden to you for your plain dealing with me in this matter, and
pleased to find, that you have an Inclination to my Principles, were it not for
some Texts of Scripture and Citations out of the Fathers, and Church History
which give you a Prejudice against them; which I hope when they come to be
closely examined will signify no more than the former.

But for the dispatching this Important Controversy, I pray give me leave to
propose this easy method, first that you would be pleased to lay down your
Authorities out of Scripture, in order as they lie. And afterward to show me,
that the Ancient Fathers, and Primitive Church always understood those Texts in
the same Sense that you do, viz. that No Resistance of the Supreme Powers is
Lawful to be exercised in any Case whatsoever.


M. I approve of your Proposal, and therefore, I will first begin with those
proofs, which are expressly against all Rebellion or Resistance in the Old
Testament. S. C. R. Chapter 1. p. 7.
The first Governor that God set over the Children of Israel, when he brought
them out of the Land of Egypt, was Moses, and I think, I need not prove how
sacred, and irresistible his Authority was. This is sufficiently evident in the
Rebellion of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, against Moses and Aaron, when God
caused the Earth to open her Mouth, Numb. 16.
and swallow them up. And lest this should be thought an extraordinary Case,
Moses, and Aaron being extraordinary Persons, immediately appointed by God, and
governed by his Immediate direction; the Apostle St. Jude alleges this example
against those in his days, who were Turbulent, and Factious, who despised
Dominions, and spoke evil of Dignities, Jude v. 11.
that they should Perish in the gainsaying of Core; which he could not have
done, had not this Example extended to all ordinary, as well as extraordinary
Cases; had it not been a lasting Testimony of Gods displeasure against all
those, who oppose themselves against Sovereign Powers. But Moses was not always
to rule over them, and therefore God expressly provides for a succession of
Sovereign Powers, to which they must all submit. The ordinary Sovereign Power
of the Jewish Nation after Moses's Death was devolved either on the
High Priest, or those extraordinary Persons whom God was pleased to raise up,
such as Joshua and the several Iu^ges, till in Samuels Days it settled in their
Kings. For as for the Jewish Sanhedrim whose Power is so much extolled Ib. p. 8.
by the Jewish Writers (who are all a late Date, many years since the
Destruction of Jerusalem, and therefore no competent Witnesses of what was done
so many Ages before) it does not appear from any Testimony of Scripture, that
there was such a Court of Judicature, till after their Return from the
Babylonish Captivity.

But yet God took care to secure the Peace, and good Government of the Nation,
by appointing such a Power as should receive the last Appeals, and whose
sentence in all Controversies should be final and uncontroul^ble as you may see
in Deuteronomy Chap. 17. D^ut. 17. v. 8.9, 10, 11, 12.
There were indeed inferior Magistrates, and Judges appointed in their several
Tribes and Cities, which Moses did by the advice of Iethro his Father in Law,
Exodus 18.
and by the Approbation of God. But as the Supreme Power was still reserved in
the hands of Moses while he lived, so it is here secured to the High Priest, or
Judges after his Death; for it is expressly appointed, that if those inferior
Judges could not determine the Controversy, they should come unto the Priests,
the Levites, that is, the Priests of the Tribe of Levi, (who by the 12. v.
appear only to be the High Priest) and to the Judge that shall be in those
days, that is, if it shall be at such a time, when there is an extraordinary
Judge raised by God, (for there were not always such Judges in Israel, as is
evident to anyone who reads the Book of Judges) they should enquire of them and
they shall show the sentence of Judgment; and thou shall do according to the
sentence, which they of that place (which the Lord shall Choose) shall show
thee, and thou shall observe to do, according to all they shall inform thee:
And what the Authority of the Chief-Priest, or of the Judge, when there was
one, was in those days, appears from, v. 12. And the Man that will do
presumptuously, and will not hearken ^o the Priest (that stands to Minister
there before the Lord thy God) or unto the Judge, even that Man shall dye, and
thou shall put away the evil from Israel This is as absolute an Authority, as
the most absolute Monarch in the World can challenge that disobedience S. C. R.
p. 10.
to their Last and final Determination, whatever the Cause be, shall be
punished with Death: and what place can there be for Resistance in such a
Constitution of Government as this? It is said indeed, v. 11. And according to
the sentence of the Law, which they shall teach thee, and according to the
Judgment that they shall tell thee, thou shall do. And hence some conclude,
that they were not bound to abide by their sentence, nor were punishable if
they did not, but only in such Cases when they gave sentence according to the
Law of God. But these Men do not consider, that the Matter in Controversy is
supposed to be doubtful, and such as could not be determined by the inferior
Courts, and therefore is submitted to the Decision of the Supreme Judge, and as
he determined so they must do and no Man under the Penalty of Death, must
presume to do otherwise; ibid. p. 11.
which takes away all Liberty of Judging from Private Persons, though this
Supreme Judge might possibly mistake in his Judgment, as all Humane Iudicatures
are liable to mistakes; but it seems God Almighty thought it necessary that
there should be some final Judgment; from whence there should be no Appeal,
notwithstanding the Possibility of a mistake in it.

So likewise when God had appointed Joshua to succeed Moses, and had conferrd
upon him all that Power that Moses had before, and that he came to give his
Orders to the two Tribes and an half before their Passage over Jordan, you will
find that they not only promised him perfect Obedience, as they had before
paid to Moses, but farther also assure him That whosoever he be that does
rebel against thy Commandment, Josh 1.18.
and will not hearken unto thy words in all that thou Command him, he shall
be put to Death: So that there was a Supreme, and Sovereign, that is, an
unaccountable, and irresistible Power, in the Jewish Nation appointed by God
himself; for indeed it is not possible that the Public Peace, and Security of
any Nation should be preserved without it.


F. You have, Sir methinks taken a great deal of pains to prove that which I do
not at all Deny, but rather join with you to ass^rt, that Stubbornness and
Disobedience to Gods Commands is a very great Sin, and the Rebellion, thereunto
is likened to the Sin of Witchcraft; as Samuel shows to no less a Man, than
King Saul himself, when he had Rebelled against (that is, disobeyed) God in not
destroying the King of the Amal^kites, and therefore it is no wonder that in a
Government, 1 Samuel 15.23.
where God himself was the Head, and had appointed Moses, and Aaron, as his
Lieutenants or Substitutes under him, the one in Civil, and the other in
Ecclesiastical matters, that God should punish their Murmuring, and Rebellion
against them as done to himself; not that I deny, but that St. Jude does
likewise denounce this Judgment of perishing in the gainsaying of Core, against
those wicked Heretics the Gnostics, who thought themselves set free from all
Civil subjection, and therefore despised Dominions, and spoke evil of
Dignities, that is, not the Men invested with them, but Civil Magistracy it
self; which they looked upon as inconsistent with their Christian Liberty.

But yet for all this, and that I grant God denounced no less than the Sentence
of Death against any Man that refused to Hearken to the Priest, or unto the
Judge in those matters that should be brought before them, by way of Appeal,
and also that whoever would not obey Joshua, but should Rebel against his
Commandments, should be put to Death; yet can I not think that there was any
Irresistible Power, placed by God, in the Persons of Moses, Joshua, or the
Judges, or that it was not possible for the Public Peace, or security of the
Nation, to be preserved without that; But indeed all these Persons above named,
being to be Obeyed, as Gods Substitutes, or Lieutenants, as he was King of the
Children of Israel, so likewise their Commands, or Dictates were only so far to
be observed, as they performed this Commission, and if they had swerved from
it, I doubt not but they might not only have been disobeyed, but also resisted
by them: And therefore, pray tell me, suppose this Rebellion of Core had
happened, because Moses making himself a distinct party, amongst the mixed
multitude of strangers, Exodus 12.38.
that came up with them, out of the Land of Egypt, and others of his own Tribe
or whom he could bring over to his Faction, under color of this Sovereign
Power, (which God had given him) had instead of leading and governing the
People committed to his charge, taken upon him to have robbed them of all those
Goods, and Riches which they had brought with them out of the Land of Egypt,
and had sold the People, or their Children for slaves to the Neighboring
Nations, to enrich himself and his Family; do you believe that the Children of
Israel had been Obliged to have Obeyed such a Leader, and not have resisted
him, and his party, if there had been occasion? So likewise, if Joshua, instead
of Leading Gods People into the Holy Land, had taken upon him, notwithstanding
Gods Commands, to have carried them again into Egypt, can you think they had
been bound to Obey him, and might not Lawfully have resisted him if he had gone
about, by the assistance of his Accomplices, to force them to it? For I doubt
not but if these Substitutes had acted contrary to that Commission God had
given them, they were no longer to be looked upon as Gods Vicegerents, no more
than the now Lieutenant of Ireland, the Lord Tyrconnel ought to be Obeyed, and
not resisted, if he should go about by Virtue of that Commission which the King
has conferred upon him, and by the help of the Rebellious Irish in that
Kingdom, to murder all the Protestants, and set up for himself. So likewise all
this strict Obedience, and submission that was to be paid to the Sentence of
the High Priest, or Judge, was only in Relation to God himself, whose Sentence
it was, and who always Revealed his Will either to the Judge by particular
Inspiration, or to the High Priest by the Ephod, or Urim and Thummim; And
therefore we read in Judges, that Deborah, though a Woman, yet being a
Prophetess, inspired by God, judged Israel.

Now suppose that this Judge, or High Priest, neglecting (like Balaam) the
Divine Inspiration, and the Dictates of that Sacred Oracle, had, instead of a
Righteous Judgment, given a Sentence, in a Cause that had come before them,
whereby Idolatry or breach of some great Point of the Law of Moses, had been
established, do you think that God ever intended that this Sentence should have
been Obeyed under Pain of Death?

And therefore you may find in the 2d. Book of Maccabees, that when Jason and
Menelaus had by Bribery obtained the High Priesthood, though it was then the
Chief Authority, (under the Kings of Syria) both in Ecclesiastical and Civil
matters, yet when they went about to undermine the Jewish Religion, and seduce
the People to Idolatry, they are not at all looked upon as Highpriests, 2
Maccab. 4. v. 25.
but are there called Ungodly Wretches, doing nothing worthy of the
High Priesthood, but having the fury of a Cruel Tyrant, and of a Savage Beast;
and were so far from being at all Obeyed by the Jews, that Jason, Menelaus, and
Alcimus who were successively Highpriests in the room of Onias, were as far as
the People were able opposed by them till at last Judas Maccabeus, 1 Mac. 7.23,
24, 25.
taking Arms against Alcimus the High Priest, restored by force the true
Worship of God: So that you see, that the Obedience was not paid to the Person
of the Highpriests, only as such, by virtue of this Precept in Deuteronomy,
but only as far as they observed the Law of Moses, and gave sentence, or
Judgment in all matters according to it. And therefore it is no good Argument
of yours, because the People were bound to obey their sentence in doubtful
cases, therefore they had an absolute irresistible Power to give what Judgments
they pleased, and that the People were obliged to observe them under pain of
Death, and being Guilty of Rebellion. For that had been to have given the
Highpriests and Judges a Power to have altered the true Worship of God when
ever they pleased, and to have introduced Idolatry in the Room of it. So that I
think none of these places will prove any more, but that God, and his
Lieutenants were to be Obeyed, and that it was Rebellion to resist them under
the Jewish Government, as long as they did not force the People to Idolatry,
which I do not at all deny.


M. Tho you labor to wave these examples, and Precepts, which I have now
cited, and will not take them for convincing, yet let me tell you your
exceptions against them only tend to prove that Idolatrous, Kings might be
resisted under the Jewish Law, which is directly contrary to the Sacred
History, as I shall prove very clearly to you by these following Testimonies, I
shall make use of, yet I think it is much more plain, that when the Jews would
have a King, S. R. S. P. p. 11.
their Kings were to be invested with a Supreme and irresistible Power, for
when they desired a King of Samuel, 1 Samuel 8.6.19, 20.
they did not desire a mere nominal, and titular King, but a King to Judge them,
and go in and out before them, and fight their Battles, that is, a King who had
the Supreme, and Sovereign Authority, a King who should have all that Power of
Government (excepting the peculiar Acts of the Priestly Office) which either
their High Priest, or their Judge had before.

And therefore when Samuel tells them, what shall be the manner of their King,
1 Samuel 8.6.19, 20.
tho what he says does necessarily suppose the translation of the Sovereign,
and Irresistible Power to the Person of their King, v. 11.
yet it does not suppose that their King had any new Power given him, more than
what was ^^^^cised formerly by the Priest, and Judges. He does not deter them
fr^^ choosing a King, because a King should have greater Power, and ^e more
uncontrollable, S. C. R. P. p. 12, 13.
and Irresistible than their other Rulers were, for Samuel himself had before
as Sovereign, and Irresistible, a Power as any King, being the Supreme Judge of
Israel, whose sentence no Man could disobey, or contradict, but he incurred the
penalty of Death, according to the Mosa^cal Law; But the reason why he
distuades them from choosing a King was, because the external Pomp, and
Magnificence of Kings, was like to be very Chargeable, and oppressive to them.
He (...) your Sons, and (...) them for himself, for his Chariots, and to be his
House Men and some shall ran before his Chariots. And he will appoint him
Captains over Thousands, and Captains over Fifties, and will set them to ear
his Ground, and to reap his Harvest. And thus in several Particulars he shows
them what burdens, and exactions; they will bring upon themselves by setting up
a King; which they were then free from* and if any Prince should be excessive
in such ^^^actions, yet they had no way to help themselves; they must not
resist, nor rebel against him, nor expect that, whatever inconvenience they
might find in Kingly Government,, God would relieve, and deliver them from it,
when once they had chosen a King: Ye shall cry out in that day because of your
King, that you have chosen you, v. 18.
and the Lord will not hear you in that day, That is, God will, not alter the
Government for you again how much soever you may complain of it.

This, I say, is a plain Proof, that their Kings were to be invested with that
Sovereign Power, which must not be resisted, though they oppress their Subjects
to maintain their own State and Grandeur, and Magnificence of their Kingdoms:
But I cannot think that these words contain the Original Grant and Charter of
Regal Power; but only the Translation that was formerly in their Highpriests,
or Judges to Kings. Kings had no more Power, than their other Governors had:
for there can be no Power greater than that which is irresistible: but this
Power in the hands of Kings, was likely to be more burdensome, and oppressive
to them, than it was in the hands of their Priests and Judges, by reason of
their different way of living, which is the only Argument Samuel makes use of
to dissuade them from transferring the Supreme, and Sovereign Power to a King;
And therefore I rather Choose to translate Mishpat, as our Translators do, by
the manner of the King, than with some learned Men, by the Right of the King,
thereby understanding the Original Charter of Kingly Power: for it is not the
Regal Power which Samuel here blames, which was much like that which he himself
^ad exercised while he was Supreme Judge of Israel, but their Pompous way of
living; which would prove very oppressive, and burdensome to them, and be apt
to make them complain, who had not been used to such Exactions.


F. You have, I must confess, made a much fairer exposition of this out of
Samuel, than diverse of our Hot and Giddy Divines who would render this Mishpat,
as it is in the Hebrew, i. e. the manner of the King, by Right of the King,
whereby they would entitle all Kings whatsoever to an absolute Right to all
their Subjects Estates, when ever they would take them away, not taking notice
that this word, Mishpat, is sometimes used, not only in a good, but a bad
sense, not for Right, or Power, but for an evil Custom or Abuse, and therefore
you may find in the second Chapter of this Book of Samuel that speaking of the
Sons of Eli who were Sons of Belial they knew not the Lord, v. 12, 13, 14.
that the Priests, viz. (their) Custom with the People was, that when any man
offered Sacrifice, the Priests servant came, whilst the Flesh was in seething,
with a Flesh-Hook of three teeth in his hand, and he struck it into the Pan, or
Kettle, or Caldron, or Pot, all that the Flesh book brought up, the Priest took
for himself: so they did in Shiloh, unto all the Israelites that came thither.
Where I desire you to observe, that that which is rendered in our Translation
the Priests Custom, is in the Hebrew Mishpat which you render Right; so that if
this word would do it, these wicked Priests had also a Right to take away as
much of every Man's Sacrifice as they pleased for themselves; nay, to take it
before God himself was served, and the Fat burnt (according to the rites of
Sacrificing) and by the same Rule Kings also by this word Mishpat should have a
Right to take what they pleased of the Subjects Estates.

I do like wise also so far agree with you, that Samuel does not here describe
a a Tyrant, but one of those absolute Eastern Princes, who made use of a great
part of their Subjects Estates (as they do at this day) to maintain their
standing Armies, and Royal Pomp, and Magnificence, so that I grant in short,
Samuel meant no more when he thus spoke to them, but since you will have a
King, he must be maintained like a King, and very great Taxes will be laid upon
you for this End; of which Burden if you shall hereafter be weary, or would
cast it off again, you shall by no means do it: for since this King shall
obtain the Crown not only by Gods appointment, but by your own Choice, or
Election, it shall not be in your Power again to depose him; since it is your
own Act, and therefore Samuel tells them, That when they should cry unto the
Lord in that day, because of the King which they had chosen, the Lord would not
hear them; and as long as this King kept himself within these bounds, I grant,
he was not to be resisted.

Yet nevertheless, this place you have now cited, as it is very far from
Patronising Tyranny, or all the abuses of Regal Power, so neither do I think it
was Samuel's meaning to make the Kings of Israel so absolute, or irresistible,
as that upon no account whatsoever the People might disobey, or resist them,
let them use this Power never so wickedly, nay, contrary to Gods express
commands, and the Ends of all Civil Government; and therefore pray tell me;
Suppose, instead of these necessary burdens, which they should be Subject to,
when they had a King, Samuel had spoke thus to them, This King (whom you
desire) shall prove an Idolater, and as cruel a Tyrant as Pharaoh, or any of
the Kings of the Philistines, Canaanites, or any other Nations who so long
Tyrannized over you, and shall take away all your Estates, and Lives too, at
his Good Pleasure, without any Crime, or Legal Trial, and in short will not
only Himself use you for Slaves, but sell you, and your Children for Bondmen to
the Egyptians, and other Nations, and shall lay such Grievous Tributes and
Burdens upon you, that you shall be scarce able to live under them.

Now can any Man think, if the Israelites had been really persuaded, that their
King must have such an Absolute, and Arbitrary Power, as a necessary and
Inseparable Prerogative of his Crown, they would ever have been so fond of such
a Government, as to have cried out with one Consent, Nay, but we will have a
King over us, that we may be like other Nations. (But sure) not to Tyrannize
over, and enslave us, but that he may Judge us, Ver. 20.
and go out before us, and fight our Battles: Or do you think, if they had had
such a King as this, they would ever have long endured him? for that the
Children of Israel did not conceive that their Kings had such an Absolute, and
Arbitrary Power over them, as to oppress them with Taxes, and to make their
Yoke more grievous to them, than they were able to bear, or to Tyrannize over
them at his good Pleasure, appears plainly by the Story in the first of Kings
concerning the Children of Isreal's assembling together at Sichem to make
Rehoboam King, Chap. 12.
and you will find the Preliminary Conditions of his Government were these. Ver.
3.4.
All the Congregation of Israel came, and spoke unto Rehoboam saying: Thy
Father made our Yoke grievous: Now therefore make thou the grievous Service of
thy Father, and his heavy Yoke, which he put upon us, Lighter, and we will
serve thee. But see the Answer that Rehoboam made them, according to the Wisdom
of his Young Counselors. Ver. 10.11.
My little Finger Shall be Thicker than my Fathers Loins: And whereas my Father
did lade you with a heavy Yoke, I will add to your Yoke: My Father has
chastised you with Whips, but I will chastize you with Scorpions. And mark,
what follows upon this Answer: Ver. 16.
So when all Israel saw, that the King hearkened not unto them, the People
answered the King, saying, What Portion have we in David? Neither have we
inheritance in the Son of Jesse; To your tents, O Israel: Now see to thine own
House, David. So Israel d^parted unto their Tents. Ver. 19.
And it is farther said, So Israel rebelled against the House of David unto
this day. Nor is this action at all blamed, or disapproved by the Scripture, or
rebuked by any Prophet at that time; for though the Word is here translated, they
rebelled, yet in the Hebrew it signifies no more than, fell away from, or
Revolted, and it is said before, that the King hearkened not to the People, For
the (...) (which may be also translated REVOLUTION) was from the Lord, 1 King
12. v. 15.
that he might perform his saying which he spoke by Ahijah the S^ilonite unto
Jeroboam, when in the Chapter before, the Prophet promised him the Kingdom of
the T^n Tribes, and that God would rend them out of the hand of Solomon, ( i.
e. his Posterity) and give them unto him; who thereupon had a Right to them,
and that upon his being made King by the People, he had also a Right to their
Obedience, is as evident: Since to continue in a State of Rebellion toward one
King, and an Obligation to obey another, are absolutely inconsistent in the
same Subject, as I have already proved at our second Conference. And therefore,
I cannot but here take notice of that rational Account which the Earl of
Clarendon, in his Survey of the Leviathan which you before quoted, gives of
this Revolution. Nor did the People ( viz. of Israel) conceive themselves
liable to those impositions; as appears by the Application they made to
Rehoboam upon the death of Solomon, that he would abate some of that rigor his
Father had exercised toward them, the rough Rejection of which, contrary to
the advice of his wisest Coun^ellours, cost him the greatest part of his
Dominions: and when Rehoboam would by Arms have reduced them to obedience, God
would not suffer him, because he had been in the fault himself.


M. After this extravagant way of Arguing, when ever the Subjects of any Nation
shall think themselves too much oppressed with Taxes, or other Grievances,
above what they are able to bear, if they are not eased by the King or Supreme
Magistrates upon the first Petition, they may presently cast off that Power
they were under, and set up another, that would govern them upon Cheaper Terms;
for if the People of Israel had this Right, why may not all other Nations claim
the same; and this Doctrine, however comfortable it might be to the People, I
am sure, it would be very Mischievous to all the Monarchies, and Commonwealths
in the World, and it is likely that the Subjects of the French King, nay,
States of Holland and other Princes, would quickly take the first opportunity
either to make their Princes, and States, to ^ax, them no more than they please
themselves or else they, may presently cry with the Israelites, To thy Tents O
Israel; nor can I see how the King, and Parliament in England, would be in a
much better Con^ition in Relation to the People they represent, should they
impose greater Taxes than they thought they could afford to pay, and this
Privilege you give the Israelites, seems to be clean contrary to what you laid
down at our last Conference* wherein you excepted great Taxes, and Tributes to
Princes, or States, as no just Cause of Resistance, or taking up Arms: And
therefore, I think, I may very well maintain the old Doctrine about this
Matter, and that though God did rend the Kingdom from Rehoboam, and bestow it
upon the Son of Nebat, whom also when the People had made him King, they were
obliged to obey, because it was Gods will it should be so, who gives and takes
away Kingdoms from whomsoever he pleases: Yet does not this at all justify the
Rebellion of the Israelites, or Iereboam's ^su^pation of his Masters Kingdom;
since God oftentimes makes use of this Rebellion of the People to execute his
Judgment upon a sinful Prince, and Nation: And therefore, it is very remarkable
that after this Rebellion of the Israelites, from the house of David they never
prospered, but by their Kings, still falling one after another into the same
Idolatry, till God at last was so highly provoked against them, that he
suffered them to be carried away Captives into a strange Land, near two hundred
Years before the Tribes of Judah, and Benjamin underwent the same fate for the
like Crime.


F. I hope you will not be in a Passion; because I have brought this Instance
of the Israelites Defection from Rehoboam as an Example of the Right that
Subjects may have in those Cases. I have put, to resist, or cast off those
Supreme Powers that God had once set over them. For I do confess Divines, and
other Authors, are much divided about this Action of the Israelites, some
maintaining it to be well done, and in Pursuance to God's Will, and others
holding it to be Downright Rebellion. And therefore, I shall not positively
assert either the one, or the other, much less that Subjects may rebel
whenever they conceive themselves overtax't; but thus much, I think, I may
safely affirm, that if the Israelites had no Right upon any score whatsoever to
resist, I cannot see, why Rehoboam might not have made them, if he had pleased,
as Arrant Slaves, as ever their Ancestors were in Egypt; and what he else
meant, by saying, instead of Whips, to chastise them with Scorpions, (which
were a sort of thorny rods, with which the Jews corrected their Slaves, and
Malefactors) I cannot understand; and as for Taxes, tho I confess, there is no
setting any positive measure to them; since no man can positively define what
the Exigences of a State may require, and I think no good Subjects ought to
deny to contribute as much as ever they are able to afford, to maintain the
Government they live under, as long as they receive the Protection of it: So,
on the other side, should the Supreme Power of any Nation, (where the People
are not mere Slaves) under the Pretense of laying necessary Taxes, for the
Maintenance, or Preservation of the Government be constantly exacting from the
People, more than they were able to pay, as if, for Example, they should out of
every Man's Estate take Nineteen parts, and leave but the Twentieth for the
Subsistence of those that own it, I do not think, in that Case the People were
obliged in Conscience to pay it, and might in such Case Lawfully resist those
Officers, that should come to levy it by force.


M. I could have argued farther against what you have now said, concerning this
Right of the People of resisting, in case of extravagant, or intolerable Taxes;
but since it is not to the Subject in hand, I shall refer it to another time:
And therefore to return where I left off; I shall in the next place show you,
how sacred, and irresistible the Persons, and Authority of Kings were under the
Jewish Government; and there cannot be a plainer Example of this, than in the
Case of David. He was himself anointed to be King, after Saul's death, but in
the mean time, he was grievously persecuted by Saul, who pursued him from one
place to another with a design to take away his Life: How now does David behave
himself in this Extremity? What Course does he take to secure himself from
Saul? Why he takes the only Course that is left to a Subject; S. C. R. 28.29.
he flies for it, and hides himself from Saul in the Mountains, and Caves of
the Wilderness; and when he found he was discovered in one place, he removes to
another; He kept Spies upon Saul to observe his Motions, not that he might meet
him to give him Bat^le, or to take him at an Advantage, but that he might keep
out of his way, and not fall unawares into his hands.

Well, but this was no thanks to David, (you will say) because he could not do
otherwise. He was too weak for Saul, and not able to stand against him; and
therefore had no other Remedy but flight. But yet we must consider that David
was a Man of War, he slew Goliath, and fought the Battles of Israel with great
success; he was an admired, and beloved Captain, which made Saul so Jealous of
him; the Eyes of Israel were upon him for their next King, and how easily might
he have raised a Potent, and formidable Rebellion against Saul? But he was so
far from this, that he invites no Man to his Assistance; and when some came
uninvited he made no use of them in an Offensive, or Defensive War against
Saul: Nay, when God delivered Saul twice into David's hands; that he could as
easily have killed him as have, Cut off the Skirts of his Garment at Engedi, 1 Samuel 24. -- 26.
or, as have taken That Spear away, which stuck on the Ground as his Bolster,
as he did in the Hill of Hachil^h, yet he would neither touch Saul himself, nor
suffer any of the People that were with him to do it, though they were very
importunate with him to let them kill Saul; nay, though they urged him with an
Argument from Providence, that it was a plain Evidence, that it was the Will of
God that he should kill him, -- 24.4. -- 26.8.
Because God had now delivered his Enemy into his Hands, according to the
Promise he had made to David; we know what use some Men have made of this
Argument of Providence to justify all the Villainies they had a Mind to act:
Ib. p. 30.
But David, it seems, did not think, that an opportunity of doing evil, gave
him a License; and Authority to do it. Opportunity, we say, makes a Thief, and
it makes a Rebel, and a Murderer too. No man can do any wickedness which he has
no opportunity of doing; and if the Providence of God, which puts such
opportunities into Men's hands, might justify the wickedness they commit, no
Man can be chargeable with any Guilt whatever he does; and certainly
Opportunity will as soon justify any other Sin, as Rebellion, and the Murder
of Princes. We are to learn our Duty from the Law of God, not from his
Providence: At least this must be a settled Principle, that the Providence of
God will never justify any Action which his Law forbids.

And therefore, notwithstanding this Opportunity which God has put into his
hands to destroy his Enemy, and to take the Crown for his Reward, David
considers his Duty, remembers, that though Saul were his Enemy, and that very
unjustly; yet he was still the Lords anointed. The Lord forbid, says he, That I
should do this unto my Master, the Lords anointed, to stretch forth any Hand
against him, seeing he is the Lords anointed. Nay, he was so far from taking
away his Life, that his Heart smote him for cutting off the Skirt of his
Garment. And we ought to observe the Reason David gives, why he durst not hurt
Saul, because he was the Lords anointed, which is the very Reason the Apostle
gives in the Romans, Romans 13.1, 2.
because the Powers that are, are ordained of God; and he that resists the
Power, resists the Ordinance of God. For to be anointed of God signifies no
more than that he was made King or ordained by God. For this external Unction
was only a Visible Sign of Gods Designation of them, to such an Office; And it
is certain, they were as much Gods Anointed without this Visible Unction as
with it. Cyrus is called Gods Anointed, though he never was Anointed by any
Prophet, but only designed for his Kingdom by Prophecy; Isa. 45.1.
And we never read in Scripture, that any Kings had this external Unction, who
succeeded in the Kingdom by Right of Inheritance, unless the Title and
succession were doubtful; and yet they were the Lords Anointed too, that is,
were placed in the Throne by him. So that this is an Eternal Reason against
r^sisti^g Sovereign Princes, that they are Set up by God, and invested with his
Authority, and therefore their Persons, and their Authority are Sacred.


F. I am so far from differing with you in what you have said concerning this
Example of David toward Saul, though his Enemy, that I think it ought to be a
Pattern to every single Private Man, tho never so great, in a Kingdom or
Commonwealth, how to comport himself toward the Supreme Powers, if he himself
alone be unjustly persecuted by them either in his Life, or Estate, that is, to
fly if he can, though with the loss of all his Estate, rather than resist, though
there are some Circumstances in this Story of David that make it evident that
he did not think a Defensive War against those Cutthroats that Saul might send
to Kill him unlawful, Sect. 2.
and so much Dr. Fearn himself, in his first Discourse called resolving of
Conscience, etc. against Resistance of the Higher Powers acknowledges: For
David when he fled from Saul, made himself Captain of four hundred Men, which
number soon increased to six hundred; 1. Sam. 22.2.23.13. 1 Chronicles. 12.1.
And still every day grew more by Additions. Now why should he entertain those
Men, but to defend himself against the Forces of Saul? that is, to make a
Defensive War when ever he was assaulted by him.


M. I think I can give you a sufficient answer to this, and therefore you must
observe that David invited none of these Men in to him; but they came as
Volunteers after a Beloved Captain, S. ^. R. p. 32.
and General; which shows how formidable he could easily have made himself,
when such Numbers resorted to him of their own Accord.

When he had them he never used them for any Hostile Acts against Saul, or any
of his Forces; he never stood his Ground when he heard Saul was coming, but
always fled, and his Men with him; Men who never were used to fly, and were
very ready to have served him against Saul himself, would he have permitted
them: And I suppose you will not call it a defensive War, to fly before an
Enemy, and to hide themselves in Caves, and Mountains; and yet this was the
only defensive War which David made with all his Men about him: nay, all that
he would make, and all that he could make according to his Professed
Principles; that it was not Lawful to stretch out his hand against the Lords
Anointed. And when these Men are pursued, as David was, by an enraged and
Jealous Prince, I will not charge them of Rebellion, though they fly before him
by thousands in a Company.

Yet there was sufficient Reason why David should entertain these Men who
voluntarily resorted to him, though he never intended to use them against Saul:
for some of them served for Spies to watch Saul's Motions, that he might not be
surprised by him, but have timely notice to make his Escape. And the very
presence of such a number of Men about him, without any Hostile Act, preserved
him from being seized on by some Officious Persons, who otherwise might have
delivered him into Saul's hands. And he being Anointed by Samuel to be King
after Saul's Death this was the first step to his Kingdom, to have such a
Retinue of Valiant Men about him; which made his Advancement to the Throne more
easy, and discouraged any Oppositions, which might otherwise have been made
against him; as we see it proved in the event, and have reason to believe that
it was thus ordered by God for that very End. It is certain that Gad the
Prophet* and Abiathar the Priest, who was the only Man, who escaped the Fury of
Saul when he destroyed the Priests of the Lord, were in David^ Retinue, and
that David enterpriz'd nothing, without first asking Counsel of God: But he who
had Anointed him to be King, now draws Forces after him, which after Readiness
Death should facilitate his Advancement to the Kingdom.


F. I cannot think your Answer to this Objection satisfactory, for first it is
evident, that when David was at the Cave of Adullam, his Brethren, 1 Samuel 22.1.
and all his Fathers House, as soon as they heard it, went down thither to him,
and though it be not expressly said, that he sent for any to come to his
Assistance, yet it is plain he refused none that came, and to what purpose
should he make use of so many as 400, or 600 Men, unless it were to defend
himself against those Men, that Saul might send against him? since half a
score, or twenty Persons had been enough to have served for Spies, and if he
had thought himself obliged only to run away* three or four Servants had been
enough in conscience to have Waired on him in any Neighboring Country; but
that David thought it no Sin to defend himself from the Violence of those which
Saul should send to Kill him, is plain from what he says to Abiathar upon his
flight unto him after the Death of his Father: 1 Samuel 22. v. 23.
Abide thou with me, fear not: for he that seeks my Life, seeks thy Life,
but with me thou shall be in safeguard; And if David had not meant by these
Words to have defended Abiathar's as well as his own Life, if assaulted, and
without a Possibility of escaping, it had been very cold comfort, for David to
have only assured him that he should be in safeguard with him, till the first
assault that should be made upon them, but that then he should shift for
himself; for as for his own part he would rather permit his Throat to be cut by
the Kings Officers or Soldiers, than resist them.

And therefore, though I own that it was not Lawful for him to stretch out his
hand against the Lords Anointed: Since I do not allow any Private Subject to
Kill, even Tyrants, unless a in State of actual War, or Battle, wherein they
are Aggressors; nor then neither, if it can possibly be avoided: Yet do I not
find it at all unlawful for David, or any other private Man, to defend his own
Life, against such Assassinates as his Prince may send against him: So it may
be done without a Civil War, or endangering the Peace of the Commonwealth; And
so much you your self, though Coldly, seem to yield, when you say, that the very
Presence of such a number of Men about David, without any Hostile Act,
preserved him from being seized on by some Officious Persons, who otherwise
might have delivered him into Saul's Hands: For I cannot think that David would
have been at the trouble of keeping so many Men only for show, and a Terror to
those Officious Persons you mention, without resisting of them if there had
been occasion.

And though you tell me that his being Anointed by Samuel to be King after Saul's
Death, was the first step to the Kingdom, to have such a Retinue of Valiant Men
about him; which made his Advancement to tho^punc; Throne so much the ^aster,
and discouraged any Opposition which might have been made against him, and that
we see it proved so in the Event; and therefore have Reason to believe, that it
was thus ordered by God to that very End, I must take the Liberty so far to
differ from you.

For first, I desire to know by what Authority David could List 600, or 700 Men
in Arms in Saul's Territories* and whether, according to your Doctrine, they
were not Rebels for joining themselves with one who was declared a Traitor by
the King? And though you say it was thus ordered by God. I grant indeed it was,
yet does it not appear, that it was done by any Divine Revelation to Nathan, or
Abiathar, but only by the Ordinary Course of his Providence, like other things
in the World; and therefore it is no fair way of Arguing for you, to affirm,
that what ever David did in the matter of his own Defense, contrary to your
Principles, he must needs do it by express order from God, of which the
Scripture is wholly silent, much less does it appear from the Story* that these
Men, whom David kept with him, were only to facilitate his attaining the
Kingdom (as you affirm,) since the Scripture mentions no such thing, 2 Samuel 2.4.
only that after Readiness Death he went up by Gods Command to Hehron with the Men
that were with him, and thither the Men of Judah came, and there they Anointed
David King over the House of Judah; but it is no where mentioned, that these Men
were of any use, to David for the Obtaining of the Crown, since the Tribe of
Judah would have made him King, though these Men had not been with him, for what
could 600, or 1000 Men do against so vast a Multitude as the whole Tribe of
Judah? And therefore it is evident, that these Forces were for no other End
than his own defense.

And though you make very light of this State of War, in which David was, in
relation to Saul; yet pray tell me, supposing that the Duke of Monmouth had
really been (as he Pretended,) the Legitimate Son of King Charles the II. but
by some Particular Disgust of his Father, or by the Intrigues of his
Competitor, the Duke of York, had been forced to fly into Scotland, and (...)
to have defended himself with 1000, or 1500 of his Tenants, and followers, though
without Fighting the Kings Forces that should have been se^^ against him, but
flying into the High-lands, and had there maintained himself, as David did by
Free Quarters, or Con^ribu^ion of the Inhabitants; till his Father dyed, would
not this have been cried out upon in all the Pulpits in England, as a most
Horrid Rebellion, of a Son and a Subject against his King, and Father; though he
had never done any Act of Hostility against his Forces, but always (...) from
them? And yet he, being Heir Apparent to the Crown might have pleaded as well
as David, that he kept these Soldiers about him, only to keep himself from
being Murdered by those Officious Persons, whom his Father, or Uncle might send
to apprehend him, and to have such a Retinue of Valiant Men about him, as might
render his advancement to the Throne more easy when ever his Father should dye.

I shall not urge, as a farther proof of the Lawfulness of David's Resistance of
Saul's Forces, his Intention to have slay'd in Keilah, and to have fortified it
against Saul, had not he been informed, that the Men of that City would have
saved themselves by delivering him up to Saul: ^ Sam. 23.
Since I confess it does not certainly appear by the Text, whether David would
have stayed any longer there than till Saul had approached near to that place;
whether the Keilites would have delivered him up, or not; much less shall I
urge, that other example which some Men make use of, of David's going to the
last Battle against Saul with Achish, King of the Philistines; For though it be
plain he marched with them, as far as Apbek in the Tribe of Issachar, yet I
confess it is not certain, whether he really intended to have assisted them, or
not, in this War against his Country, since he might either have gone over to
Saul at the beginning of the Battle* or else have stood neuter; though neither of
them would have been very Honorable; or Consonant with David's Character,
therefore I shall say nothing of this; since the Lords of the Philistines, for
fear he should prove a^ adversary to them in the Battle, made him retire again
into the Land of the Philistines, 1 Samuel 29.3, 4.8.
though he seemed to be very much troubled to be so distrusted, that he might not
fight against the Enemies of that King, who had so good an Opinion of him; And
therefore I pray will you proceed to those other Ex^mples you have to produce
out of the Old Testament.


M. Well, since you are not fully satisfied with this Instance of David, (though
I am glad you allow the Persons even of Tyrannical Princes to be Sacred)
therefore to proceed in the story; Solomon, who succeeded David in his Kingdom,
S. C. R. p. 37, 38.
did all those things which God had expressly forbid the King to do. He sent
into Egypt for Horses. He multiplied Wives, and loved many strange Women,
(together with the Daughter of Pharaoh) Women of the Moabites, 1 Kings
11.1.10.27.
Ammonites, etc. He Multiplied Silver, and Gold. For this God ( who is the only
Judge of Sovereign Princes) was very angry with him, and threatens to rend the
Kingdom from him; which was afterward accomplished in the Days of Rehoboam:
but yet this did not give Authority to his Subjects to Rebel. If to be under
the Direction, and Obligation of Laws, makes a Limited Monarchy, it is certain
the Kingdom of Israel was so. There were some things which the King was
expressly forbid to do, as you have already heard; and the Law of Moses, was to
be the Rule of his Government, the standing Law of his Kingdom. And therefore
he was Commanded, when he came to the Throne to write a Copy of the Law with
his own hand, Deuteronomy. 17. v. 18, 19, 20.
and to read in it all his Days, that he might learn to fear the Lord his God,
and to keep all the Words of this Law, and these Statutes to do them, and yet
being a Sovereign Prince; if he broke these Laws, God was his Judge, and
Avenger; but he was accountable to no earthly Tribunal; nor do we find, though
there were so many wicked, and Idolatrous Kings of Judah, who broke all the
Laws of God given them by Moses that ever any of the Priests, or Prophets
stirred up the People to Rebel against them for it.


F. Neither of these Instances do reach the Case in hand; For I grant that
neither the Breach, or non-observance of these Precepts enjoined the Kings of
Israel, by God; Nor yet their open Idolatry were a sufficient Cause, for their
taking up Arms, or resisting their Kings in so doing* since those were offenses
only against God, and in which the People had nothing to do, those being no
part of that Tacit, or implicit Compact of Protection, and Preservation, that
goes along with all Kingdoms and Supreme Powers whatsoever. And I have already
excepted out of the Causes of Resistance, or taking up Arms, the Princes being
of a different Religion from that of his Subject; And though I must own, that the
Kings of Israel were under the direction or Obligation of the Law of Moses, and
so were limited Monarchs, yet this limitation was not from the People, but from
God, whose business it was to revenge the breach of it as often as they
offended, and if they broke those Laws, God only was their Judge, and Avenger
(as you your self very well observe) who never failed severely to punish this
breach of his Laws.

Nor yet were the People of the Jews always so nice and temperate as you make
them; For (besides the example of Rehoboam, which I have formerly made use of,
you will find in the 2d. of Chronicles concerning Amaziah, who when he turned
away from following the Lord, Chap. 25. v. 27.
They (viz. the People) made a Conspiracy against him in Jerusalem, and he fled
to Lachish but they sent to Lachish after him, and slew him there: and made his
Son Vzziah King in his stead; nor do we read that any were punished for killing
him, as Am^ziab put to Death the Servants of his Father King Ioash, for
conspiring against him, as it is related in the 10th. Chap. of the 2d. of
Kings, and you will find in the same Chap. 21.10.
Book that the City of Libna revolted (which sure is the highest degree of
Resistance) from that wicked King Iehoram, who had slain all his Brethren with
the Sword, v. 4.6.
and walked in the way of the Kings of Israel, as did the house of Ahab, and
wrought that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, etc. And therefore it is
said expressly in the Text, that the City of Libna revolted from his hand,
because he had forsaken the God of his Fathers. I bring not these Instances to
Justify Rebellion, but to let you see that it was sometimes practiced, amongst
the Jews, though you affirm to the contrary.

But much more lawful was the Resistance, which Azariah, and the 80 Priests, 2 Chronicles. 26.
that were with him, made against King Vzziah, when he would have burnt Incense
in the Temple: pray turn with me to the Place, and read what is there said, And
they (viz. the Priests withstood Uzziah the King, and said unto him, It
appertains not unto thee, Uzziah, ver. 18.
to burn incense unto the Lord, but to the Priests the Sons of Aaron, that are
consecrated to burn Incense: go out of the Sanctuary, for thou have trespassed,
neither shall it be for thine Honor, etc. And when he persisted therein, and
took the Censer in his hand to Burn Incense, and that thereupon the Leprosy
arose in his Forehead* the Priests thrust him out of the Temple, The LXX.
render it, Vide St. Chrysostom. Ecloga at Imperio, and Potestate, where you will
find that he both owns and justifies this Resistance in the High Priest.
(...), i. e. they resisted him; Josephus says, they drove him out in haste, so
that you see they went somewhat farther than Solomon's Question, Who may say to
a King what do thou? And, which is more remarkable, they withstood him
before the Leprosy rose upon his Forehead, and no doubt but they would have
done the same to him, whether that Judgment had happened, or not, since he went
about to Vsurp the Priests Office, it not being so much as Lawful for him, that
was no Priest to set his foot within the Temple.

But if you look into the History of the Kings of Israel after their Division
from Judah, they are so far from teaching us these Lessons of Passive
Obedience, and Non-resistance, that you will scarce find any other manner of
Succession amongst them, but the Killing of one King, and the setting up
another, and Iehu for Rebelling against and destroying the house of Ahab, had
the Crown entailed by Gods Promise to his Posterity unto the fourth Generation.
2 Kings 10.30.
And though I do not produce any of these Examples as fit for our Imitation at
this day, (since what Iehu did was done by Gods express Warrant and Command)
yet I think they are sufficient Evidences, that neither the Person, or Power of
the Kings of Judah, or Israel were always looked upon as so Sacred, and
Irresistible by their Subjects, as you suppose.


M. I am glad you are so ingenuous to confess, that most of these Examples you
have brought of the Resistance, and Murders committed by the Jews and
Israelites upon their Kings were not Lawful, or can be proposed for the
Imitation of Christian Subjects, and if so, pray make what other use of them
you please, since a facto, ad Ius non valet Consequentia: I cannnot deny, but
that the Succession of the Kings of Israel after Nadab, the Son of Jeroboam,
was very confused. God stirring up some or other to Rebel against them, S. C.
R. p. 35. 1 Kings 15, 25, 26, 27. 2 Chro. 16.7.
and make them away as a Punishment for their former Rebellion, and Idolatry:
Thus Baasha killed Nadab the Son of Jeroboam, and Reigned in his stead, and for
this, and his other Sins, God threatened Evil against Baasha, and against his
House, Zimri slew Elah the Son of Baasha, but he did not long enjoy the Kingdom
which he had Usurped by Treason, and Murder, for he Reigning, but seven days in
Tirza, which being Besieged, and taken by Omri, v. 18.
he went to the Palace, and burned the Kings House over him with fire, and died.

This Example Iezebel threatened Iehu with, 2 K. 9 31.
Had Zimri Peace who slew his Master? And yet Nadab and Elah were both of them
very wicked Princes: And if that would Justify Treason and Murder, both
Baasha, and Zimri had been very Innocent, but as for the example of Iehu's
killing his Master King Ioram, (you say) it was by the particular Command of
God, and is no more to be produced as an Example for Rebellion, and the murder
of Princes by the General of their Armies, than that because the Children of
Israel had a Power given them by God to extirpate, and destroy those seven
Nations whose Countries God had given them to Inherit,, therefore they had a
like Right to destroy all other Nations whatsoever, that lay near them: And
therefore those Actions in Scripture, which are sometimes Commanded by God for
the bringing about the great Designs of his Providence, by those Human means
that may seem unjust to us, are not to be produced for Authorities, nor
alleged as Examples.


F. I so far agree with you, and I do by no means allow that particular Private
Men, of what condition soever they are, should disturb the Common Wealth, and
Murder their Lawful Princes, though wicked, or Idolatrous, only to satisfy their
own private Zeal or Ambition and to set up themselves, who perhaps are
altogether as o^d, or worse than him they depose, or make away. But yet I think
I might very well produce these to convince you, that there were no better
Examples for Loyalty, or Passive Obedience among the Jews, than other Nations;
And therefore that your Examples out of the Scripture do hitherto prove
insignificant: Yet I cannot but take notice of one passage, wherein by
following the ordinary English translation you fall into a great mistake, where
you make Baasha to be slain by Zimri, because he killed Nadab, which, as it is
there rendered in the English, is false, for the Words in (...) Translation
are, because he killed him, viz. Jeroboam to whom it there immediatel^ relates,
which is false, for Baasha did not kill Jeroboam, but Nadab his Son; Neither
was it suitable to Gods Justice to destroy Baasha, for that which he himself
had ordained him to do. For God by Iehu the Prophet, said to Baasha, for as
much as I exalted thee, out of the Dust, and made thee Prince over my People
Israel, and thou have walked in the way of Jeroboam, and have made my People
Israel to Sin, to provoke me to anger by their Sins: And therefore the Text
concludes this Narration with there words, that the Word of the Lord came
against Baasha and against his House, even for all the Evil which he did in the
sight of the Lord in provoking him to anger with the work of his Hands in being
like the House of Jeroboam, but the words which immediately follow, and because
he killed him (i. e. Jeroboam) cannot be truly rendered in our English
Translation, for the Reason already given, and therefore the best Critics upon
this place Translate it thus, leaving out, and therefore He (viz. the Lord)
smote him: (i. e. Nadab) by the hand of Baasha) Whereas our Translation makes
the Scripture to contradict it self. I have no more to observe from this
History of the Kings, and Chron. and therefore I pray proceed to what other
Testimonies you have to produce.


M. Well, I think I can make it much more plain, from other Examples and
Precepts out of Scripture, that the Jews were not only under high Obligations
to be Subject to the Higher Powers, S. C. R. p. 35.
after they were carried Captives to Babylon, but also not to resist them, though
they went about to exercise their Power, never so cruelly, and Tyrannically,
even to the Destruction of the whole Nation. Now the Prophet Jeremiah had given
them an express Command. Seek the Peace of the City whither I have caused you
to be carried away Captives, Ier. 29.7.
and pray to the Lord for it: for in the Peace thereof you shall have Peace.
Which made it a necessary duty to be Subject to these Powers, under whose
government they lived. And accordingly we find, that Mordecai discovered the
Treason of Bigthana, Esther. 6.2.
and Teresh two of the Kings Chamberlains, the Keepers of the Door, who sought
to lay hand on the King Ahasuerus; S. C. R. p. 40, 41.
And how numerous and Powerful the Jews were at this time, and what great
disturbance they could have given to the Empire, appears evidently from the
Book of Esther.

King Ahasuerus upon the suggestions of Haman, had granted a Decree for the
Destruction of the whole People of the Jews; which was sent into all the
Provinces, Written, and Sealed with the Kings Ring; This Decree could never be
reversed again; for that was contrary to the Laws of the Medes and Persians.
And therefore when Esther had found Favor with the King, all that could be
done for the Jews, was, to grant another Decree for them to defend themselves;
which accordingly was done, and the effect of it was, That the Jews at Shusan
slew 300 Men and the Jews of the other Provinces slew 75000 and rested from
their Enemies: Esther 6.15.16, 17.
Without this Decree, Mordecai did not think it Lawful to resist (which yet was
a Case of as great extremity, and Barbarous Cruelty as could ever happen) which
made him put Esther upon so hazardous an Attempt, as to venture into the Kings
Presence, without being called, which was Death by their Law, unless the King
should graciously hold out the Golden Scepter to them; Esther 4. 11.
yet when they had obtained this Decree, they were able to defend themselves
and to destroy their Enemies; which is as famous an Example of Passive
Obedience, as can be met with in any History.

And pray see here, what the Prophet Daniel acknowledges to Belteshazzar. Dan.
5.18, 19.
The most High God gave Nebucadnezzar thy Father a Kingdom, and Majesty, and
Glory, and Honor: and for the Majesty that he gave him, all People, Nations,
and Languages trembled and feared before him. Whom he would be slew, and whom
he would be kept alive; and whom he would be set up, and whom he would ^e
pulled down And if these Heathen Kings received such a Power from God, as the
Prophet here affirms, St. Paul has made the Application of it, that he that
resists, resists the Ordinance of God. And I think these Examples may serve
out of the Old Testament, and therefore I shall conclude with the saying of the
Wise Man, who was both a Prophet, and a King: Eccl. 8.2, 3, 4.
Where the Word of a King is there is Power, and who may say unto him, What
do thou?


F. Though this last proof be the stongest you have yet brought, yet I think it
will not reach the Point in Question, to prove, that no Resistance whatsoever,
though for saving the Lives of a whole Nation, can be Lawful: I grant indeed that
the Command of the Prophet Jeremiah, of Praying for the Peace of the City
whither they were carried away Captives, was to be obeyed, being obliged to do
it, not only by the Laws of Nature, and in Regard of those Benefits of
Protection, and enjoying the Free exercise of their Religion, and Liberties
without being made Slaves, though they had been carried Captives; which was no
more than removing them out of one Country, and settling them in another,
according to the Custom of the Eastern Princes of those times, when they would
by removing of the best, and greatest of the People out of a Conquered Country
prevent their Rebelling against them, as they had done before, but that they
enjoyed a Property in their Lands, and Estates after their Captivity, is
certain by the Prophets commanding them, to Build and Plant Vineyards in the
Country of Babylon during the 70 years Captivity foretold by him from God. So
likewise I grant it to be a necessary Duty in Subjects, though strangers, to be
Faithful, and Obedient to those Princes and States under whose Governments they
live; and therefore Mordecai no doubt performed his Duty, when he discovered
the Treason of the Kings Chamberlains that thought to kill him.

But to come to your main Argument, that it was unlawful for the whole Nation
of the Jews to resist those, who were empowered by the Decree of King Ahasuer^^
to Massacre and Destroy them, I shall not dispute with you about the Matter of
Fact, as you have related it, but only in this particular, Esther 8.11.
that whereas you suppose till the King had Issued out a second Decree, wherein
he granted the Jews which were in every City to gather themselves together, and
to stand for their Lives, to destroy, to slay, and Cause to Perish all the
Power of the People, and Province that should assault them, etc. and to take
the spoil of them for a Prey; without which Decree you suppose, Mordecai did
not think it Lawful to resist, though it was a Case of as great extremity, as
could ever happen, and that therefore Esther was put upon so Hazardous an
Attempt as to venture to Obtain this Decree, though with the Peril of her Life:
but that when they had once obtained it, they were then, and not before enabled
to defend themselves, and destroy their Enemies. In answer to which, I must
needs tell you that, you do not fairly represent the latter part of this story;
for it no where appears in the Text, (though you are pleased to add it,) that
Mordecai did not think it Lawful for the Jews to resist, till this Decree was
obtained; for it is only there said, That he sent Esther to the King, and as
soon as she came into his presence, she fell down at his feet, and besought him
with Tears to put away the Mischief of Haman the Agagite. Esther. 8.5.
(Pray read the words) And she said, If it pleases the King, and if I have
found favor in his fight, and the thing seems right before the King, and I be
pleasing in his Eyes let it be written to reverse the Letters devised by Haman,
the Son of Hammedatha the Agagite, which he wrote to destroy the Jews which are
in all the Kings Provinces. By which you may see that Esthers Request was not
for a Liberty to defend themselves, (as you suppose) but only to try if she
could get the King to reverse the first decree, obtained by Haman to destroy
them; but because the Kings Decree, when once Issued out was not to be
reversed, therefore, He Issued this second Decree, to give the Jews a Legal or
Civil Power, to gather themselves together, and stand upon their defense
against all that should assault them, Chap. 9.3.
which was so far obeyed, that the Rulers of the Provinces, and other Officers
of the King, instead of destroying, helped the Jews, because (says the Text)
the fear of Mordecai fell upon them.

So that, though I own this Decree, gave them a Legal Power to stand upon their
defense, and did likewise hinder the Kings Officers from Heading the People,
and putting the first Decree for their Destruction in Execution, as otherwise
they would have done, had it not been for this last, and for that great Power
which they perceived Mordecai had at Court; yet does it not therefore follow,
that it was before that, absolutely unlawful for the whole Jewish Nation to
have defended their Lives against those Officers, or others who would have gone
about to destroy them, and have totally extirpated their Nation. So that I take
this Decree not to confer any new Right in the People of the Jews to defend
themselves, but only to be a Confirmation of that Natural Right of
self-defence, which all Nations, and every particular Member of Mankind have to
preserve themselves And though I grant that Particular Persons are often obliged
to give up this Right for the Public Peace, and safety of the Commonwealth,
yet does not the Law extend to whole Nations, or such Bodies of People, without
which the Common Wealth cannot well subsist.

And therefore I leave it to any unprejudiced person to judge, whether it had
not been better, that the Jews should have thus resisted, and saved their
Lives, though without this second Decree, which only discouraged the Kings
Officers, and others from falling upon them, than that all Gods Peculiar People
should have lain at the Mercy of their Enemies, to be destroyed according to
the first Cruel Decree.

But farther to convince you, that the Jews, after the Captivity, did not think
it unlawful to make use of defensive Arms against cruel, and persecuting
Tyrants, who went about to destroy their Religion, and Nation, it is apparent
from the Famous Example of the Priest Mattathias, with Judas Maccabeus, and the
rest of his Sons, who successively Headed the People of the Jews in that
obstinate, and Noble Resistance, which they made against Antiochus Epiphanes,
though then their Sovereign, who when he had Profaned the Temple, and would have
forced the Jews to renounce their Circumcision, and to have Sacrificed to
Idols, under Pain of Death, they joined together, and resolved to defend
themselves, and to stand up for their Religion and Nation, then ready to be
destroyed; And you find by the History, as it is related in the Books of the
Maccabees, and Josephus, that God did Bless those Arms with Success, which they
had taken up in their own defense, against a Prince infinitely more Powerful
than themselves, who with his Predecessors had been their Sovereigns for above
130 years; And though Antiochus died long before the End of the War, yet did they
still prosecute it against his Successors; Nor did they ever make Peace with
them till Jonathan, Brother of Judas (who had before recovered and purified the
Temple) was acknowledged High Priest, by Alexander, the pretended Son of
Epiphanes, and that they had cast off that Yoke of Subjection, which they were
under to the Kings of Syria, and had settled the Government of their Nation upon
the Princes of the Asmonaean Race in gratitude of that deliverance, they so
justly owed to their Piety, and Courage; and which continued in this Family
till the Conquest of Judea by Pompey, after 106 years free enjoyment of it: So
that it is plain, the Jews, before the Coming of Christ, both Priests, and
People, did not think it unlawful to defend their Lives, and Religion, in Case
of great Extremity, and that our Savior Christ, has any where by his Gospel
Retrenched whole Nations of that liberty lies upon you to prove.

But to conclude, as for the Text you have cited out of the Proverbs, that will
do you as little service: For though I grant it is true, that no Man can say to
an Absolute King, or Monarch, What do thou? i. e. Call him to Account as his
Superior; Yet does it not therefore follow, that a whole People, or Nation,
have no Power to defend themselves in any case whatsoever, against his unjust,
Violence, or Tyranny: This not being the Act of a Superior, but an equal (as I
have already said) nor any Political, but a Natural Power.


M. I confess this is the Notablest Example of Resistance, that you have
brought yet, but I think it may be easily answered, if we suppose with Iosepbus
and other Authors, that though Alexander the great, was certainly possessed of
Palestine, by right of Conquest, and the Submission of the High Priest Iaddus
unto him; Yet his Chief Captains conspiring together, made such a Scambling
Division of the Empire among themselves, as they could, every one almost,
seeking how he might suppress the rest, and attain the whole alone for himself:
so as thereupon the Jews, were as free from the Macedonians, as any other of
their Bordering Neighbors; none of the said Captains having any Lawful
Interest, or Title to Judah: But that which turned to the benefit of some
others, brought a great detriment (for want of Ability) unto them: For one of
the said Captains, viz. Antiochus, having gotten to himself a very great
Kingdom in Syria, and another, viz. Ptolomy, in Egypt, the Jews dwelling
betwixt them both, were miserably, on every side, vexed by them, sometimes the
Egyptians by Oppression and force, brought them under their Subjection, and
imposed great Tributes upon them; and sometimes the Syrians, growing mightier
than the Egyptians, did likewise very greatly afflict them; especially in the
Reign of Antiochus Epiphanes, whose Invasion and Government was most Unjust and
Tyrannical. 1 Macc. 1.37.
He shed Innocent Blood on every side of the Sanctuary, spoiled the Temple,
erecting in it the Abomination of the Gentiles, and caused it to be named the
Temple of Jupiter Olympius. Not to mention the Profanation of the Law, and
unspeakable Cruelties, exercised upon those who refused to offer Sacrifice unto
Idols, until Mattathias moved with the Monstrous Cruelty, and Tyranny of the
said Antiochus, made open Resistance, the Government of that Tyram being not
then either generally received by Submission, or settled by Continuance. So that
after the time of Alexander the Great, the Jewish Nation was Governed by their
own Highpriests, and Sanhedrim, and lived according to their own Laws, in all
matters, both Civil, and Ecclesiastical, though, more often, I own, with a
Subordination to the Sovereignty of the Kings of Egypt, till this Invasion of
their Religion, and liberties by Antiochus. So that they had a Legal Right to
the Free exercise of their Religion which could not without the Highest
Violence, and injustice be taken from them.


F. Notwithstanding what you have now said concerning this Action, I doubt not,
but if you will consider Josephus better, as also the two Books of the
Maccabees, you will find, that not only Antiochus Epiphanes, but also Antiochus
the Great, and Seleucus Philopater were true and Lawful Monarchs of
Coelo-Syria, and consequently of Palestine, And though I grant there had been
Wars between Antiochus the Great, and Ptolemy Philopater, concerning the
Dominion of that Country, yet it is plain out of Iosephus's Antiquities. Lib.
12. Cap. 3.4 th.
That Antiochus had re-conquer'd all this Country from the Egyptians, though he
afterward parted with half of the Tribute of it to Ptolomy Epiphanes King of
Egypt, as a Dowry with Cleopatra his Daughter; Yet surely he retained the
Supreme Dominion of it to himself, for we find in the 2 Maccabees, Cap. 3.
that Seleucus Philopater, supplied all the Costs of the Sacrifices out of his
own Revenues, that is, of those Sacrifices, that were offered for the Health of
the King, as afterward for the Roman Emperors. And we find in the beginning of
both the Books of the Maccabees, that the King of Syria had Power to make, and
unmake the High Priest when ever he pleased, as having the Dominion over
Coelo-Syria, and Phoenicia, over which, as appears by the 2d. Chap. of the 2d.
of Macc. Seleucus had made Apollonius Governor under him: So that there cannot
be more certain marks of Sovereign Majesty, exercised by the Great Turk over
any of those Tributary Princes, or Governors, which he places, and displaces
at his Pleasure: And therefore it is apparent, notwithstanding what you have
said to the Contrary, out of I know not what Authors, that the Government of
Antiochus Epiphanes, was an unjust Usurpation, for bating this Tyranny in the
exercise of it, he had a juster Title than ever Alexander the Great had, since
besides Conquest, he had your own Right of Prescription by three Descents, and
I have Grotius, (besides other more ancient Authors) on my side in this matter.
And pray now see Grotius his Opinion in his first Book de I.B. and P. cap. 4.
which I will read into English,. 7.
and I think will make sufficiently for my Opinion.

The Fact of the Maccabees may seem like to this, ( viz. the Example of David
before going) for that some to defend these Arms by this Pretense, as if
Antiochus were not their King, but an Invader, I suppose to be vain, since no
where in all the History of the Maccabees, Antiochus is called by any other
Name, but that of the King; and that deservedly, since the Jews had long since
acknowledged the Empire of the Macedonians, in whose Right Antiochus, had
succeeded, for that the Law forbids a Stranger to be set over the People, is
only to be understood of a Voluntary Election, and not of that which the People
were forced to s^bmit to by a necessity of the times. But what others say, that
the Jews then used the Right of a People, who were in their own Power is not
true. For first of all, the Jews being Conquered by Nebuchadnezzar, by the
Right of War, obeyed by the same Right the Medes, and Persians, as Successors
to the Caldeans, whose whole Empire devolved upon the Macedonians, (with which
Justin likewise agrees in his 36. Book) hence the Jews are said by Tacitus, to
have been during the Empire of the Medes, and Persians, Vilissima pars
Servientium. Neither did they covenant any thing with Alexander, and his
Successors, but submitted themselves to their Dominion without any Conditions
as they had been under that of Darius before. But if the Jews were sometimes
permitted to observe their own Rites and Laws, that was merely pr^cariou^
p^oce^ding from the Beneficence of those Kings, and not from any Law
superinduced on that Empire. Therefore there is nothing which can defend the
Maccabees in this matter, besides the most extreme and most certain danger (
viz.) as long as they so contained themselves within the boun^s of
self-defense, and that according to David's Example, they retired into defeat
Places for their (...), nor took Arms until they were set upon. So far Grotius.


M. I shall not farther dispute this Point, though I thought I had very good
Authority on my side, but I think I have a letter Apology to make for thi^
A^tion of theirs, viz. That God might very well either by an Express
Revelation, or at least a Divine Impulse of his Holy Spirit, Command, or Excite
Mattathias, and his Sons the Maccabees, to take Arms in defense of those
Privi^edges, which had been so often Confirmed to them, till at last it pleased
God to restore the Jews to an absolute Liberty for some years, under their own
Princes, which they abusing by Cruelty and Ambition, Tyran^^ing over their
Subjects, and Murd^ring their Brothers, it was no wonder that God was pleased
to take away the Scepter from them, and conferr it upon the Romans, who gave it
under them to Herod, the Son of Antipater, the Idumean, And therefore you can
with no more Justice urge this Example of the Maccabees to prove Subjects may
Resist the Supreme Powers, than to allege the Example of Iehu as an Authority
for Rebellion: Since, as I said before, whatsoever God is pleased to bring
about by Human means, but yet by his Particular Precept or Revelation, is to be
still looked upon as an exception from the general Rules of Non-Resistance, and
Passive Obedience.


F. I confess what you say would fully answer my Objection, could you as
evidently make out from the History of the Maccabees, or Josephus, that these
Maccabean Captains did at all Act in those Wars they made, by any express
Precept, or Divine Revelation from God, as without any just grounds you suppose
it: And therefore I desire you would show me, if you can, any Testimony out of
the Maccabees, or Josephus, to prove that they acted thus by Virtue of any such
Divine Inspiration; and then I am contented to yield the Cause, which if you
cannot do (as I think you cannot*) I must look upon my self as to have had the
better in this Controversy concerning the Right that Subjects had to Resist in
Case of Necessity, before the Coming of Christ.


M. Yet for all that, some of the Fathers, and Modern Commentators, on these
Books of the Maccabees do hold, that such wonderful Victories, as were obtained
by Judas, and his Brethren, could not have been without the Miraculous
Providence of God, and Consequently a Divine Inspiration assisting them,
especially considering the Strange Judgment, that we read fell upon Antiochus
for his Impiety; and that Judas had oftentimes Divine Revelations, appears by
that Dream, or Vision, mentioned in the last Chapter of the 2d of Maccabees, of
Jeremiah the Prophets giving him a Golden Sword, v. 16.
and in giving it, speaking thus, Take this Holy Sword a Gift from God, with
which thou shall wound the Adversaries: which dream, if it were sent from God,
as is highly probable, sufficiently confirms the Commonly received Opinion,
that this Resistance of the Maccabees was by Divine Warrant, or Inspiration:
and when ever you can show (...) since the Coming of Christ, any Resistance so
miraculously abetted as this was, I will grant it also to be Lawful.


F. I do join Issue with you in this, and must still suppose, (until you give
me better evidence to the contrary) that the Jews, under the Conduct of the
Maccabees did not take up Arms, against Antiochus, and his Successors by Virtue
of any Divine Inspiration to Mattathias, or any of his Sons, far it appears
plainly, as well by the Scripture, as by Josephus his Testimony, that there was
no more Divine Revelation after Malachi, neither do the Books of the Maccabees,
Josephus, Sulpitius Severus, or any other ancient Ecclesiastical Writer,
mention these Maccabees as Men inspired by God. I grant indeed, they might be
excited by some Divine Impulse of Gods spirit to do what they did; But this is
so far from being at all Miraculous, that I do suppose that diverse great, and
good Men have been in our latter times of Reformation stirred up by the same
Divine Spirit to undertake, and perform extraordinary things; for the
Reformation of Religion, and the deliverance of Gods Church, and People. And
therefore as for the Vision, or Dream which you mention, it does not appear,
that it was any more than an Ordinary Dream; and if this might p^s^ for a proof
of a Divine Revelation, I could quote you many such Dreams, as this, out of the
Lives of Luther, Calvin and diverse others of the first Reformers; whom I
suppose you will not maintain to have had any express Revelation to do what
they did, contrary to the Civil and Ecclesiastic Laws of those Princes, and
States under which they lived. And though it is true these Books are not held
Canonical; yet they were always esteemed in the Church as Sacred Writing, as
Written, though not by Inspired, yet, by Pious Men, and though they are not
received in matters of Faith and Doctrine, yet you know very well they are
Commanded to be read in our Ch^r^^es, as containing excellent Precepts, and
Examples in matters of Morality, and therefore, (...) p^rhaps they would not be
a good Authority to a Praesbyterian, yet I hope we of the Church^s England
cannot refuse them as Rules of Morality. But I think we are now come to the
last Instanc^ that can be brought before the Coming of Christ, and therefore
pray will you now proceed with your Quotations out of the New Testament, which
I suppose you have ready for me.


M. I confess I am not able, in a Story so imperfectly related as this of the
Maccabees, to prove they had Gods express Warrant for this Resistance; and you
on the other side, produce b^t a Negative Argument, that they had not ( viz)
because neither Josephus, nor the Book of the Maccabees expressly mention any
such thing, and yet for all that Mattathias might (for ought that you, or I
know,) have acted in this matter by Divine Revelation, since as the Rabbis
suppose* there was for a long time after the times of the Prophets a l^wer s^^t
of Revelation, given by God to some particular Men called Batcol, that is, the
Daughter of the V^^ce, which seems to have been some Private, or inward Voice,
by which God Revealed his Will in some Particular Cases, and we read that long
after this, Josephus relates that H^rcanus, the last good High Priest of the
Maccabean Race, had the Gift of Prophecy by Divine Revelation: And why his
Great Grandfather, might not have it likewise, I see no reason, besides all
this, there might be other reasons, that God might allow to the People of the
Jews a greater Liberty of Resistance, even without Cruel Authority, to revenge
the Profanation of his Temple, and Religion, being the Place, where he was
pleased particularly to place his Name, than are allowed to us Christians at
this Day, who have no such Visible Temple, nor are under such severe
Obligations to extirpate Idolatry. So that what Mattathias, and the People of
the Jews acted in this matter, they might do it by the Right of Zealot^, for
the defense of the Law of Moses, even as Phineas did, who by killing Zimri; and
Cosbi, for Fornication, and Idolatry, did that which in another occasion, and
at another time would have been down right Murder.

But be it as it will, I think we Christians are by the Laws of the Gospel tied
to a stricter Subjection to the Supreme Powers, (if it be possible) than the
Jews themselves were, and whatsoever they might have done under Antiochus, for
their own defense, and to avoid Persecution, yet Jesus Christ does now require
Higher things of us, and has by his own Example, as well as Precept, forbidden
us to Resist the Supreme Powers, for any Pers^cution, for Religion, whatsoever,
since, he has Ordained his Religion, to be Propagated, and desended by
Sufferings, and Persuasions, and not by Force of Arms, against the Will of the
Supreme Powers, and if not for Religion, the most Weight^ of all Concerns,
surely not for any Temporal thing whatsoever. But the Proof of this, requires
more time, than this evening will afford, without trespassing too much upon
your, as well as my own repose. And therefore I should be glad of another
Evening^ conversation with you, to free your Mind, if it were possible from
this dangerous Error, and to bring you over to the true Belief, and Practice of
the Primitive Christians, and of our Mother the Church of England, who treids
exactly in their steps.


F. I humbly thank you for your great Kindness to me, and the Pains you have
taken, ^as also for what you intend to take for the better Information of my
Conscience, and therefore if you please; and that you have no other occasion to
draw you forth out of your Lodgings, I will wait upon you again to morrow in
the Evening, about seven, and shall think it a very proper Work for the Lords
Day, to have my Conscience, better informed by those Testimonies, which you say
you will bring out of the New Testament, and Waitings of the Primitive Fathers,
and Church Historians for my Instruction, and if you can out of them prove to
me, that all Resistance whatever is unlawful: I promise you, upon the Word of
an Honest Man, to become a Proselyte to this Doctrine.


M. I humbly thank you, Sir, for your great Candor, and Ingenuity: and though I
am no Professed Divine, yet I hope by the help of the Scripture, and those
Quotations that I can produce out of the Fathers, as also from the constant
practice of the Primitive Church, to prove these Doctrines of Passive
Obedience, and Non-resistance to be the true, Ancient, and Apostolical B^^^s.
But it is now late, and I will not trouble you any longer to night, therefore
shall take my leave of you, and so Sir, your Humble Servant.


F. Dear Sir, good Night, yours most heartily, Well, to morrow I will wait upon
you as I appointed.


M. Pray be sure to come at your hour, for I Will expect you.


FINIS.
Bibliotheca Politica: Or, A DISCOURSE By way of DIALOGUE; WHETHER Absolute Non
Resistances of the SVPREAM POWERS be enjoined by the Doctrine of the Gospel,
and was the Ancient Practice of the Primitive Church, and the constant Doctrine
of our Reformed Church of England.

Collected out of the most Approved Authors, both Ancient and Modern.

Dialogue the Fourth.

LONDON, Printed for R. Baldwin in Warwick Lane, nea^ the Oxford-Arms; where
also may be had the First, Second and Third Dialogues. 169^.

The Subject of the Fourth Dialogue.
AUthors made use of in this Dialogue, and how denoted in the Margin.

1. Dr. Sherlocks Case of Resistance of the Supreme Powers. S. C. R. 2. Mr.
Bohun's Preface to Patriarcha. B. P. P. 3. Mr. Dudley Digge's Unlawfulness of
Subjects taking up Arms against their Sovereigns, Ed. 1643. U. S. A. S. 4. The
History of Passive Obedience. H. P. O.
THE Fourth Dialogue BETWEEN Mr. MEANWELL a Civilian AND Mr. FREEMAN a
Gentleman.
M. YOur Servant Sir, I see you are better than your Word, since you come
somewhat before the time appointed.


F. I do not deserve any great Commendation for it, for this Evening being a
time of leisure, I had nothing else to do but to wait on you, and indeed I was
impatient, `till I was with you, since I desire nothing more, than to receive
satisfaction in this weighty controversy; since I know how great a Master you
are both in Divine, as well as Civil Knowledge; and therefore, I beseech you*
to proceed in the Method I at first proposed, by giving me these places of
Scripture out of the New Testament, which you suppose prove your Doctrine, and
in the next place show me that they were always unders^ood by the ancient
Fathers, as well as the Practice of the whole Primitive Church in that Sense.


M. I very well approve of your Method, and therefore to go on where we left
off, I shall in the first place lay down some plain, and easy Propositions, as
the Grounds of our future Discourse, which I suppose you will have no Reason to
deny.

First, Therefore I suppose, that our Saviors Kingdom not being of this World,
he came not to alter the Civil Government or Polity of it, (as you have already
asserted) And therefore did not alter any of those Rights of Sovereign Powers,
and those measures of Obedience, and Subjection which were before fixed and
determined by God himself: S. C. R. Ch 2. p. 43.
Neither has given the People (either considered as particular men, or as a
collective Body) any Power or Right to resist, or rebel against such Supreme
Magistrates, though they never so much abuse their Power by their Tyrannical
Government, either by persecuting the true Religion, or by any other Violences,
and Oppressions whatsoever.

And our Savior himself tells us, Ib. 44. Mat. 5.17.
That be came not to destroy (...) Law, and the Prophets, but to fulfill it;
that is, to fulfill the Ancient Types, and Prophecies in his own Person, to
perfect an External, and Ceremonial, by a Real, and Evangelical Righteousness;
to perfect the Moral Laws with new Instances and Degrees of Virtue, and
Obedience, but he abrogated no Moral Law, and therefore not the Laws of
Obedience, and Subjection to Princes which have always been reduced to the
fifth Commandment. Pray tell me, how you approve of this Doctrine.


F. I do readily agree to the greatest part of it, but yet as our Savior has
not been pleased expressly to enjoin us to resist the Supreme Powers when they
manifestly break, and transgress all the Ends of Civil Government, and
consequently dissolve it, so on the other side, he came not to destroy those
Natural Rights, which Mankind enjoyed before his coming, of defending
themselves, and providing for their own Happiness and Security when their Civil
Governors either could not, or would not protect them* And as I grant, that
our Savior made no Alteration in Civil Government by abridging the Rights of
Sovereign Power; so likewise has he not conferred upon them any new Rights, or
Prerogatives of destroying, or ens^^^^ their Subjects, without any
Contradiction, or Resistance: and consequently has altered nothing in those
Natural Rights, or means which the People had before his Coming, of hindering
the Supreme Powers, from perverting those main Ends of Government, the
Happiness, and Preservation of the People* And that this Liberty does not any
way destroy those Rights or Prerogatives which are necessary for their own
Security, and the Well-governing of the^ People, I have, I think, sufficiently
proved in our last Conversation. So that, unless you can now show me, by such
express Authorities, as that I can have no reasonable ground to deny it, I hope
you will pardon me, if I cannot believe, that Christ by his coming into the World
has taken away, or abridged, that Natural Right which Mankind before enjoyed
(even after the Institution of Civil Government) of Resistance or Self-defence
in Cases of Extrem^ty, against those who exercise nothing of that Supreme
Power, with which God has invested them, but the mere Title: For had the
intent of our Saviors coming, been for this End, he had instead of freeing us
from the Yo^^ of the Law, laid a much heavier upon our Necks, if the Doctrines
of Pass^^ Obedience, and Non-resistance are to be taken in that large Sense,
and ^^^mited extent that their Asserters have been pleased to give them: So
that though I grant our Savior came to perfect, and not to abrogate the Moral
Law, with new Instances of Virtue and Obedience, and therefore has not
abrogated any Laws of Obedience, and Subjection to Princes; so has he neither
abrogated the great Law of Nature, of Self-defence in the People, wh^^ they are
universally assaulted, or oppress't in their Lives, Liberties, or Properties.

And though I grant Obedience to Princes has been reduced to the fifth
Commandment, yet neither does that by commanding us to Honor our Father, and
Mother, forbid all Resistance of Children to the Violent and unreasonable
^ctions of their Parents, much less of those whom they may command, or ^et on
to kill, or ruin us, as I have, I think sufficiently proved at our first
Conference. And therefore, I pray, proceed to your Proofs themselves, and show
me, that they prove, as much as you have affirmed.


M. Before I come to my Proofs, I pray give me leave to observe it ^ou by way
of ^ntroduction, that as our Savior has left the Government of the World as
he found it: So he has besides all this, given such admirable Laws, S. C. R.
p. 46.
as will both teach Princes to Govern, and Subjects to Obey better, which is
the most effectual way to secure the public Peace, and Happiness, to prevent
the Oppression of Subjects, and Rebellion against Princes; But he has not
interposed in new modelling the Governments of the World, which is not of such
consequence, as some Men imagine. It is not the External form of Government,
but the Fatherly Care and Prudence, and Justice of Governors and the dutiful
Obedience of Subjects, which can make any People Happy. If Princes, and
Subjects be good Christians, they may be happy under most forms of Government,
if they be not, they can be so under none: Had our Savior given Subjects
Liberty to Resist, to Depose, to Murder Tyrannical Princes, he had done them no
kindness at all: For to give Liberty to Subjects to Resist, is only to proclaim
an universal License to Factions, and Seditions, and Civil Wars, and if any Man
can think this such a mighty Blessing to the World, yet methinks, it is not a
Blessing, proper for the Prince of Peace to give.

But he, who instructs Princes to rule as Gods Ministers, and Vicegerents, and
to express a Fatherly Care, and Concernment for the Happiness of their
Subjects, Ib. p. 47.
and that teaches Subjects to Reverence, and obey their Prince as the Image of
God, and quietly to submit, and yield to his Authority, and that inforces these
Laws both on Princes and Subjects in the Name and Authority of God, and from
the Consideration of the future Judgment, when Princes who abuse their Power
shall give an account of it to their great Master, and when Subjects who
resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation, and those who patiently suffer
for Gods sake shall have their Injuries redress't, and their Obedience
rewarded: I say, such a Person as this, takes a more effectual Course to reform
the abuses of Civil Power, and to preserve good Government in the World, than
all your wise Politians, and State-Menders who think to reform the Government
of the World, Ib. p. 47.
by some State Spells, and Charms, without reforming those, who govern, and
those who are governed. This our Savior has done, and this is the best thing
that could be done; nay this was all that he could do in this matter: He never
usurpt any Civil Power, Ib. p. 48.
and Authority, and therefore could not new model the Governments of the World,
He never offers any External force, and Compulsion to make Men obey his Laws,
and therefore never forces Princes to rule Well, nor Subjects to Obey. But he
has taken the same care of the Government of the World; as he has done of the
other Duties of Piety, and Virtue, that is, he has given very good Laws and
threatened those who break them with Eternal Punishments, and as the Laws, and
Religion of our Savior prevail, so will the Governments of the World mend
without altering the Model and Constitution of them: But I come now to those
places of Scripture, I have to urge against your Opinion --


F. I pray Sir, pardon me, if I interrupt you, and beg leave to make some
Remarks upon this Preface you have now made. I will not deny, but you have
spoken some honest Truths, in what you have now said, though not without a
mixture of diverse mistakes, for though I grant that Jesus Christ has not
interposed in new modelling the Governments of the World; so he has likewise
given Princes no Authority to alter those, which they find ready made, and
modelled to their hands in those Countries wherein God has placed them at the
helm. And though you tell me, those models of Government are not of such
consequence as some men imagine, yet I hope you ought to have a better opinion
of this of England, since it is only to this Frame of Government, that you will
own, we owe all our Freedom and Happiness above diverse other Nations our
Neighbors: Since if it were not for our Laws, and Original Constitutions to
the contrary, I do not see why we may not be made as absolute Slaves as any in
Turkey, when ever the King pleases: I grant indeed, that it is the Fatherly
Care, Prudence, and Justice of Governors, that can make any People Happy. But
I desire you to show me, how many Governments there are in the World where
Princes exercise this Fatherly Care, as they ought, without any known Laws, or
where Subjects express a dutiful Love, and Obedience to their Governors
(unless Servile fear must be called so) whilst they find themselves miserable
Slaves, and Beggars.

I also yield, that if Princes, and Subjects are good Christians, they may be
happy under most forms of Government; and if not, they can be happy under none,
is true in this Sense, if you take Happiness, for the hopes of a future Life;
but otherwise there have been diverse Princes, who have been very good
Christians, and yet by carelessness of their Affairs have governed their
Subjects very ill; and likewise, I know some Subjects who have been very Loyal
to their Prince, and very good Christians, and yet have been made very
miserable, as Witness the Protestants in Hungary, and France.

But as I do not suppose, that our Savior has given Subjects Liberty to
resist Tyrannical Princes upon every slight occasion, much less to depose, or
murder them; yet will it not follow, that if he has given Liberty to Subjects
to resist in some Cases, it would only serve to proclaim an universal License
to Seditions, and Civil Wars: Since I do not suppose such Wars to be lawful,
but when the People are in as miserable Condition as a State of War can bring
them to; and if our Savior had not allowed them this Power, no rational Man
would think it a Blessing proper for the Prince of Peace to give, or to come
into the World to introduce Slavery, and the Arbitrary Power of the Sword.

Though I grant he instructs Princes to rule as Gods Ministers, and Vicegerents,
and to express a Fatherly Care, and Concern for the Happiness of their
Subjects, and that he likewise teaches Subjects to obey their Princes: Yet you
know too well, how seldom these Instructions have all those good effects either
with the Princes, or People. And therefore, as on the People's side, besides
those Obligations of Conscience you speak of, there are likewise ordained
temporal Punishments, to keep Subjects to their Duty, so likewise there is
often need of something else, besides mere Conscience, and honor, to keep
Princes from Tyrannizing over their Subjects.

And though I suppose the Consideration of a future Judgment may go a great way
with some Princes to make them perform that great Trust, God has given them,
yet pray tell me, have you not read (if not known) some Princes in the World of
late times, who have either believed no such thing, as Eternal Damnation, or at
least have found a way by Nice Distinctions, or Equivocations to evade all
Laws, Oaths, and Promises whatsoever? And what satisfaction is it to me, or how
does it serve to alleviate my misery, When I am made a Slave, and a Beggar,
that those that had the Rule over me will be damned for so doing. But you tell
me, that I must quietly and patiently suffer this for God's sake, and that then
we shall have our injuries redress'r, and Obedience rewarded: I grant indeed
that a single Person may be rewarded in this kind, for preferring the Common
Good, or Quiet of the Nation before his own Private Interest. But that whole
Nations, and Bodies of People are obliged by the like Rule, I utterly deny,
since I do not find where our Savior either enjoins, or requires such an
absolute Subjection at their Hands; and if he does not, it is no better than
Will Worship to pay it, and therefore, it still lies upon you to prove it to me.

To conclude. I think it may be a more effectual Course, to preserve the main
Ends of Government, for the People sometimes to resist the insupportable
Tyranny and Violence of the Supreme Powers in those Cases of Extremity I have
already put, than to let those, who have got the Power over us in their Hands,
do whatsoever they please with it to our ruin without any control. And also,
I desire you to consider, whether the Fear of such resistance from Subjects,
when thus outraged and oppress't, may not often be a more Powerful State's
Spell or Charm (as you call it) to keep the Supreme Powers in their Duty, than
those many Sermons, and other Discourses that have been lately preached, and
published, that their Power is irresistible, and that therefore, all their
Subjects are bound to endure whatsoever Tyranny they have a mind to exercise
upon them: In short, I absolutely agree with you, that as our Savior never
usurpt any Civil Power, or Authority, and therefore did not new model the
Governments of the World, so has he also given Subjects a Right to maintain
whatsoever Models, or Forms of Government, God has been pleased to establish
among them, when they are in danger to be altered, or invaded either by a
Domestic Tyranny, or Foreign Force. And without this Right of Resistance, for
you to tell us, That Jesus Christ has given very good Laws, and threatened
those that break them with Eternal Punishments, and that as the Laws, and
Religion of our Savior prevail, that so the Government of the World will mend
without any more ado; is altogether as reasonable, as to preach, that because
Christ has given us good Laws, and threatens Everlasting Punishments to those
that break them, therefore they are sufficient to keep Men from Robbing, and
Murdering their Neighbors; and that all men giving up their Natural Rights of
resisting such Robbers, and defending themselves against them, should wholly
rely upon the Effi^acy of the Commandment against Stealing, or else on the
more Powerful Motive with such People, of a Judge, and a Gallows, should let
them do with us what they please, whenever we fall under their Power: And
therefore, I desire you would give me some better proofs, that our Savior has
enjoined all Mankind an absolute Subjection to the Supreme Powers under pain of
Damnation without any Resistance in any Case whatsoever; but I pray pardon this
Digression, which your own long Preface extorted from me.


M. I shall not now dispute this matter with you, and therefore to observe your
Commands, I shall begin with that Divine Answer, of our Savior to the
Pharisees, and Herodians when they consulted together to entangle him in his
Talk. They came to him with great Ceremony, and Address, S. C. R. p. 49. Matthew.
22.15. etc.
saying, Master we know, that thou art true, and teach the way of God in
Truth, neither carest thou for any Man, for thou regardest not the Person of
Man. Tell us therefore, what think thou? Is it lawful to give Tribute to
Caesar or not? They thought it impossible that he should give any Answer to
this, which would not make him obnoxious, either to the Roman Emperors, if he
denied that the Jews might Lawfully pay Tribute to Caesar, or to the Pharisees,
and People, if he affirmed that they might; for there was a very potent Faction
among them, who thought it unlawful for the Jews, to own the Authority, or
Usurpations of any Foreign Prince, or to pay Tribute to him as to their King,
They being expressly forbidden by the Law, Deuteronomy. 17.15. Ib. p. 50.
To set a Stranger over them for their King; who was not their Brother, that
is, who was not a Natural Jew. And it seems they could not distinguish between
their own Voluntary Act in choosing a Stranger for their King (which was indeed
forbid by their Law) and their submitting to a Foreign Prince, when they were
conquered by him. Our Savior, who knew their Wicked Intention in all this,
that they did not come with an honest Design to be instructed in their Duty but
to seek an Advantage against him, expresses some Indignation at it, Why tempt
ye me, ye Hypocrites? but yet to return them an Answer to their Question, he
bids them show him the Tribute Money, that is, the Money in which they used to
pay Tribute, and enquired, whose Image, and Superscription it had. For Coining
of Money was then as certain a mark of Sovereignty, as making Laws, or the
Power of the Sword. Well, they acknowledge that the Image, and Superscription
on the Tribute-Money was Caesar's, upon which he replies, Render therefore unto
Caesar, the things that are Caesar 's, and unto God the things that are Gods.
The plain meaning of which Answer is this, that since by the very Impression on
their Money, it is evident, that Caesar is the Sovereign Lord, they must render
unto him all the Rights of Sovereignty, Ib. p. 51. Romans 13.7.
among which Tribute is one, as St. Paul tells us. Render therefore unto all
their Dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom Custom, Fear to whom
Fear, Honor to whom Honor. Whatever then is due to Sovereign Princes, and
does not interfere with their Duty to God, that they must give to Caesar, who
at this time was their Sovereign.

And though our Savior commands us, only in general, to render to Caesar the
things that are Caesar's, without telling us, what Caesar's things are; this is
so far from making his Answer Ambiguous, and of no use in this present
Controversy, that it suggests to us three plain, and natural Consequences,
which are sufficient to end this whole dispute. First, That our Savior did not
intend to make any Alteration in the Rights of Sovereignty, but what Rights he
found Sovereign Princes possessed of, he leaves them in the quiet Possession of,
for had he intended to make any change in this matter, he would not have given
such a general Rule, to render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, without
specifying what these things are. Secondly, S. C. R. p. 56.
And therefore he leaves them to the known Laws of the Empire, to determine
what is Caesar's Right. What ever is essential to the Notion of Sovereign Power,
whatever the Laws, and Customs of Nations determine to be Caesar's Right, that
they must render to him; for he would make no alteration in this matter. So
that Subjection to Princes, and Non Resistance, is as plainly determined by our
Savior in this Law of paying Tribute; for Subjection, and Non-Resistance is as
essential a Right of Sovereign Power, and as inseparable from the Notion of it,
as any thing can be, and so it is acknowledged by the Laws, and Customs of
Nations, and is so determined by the Apostle St. Paul as I shall show
hereafter. Thirdly, I observe farther that when our Savior joins our Duty to
our Prince, with our Duty to our God Render to Cae^ar the things that are
Caesar's, and to God the things that are Gods, he excepts nothing from Caesar's
Right, which by the Laws of Nations is due to Sovereign Princes, but what is a
Violation of, and an encroachment on God's Right, and Sovereignty, that is, we
must pay all that Obedience, Ib. p. 57.
and Subjection to Princes which is consistent with our Duty to God. This is
the only limit our Savior sets to our Duty to Princes. This, I hope, is
sufficient for the Explication of our Saviors Answer to the Pharisees and
Herodians, which evidently contains the Doctrine of Obedience and Subjection to
Princes, enforced on us by the Authority of our Savior himself.


F. I shall not dispute, that this Instance of our Savior does enjoin the Jews
to pay Tribute, and render all those Rights, and Dues to Caesar as the Supreme
Power, which are necessary to it is Essence, but you seem to me, to stretch this
Prerogative a great deal too far, when you thus suppose an absolute Subjection
to Princes, without any resistance to be as plainly enjoined by our Savior in
this Law, as paying Tribute. For the Reason you give for it, viz. that
Subjection, and Non resistance is as essential a Right of Sovereign Power, and
as inseparable from the Notion of it, as any can be, and that it is so
acknowledged by the Laws, and Customs of Nations, is the thing which I deny,
and which having been the Subject of our last Conversation, is still the thing
to be proved; and I think I have there sufficiently proved that absolute Non
resistance is no Essential Right of Sovereign Power, nor inseparable from the
Notion of it: Since by asserting it, no just Right of Sovereign Power will be
thereby destroyed, or taken away; but rather confirmed, and that I may make it
out, yet plainer by a Familiar Instance; a General of an Army, has an absolute
Power over the Lives of his Soldiers, that transgress his Rules of War, or
Military Discipline; but suppose that in a Mad, or Drunken sit he should
command some Troops of his Guards to cut the Throats of all the rest of the
Army, and they be such obedient Coxcombs, as to go about to put this order in
Execution, does it therefore derogate, from the absoluteness of his Power as
General, if the Army will not stand still, and let three, or four hundred
fellows take away all their Lives? But that this Principle of Passive Obedience
in your Sense, of suffering Princes, or other Supreme Powers to destroy, or
inslave them; is so far from being acknowledged, by the Laws, and Customs of
all Nations, that, as I think, I have proved it to be contrary to the Laws of
Nature, and Reason; so I doubt not, but I can much easier make it out by the
Laws and Customs of all Nations, as well Barbarous, as Civilized to be both
unreasonable, and impracticable. And that it is otherwise determined by St.
Paul, I desire you to prove it to me, when you come to make use of the 13 th to
the Romans, so much insisted upon by those of your Opinion.

But before I make an end with this Text we are now upon, I cannot but take
notice of your last Assertion, That by rendering to Caesar the things, which are
Caesar's, God excepts nothing from Caesar 's Right, which by the Laws of Nations
is due to Sovereign Princes, but what is a Violation of, and Encroachment on
Gods Right, and Sovereignty; that is, we must pay all that Obedience, and
Subjection to Princes, which is consistent with our Duty to God. Now if this be
the only limit that our Savior sets to our Duty to Princes (as you suppose) I
wonder by what Law the Learned Doctor from whom you borrow this Principle, as
also those other Clergymen of the Church of England, could justify thelr
refusing to read the Kings late Proclamation of Indulgence, or Toleration, for
if the King (as they own in the Oath of Supremacy) is the only Supreme
Governor of his Dominions, in all Things, or Causes whatsoever; He must
likewise be the Caesar here meant in this Text; and consequently an Active, not
Passive Obedience ought to have been paid to this Declaration. Since you say,
that Obedience is by the Law of Nations due to Sovereign Princes, to whom we
must pay all that Obedience and Subjection, which is consistent with our Duty
to God, and I hope you will not say, that this Declaration was inconsistent
with that Duty, or was any Violation or Encroachment upon Gods Rights of
Sovereignty.


M. As for your last observation upon those Clergy men who refused to read the
Declaration, I must confess, I have according to my Civil Law Maxims, no excuse
ready for them, since with us it is always true, in this as well as other
absolute Monarchies, Quicquid Regi placuit, Legi's habet Vigorem. Much less can
I reconcile it with that unbounded Supremacy which the Oath of Allegiance, as
also the Opinions of most modern Judges have placed in the King in all
Ecclesiastical Matters; but indeed I can least of all reconcile it with this
Assertion you now mention, which I confess, I have taken from diverse Sermons
and Treatises, that have been Prea^ht and Printed of late by our City Divines;
to whom I shall leave it to Answer this Objection; but to proceed with the
design in Hand, S. C. R. p. 57.
I shall come in the next place to prove an absolute Subjection without
Resistance to be due to the Sovereign Power, from our Savior's rebuke to St.
Peter, when he drew his Sword, and struck a Servant of the High Priest, and
smote off his Ear, which is as plain a Declaration against Resistance as Words
can make it. Mat. 26.52.
Then said Jesus unto him, put up thy Sword unto his place; for all they that
take the Sword, shall perish by the Sword. For the understanding of which, we
must consider, upon what occasion St. Peter drew his Sword; for we must not
think that our Savior does absolutely forbid the use of the Sword; which is to
destroy all Civil Governments, Ib. p. 58.
and the Power of Princes, and to proclaim impunity to all which Villainies that
are committed in the World. The Sword is necessary to punish wickedness, and to
protect the Innocents. In the Hands of Princes it is an Instrument of Justice,
as St. Paul tells us. That they bear not the Sword in vain, Romans 13.4.
But are the Ministers of God, revengers to ex^cu^e wrath upon him that does
evil. In the Hands of priva^e Persons it may be lawfully used in Self-defence*
thus our Savior a little before his Crucifixion, gave Commission to his
Disciples to furnish themselves with Swords, Luke 22.36.
though they parted with the^r Garments for the Purchase. Which we suppose was
not designed as a mere modish, and fashionable thing, but to defend themselves
from the Private assaults of Robbers* and such like Common Enemies, Ibid. p. 59.
who as Josephus tells us, were very nu^mero^s at that time. For no Man wants
Authority to defend his Life against him, who has no Authority to take it away.

But the Case of St. Peter was very different: He drew his Sword indeed in his
Masters defense, but against a lawful Authority. The Officers of the Chief
Priests, and Pharisees came with Judas to the place where Jesus was, to seize
on him. This was a lawful Authority though employed upon a very unjust Errand;
but Authority must not be resisted, though in defense of the greatest Innocence.
Men who draw their Swords against lawful Powers shall perish with the Sword,
which does not signify, what the event shall always be, but what is the desert
and merit of the Action. Rebels may sometimes be prosperous, but they always
deserve Punishment; and if they escape the Sword in this World, St. Paul tells
us, they shall receive Damnation in the next. What can be said more expressly
against Resistance than this? Ib. p. 59 60.
St. Peter never could have drawn his Sword in a better Cause, never in the
Defense of a more sacred Person: If we may defend oppressed Innocence against a
lawful Authority, if we may oppose unjust and illegal Violence, if any
obligations of Friendship, Gratitude, or Religion it self could justify
Resistance, St. Peter had not met with this Rebuke. But though it was a very
unjust Action, yet it was done by a just Authority; and lawful Powers must not
be resisted, though it were in defense of the Savior of the World, and if St.
Peter might not use the Sword in defense of Christ's Person, there is much less
pretense to fight for his Religion, for though some call this f^ghting for
Religion; it is only fighting for themselves. Men may keep their Religion, if
they please in despite of Earthly Powers; and therefore no Powers can hurt
Religion, though they may persecute the Professors of it: And therefore when Men
take up Arms to avoid Perse^ution, it is not in defense of Religion, but of
themselves, that is, to avoid their suffering for Religion. And if St. Peter
might not fight to preserve Christ himself, certainly neither he, nor we, ought
to take up Arms to defend our selves from Persecution. Christ was the first
Martyr for his own Religion, his Person was infinitely more Sacred, and
inviolable than any one of us can pretend to be. And if St. Peter must not
fight for Christ, certainly we must not fight for our selves, though we absurdly
enough call it fighting for our Religion. And who were these Powers St. Peter
resisted? They were only the Servants and Officers of the High Priest. The
High Priest did not appear there himself, much less, Pilate, much less Caesar,
and yet our Savior rebukes St. Peter for resisting the Inferior Officers, Ib.
p. 62.
though they offered the most unjust, and illegal Violence. It seems he did not
understand our modern distinctions between the Person, and the Authority of the
Prince, that though his Person be sacred, and must not be touched, yet his
Ministers who act by his Authority may be opposed. We may fight his Navies, and
demolish his Garrisons, and kill his Subjects, who fight for him, though we must
not touch his Person. But he is a Mock Prince, whose Authority is confined to
his own Person, who can do nothing more than what he can do with his two hands;
which cannot answer the Ends of Government. A Prince is not merely a natural
but a Political Person, and his Personal Authority reaches as far as his
Commission does. His Officers and Ministers of State, and Commanders and
Soldiers are his Ends, and Eyes, and Ears, and Legs, and he who resists those
who Act by his Commission, may as properly be said to resist the personal
Authority of the Prince, as if he himself were present in his Natural Person as
well as by his Authority. Thus our Savior, it seems, thought, when he rebuked
St. Peter for striking a Servant of the High Priest, and smiting off his Ear.


F. In Answer to this place, which you have now brought to prove that the
Resistance that St. Peter would have made on our Saviors behalf, was
absolutely unlawful, I shall not insist as some do, that Christ came into the
World on purpose to be a Sacrifice for Sin, and that therefore it was
inconsistent with his design, and the Person he undertook, to resist, and
oppose, had it been never so lawful to resist; though our Savior himself by the
Words, John 18.11.
which St. John relates him to have spoken to St. Peter, seems to favor this
Interpretation; when after he had bid him put his Sword into the Scabbard, he
adds, The Cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink it; and so
likewise the answer he gave Pilate, who asked him whether he was a King? John
18.37.
Thou say, that I am a King; to this End was I born, and for this Cause came
I into the World, that I should bear Witness unto the Truth: Nor yet shall I go
about to interpret these Words, For they that take the Sword shall perish by
the Sword; in that Sense which Grotius puts upon it, though quite different from
yours, as if it were not designed as a rebuke to St. Peter, but for the
encouragement of his Disciples, and being indeed a Prophecy, that the Jews,
who now came against him with Swords, and Staves, should perish by the Sword of
the Romans, who should be the Avengers of Christ's Death: but I shall take it in
the same sense as you do, as a rebuke to St. Peter, for going about to resist a
Lawful Authority, though employed upon a very unjust Errand: Yet will it not
prove that the Supreme Powers may not be resisted in any Case, or by any Person
whatsoever, let them use their Power never so Cruelly, or Tyrannically against
their Subjects: I grant indeed, it proves, what I have never denied, that a
private Person, though Innocent ought not to r^sist the Civil Officers that come
to seize him, for a Crime whereof he is accused before a Lawful Authority, for
this is not only unlawful by the Command of Christ, but also by the Law of
Nature, and Nations. For in England, it is not only Penal, for a Man to resist
the Officers of Justice, that come to seize him, though he be Innocent of the
Crime, whereof he is accused, but also to withdraw himself from Justice by
flight. And though upon Trial, he be found Innocent, yet if he fled for the same,
he shall forfeit all his Goods; and that very justly, because no Man ought to
suspect, and withdraw himself from the public Trial of the Laws; now to apply
this to the Case of our Savior, though the Action which these Priests, and
Soldiers came about was in it self unjust; Yet was it not so, either in
respect of these Officers themselves, who acted by a Lawful Authority, nor yet
was it unjust, or unlawful in respect of the High Priest and Sanbedrim, who
sent them: For since it belonged to them alone to Judge of a Prophet, who they
supposed taught contrary to the Law of Moses, since they did believe our
Savior to be such a Prophet, it was in respect of them, neither unjust nor
unlawful to seize him, and bring him before them, to give an account of his
Doctrine, and they might likewise do this either by day, or by Night with the
help of more, or fewer men, according as they should think fit; since they
feared the People might rescue him; especially since they looked upon him as
one who went about to make himself King of the Jews, in Opposition to Caesar;
and therefore whilst they lay under this Mistake* they were under as high an
Obligation, as an Erroneous Conscience could lay upon them of Seizing him, and
bringing him before the High Priest and the Governor. For if they had believed
him to be the true Messiah, and consequently the King of their Nation, it had
been impossible, that they should ever have gone about to put him to Death.
Which likewise our Savior himself acknowledges, Luke 23.24.
when Praying for them that Crucified him, he said, Father forgive them, for
they know not what they do. I speak not this to excuse the Priests, or
San^edrim for condemning our Savior to Death, or for using all the Power they
had with Pilate to have him executed: Since I grant their Ignorance being in
great part Wilful, at least not Invincible, they had no just excuse, not to
believe on him, after so many Miracles he had wrought in the sight of all the
World: But only to prove that (which I suppose you will not deny) i. e. that
Magistrates, even whilst they Act unjustly are not to be resisted in the
Execution of Public Justice; no, not to rescue an Innocent Man by force, from
the Hand of Justice, after he is Condemned: Since the false, or unjust
Sentences of Judges against particular Persons, are to be taken for just in
common Acceptance, till they be Repealed; according to that Maxim in your
Civil Law, Proetor dum iniquum decernit, Ius dicit; De Iustitia, and Iure Lege
Ius.
and therefore our Savior coming to fulfill all Righteousness, and to be the
exact Pattern of Divine, and Moral Actions could not do less than rebuke St.
Peter, for making use of the Sword against a Lawful Authority, but what is this
to the Cases that I have put of the Resistance of whole Nations, or Bodies of
Men against an unjust force, and destructive Violence, upon their Persons, and
Estates by those who pretend to Act as the Supreme Powers, tho contrary to all
Laws, Natural, and Divine, and who have no Pretense to Act as they do, but only
their unjust and Arbitrary Wills backed by Power: And that there is a great
difference in these two, I will clearly show you, from your own Concession,
that no man wants Authority to defend his Life against him, that has no
Authority to take it away; Acts 21.
and therefore I suppose St. Paul might only with the Help of those that were
with Him, not only have defended his Life, against those whom we find (in the
25 th of the Acts) who were by Order of the High Priest, and Chief of the Jews,
to have lain ^n wait to kill Paul by the way, but also against any that Festus
the Governor himself should have sent for the same End: Since He there
dec^ares, Acts 25 16.
That it is not the manner (i. e. Law) of the Romans, to deliver any Man to
dye, before that he, that is accused, have the Accu^^rs face to face, and have
License to Answer for himself, concerning the Crime laid against him: And
therefore as Caesar could give Festus no Commission to Murder Men, so neither
did God bestow on the Emperor any Authority to commit murder or to Authorize
others to do it; and if a single Person might do this, certainly much more a
whole Nation, Country, or City may justify such a Resistance, where their
Lives, Liberties and Estates lie at Stake from the Violence, or Tyranny of the
Supreme Powers and therefore, I do not see, but that I may very well grant the
Instance, you have put to be conclusive against this Resistance, made by St.
Peter on our Saviors behalf, so that your Instance does not reach the Case in
hand, that all Resistance of Supreme Powers is unlawful. And you your self have
already granted as much as I can in Reason desire, that no Man wants Authority
to defend his Life against Him, who has no Authority to take it away: So that
unless Princes and their Inferior Officers receive Authority from God to
commit Murders, every Man may defend himself against them, when they go about
to take away their Lives by Violence contrary to Law. And therefore, I see no
Reason, from any thing that you have hitherto said, to believe that Christ did
not allow this Distinction between the Person and Authority of the Prince, to
be good in some Cases; or that though his Person should be sacred, yet that his
Ministers who Act not by his Regal Authority, but his Personal, and Tyrannical
Will may be opposed, nor can I find any Consequence from what you say, that he
is a Mock Prince, whose Authority is confined to his own Person, who can do
nothing more, than what he can do with his own Hands. Since no Man in his Wits
asserts, any such thing; for I grant that an Absolute Prince has Power to make
Laws, and to Command them to be put in Execution, which do not contradict the
Laws of God, and Nature, and a Limited Prince has likewise a Right to Command
in all things, that do not expressly contradict Gods Natural, and revealed Laws,
and also those Positive Laws of his Country, (which he is not the sole maker
of) that do not contradict the former; and if he can do this; I think he is
endued with an Authority sufficient to Answer all the Ends of Government,
without supposing, that he must needs have an irresistible Power (and without
which he cannot Answer those Ends) to Murder, and Enslave whomsoever he will. I
grant indeed a Prince is not merely a Natural, but a Political Person, but
certainly his Personal Authority as King does not reach as far as his
Commission, or that he who resists those, who Act by his Commission, may be
said in all Cases to resist his Regal Authority. Since at this rate the poor
Protestants in Ireland at the beginning of the last Irish Rebellion, had been
in a very woeful Condition, if it had happened (which was not impossible) that
King Charles the first should really have granted a Commission to Sir Phelim
On^al to destroy them; which no man could then certainly tell, but that he had,
since Sir Phelim publicly showed such a Commission, and still asserted the
Truth of it, till he came upon the Gallows; but this is only by the by, and in
answer to what you have now said to this Matter. So that there is no need of
supposing, what our Savior thought one way, or other in this matter: Since he
did not rebuke St. Peter, for resisting the Inferior Officers, because they
offered an unjust, and illegal Violence; but because he resisted those who
acted by a true, and Legal Commission from the High Priest, and Sanhedrim, who
supposed our Savior to be a false Prophet.


M. If this Distinction of yours were true, it would render the Example of
Christ's suffering, in obedience to the Supreme Powers, though unjustly, yet
without Resistance, of no effect to us, whereas I am firmly persuaded, S. C. R.
p. 81.
that Christ took such a mean, and suffering a Person upon him, because it was
most agreeable to the Religion which he preached, and of which he was to be an
Example; and therefore, though Christ suffered for other Reasons and to other
Ends and Purposes, than we do or can suffer, yet his Sufferings are an Example
to us, because God chose to save, and redeem us by the Sufferings of his Son,
not only that he might expiate our Sins by his Blood, but also that he might be
an Example to us of Meekness, and Patience, and Submission to the Divine Will,
and Subjection to Government, even in the most unjust, and infamous Sufferings.
We may consider farther, that Christ's Sufferings in Obedience to the Will, and
Appointment of God, does not make him unfit to be our Example. Ib. p. 82.
For though God has not so peremptorily decreed that all Christians should
suffer, as he did, that Christ should suffer, yet when ever we are called to it
(as we always are, when we cannot avoid suffering without resisting a Lawful
Authority) our Sufferings are as much the Effects of Gods Decree, and
appointment, as the Sufferings of Christ were; and in such Cases every
Christian may, and ought to say as his Lord did. The Cup which my Father has
given me, shall I not drink it?

Thus St. Peter expressly tells the Christians, to whom he wrote, and gives it
as a Reason, why they should suffer patiently, even for doing well. 1 Pet. 2.21.
For even hereunto were you called, because Christ also suffered for us,
leaving us an Example that we should follow his Steps. Now, calling, in the New
Testament signifies the Choice, and Election of God, and always supposes a
Divine Decree, Appointment and Constitution, Romans 11.29.
as the Foundation of it. Thus St. Paul tells us that the Gifts, and Calling
((...)) of God are without Repentance, Ibid. p. 83.
that is, that Decree he made to choose the Po^^erity of Abraham for his
People, which still entitled all those of them to the Blessings of the Gospel
who would believe in Christ. 2 Timothy 1.9. Heb. 3.1.
Thus the State of Christianity is our Calling, and Holy Calling, because it is
the Way, and Means, God has Chosen and Appointed for the Salvation of Mankind:
and Christians are often styled the Called, because God has now decreed to
choose all the sincere Disciples of Christ, as he formerly did the Posterity of
Abraham to be his Peculiar People; and throughout the Scriptures of the New
Testament; God is never said to call, nor any one to be called of God, but with
respect to some Divine Decree, and Constitution; and therefore when St. Peter
tells the Christians, that they are called to suffer, it signifies that God
has appointed them to it, by his positive Will and Decree.

This St. Paul discourses more at large in his Epistle to the Romans, and
comforts them under their sufferings, from this very consideration, that the
sufferings which they underwent, were not the Effects of mere Chance and
Accident, nor of the wickedness and injustice of men, nor barely of God's
Permission, but of his Decree and Appointment; and therefore they might
certainly conclude, that whatever their sufferings were, they should turn to
their Good. Romans 8.28, 29, 30.
And we know, that all things work together for good to them that love God, to
them that are called accroding to his purpose, Ib. p. 14.
those who are called, that is, to suffer (which is the Argument, the Apostle
is discoursing of) according to his Will, and Appointment. And a little after
he goes on, and says;

And such Persons who are thus appointed, who are thus called by God to suffer,
Ib. p. 85.
shall be sure to conquer, and to receive the Reward of Conquerors. For thus
the Apostle adds, for whom he did foreknow he also did predestinate to be
conformed to the Image of his Son; that he might be the first born amongst many
Brethren. This Conformity to the Image of Christ in this place, does plainly
signify a Conformity to him, in sufferings, as is evident from the whole scope
of this place. Some Persons it seems there are, whom God does predestinate, or
fore-appoint to be conformed to the sufferings of Christ; for this is not the
actual portion of all Christians, though it is the Condition of our
Disciple-ship.

So that though God has not made us Slaves and Vassals to the humor of every
Tyrant, Ib. p. 86.
yet all the Afflictions and Sufferings of Christians, especially those which
befall them on the account of Religion; are as particularly ordered, and
determined by God, as the sufferings of Christ himself were; and therefore
there is no difference upon this Account, between the sufferings of Christ, and
the sufferings of his Disciples; and therefore though Christ came into the
World on purpose to suffer in Obedience to the Divine Will, this does not make
him ever the l^ss fit to be an Example to us. Nay, this Obedience to the Will
of God in suffering the hardest things, from the most unjust, and Tyrannical
Powers, is an Example to us of the same patient suffering and Submission to the
Will of God.

It is true, none of us in particular can know, that God has decreed, Ib. p.
87.
that we shall suffer such, or such things; and from such or such hands, as our
Savior did; but yet this we know, that it is God's Will and Pleasure, that we
should patiently endure those sufferings which we cannot avoid without sin; and
since he has forbid us by express Laws to resist the higher Powers, whatever
sufferings cannot be avoided without resistance, it is God's Will, and
Pleasure, that we should submit to them. And since none of these sufferings,
which are unavoidable to us, befall us without the particular Decree, and
Appointment of God, we have reason in Imitation of our great Master, to submit
to them, with the same cheerfulness and self-resignation as he did.

There is something indeed in the Example of our Savior, which in our
Circumstances we are not bound to imitate; for he punctually knowing, what
God's Will and Pleasure was concerning him, voluntarily chose that Condition
which he so well knew, God had allotted for him. He freely chose a mean, and
servile Fortune, he chose suffering and Death; when his time of offering up
himself was come, he went up to Jerusalem on purpose to die there; but we are
not bound to choose Poverty and disgrace, and suffering, we are not bound
voluntarily to deliver up our selves into the hands of Tyrants, and
Persecutors, who thirst after our blood. We may, and ought to use all just and
honest Arts to make our Condition easy and comfortable in the World, and to
avoid the rage and fury of bloody Men, because we cannot tell, Ib. p. 88, 89.
that it is the Will and Appointment of God, that we shall suffer, till our
sufferings are unavoidable; and then when we must either suffer, or sin, when
we must either renounce our Religion, or resist the Supreme Powers; we must
embrace sufferings, and Death, as that Portion which God has allotted for us.

I shall only here observe what a mighty security this is to all Good
Christians, how absolute or Tyrannical soever the Power be under which they
live; that they are safe in God's hands, and all the Powers of Men and Devils
cannot touch them, till God by a positive Decree appoints, and orders their
sufferings. There could not be greater, nor more absolute Tyrants, than the
Roman Emperors were at this time, and yet they had no Power over the meanest
Christian, but by an express Commission from Heaven. This is the special
Privilege of the Christian Church above the rest of Mankind, that they are
God's peculiar Care and Charge; that he does not permit any Sufferings or
Persecutions to befall them, but what he himself orders and appoints. It is a
great security to the World, that there is no evil happens to men, but what God
permits, and that he permits nothing but what he can overrule to wise and good
Ends; but it is a greater happiness to have our Condition immediately allotted
by God. God may permit a great many evils to befall us in Anger and
Displeasure, but when he takes us into his immediate Protection, and under his
own Government, whatever evils he appoints for us, whoever are the Instruments
of them, they are certainly for our good. And therefore there is no such danger
in the Doctrine of Non-Resistance, Ib. p. 90.
as some Men imagine, how absolute soever this may be thought to render
Princes, sincere Christians can suffer nothing by it, for they shall suffer
nothing more, nor less than what God appoints for them to suffer; but as for
the absurdity you think you have brought me to, by granting that no man wants
Authority to defend his own Life against him who has no Authority to take it
away, that does not extend to Supreme Powers; since though I grant they have no
Authority to take away men's Lives contrary to Law; yet does it not follow that
we may resist and oppose them, if they do; this I absolutely deny, because God
has expressly commanded us not to resist them; Ib. p. 190.191.
and I see no inconsistency between these two Propositions, that a Prince has
no Legal Authority to take away men's Lives against Law, and yet that he must
not be resisted when he does so, for both the Laws of God, and of our Country,
suppose these two to be very consistent.


F. To answer this long speech of yours, the best way may be, to show you first
how far I agree with you, and wherein I must differ from you, and I will also
tell you what reasons I have for it. In the first place I grant, that though
our Savior was indeed the Messiah, and true King of the Jews, yet was he not
such a Messiah as they expected, nor was he to have a Temporal, but Spiritual
Dominion, and therefore would not be such a king, though the Jews would have
made him so. I likewise yield, that Christ submitted to the most unjust
Sentence, and to the most ignominious, and painful Death, rather than he would
resist the Higher Powers; though he could easily have called for Legions of
Angels to his rescue: As also that he rebuked Peter, when he drew his Sword in
his defense, and tells Pilate the reason why he was so easily apprehended, and
without any Resistance o^ Opposition. My Kingdom (said he) is not of this
World, if my Kingdom were of this World, then would my Servants fight that I
should not be delivered to the Jews; but now is my Kingdom not from hence. All
which plainly shows that our Savior's Subjection was no matter of force, or
constraint, because he wanted Power to resist, but it was matter of choice,
that which was most suitable to the Nature of his Kingdom, which was not to be
propagated by Carnal Weapons, but by sufferings; yet though it may not be
propagated, sure it may be defended by force. In some Cases, as if we were
invaded by a Foreign Power, who made War upon the Account of Religion, and also
in those Kingdoms or Commonwealths, where Christianity, or the true Profession
of the Gospel is established by Law, and makes a part, not only of the
Ecclesiastical, but Civil Constitution of a Nation. In these Cases, if those
who pretend to the sole Legislative Power, (but have it not) should go about to
alter the National Religion by force, and put Men to death contrary to the
former Laws, and Constitutions of that Kingdom, I think such Illegal Powers may
lawfully be resisted by the People, they having as much right to the free
Exercise, and Enjoyment of their established Religion, as they have to their
Liberties, Properties, or any other Civil Rights; since by this Legal
Establishment, Religion becomes a part of the Civil Constitution of the
Kingdom, and so may be maintained by the same means as other Rights.

2 dly. I grant, that in all other Cases our Savior has so far proposed his
sufferings to us for our Imitation, as we are engaged by our Baptismal Vow, to
suffer in the same Cause for which he himself suffered, that is, for the
bearing witness, That Jesus is the Christ, or true Messiah, and Son of God. And
this the Apostle calls (speaking of Christ himself) the witnessing before
Pontius Pilate a good Confession. The like I also hold of all such Truths, as
are the necessary consequences of this great Doctrine.

3 dly. I farther grant, that when our God calls any Person to suffer, for the
Testimony of his Truth, by the Cruelty of those who are the Supreme Powers, (as
the Apostles, and Primitive Christians were by a particular Providence,) that
then those Powers are not to be resisted, but patiently submitted to by
Christians at this day; whenever it proves necessary for the same great ends
for which Christ at first enjoined it, ( viz.) for bearing witness to the Truth
of the Gospel; and for the further Propagation thereof by our constant
Sufferings and Example, according to that saying of the Primitive Fathers,
Sanguis Martyrum, semen Ecclesiae; yet is not this absolute Submission to the
Supreme Powers in matters of Religion due by the Law of Nature, or that
delivered to Moses, but (if at all) purely from the express Example of Christ;
so that all the difficulty lies in discovering, when we are thus called by our
Savior to suffer, and bear witness to the Truth; though with the loss of our
Lives, and all that is dear to us.

And therefore, if I should grant that when ever we lie under the same
Circumstances of giving this Testimony as the Primitive Christians then did,
and that it may serve as much for the same ends designed by God, thereby we are
also under the same Obligations; otherwise I think we are lawfully discharged
from it: As for Example, suppose the King should, instead of a Papist, have
turned Mohammedan, and to propagate, or set up his own abominable Superstition
here, should have sent for from Turkey, or Morocco a great Army of Turks, or
Moors, and by them would force all the Christians in England to turn
Mahometans, by the same Methods of Dragooning Men, and seizing their Estates,
as the French King has exercised upon his Protestant Subjects. Can any
reasonable Man believe, that we lie under the same Obligation, thus to suffer
in a Country where the People are all Christians, as we were if we had happened
to be converted in a Country where almost all or the greater part of them were
Mahometans, or Heathens, and where the Mohammedan, or Pagan Religion has been
for many Ages the Established Religion of that Nation and Government?

For in our Case, there is no farther occasion to bear witness to the Truth by
patient Suffering for it; Nor yet of Propagating it by our Martyrdom; since all
the People amongst whom we live, are sufficiently convinced of the Truth of it:
Nor can it be reasonable that our Savior should give up whole Nations to be
thus destroyed, at the Will of one, or a few Men, only to do that, of which
there is no need. For then Jesus Christ had delivered us up to be mere Slaves,
and Vassals to the Will and Humor of every wicked Tyrant, (which you seem to
disapprove) without performing any of those great Ends, for which He at first
enjoined this Submission. And though I grant, that the Afflictions and
Sufferings of Christians, on the Account of Religion are as particularly
ordered and determined by God, as those of Christ himself; yet, it is only, as
they may be subservient to higher Ends, viz. The propagation of his Religion,
and the Good, and Peace of Mankind, which I think cannot be well promoted by
supposing, an irresistible Power in the Prince, or State, of rooting
Christianity quite out of a Nation, or Country, after it is settled by Law, and
become the National Religion thereof; and of inslaving all the People of it
when ever he pleases And though I take this to be the true bounds and limits of
our Submission to the Supreme Powers in matters of Religion. But supposing not
granting at present that Christ has laid any more strict Commands of
Submission upon us in those matters, yet since he came not into the World to
put us into a more miserable Condition in other things, than we were before his
Coming, nor to take away, or abridge us of any of those Natural or Civil Rights
that we enjoy as Men or Subjects, therefore if the People had a Right before
Christ, to defend their Lives, Liberties, or Properties against the violent
Assaults, and Oppressions of Princes or States, they have still the same
Liberty left entire in all Cases, which remain not excepted by the express
Precepts or Example of Christ; since it is a general rule in all positive Laws,
that whatever is not excepted, or altered, by a subsequent Law, remains the
same as it was before in all other Cases, which are not so particularly
excepted; and therefore though I should grant that it were now unlawful in any
case to resist the supreme Powers who persecute, or put Men to death for
bearing witness to Christ's true Religion; yet does it not therefore follow
that it were unlawful to resist in any other Case whatsoever, though it were in
the defense of our Lives, Liberties, or Properties, since such defense was
lawful (as I have already proved) before Christ's coming, and is not expressly
forbidden by any Place of Scripture, or express Command of Christ or his
Apostles.

And without the Considerations of these great Ends, that Jesus Christ had to
enjoin his Followers, an absolute Submission to the supreme Powers in some
Cases, (though not in all) were to suppose, that instead of a merciful Savior he
had only come into the World to patronize Tyranny, and to render the Condition
of Mankind much more miserable than it was under the Law of Moses, or in the
State of Nature, and seems to suppose that instead of Commiserating Men's
sufferings, he only took delight to make them miserable; nor will it be any
comfort, or security to Christians when they are once made Slaves under an
Arbitrary Tyrannical Power, That they are safe in God's hand, and that all the
Powers of M^n or Devils cannot touch them, till God by a Positive Decree
appoint, and order their Sufferings: For if this were a good Argument against
all Resistance, it would be so likewise against resisting Pirates or Robbers,
since whatever we suffer from them is by God's positive Decree, who thus orders
all our sufferings even from them; and (...) I think (since men are not now to
be saved by Miracles) he has like wise also ordained Resistance as the only
human means to prevent their Malice and Violence; or escape out of their hands
when we fall under them; nor are the same ends unlawful against any other
humane Powers, but what God himself has ordained.

And therefore it is a very crude Assertion to say, that though there could not
be more absolute Tyrants than the Roman Emperors, yet than they had no Power
against the meanest Christian, but by an express Commission from Heaven;
whereas I never knew as yet (and I would be very glad you could show it me)
where this express Commission is to be found, whereby Princes, or other Supreme
Powers are Authorized to persecute, enslave, or take away the Lives of the
meanest Christians, barely for matters of Opinion, or faults that do not
immediately concern the public quiet and safety; and as you have talked a
great deal of the great security it is to the World, that no evil can happen to
us, but what God permits, and that he permits nothing but what he can overruled
to wise and good Ends, and that God may permit a great many evils to befall us
in his Anger and Displeasure, and that whatever Evils be appoints for us, they
are certainly for our good, and that therefore there is no such danger in the
Doctrine of Non-resistance as some Men imagine, because sincere Christians can
suffer nothing by it, since they shall suffer nothing more, or less than what
God appoints them to suffer. All these Arguments might as well be used for not
resisting Pirates, or Thieves, or not endeavoring to divert, or oppose a
River, that had run beyond its Banks, but to let it go where it lists to the
destruction of a whole Country, because forsooth sincere Christians can suffer
nothing by it, for they can suffer nothing more nor less than God a^points them
to suffer; indeed a wondrous use of Consolation. And therefore unless you can
prove that all Tyranny is ordained by God for our good, and that therefore we
are obliged under pain of everl^sting Damnation, to submit to it; all that you
have spoken concerning the Example and sufferings of Christ signify just
nothing; so that I think the absurdity still lies at your door, since if Christ
has not expressly forbidden all resistance of the unjust violence of Princes,
(as I do not find he has by any of the Texts you have yet brought) every man
may defend his Life against him, who you grant has no Authority to take it
away: and as for its being forbidden by the Laws of our Country, I shall answer
that when you urge those Laws to me.


M. I hope I shall be able to prove that by and by, but in the mean time give
me leave to observe, that it seems very strange to me; that you should own
Christ has obliged his Disciples to submit without any resistance in some
Cases to the Supreme Powers, when they persecute them and put them to death for
Religion; and that they might not take up Arms in their own defense, and that
of their Religion, which is the greatest concern that men ought to have in this
World; and yet that they might do it for much less considerable Matters, viz.
their Lives, Liberties, or Estates, which sure ought to be of much less
importance than the Glory of God, which is chiefly maintained by his true
Worship; but I see you have found a Salvo for this, and will not allow Princes
the irresistible Power of Persecution, when the Religion is once settled by Law;
that is, when the Christians were strong enough to resist, which certainly
would be no thanks at all, for their Submission, since Men who are weak and
unable to resist, must needs obey, and suffer; which were matter of force and
not of Duty; whereas we find by Tertullian, and all the Ecclesiastical
Historians, that though the Christians were strong and numerous enough in the
Roman Empire, yet they chose rather to dye than to resist, as I shall show you
more particularly anon, when I come to those Quotations; but I will if you
please, now proceed to the two last Texts I have to cite to you out of St.
Paul, and St. Peter.


F. That we may not confound things one with another, I pray give me leave now
to answer what you have objected against what I said last, before you proceed
to any fresh places of Scripture; for though in the first place I doubt whether
the Non-Resistance which Tertullian and other Primitive Fathers so strictly
preached up, was sounded upon any express Command of our Savior or his
Apostles; yet granting at present that Christ and his Apostles enjoined it both
by their Example and Precept, yet this does not reach the case now before us,
for there may be very good Reasons why our Savior might enjoin an absolute
Submission to the (...) Powers without any Resistance, though they persecute
us, nay, put us to (...) for Matters of Religion; and yet he may allow us
greater Liberty for the defense of our Lives, Liberties, and Estates, when
assaulted by the unjust violence of the supreme Powers.

For, First, our Savior ordains his Religion to be suitable to his Person,
viz. a meek, humble, Suffering Messiah to be an Example of a meek, and
suffering Religion. Secondly, Religion is a thing that no Power in the World
can take from us, Persecution indeed may increase it, and render it more
fervent, but can never diminish it, if it be real. And God has expressly
promised so great a Reward in another Life for our sufferings for it in this,
that it will infinitely outweigh all that ever we can suffer on that Account;
and Lastly, our Savior Christ was pleased to ordain his Doctrine to be
propagated by Miracles, and Sufferings to distinguish it from all the false
Religions that had been in the World before his, or that should be set up in
opposition to it afterward; since neither the Pagan, nor Mohammedan
Superstitions, nor yet the Jewish Religion can show the like; to subsist, nay
increase for above three hundred years under such great and cruel Persecutions;
nor yet is the Glory of God at all diminished, but rather increased under
Persecution, since none are then firm to it, but such as are really persuaded
of its Truth; and that they ought to suffer the worst that can befall them,
rather than forsake it.

And certainly nothing can tend more to the Glory of God, than to see it
subsist and increase under a cruel and bloody Persecution; nor is it the same
reason that we should suffer Persecution after Religion is become the settled
Constitution of a Nation, because then every man has the same Right to it as
he has to his Property or Freedom: And though a man may part with either the
one or the other, yet is he not obliged to give them up by force, and whether
he will or no; so likewise neither that Right which he has to enjoy his
Religion according to the Laws of his Country. And therefore I do not resolve
the Obligation to Non-Resistance in matters of Religion into the being the
major party in a Kingdom as you suppose, for if the Government of England were
Popish, that is, the Legislative part of it, and the Major part of the Common
People were Protestants, perhaps in that Case they were under all the
Obligations of enduring Persecution without resistance, as they were under the
Heathen Emperors; but indeed the Primitive Christians were obliged to
Non-resistance, because they lived under a Government in which Christianity was
forbid, and Paganism established by Law.

And though it is true, Constantine made several Laws, enjoining the free
Exercise of the Christian Religion, and forbidding the Heathen Sacrifices, and
that the Pagan Temples should be shut up; yet was not the Christian Religion
for all that, the sole Religion of the State; the Senators of Rome, and the
Major part of the Common People continuing Pagans still. So that it seems the
Christian Religion was all this while rather established, together with
Heathenism, than that this was wholly forbid; since all Civil Offices and
Preferments were equally conferred upon Pagans, as well as Christians, if they
deserved them; and therefore it was no hard matter for Julian the Apostate, to
revoke so many of those Edicts his Uncle had made in Favor of Christianity,
and to abrogate those, which had been published against the public Sacrifices
to the Heathen Gods, and shutting up their Temples; so that no wonder if they
were now again under the same Obligations to suffer, as they were before
Constantine's Time; since the Christian Religion was never the only One
established by Law, so as to exclude the open Profession of any other, till the
Time of Theodosius; after which, as also before, according as the Christian
Religion increased, and as they got greater Privileges from the Emperors, so
were they more stout and bold in standing up for, and defending the just Rights
of their Religion, when ever they thought them invaded by the Arian, or other
Heretical Emperors, as I shall show you by several Instances out of
Church History when we come to it; but you may now if you please proceed to the
rest of those places of Scripture, which you have to produce against this
Doctrine of Resistance in those Cases I have put.


M. I have many things still to object against your last Discourse; but since
it grows late; I shall now continue my self to the Doctrine of the Apostles
concerning Non-resistance; not as if the Authority, and Example of our Savior
were not sufficient of it self to make a Law, S. C. R. p. Chapter 4. p. 100.
but stood in need of the Confirmation, and Additional Authority of his own
Apostles, but we might justly suspect our selves mistaken in the meaning of our
Saviors Words, or in the Intention, and design of his Sufferings, had none of
his Apostles who were immediately instructed by himself, and acquainted with
the most sacred Mysteries of his Kingdom ever Preached any such Doctrine, as
this of Subjection to Princes. And therefore, to give you the more abundant
Assurance of this, I shall plainly show you, that the Apostles taught the same
Doctrine, and imitated the Example of their great Master. I shall begin with
St. Paul, who has as fully declared himself in this matter, as it is possible
any Man can do, Romans 13.1, 2.
by Words. Let every Soul be subject unto the Higher Powers, for there is no
Power but of God, the Powers that be, are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore
resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God, and they that resist shall
receive to themselves Damnation.

This is a very express Testimony against Resistance, and therefore, I shall
consider it at large, for there have been various Arts used to pervert every
Word of it and to make this Text speak quite contrary to the Design, and
Intention of the Apostle in it: And therefore, I shall divide the Words into
three general parts. 1. The Doctrine the Apostle instructs them in, Let every
Soul be subject to the Higher Powers. 2. The Reason, whereby he proves, and
inforces this Doctrine: For there is no Power, but of God; the Powers that he,
are ordained of God. Whoever therefore resists the Power resists the
Ordinance of God. The Punishment of such Resistance, and they that resist shall
receive to themselves Damnation. I shall begin with the Doctrine, Ibid. p. 102.
That every Soul must be Subject to the Higher Powers, and here are three
things to be explained. 1. Who are contained under this general Expression of
every Soul. 2. Who are meant by the Higher Powers. 3. What is meant by being
Subject. 1. Who are contained under this general Expression of every Soul,
which by an ordinary Hebraism, signifies every Man: For Man is a Compounded
Creature of Body, and Soul, and either part of him is very often in Scripture
put for the whole, sometimes Flesh, and sometimes Soul signifies the Man; and
when every Soul is opposed to the Higher Powers, it must signify all Men, of
what Rank, or Condition soever they be, who are not invested with this Higher
Power. And again, says he, The design of the Apostle, as you shall hear more
particularly, by and by, was to forbid all Resistance of Sovereign Princes; and
had he known of any Man, or Number of Men, who might Lawfully resist, he ought
not to have expressed it in such general Terms, as to forbid all without
Exception.

And therefore, I shall now a little more closely examine your main Argument,
or indeed Foundation of all that you have Urged, for Resistance, viz. That,
though it is unlawful, for private or particular Men, to resist the Supreme
Powers; yet that it does not extend unto the whole, or Major part of a people
or Nation, whenever they are outragiously oppress't, or assaulted by the Higher
Powers beyond what they suppose they are able to bear; Ib. p. 103.
whereas the Apostle here commands every Soul to be subject, and therefore if
the whole body of the People be subject to God, they must also be subject to
the Prince too, because he acts by God's ^uthority and Commission; were a
Sovereign Prince the Peoples Creature, that might be a good Maxim; Rex maj^r
singulis, sed minor universis, That the King is greater than any particular
Subject, but less than All together; but if he be God's Minister, he is upon
that account as much greater than all, as God is.

And that the whole body of the People altogether, as well as one by one, Ib.
p. 104.
are equally concerned in this Command of being subject to the higher Powers,
is evident from this Consideration, that nothing less than this will secure the
Peace and Tranquillity of humane Societies. The resistance of single Persons is
more dangerous to themselves, than to the Prince; but a powerful Combination of
Reb^ls is formidable to the most puissant Monarchs. The greater Number of
Subjects rebel against their Prince, the more do they distress his Government,
and threaten his Crown and Dignity; and if his Person and Authority be sacred,
the greater the violence is which is offered to him, the greater is the Crime.

Had the Apostle exhorted the Romans after this manner; Let no private and
single man be so foolish, Ib. 104.105.
as to rebel against his Prince, who will be too strong for him; but ^f you can
raise sufficient forces to oppose against him, if you can all consent to
depose, and murder him, this is a very innocent, and justifiable, nay, an
heroical Achievement, which becomes a Freeborn People: How would this have
secured the Peace, and quiet of the World? How would this have agreed with what
follows, that Princes are advanced by God, and that to resist our Prince, is to
resist the Ordinance of God, and that such Men shall be severely punished for
it in this World or the next? for can the Apostle be thought absolutely to
condemn Resistance, if he makes it only unlawful to resist when we want Power
to conquer? which yet is all that can be made of it, if by every Soul the
Apostle means only particular men, not the united Force and Power of Subjects.

Nor can there be any reason assigned why the Apostle should lay so strict a
Command on particular Christians to be subject to the higher Powers, Ib. p. 106.
which does not equally concern whole Nations. For if it can ever be lawful for
a whole Nation to resist a Prince, it may in the same Circumstances be equally
lawful for a particular man to do it; if a Nation may conspire against a Prince
who invades their Rights, their Liberties, or their Religion, why may not any
man by the same reason resist a Prince when his single Rights and Liberties are
invaded? Ib p. 106.
It is not so safe, and prudent indeed for a private man to resist, as for
great and powerful Numbers; but this makes resistance only a matter of
Discretion, not of Conscience; if it be lawful for the whole body of a Nation
to resist in such Cases, it must be equally lawful for a particular man to do
it; but he does it at his own Peril, when he has only his own single force to
oppose against his Prince. So that our Apostle must forbid resistance in all
men, or none. For single Persons do not use to resist, or rebel, or there is no
great danger to the Public if they do; but the Authority of Princes, and the
Security of public Government, is only endangered by a Combination of Rebels,
when the whole Nation, or any considerable part for Numbers, Power, and
Interest, take Arms against their Prince. If resistance of our Prince be a Sin,
it is not the less, but the greater sin, the greater and the more formidable
the resistance is; and it would very much unbecome the gravity and sacredness
of an Apostolical Precept, to enjoin Subjection to private Christians, who dare
not, who cannot resist alone; but to leave a powerful Combination of Rebels at
liberty to resist; Ib. p. 107.
so that every Soul must signify all Subjects, whether single or united; for
whatever is unlawful for every single Person considered as a Subject, is
unlawful for them all together; for the whole Nation is as much a subject to
the higher Powers as any single Man. Thus I am sure it is in our Government,
where Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament own themselves the Subjects of
the King, and have by public Laws disclaimed all Power of raising any War
either offensive, or defensive against the King.

Let us now consider what is meant by the higher Powers, ((...)) which
signifies the Supreme Power in any Nation, in whomsoever it is placed, Whether
in the King, as in Monarchical Governments; or in the Nobles as in
Aristocratical; or in the People as in Democracies; At the time of writing this
Epistle, the Supreme Power was in the Roman Emperors; and therefore when St.
Paul Commands the Roman Christians to be Subject to the higher Powers, the
plain meaning is, that they should be subject to the Roman Emperor. 1 Pet.
2.13.
And thus St. Peter explains it: Be subject to every Ordinance of Man for the
Lords sake, whether to the King as Supreme, (...), the word used in this Text,
as to him who has a Supereminent Power, and is above all others, as also unto
Governors that are sent by him, etc. From which Text Epiphanius proves, that
subordinate Magistrates under the King are ordained of God. And therefore that
the Power of Underofficers, since it is the Ordinance of God, ought no more to
be resisted than the King's, from whom it is derived.


F. I hope I shall not be very tedious in answering your long Speech, since a
small share of Natural Reason, and Grammar will do it; therefore to be as short
as I can, I do freely acknowledge, that not only private men, but whole Nations
are by this Precept of St. Paul, to be subject to the higher Powers, without
any Rebellion against them, as well as particular Persons, as far as they are
Powers ordained by God. And therefore it is necessary, that you should consider
what is the true signification of the word (...), which if it be once
discovered, you will find it carries its own limitation along with it* for it
excludes both the Usurpation of the supreme Power, and also the illegal and
wicked Exercis^ of it; and of this Opinion is the Learned Dr. Sanderson in his
Lectures of the Obligation of humane Laws, where in his 5 th ^ecture, 12. (as I
remember) he speaks to this purpose, in answer to an Objection* That then all
those who have the Power of the Sword, that is, of compelling those who are
under their Power to perform t^eir Commands, ought then to be obeyed in
Conscience. His Answer is to this purpose, That the Power he means, and on
which alone lies the Obligation of Conscience, is not that Power which the
Greeks call (...), that is, Natural, or Physical Power or Force; or else that
which is only de facto, by which any one is able to do whatever he pleases,
without any hinderance; but that Power which they call (...), that is, lawful
Power, or of Right, to wit, that which belongs to him that has it by the Law
of Nature, Nations, or Civil Constitutions* by reason of the Person who bears
it, and in respect of those, who are to be subject to it; to this (...), or
lawful Authority the Apostle does now so much press an exact Obedience, that he
names it five times in the space of three Verses, but says not one word of this
(...), or force. So far he. And if our Transl^^ors of this place had rendered
the word (...), Authorities, instead of Powers, as they have rendered it in
other Places, and as they were forced to do in the first of Peter Chapter 3. Ver.
22. where (...), and (...) coming together in the same Verse, they are forced
to render the former word by Authorities* and the latter by Powers, which if
they had constantly done, they had effectually prevented the false application
of this Text, since no Man in his Wits can imagi^e that when a Prince (for
Example) destroys, oppresses, and enslaves his Subjects, he acts thus as a
lawful Power or Authority, or that belongs to him (as Dr. Sanderson very well
expresses it) by any Natural, or Municipal Laws, much less can be the (...),
true, or just Authorities, or Powers which are here meant by St. Paul to be
ordained by God; and that these words may be so rendered, instead of the Powers
that are, Vid. Lexicon Scapulae.
appears from Plato, who more than once has (...) for vera Potestas, true
Power or Authority.

So that if this Text were to be understood in your sense, this place of
Scripture would serve to countenance and defend all the Tyranny, Cruelty, and
Oppression which the most wicked Tyrants can commit, all which must be ordained
by God, by virtue of this equivocal word Power. But that you may the better see
the absurdity of this Interpretation, Pray let us put these things into the
Text instead of Powers, and see how it will run then. The^^ is no Tyranny,
Violence, or Oppression committed by Princes, or their subordinate Officers,
but what is ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists this Power, resists
the Ordinance of God. You Will say perhaps, that this is not your meaning, yet is
it the true sense that must arise from your Interpretation of this place. Which
is no more than the Voice of God approving all just and lawful Governments, and
confirming from Heaven those Moral Duties of Submission, Obedience, and
Non-resistance, which were always due, and must ever be to lawful Authority,
that is, such as is agreeable to the Laws of God, and Nature, which you plainly
see are not due to mere Force, Violence or Cruelty, for that is absolutely
excluded out of the Text, which will by no means admit of it. The higher Powers
ordained by God having no Commission from him for any of these wicked Purposes.


M. I doubt for all your Confidence, that you very much mistake the sense of
these Words, S. C. A. p. 19.
for in the first place your (or rather the Dr's) Criticism between (...) and
(...) will not do; for they both signify the same thing in Scripture, either
Force and Power, or Authority, (...), I will not be brought under the Power of
any thing, 1 Cor. 6.12. must signify force, and (...) must signify Authority
and Dignity; thus Ephesians. 1.21. (...), which are several Names, and degrees of
Dignity, and Authority, as well as Power. And in the second place, you do much
more mistake, when you suppose by this word Powers to be meant only the true,
or just Exercise of Civil Authority, whereas the (...), are the (...), the
persons themselves, who exercise Authority, and Dominion, the (...), the
Rulers, v. 3. the Ministers of God which bear the Sword, v. 4. in St. Peter,
the (...), and (...)* the King, and his Governors, and Magistrates, 1. Pet.
Chapter 2. v. 13, 14. And therefore Imust tell you, you do very ill to separate the
Power, or Authority from the Persons instructed with it.

But suppose I should grant you, that this word (...) does here signify the
Exercise of Authority, U. S. A. S. p. 133.
yet does it not signify the Right and lawful use of this Power, but the Right
to Exercise this Authority; whether well, or ill, it is all one, as to the
Submission due to it, because no Resistance can be lawful for want of a
superior Jurisdiction over it. The truth of this is evident from John 19.10,
11. Pilate says to Jesus, Know thou not that (...) I have Power to crucify
thee, and have Power to release thee, Jesus grants it, and answers (...), etc.
Thou could have no Power against me, Ib. 138.
except it were given thee from above. And therefore I shall reduce your
Argument into the form of a Syllogism, that you may more plainly see the
absurdity of it. Powers not ordained by God, may be resisted without danger of
Damnation.

But Powers used Tyrannically, are not ordained of God,

Therefore we are not forbidden to resist them.

In this Syllogism the Minor is not true; for though Tyranny be not the
Ordinance of God, yet the Power, or Authority (of which this Tyranny is but an
abuse) is of Divine Institution: For though the Supreme Power is commanded to
rule justly, yet is it withal enabled to act otherwise; for the good, or ill
use of it is left indifferent in respect of the Subjects subjection, though not
of the Magistrates commanding, or acting Power; so that the abuse of this Power
does not make void the Authority, though acting contrary to the Laws of God, or
Nature. The Obligation not to resist the Supreme Powers receiving not any
Validity from their Justice, nor is it weakened, or annulled by their violence,
or injustice. Saul was God's anointed, and Pilate had his Authority from above,
notwithstanding their high abuse of it.

So that upon the whole matter, I incline to believe, that the reason which
made St. Paul call the Magistrates by the abstract, Powers, was this* He wrote
to Christians living in the Roman Empire, and it was the Custom of the Latin
Tongue to call Persons endued wit^ Power, Ib. p. 133.
Potestates. You may observe it in Ulpi^n, L quid sit. D. de Aedil. edict.. 19.
And in Augustine, Epist. 48. who says, sive Potest^s veritati savens aliquem
corrigat, laudem habet ex illo, qui fuerit emendatus; sive inimica veritati in
aliquem saeviat, laudem habet ex illo qui fuerit Co^natus, and mark that,
Potest^s inimica veritati must needs signify a Man abusing his Authority. And
in I^venal we read An Fidenarum Gabirunque esse Potestas. And in Suetonius*
Iurisdictionem de si^ei commissis (...), and tan^um in urbe deligari
M^gistratibus solitam, in perpetuum atque etiam per Provincias Potestatibus
delegavit: The modern Languages, Italian, and French, which were bred out of
the Latin, retain this ancient way of speaking, for potestat in old French, and
podesta in Italian, express not the Function only, but the Person who manages
it. Thus anciently the Latin word for the Chief Justice, was Iustitia, as you
may find in Glanvil, Lib. 2. Cap. 6. and Roger Hoveden's Annals; so our King is
called in the abstract, Majesty, as the Grecian Emperors (...).

Many dangerous Consequences flow from thence, but I desire not to make sport
with that unhappy distinction, which had almost ruined as flourishing, and
strongly tempered a Kingdom as any in the Christian World. It exposes
Magistrates, and all in Authority, to the (...) and Injuries of the basest sort
of People; for when discontented, it is very obvious for them to tell them,
though Reverence is indeed due to the^ Function, yet that setting their Office
aside, they will take the liberty only to kick their Persons, and that the
Magistrate is not at all affronted, though the Man be soundly beaten. Indeed it
is against common sense to put such a difference between the Person and the
Authority of Kings, for if it were real, neither God, nor the Laws of the Land
have made any Provision for the King's safety; for his Authority is not capable
of receiving any benefit, and therefore it must be acknowledged by all sober
and reasonable men, that this Authority does but convey such and such
Privileges upon the Person, who only can be sensible of them, and consequently
whatever is attempted against his Person, is attempted against his Authority
likewise.


F. I doubt you will have no better luck in Criticisms, than my se^f, and that
they will do your cause as little good; for if there be no difference in the
Scripture between (...), and (...), as you affirm, and that both of them
signify, not the Authority alone, but the Persons endued with it, and that
they are all from God, then Tyrants, and Usurters are ordained likewise by God,
and consequently Oliver Cromw^ll was as much the Ordinance of God, as King
Charles, and if this be your Doctrine much go^d may it do you. But pray keep it
to your self, lest i^ your Friends the Old Cavaliers, come to know it, they
will quite banish you their Company; besides, I can show you other Consequences
that will follow from it, which I have not now a Mind to urge, but may
hereafter, for I have no Mind to enter into that troublesome debate any more,
for I told you enough of my Mind concerning it the last time we met save one.

But since you will needs have these (...), not to signify Powers, or
Authorities, but the Persons themselves, you shall have your will for once,
only I pray now Answer me one short Question, when for Example, Charles the
sixth King of France, fell mad, and would have killed his Servants, by what
Authority did they distinguish and separate between his Person, and his Power?
and thought that they might very well resist and bind the one, without any
Diminution to the other. Or by what Right did the Portugueses seize, and
imprison their late King, and make his Brother Regent in his Room because the
former used sometimes in a Frolic to murder his Subjects, out of the Window,
or as he met them upon the way, and was besides found by Reason of incurable
Folly to be utterly incapable to govern? Pray tell me did not the Servants, and
Subjects of these Princes then separate the Authority, from the Person? if not,
they must have let them alone to have done what they would, the Consequence of
which you may easily imagine.


M. These Instances of the Folly and Madness of Princes are the main things
that you Gentlemen of Commonwealth Principles have to defend them withal; but
to show you there is a great difference between Mad, or Foolish, Princes, and
Tyrants, who are in their Right Wits, I will show you my Reasons, why the one
may be bound, or resiste^* and not the other. In the first place, I suppose,
you will not deny, but that Folly, and Madness do so far incapacitate the
Persons, that are under those misfortunes, that they hinder them from acting
like ration^l Men, much more from performing any of the functions of Civil
Government. In the next place, they ought to be restrained for the Common good
of their People, as well as themselves, lest they should not only Murder and
Hurt their Subjects, but themselves too. And lastly, because it is the highest
Courtesy, and ^enefit, that can be done such Mad, or Foolish Princes, to shut
them up close, and ^inder them from exposing their Folly, and Madness, and
re^dring themselves ridiculous to the World; whereas a Tyrant, whom I suppose
in his Right Wits, though he never so much ^nslaves or oppresses his People* yet
Civil Government may be well enough carried on, and maintained under his
Personal Conduct, and as long as he has Wit and Sense enough to govern, he is
so long to be obeyed as the Ordinance of God, without any Resistance whatsoever.


F. But this much I suppose you will not deny, but that this Power of
resisting, and shutting up Mad, or foolish Princes is wholly exercised by the
Law of Nature, since I never heard of any Civil, or Munic^pal Law that made
Provision for it.


M. I shall not much dispute that with you, it may be so, but what do you
infer from thence?


F. Why, no more than this, that if I can prove to you, that there is no such
great difference, between Madmen, and Fools, and (...) incurable Tyrants (as
you imagine) there is a like R^ght in the people by the Law of Nature to
resist, and defend themselves against the one as the other; and therefore I
will examine each of your three Reasons, one after another, and see whether
they may not as well be applied to such Tyrants, whom alone I suppose may be
resisted, as to Madmen, or Fools, and if they do, I suppose you will not deny
the Consequence. Your first Reason is, that Folly, and Madness do so far
incapacitate their Reasons that are under those Misfortunes, that they hinder
them from acting like rational men, much more from performing any of the
functions of Civil Government: Now pray tell me, does no^ Anger, Lust, Pride,
Cruelty, and Ambition, and unreasonable Self-love which are the Passions, and
Vices which disturb the Souls of Tyrants, and make them to take a delight to
enslave, destroy, and oppress their Subjects, as much incapacitate their
Reasons for performing these ^unctions of Civil Governments, as Folly and
Madness themselves? and I think I have already proved, that when Princes bring
things to this Pass, they do as much deserve Tutors or Guardians to keep them
from doing mischief, and to manage their Kingdoms for them, as the most Mad, or
Foolish Prince we have read of in History: But the mischief of it is, that such
Tyrants, not being Mad enough to be shut up like Madmen, or Fools, nor yet
having Judgment, nor Good Nature sufficient to perform the Main Ends of Civil
Government, by the greatness of the Rewards that they are able to bestow upon
their followers, they may soon bring the best Government into a State of War,
and Confusion: And till then, I do not allow their Subjects to resist them.

Your next Reason is, that they ought to be restrained for the Common good of
their People, as well as themselves; lest they should not only hurt, or Murder
their Subjects, but themselves too. Now, pray consider, if these Mad, and
Foolish Princes may be restrained, and resisted, because they only Murder, or
hurt a few of their Subjects, that may come in their way; then have not such
Tyrants much greater Reason to be resisted, and secured, that through
unreasonable revenge or Superstition, make War upon and destroy the People, for
no other cause, but because they will not Submit themselves to their
unreasonable Lusts? Or that burn Cities, Massacre whole Towns of Innocent
Subjects, and enslave, and oppress a late flourishing Kingdom; ought not these
as well to be restrained or resisted for the Common good of Mankind, though
perhaps they will not hurt or make themselves away, as Mad men or Fools may? Or
can any reasonable Man show me, why the Extravaganoles of such Mad or Foolish
Princes may be resisted, but the furious, wicked and Tyrannical Actions of the
other, must be submitted to as the Ordinance of God? Or lastly, why a Natural
Infirmity, or Weakness, such as Folly, or Frenzy, shall make a Prince incapable
of Government, and why insufferable Tyranny, which is but a moral Disability,
shall give Princes a greater Privilege, I cannot understand; since the latter
is much more destructive to the main Ends of Government, i. e. the
Preservation, and good of the People, than the former can possibly be.

As for your last Reason, that it is the highest Courtesy, that can be done to
such Mad, and Foolish Princes to shut them up and hinder them from exposing
their Folly and Madness, and rendering themselves ridiculous to the World, I
think the Reason will hold more strongly for the one, than the other. For as
such Foolish and Mad Princes would, if they could come to themselves, thank
those, who had done them so charitable an Office as to resist them, and shut
them up; So likewise, I verily believe, that if the Grace of God, or some
Natural Means or Accident could so far open the Eyes of such a Tyrant, as to
let him see the Folly, and Wickedness of those Courses he takes against the
People, he would, instead of being Angry, thank his Subjects for resisting him,
because, thereby they had not only hindered him from making himself any farther
the Common-hatred of his own Subjects, as well as his Neighbors; but also from
committing such heinous Sins and Offenses against God, as Murder, Violence and
Oppression. To conclude, I grant, that as long as a Cruel, or Wicked Prince can
so far restrain his Vices and Passions, as to maintain the Ends of Civil
Government above mentioned, he is to be Obeyed as the Ordinance of God: But
when he will set no Bounds to his Tyranny, but resolves that his Lust shall be
unconfined, whereby he becomes insupportable to his People, they may as well
distinguish his Person, from his Power, as they do in the Case of Princes, when
they are either Fools or mad Men.


M. But Pray consider the rest of the Consequences, of my last Discourse, and
will not then the supposing a Power in the People of making this Distinction
when they please, and of Judging when the Prince's Government becomes
intolerably Tyrannical, make them to take upon them to judge it so, when it is
quite otherwise; and so not scruple to Rebel, or to Resist, (as you call it)
when ever they are in the mind to do it? And we have the more reason to be
afraid of this because from the Long Parliaments and their Adherents making use
of this Distinction among other Specious Pretenses, were derived all the
Miseries of our last Civil War. And therefore, though I own it is an easy thing
to judge of the Madness and Folly of Princes as well as other men, yet (the
Wickedness and Partiality of Human Nature considered,) it is a much harder Task
to judge rightly, what Actions of Princes are destructive to Civil Government,
and tender them as incapable of it, as the most Extravagant Actions of Foolish
and Mad Princes can be pretended to make them so.


F. If the Instance of mad Men and Fools seem to displease you, because it is
very pat to the Subject in hand, I think I may likewise remark, that those
Inconveniences, you suppose of making the People Judges in this Case, is the
Sole Objection, I can find you have against what I have said; for otherwise I
do not see you have any thing to allege against the fitness of the Parallel.
But I have already, I believe, made it pretty plain, that Murdering, Enslaving
and Robbing of the People of their Properties are thing as easy to be Judged
of, as Folly or Madness, and if a few Domestics about the Prince shall be
allowed to Judge, when their Monarch is mad or foolish enough to be resisted,
and shut up; I cannot see any Reason, why the whole Body of the People, may not
as well be able to Judge, when, by his Tyranny and Oppression, he has
dissolved the Government, and entered into a State of War with them.

But to return now to the last part of your former Answer, wherein you grant
that this word (...), does sometimes signify not only the Person, but the
Exercise of Authority; but that it does not signify the Right or Lawful Use of
it, but Abuse too; and for the Proof of this, you allege the Speech of Pilate
to our Savior; I am very well satisfied, that that Text will make nothing for
your Purpose; For though I grant that the Word in that place denotes Power, or
Authority, yet does it not there signify the Abuse of it too? For certainly,
Pilate would never have told our Savior, that he had a Power to abuse his
Authority, and to condemn him, though innocent: Neither would our Savior have
answered him, that he had that Power from above. And therefore, I think I may
very well maintain my Syllogism to be true, notwithstanding your denying of the
Minor Proposition; For since you cannot affirm Tyranny to be the Ordinance of
God, yet that the Power or Authority, of which this Tyranny is but an Abuse, is
of Divine Institution; which is but a Fallacy if it be looked into. For though you
may, vulgarly speaking, call all Tyranny an Abuse of Civil Power, yet some
Tyranny is more than that. For it is not so properly an Abuse, as a Corruption
of it, into quite another thing* which God never Instituted, and consequently
therefore is not to be submitted to out of Conscience. It is an old saying,
Corruption optimi, est pessima, and you may as well tell me, that Vinegar,
notwithstanding its Acidity, continues Wine still, as that Civil Government,
when it degenerates into the rankest Tyranny, continues still Gods Ordinance?
and if this be the true Consequence you draw from your Argument, it signifies
little, viz. that the Abuse of this Power, does not make void the Authority of
the Law of God, or Nature. For I think I may maintain the clear contrary to
what you assert, viz. that the Obligation not to resist Supreme Powers, does
receive some Validity from the Justice they execute, and is weakened, and at
last annulled by their Intolerable Violence, or Injustice.

Nor are your Instances of Saul, or Pilate to the Question in hand; I grant
Saul was God's Anointed, and could not have been Lawfully resisted by David,
notwithstanding his Murdering of Abimelech, and the rest of the Priests; And
Pilate might have his Authority from above, notwithstanding his Abuse of it;
Yet does it not therefore follow, that if either the one, or the other, had
declared themselves Sworn Enemies to the whole Nation of the Jews, and that
instead of Governing and Protecting them, they had gone about utterly to
destroy them, I think they had then ceased to be the Ordinance of God, and
their Divine Commission had been at an end. To conclude, as for the Reason you
give, why St. Paul might call the Roman Emperors by the Name of Powers, I
shall not deny it: But whether by the word (...), the Apostle means Persons or
Powers, is much at one, for if he means the former, he only urges Obedience to
them as they are the means of the Happiness, and Preservation of the People, as
appears by the Third and Fourth Verses of the Chapter you now quote, where the
main Reason St. Paul gives for our Obedience, is, That Rulers are not a Terror
to God Works, but to the Evil, and that He, ( viz. the Supreme Power) is a
Minister to us for our Good; and indeed it had been a very odd way of enforcing
our Obedience, for him to have said the quite contrary, that this Power was to
be Obeyed, because he was a Terror to good Works, and a Plague to all good Men,
and a Minister to us of all manner of mischief and misery. This had been an
excellent way of proving the Supreme Powers to be the Ordinance of God.


M. Before I can give you a full Answer to what you have now said; I must beg
leave to look back to the beginning of your first Answer, where you object,
that if by the higher Powers here mentioned, the Persons, and not the Authority
of those in Power are to be understood, then it would follow, that Tyrants and
Usurpers are likewise the Powers ordained of God, which Objection, I think, may
admit of an easy Answer: First, S. C. R. p. 120.
can there be no wise Reason given why God may advance a bad man (or Tyrant) to
be a Prince* If there may, then it is no Reproach to the Divine Providence. The
Natural End of Human Societies is the Preservation of public Peace and Order;
and this is in some measure attained even under the Government of Tyrants: But
God has a farther end than this, to bless and reward a virtuous Nation, or to
punish a loose and degenerate Age; and there cannot be a greater Blessing, than
a Wise and Virtuous Prince, nor a greater Plague, than a merciless Tyrant. And
therefore the Providence of God, is as much concerned in setting a good, or a
bad Prince over any People, as in rewarding, or punishing them. Upon this
account God calls the King of Assyria the Rod of his Anger, Isai. 10.5.6.
whom he raised up for the punishment of an hypocritical Nation.

Secondly, I have already proved, that by the Powers in this Text, Ibid. p. 121.
the Apostle means the Persons of Sovereign Princes, and therefore, according
to his Doctrine, those Princes who were then in Being, that is, the Roman
Emperors, were advanced by God; the Powers that be, that is, the Princes and
Emperors who now govern the World, are ordained and appointed by God, and that
thus it is God himself tells us. Ierem. 2^. v. 5.6.
I have made the Earth, and given it to whom it seemed meet unto me, and now I
have given all these Lands into the hands of Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon,
my Servant.

This was also the Belief of the Primitive Christians under Heathen and
persecuting Emperors. Tertullian, who wrote his Apology under Severu^,
asserts, that Caesar was chosen by God, and therefore that the Christians had a
Peculiar Propriety in Caesar, as being made Emperor by their God. So likewise
St. Augustine, de Civitate Dei, speaks to this purpose (as I remember)? God
gives Happiness in the Kingdom of Heaven to the Godly alone: But this Earthly
Kingdom, both to the Godly, and Ungodly, as it pleases him. He that gave the
Government to Marius, gave it also to Caesar: He who gave it to Augustus, gave
it also to Nero^^ He who gave it to the Vespasians Father and Son, most beloved
Emperors, gave it also to the most cruel Domitian (and not to recount the rest
of them) He who gave it to Constantine the Christian, gave it also to the
Apostate Julian. These things without doubt, the only True God governed as he
pleased, by Causes though hidden, yet not unjust. So likewise almost all the rest
of the Fathers do own, that Wicked and Tyrannical Princes are given as
Punishments to the People for their Sins, and so upon this account are to be
endured, and not resisted, since it is God's Will to have it so. But as for
Usurpers, I think I can give you a very satisfactory Answer, S. C. R. p. 128.
for the most prosperous Rebel is not the higher Power, while our natural
Prince, to whom we owe Obedience and Subjection, is in being: And therefore,
though such men may get the Power into their hands by God's Permission, yet not
by God's Ordinance, and he who Resists them does not Resist the Ordinance of
God, but the Usurpations of Men. Whereas in Hereditary Kingdoms the King never
dies, but the same Minute, that the Natural Person of a King dies, the Crown
descends upon the next of Blood; And therefore, he who Rebelleth against the
Father, and murders him, continues a Rebel in the Reign of the Son, which
commences with his Fathers Death.

It is otherwise indeed, where none can pretend a greater Right to the Crown
than the Usurper* for there the Possession of Power seems to give a Right. Thus
many of the Roman Emperors, came to the Crown by very ill means, Ib. p. 129.
but when they were possessed of it, they were then the higher Powers: For the
Empire did not descend by Inheritance, but sometimes by the Election of the
Senate, sometimes of the Army, and sometimes by Force and Power, which always
draws a Consent (and Submission) after it. And therefore, the Apostle does not
direct the Christians to inquire by what Title the Emperors held their Crowns,
but commands them to submit to those who had the Power in their hands. For the
Possession of the Supreme and Sovereign Power is Title enough, when there is no
better Title to oppose against it, for then we must presume, that God gives him
the Irresistible Authority of a King, to whom, he gives an Irresistible Power;
which is the only means, whereby Monarchies and Empires are transferred from
one Nation to another: There are two Examples in Scripture, which manifestly
confirm, what I have now said.

The first is in the Kingdom of Israel, after the Ten Tribes had divided from
the Tribe of Judah, and the Family of David, where God had not entailed the
Kingdom upon any certain Family. For after Jeroboam the first King, it is plain
by the Story in the Books of Kings and Chronicles, that for some Successions,
there was nothing but Rebellion, and the Murder of one King by another, so that
the Kingdom rarely descended from the Father to the Son* and in the whole
Succession of these Kings, it only remained in the House of Ie^u for four
Generations, and then it returned to its former uncertainty, as you may see in
the 15 th. Chap. of the 2 d. of Kings: Ibid. p. 131.
All which plainly shows that where there is no regular Succession to a
Kingdom, there Possession of Power makes a King, who yet cannot afterward be
resisted and opposed without the Guilt of Treason; And this was the Case of the
Roman Empire at the Writing of this Epistle: And therefore the Apostle might
then very well say, that the Powers that be, are ordained of God, and that
whoever had the Supreme Power in his hands, was the Supreme Power, that might
not be resisted.

But it was otherwise in the Kingdom of Judah, which God himself had entailed
on David's Family, as appears from the Examples of Ioash and Athaliah, which we
discoursed of at our last meeting but one; which Examples plainly show, that no
Usurpations can extinguish the Right and Title of a Natural or Hereditary
Prince; such Usurpers, though they have the Possession of the Supreme Power, yet
they have no Right to it, and though God for wise Reasons, may sometimes permit
such Usurpations, yet whilst his Providence secures the Persons of such deposed
and banished Princes from Violence, he secures their Title too.

But to prove more plainly that no Resistance is to be made against the Persons
or Authorities of the Supreme Powers, let them be never so Cruel and
Tyrannical, as it is evident not only from what St. Paul has here written; but
I shall crave leave to insist farther on that Text of St. Peter, before cited
in his 1 st. Epistle 2 d. Chap. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man
for the Lords sake, V. 13, 14.
whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors as unto them that are
sent by him, for the punishment of Evil Doers, and for the Praise of them that
do well: where by Ordinance of Man whether we understand, as some do, every
Human Law, or with others more justly (...), every human Creature, (as it is in
the Original) that is, every man endued with Supreme Power, it comes all to the
same sense, and the King as the Supreme Power, and his Ministers, or Officers,
as Powers subordinate to him, and acting by his Commission are to be submitted
to and obeyed as much as himself: And it had been in vain for St. Peter to have
concluded this Exhortation with Fear God, and Honor the King, if he had
allowed it Lawful in any Case to resist him; since certainly no Man can Honor
him, whom he Resists; and that this is a Doctrine everlastingly true, appears
by the time in which St. Peter and St. Paul wrote these Epistles, which was
either under the Reigns of Claudius, or Nero, and I suppose you will hardly
meet with two worse Men, or more cruel Tyrants in all the Catalogue of
Emperors: Since the former committed many wicked and Cruel things by his
Freed-men, and Officers, and also banished the Jews, and Christians together
with them, from Rome. And the latter is so notorious, for his Cruelty and
Persecution of the Christians, that his Name passes into a Proverb. And yet
these were the Higher Powers, to whom the Apostles commanded them to be
Subject. From whence you may see your Error in interpreting the (...) to
signify just and Lawful Authority, whereas it plainly signifies in this
place, the Men vested with this Authority howsoever Tyrannically they abuse it.


F. You have made a pretty long reply, and I have heard it patiently, because I
confess, that on this depends the whole Controversy between us; and therefore,
I shall beg that you would hear me with the like Patience, because what you
have now said, I grant to be of that weight as to require a large, as well as a
considerable Reply. And therefore, I shall make bold to consider the last part
of your speech in the first place, because I can soonest dispatch it: As for
your Argument, that we ought to be Subject to the most Tyrannical Governors
without any Resistance, because Claudius or Nero, whom you suppose to be cruel
Tyrants, then governed the Empire, and persecuted the Christians.

In Answer to this, I must tell you, that if you please better to consider of
it, you will find it very doubtful, whether St. Paul wrote this Epistle to the
Romans during the Reigns of Claudius, or Nero. The Learned Monsieur Capel in
his Discourse which he has written, on purpose, concerning the time of the
writing of this Epistle, proves this Epistle to the Romans, to have been
written during the latter End of the Reign of Claudius. But those Learned Men,
who will have it written during the Reign of Nero, do all agree, that it was in
the beginning of it within the first five years, when the Administration of
Affairs was under the Ministry of Seneca, and Burrhus, and when the Government
of the Empire, was most just and moderate, and diverse years before ever Nero
burnt the City, or persecuted the Christians, and did so many extravagant
Cruel, and Tyrannical Actions, as forced the Senate to declare him the Enemy of
Mankind. But as for Claudius, he never persecuted the Christians at all, as I
know of.


M. I pray Sir, give me leave to interrupt you a little; Did not Claudius
persecute the Christians, when under the Notion of Jews he banished them from
Rome, as appears by Acts the eighteenth, when Aquila, and Priscilla were forced
to quit Italy and come into Greece, because of that Edict? And yet it was this
very Claudius, to whom St. Peter (if not St. Paul) does require all Men to be
Subject without any Resistance.


F. I think this difficulty will easily be answered, for in the first place,
though I grant that Claudius toward the latter End of his Reign banished the
Jews from Rome, yet did he not banish the Christians from thence, as we know
of, any otherwise than as they were Jews by Nation, and upon this account it
was, that Aquila being a Jew by Birth, was forced to quit Rome with the rest;
but neither Suetonius, nor any other Author tell us, that he likewise banished
the Christians, though I know indeed there are some learned Men, that would
interpret this Passage in the former Author, in his life of Claudius: Iudaeos
tumultuantes, impulsante Cresto Roma expulit: to be meant of the Christians
being expelled Rome, as instigated by Christ their Prophet to Sedition. But
though I own that our Savior, was sometimes called Chrestus by the Pagans, by
way of contempt, yet, that by this Chrestus here mentioned, cannot be
understood our Savior Christ, is very evident, for it had been very
improbable, for Suetonius to have made Christ who was dead above thirty years
before, to have excited the Jews to Sedition: And therefore, the Lord Primate
Usher, in the second Volume of his Annals, (with much better Reason) supposes,
that not our Savior, but some Seditious Jew called Crestus, who headed this
Sedition, was the Cause of the Banishment of the Jews from Rome: So that this
was no more a Persecution for Religion, than it would have been for the
Parliament in King Charles the seconds Reign during the heat of the Popish Plot
to have banished all the Papists out of England, upon the Account of their
former Rebellions, and constant Machinations to overturn the Government, and
Religion established by Law; but supposing this Edict to have banished the
Christians as well as Jews, it had signified nothing, for it was no Persecution
for Religion: and besides, being made in the last year of Claudius, it was but
a temporary Edict; and we find the Jews to have lived quietly at Rome in the
Reign of Nero, as appears by the last Chapter of the Acts.

But as for Claudius's Government, it was so far from being an insupportable
Tyranny, that there was no Prince, that did take more care to do impartial
Justice, according to that small Capacity he was Master of, than himself. And
though I yield that by his Proconsuls, Presidents, and Freemen there were many
Oppressions, and Cruelties committed in the Provinces, yet it was only against
some Private Men, and did not extend to the destroying, and enslaving the whole
Body of the People, who during his Reign generally enjoyed their Liberties, and
Properties with as great Freedom, as under any of his Predecessors.

And as for Nero, all Ecclesiastical Historians agree, that if this Epistle of
St. Paul was written in his Reign, it was within the first five years of it,
which was in his Nonage, under the Administration of Seneca, and Burrhus,
during which time all the Historians agree, that the Empire was never better
governed* and as for the wickedness, and Violence that Nero committed
afterward, when he persecuted the Christians, murdered his Mother, his Wife,
and most of his best, and most intimate Friends, and set the City on Fire: St.
Paul was so far from knowing any thing of them, that sure he would not have
urged it to the Romans, as a Reason of their Subjection to him, that Rulers are
not a terror to good Works, but to the Evil, or that he was a Minister to
them, that is, to the Subjects, for good; nay even in the worst of his Reign,
as far as Justice was duly administered by himself, or his Underofficers. I
grant, he was not to be resisted, notwithstanding his Personal Crimes, which
could only reach a few Persons, since a wicked Man may often make a Tolerable
Prince.

And though Domitian was in his own Person, a Cruel Tyrant, yet he was so far
commendable; and to be born with by his Subjects, that during his Reign the
Proconsuls, Presidents, and other inferior Magistrates, were never freer from
Corruption, and Oppression: Whereas when Nerva (who was a mild good natured
Prince) succeeded him; by his too great Lenity, toward those inferior
Magistrates, all things presently degenerated into a most sad Condition,
Justice being sold, and Perverted, and the Poor robbed and oppress't, by the
Violence of the Rich, and Powerful. And even Nero himself had this Commendation
from his greatest Enemy, Suetonius, that he would not be governed by his
Officers, and Freed-men (as Claudius was) to do foolish, and unjust things. So
that if Nero himself had not by burning the City, and by murdering the Innocent
Citizens in the Night, made himself a public Enemy: I do not see, but his
Government might very well have been born with, notwithstanding his Personal
Crimes, and Vices. For if you please to remember, I have already excepted
Personal Faults in Princes, from being any just Cause of resisting their
Authority, if they are such as can any way consist with the Common safety, and
welfare of the People.


M. I must confess, I never yet considered this matter, concerning the time
when St. Peter, and St. Paul wrote these Epistles, and you will pardon me, if I
do not readily allow what you say, but I promise you to consider farther of
this Story, and examine the Authors you have quoted; but however, whether the
Christians were then actually persecuted, or not, or whether these Emperors
were then actually Tyrants, or not, signifies very little to me; for these Holy
Apostles might very well foresee not only by Divine Revelation, but by Natural
Prudence, or Foresight, that the Emperors would prove great Tyrants, and
Persecutors of the Church, and the late Example of the Emperor Caligula had
showed them not only the Possibility, but also the great likelihood, that it
might happen again; and therefore it is no wonder, that these Apostles do, in
consideration of this, command all Christians, to submit to, and obey all
Supreme Powers, and their Subordinate Officers, upon pain of Damnation; and if
St. Peter in this Chapter last quoted commands Servants to be Subject to their
Masters, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward, (that is, to
the Cruel, and Ill-condition'd) and gives this Reason for it. For this is
thank-worthy, if a Man for Conscience toward God endures grief, suffering
wrongfully: And inforces it with this great Motive, For even hereunto were ye
called, because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an Example, that ye
should follow his Steps: And if Servants, or Slaves were to be Subject to their
Masters, let them use them never so cruelly; it will, I think, hold more strong
for Sovereign Powers who are the immediate Ordinance of God.


F. You need not have made your Answer half so long, if you had been pleased to
take notice, that I have still excepted any Resistance, which might be then
made against the Roman Emperors, upon the account of Persecution upon the mere
score of Religion, since I grant, that our Savior has for those particular
Reasons, I have already alleged, commanded us to a patient Suffering, and
bearing Testimony to the Truth of his Religion by Martyrdom, or any other
Sufferings which he shall think fit to inflict upon us by Lawful Authority, and
for the like ends for which they were to suffer. Yet has he not therefore
taken away, all those Natural Rights, which whole Nations had of Self-defence
against Tyranny, and Slavery, whenever they are exercised upon them. Nor does
your Argument from particular Slaves, to their Masters at all concern Subjects,
much less whole Nations; For, I hope, there is a great deal of difference
between them, and perfect Slaves, who have no Interest in their own Persons,
and so had neither Liberties, nor Properties to lose.

But besides, if you please better to consider this Text, you will find, that
this did wholly concern such Christian Slaves, who were for their Religion's
sake oftentimes the more cruelly treated by their Heathen Masters. And
therefore those Words you have but now repeated, If a Man for Conscience sake
suffers wrongfully, as likewise those in the 20 th verse, if you do well, and
suffer for it, can only be meant of Suffering for the Profession of Christ,
since no Heathen Emperors, nor Masters ever persecuted their Subjects, or
Cruelly treated their Slaves, for well doing, that is, doing those duties and
services that they owed them, and therefore, this place makes nothing at all to
the Question in Hand.


M. But, pray, tell me* does not the Apostle Paul expressly command every Soul,
that is, every Man whatsoever, (not whole Nations excepted) to be Subject to
the Higher Powers. And since you grant it to be true as to particular Men, why
it should not likewise hold as to whole Nations, I can see no Reason, unless
you will be wiser than the Apostle, and make exceptions out of this General
Rule where the Scripture it self makes none; for can any thing be more express
than this, that they that resist shall receive to themselves Damnation; and the
Word is in the Plural Number, they, and must therefore take in all Men, none
excepted: I have urged this already, and I finding you have not given me an
Answer to it; I make bold to re-mind you of that Omission.


F. I beg your Pardon, if the multiplicity of your Objections has made me omit
any thing, that was material, to be answered; but the Truth is, I supposed,
that I had in effect done it already: But since you will needs have it made
plaine^ to you, I hope you will pardon me, if in the doing of it, I am forced
to use some Repetition. Therefore in the first place, I shall not deny the
Interpretation, which our Translators put upon this Word (...), which though it
sometimes signifies not Eternal Damnation, but Temporal Judgments: Yet I will
own, it will not well agree with what follows in this place, which are only
temporal Reasons, and Motives for this Duty, now understand this word (...), in
the Scripture Sense, and though I do, it will be much at one, for I have already
proved to you, that whether you take these (...) for Powers, or Persons, they
are not absolutely irresistible, and I have St. Chrysostom* on my side in the
Interpretation of this Word, who understands no more by it, than that Civil
Power, or Authority is from God, but not the Tyrants or Wicked Men that execute
it; but if it be taken for the Person, endued with this Authority, I have also
shown you, that when they degenerate into intolerable Tyrants they lose their
Character, and may be resisted, as well as Madmen, and Fools; So much in
respect of the Powers themselves, and now to come to the People: I think I have
given very good Reasons already, why a whole People or Nation, or the Major
part thereof, may have a Right to resist the Supreme Powers, and yet that I
need not allow particular, private Persons the same Liberty; and one great
Reason is, because they cannot, and the other, because they ought not to do it.
The first you your self do acknowledge, since you say, A private Person, when
he makes such Resistance does it at his own peril, when he has only his own
single self to oppose against his Prince. And that single Persons don't use to
resist, nor is there any great Danger to the public if they do; to which I
shall likewise add a much better Reason, which I have also given you before,
why private Subjects ought not in a Civil State to make public disturbances,
to avoid any Violence that may be done to their Particular Persons, or Estates,
because every private Subject ought to prefer the Peace, and Happiness of the
Commonwealth, whereof he is a Member, before his own private Interest, which
being a Dictate of the Law of Nature, or Right Reason cannot extend to the
whole Nation, or Civil Society: Since it is as much against the Law of Nature,
for that to be destroyed, beggared, and enslaved, as it is that God should
ordain all Mankind to be so. And therefore our Savior, and St. Paul never
intending to alter any of those great Laws of Nature, it cannot be believed,
that they would tie Mankind to such strict, and severe Rules of Non-Resistance,
and Subjection, as should expose them to Beggary, and Slavery, and Ruin, with
all the Miseries of this Life: Nor do I find that our Savior, or his Apostles
have either promised Eternal Life for such slavish Subjection, nor threatened
Damnation for such Resistance.


M. To answer what you have now said, I must in the first place take notice,
that though I grant, St. Chrysostom, for fear of making Tyrants, and wicked
Princes to be ordained by God, gives that Interpretation of the Word (...)
which you have now done, yet he owns the Doctrine of Non-Resistance, because
the Power is from God, as you may here see in these Quotations out of him,
which the Learned Primate has made use of in the second part of his Treatise
of the Power of the Prince, which you may, if you please, read with me; and
compare the Greek in the Margin: page 111, 112.
For it is the pleasure of God, that the Magistrate whom he has stamped with
his own Image should have also his own Power. And he that obeys not him,
makes War in a sort with God who has appointed these things. Let us not
therefore invert this Order, nor Fight with God: demonstrating by our deeds,
that saying of the Apostle, Whosoever resists the Power, resists the
Ordinance of God. So likewise in another place, If we reverence, and fear those
Magistrates that are elected by the King, although they be Wicked, although they be
Thieves, although they be Robbers, although they be unjust, or whatever they be;
not despising them for their wickedness, but standing in awe of them for the
Dignity of them that did Elect them: Ib. p. 116.
much more ought we thus to do in the Case of God. But it is no matter in what
Sense this, or any other Father takes these Words, so long as the Doctrine of
Non-Resistance is secure.

But it seems very strange that you cannot find that our Savior and his
Apostles have neither promised Eternal Life for slavish Subjection, nor
threatened Damnation for Resistance; for as sure as the Words are, that they
that resist shall receive to themselves Damnation, so sure it will likewise
follow, that they that do the Contrary, and are Patiently Subject, shall
receive Eternal Life. I beg your pardon for this Interruption, therefore pray
go on with the rest of your reply. And let me see how you can avoid Damnation,
if the Words of the Apostle are true.


F. The Question is still the same, as it was before, notwithstanding what you
have now said; for it is not, whether some Resistance be not unlawful, but
whether all Resistance whatsoever, be that Resistance forbidden by the Apostle.
And to let you see, that you do not put such a strict Interpretation upon other
places of Scripture, pray tell me the Reason, why, when our Savior expressly
commands us, Not to resist the Evil, Mat. 5.39, 40, 41, 42.
(that is, the Evil Doer) but whosoever shall smite thee on thy Right check,
turn to him the other also* And if any Man will sue thee at the Law, and take
away thy coat, let him have thy Cloak also. And whosoever shall compel thee to
go a (...), go with him twain. Give to him that asks thee, and from him that
would borrow of thee, turn not thou away. [Or yet those more severe commands]
of pulling out the Right Eye, Ver. 28.29:
and cutting off the Right Hand if they offend us, of making our selves Eunuch^
for the Kingdom of Heavens sake, and that be that can receive it, let him
receive it. What is the Reason, I say, why those places of Scripture, which
taken literally, are as strict as this you now quote; That they that resist
shall receive Damnation, yet that most of the Fathers, as well as the more
modern Commentators put a Figurative, and not a Literal Sense upon these Texts,
pray tell me your Reason why they do so.


M. I think the Reason is very plain, because to understand them in a literal
Sense, were utterly unpracticable, and contradictory to the common Sense, and
Notions of Mankind, and those Natural Dictates of self* Preservation, which St.
Paul approves of, when he says, No man yet hated his own Flesh; and it was
altogether unsuitable to the Doctrine of Christ which was intended for the
perfection of human Nature, that is, of Men's Souls, and natural Reasons, and
for the Quiet and Happiness, not Hurt and Destruction of their Bodies.


F. I grant your Reasons are very good, and self-evident, but pray tell me, is
it not as much against the Common Sense and Notions of Mankind, that God should
give any Civil Sovereign an Arbitrary Irresistible Power to Murder, Destroy and
Ruin their People, if they should think fit so to do, or that Jesus Christ,
who you say came into the World for the Perfection of our Human Nature, and not
for the Destruction of our Bodies, should give the Supreme Powers, an Authority
to do the same things with Murderers and Thieves, and that it was unlawful for
men to defend themselves against their Violence, if they could. So that I can
see no Reason why this Precept against Non-Resistance, may not be taken in a
Limited or Rational Sense, as well as Swear not at all; which though as express
as words can make it, yet Commentators interpret it to extend no farther than
against Swearing in Common Communication. So likewise this Precept, Children
obey your Parents in all things, which without the reasonable Interpretation of
all things Lawful, would oblige Children to obey their Parents in whatsoever
they commanded them, whether good or bad.

But to come to your Quotations out of St. Chrysostom, which you would oppose
against mine; I think they will not serve so much to your purpose, as you
imagine. For I grant, that the Supreme Magistrate derives his Power from God,
but not a Power to Murder and Destroy; so likewise he that obeys him not,
wars in a sort with God, and that whosoever resists the Power, (that is, when
it is executed according to God's Will) Resists the Ordinance of God; And as
for the last Quotation concerning the Reverence, that is due to subordinate
Magistrates elected by the King, though they are Wicked, Thieves and Robbers,
etc. And consequently, much more the King who sends them; this, though the
strongest place of the Three, yet will not do the Business: For I believe you
cannot suppose, that St. Chrysostom there means that subordinate Magistrates
sent by the King were really Thieves and Robbers, and took away Men's Goods
upon the common Road, but only that by Bribery, and Corruption, in their
Offices they did Robb, and Peel the People, as much as if they had been really
so, which extending only to some few Persons, was rather to be born with ( as
any intolerable Inconveniences in civil Government are) than for the People to
take Arm and Resist them. But I think the Case would have been much otherwise,
had these Subordinate Magistrates by virtue of the Emperors Commission, made
use of his Forces to Murder, and Robb the Subjects of those Provinces over
which they were set; and that it would not have been any Rebellion in the
People if they should have taken Arms, and Resisted them, since the Emperors
did not Empower such Magistrates to murder or robb, but to protect his Subjects.

But to give you a Quotation out of St. Chrysostom, in lieu of yours, I shall
show you his Comment upon these Words in his 23 d. Homily on the Romans, Let
every soul be subject to the Higher Powers, (that is, says he) that Christ
might show that he had not instituted his Laws so, that he might overturn all
Common Policy and Government, but that he might reform it to the better, and
might also teach us that superfluous, and unnecessary Ways were not to be
undertaken, because it was then a Common Discourse traducing the Apostles as
Seditious and Innovators, and doing all things they could to overthrow the
Common Constitutions of their Country; and therefore he stops their Mouths with
these Words.

From whence we may infer, that St. Chrysostom did not believe that St. Paul
wrote this only to give Tyrants a Power, to do what ever they pleased against
their Subjects without any Resistance; Nor yet that Subjects should begin
unnecessary and unlawful Wars, by Resisting upon every slight Occasion: Nor
does this Father here forbid Subjects to Resist in Cases of the Highest
Tyranny, or Oppression that could befall them; so that I take the true Sense of
these places of St. Peter, and St. Paul to be no more than this: Let every
Christian submit to the Supreme Powers, i. e. to the Emperor, and all other
subordinate Magistrates sent and appointed by him. For all (...), or Civil
Authority is from God, and Magistrates justly exercising this Power are from
him, and in his Stead, all Supreme Powers under what ever different Names or
Titles they be, are by God's Providence appointed in the World, for its Order,
Peace and the well Governing of it. He therefore that Resists such Supreme
Powers, whoever he be, Resists the Ordinance of of God, that is, the means
that God has ordained for the Restraining the Disorderly Lusts and Passions of
Men. And they that will not obey their Laws as far as the Laws of God and
Nature may permit, but will Resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation. And
thus far even Tyrants and Usurpers may be Obeyed, though not as such, but as
Dispensers of Public Justice, and Executors of the Laws, and so are God's
Ministers for good; that is, for the public Peace and Safety. But neither the
Apostle, nor St. Chrysostom his Commentator, any where say, that either the
Power however exercised, or the Persons that thus abuse it to the Destruction
of Mankind, are likewise from God.


M. But pray consider the Medium a little more closely, by which the Apostle
proves, and enforces this Doctrine of Subjection, or Non-Resistance. For, says
he, There is no Power but of God, the Powers that be are ordained of God. S. C.
R. p. 116, 117.
Whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God. The
plain meaning of which is this, That Sovereign Princes whether good or bad,
Tyrants, or good Governors, being advanced to the Throne by God, are his
Ministers, and Vicegerents invested with his Authority, and Power to govern,
and therefore, when we resist our Prince, we resist the Ordinance,
Constitution, and Appointment, of God: and such men do not resist, rebel, or
fight against Man, but God; as he who resists any subordinate Magistrate,
resists his Prince, from whom they receive their Authority, and Commission.
And this is a very forcible Argument for Subjection to Princes, for whatever
our Prince be, it is certain, that God has an absolute, and uncontrollable
Right over us, as being the True Lord, and Governor of the World; and if
Earthly Princes are placed in the Throne by him, who is at liberty to put the
Government of the World, into what hands he pleases, who will dare to oppose
God* or ask him, Why have thou done so? Whoever has any sense of God's
Dominion, and Sovereignty, dares not Rebel against him, and he who believes
that Princes are made by God, will no more dare to Rebel against his Prince,
than against God himself. Since (as I said before) Evil Princes may be sent by
God for a punishment to a Wicked People, as well as good ones for a Blessing to
a pious Nation.


F. If you had pleased to have considered what I have already said, you might
have spared this Objection; for it is no more, than what has been already
answered; for though I grant that Sovereign Princes are advanced to the Throne by
God, and are by him invested with Power and Authority to govern, and that when
we Resist our Prince, we Resist the Ordinance of God; yet I desire to be judged
only by your own words in this matter; the Prince receives from God Authority
to Govern, but is the murdering, ruining and enslaving the People, any part of
Civil Government? and when we Resist our Prince, we Resist the Ordinance of
God; but is the Resisting of an Implacable Tyrant* and an Enemy of Mankind,
Resisting the Ordinance of God, or fighting against him? And I desire you only
to consider the force of your own Comparison: for (you say) he who Resists
any Subordinate Magistrates, Resists the Princ^ from whom they receive their
Authority and Commission, yet it is only in such things, which the Prince has
given them Authority, or a Commission to do; as for Example, a Bailiff may
Arrest me for Debt, by virtue of the King's Writ, yet if he goes about to Rob,
or Kill me, I may lawfully Resist him, and if I kill him, it is no murder. The
same may be said of all other Subordinate Ministers, how great soever they are,
therefore to carry on your Parallel, the same that Subordinate Magistrates are
in Relation to Princes, the same are Princes in respect of God: Therefore if
they never received any Commission, or Authority from God to destroy and
enslave their People, they so far cease to be the Powers ordained by God, and
sure may then be Resisted by their oppressed people. As for the rest of your
Speech, as far as Earthly Princes, are placed in the Throne by God, and Govern
there like his Vicegerents, I own they are not to be Opposed, but since you
will have them to be submitted to, because they may be Ordained by God for a
Punishment, for a Wicked People: I thank you for putting me in mind to answer
what you have before said upon that Subject: I do not deny, but God may often
for the Punishment (as you say) of a sinful Nation, give them a wicked, or
Tyrannical Prince, and likewise that such a Prince, when thus Imposed by God,
is to be born without Resistance, as far as is possible, or that may consist
with their being a People, and with those Enjoyments of Life, which are
necessary to their being Subjects, and Freemen, and not Slaves: And though I
grant, that God does likewise sometimes punish a wicked Nation, by appointing
Conquerours, such as the King of Assyria, to carry them away captive, and to
reduce them to the Lowest Condition of Poverty, and Slavery, as in this Case of
the Jews by the King of Babylon, who was then the Rod of G^d's Anger, and whom
he raised up for the punishment of an Hypocritical Nation. Yet when he does so,
excluding all farther Resistance in the People, it can only be known by Divine
Revelation, and cannot extend to all Conquerours whatever, whether by Right or
Wrong. And therefore, as God does often in his Arger deliver the People, up to
the Power of some Cruel Conqueror, or Tyrant; so likewise will he in his good
time, and upon their Repentance, deliver them from it again: Now this
Deliverance must be performed either by Miracles, or Human Means. Now Miracles
are ceased, and therefore, since only Human Means remain, these must be either
1 st. by changing the Hearts of such Tyrannical Princes into a better, and more
merciful Temper toward their Subjects as Solomon says* Prove. 21.1
The King's Heart is in the Hand of the Lord, as the Rivers of Water, he
turns it whithersoev^r he will. Or else 2 dly. by taking away, such a
Tyrannical Prince out of the World, and putting another in his stead, who may
Govern the People more mercifully, and who will not any more destroy, or
oppress them* as his Predecessors did. Or 3 dly. by stirring up some Neighbor
Prince to revenge the Injuries, and Oppressions done unto such a persecuted,
and almost ruined People; and to restore them to the Enjoyment of their former
Liberties, Religion and Estates. Or lastly, by stirring up the People
themselves to Rise, and Resist those Oppressions, they lie under, by their own
single Forces, or by imploring the Assistance of some Powerful Neighboring
Prince, or State. Now I suppose you will not deny, but that the first of these
ways does never happen, the second very rarely; and as for the 3 d. we seldom
find that when a former Prince is taken out of the way, his Successor grows so
sensible of the Tyranny, and Misgovernment of his Predecessors, as to let go
any of that Arbitrary Power, which he has usurped, or to remit any of those
intolerable Taxes and Oppressions which He has laid upon them* but are
commonly like Rehoboam, when they come to the Crown, so far from making their
People's yoke more easy, that they rather lay it more heavy upon their Necks,
as we may see in the Kingdom of France, in these three last descents, where
every Prince has been still more severe, and Tyrannical than his Predecessor;
for finding himself invested in this Absolute and Despotick Power, without any
unjust Act of his own, he will exercise it as he found it, and will think
himself not at all obliged in Conscience to restore any of those just Rights
his Predecessors had formerly usurpt upon the People, since we find, Princes
seldom lose any thing they have once got, and this may continue to all
generations, for ought we know, (which is much too long for a punishment)
unless some extraordinary Accident fall out, as we now see by the Example of
the Greek Christians, who having lain diverse Ages under the Mohammedan Yoke, are
now restored to the Liberty of their Religion, by the Arms of the German
Emperor, and Venetians, and are so far from being blamed for joining
themselves to their Deliverers, that they are rather commended by all
Christendom for so doing. And I see no Reason why all good French men, as well
Protestants as others, may not as justly join themselves to the Prince of
Orange, or any other Foreign Prince, who will be so generous, as to undertake
their Deliverance from that Cruel Yoke, they lie under, and will restore them
to their Antiens Liberties, and the Protestants to the Free Exercise of their
Religion: Nor can I see any Reason, why God should deliver a People into
Servitude, when ever a Tyrannical Prince has sufficient Power to oppress them,
and why God may not be as well said to deliver them, as often as the People
find fit means* and opportunity so to set themselves free. For does such a
Tyrant derive his Power from God to oppress, only because he has Power? And
may not the People likewise from the same Original, derive a Right to defend
themselves against such an intolerable Oppression? Otherwise, God would chiefly
regard, and provide for this destructive Tyrannical Power of Princes, as the
chief end of all Civil Society, and make the Good and Happiness of the People
as subordinate to that, or rather only by the by, which is contrary to Reason.
It Is true, the Prophet Amos says, That there is no Evil in a City which God
has not sent: Chapter 3.6.
So likewise are all Natural Evils such as Famine, Pestilence, Inundations and
Foreign Enemies, and yet have not the People in these Cases a Power to rid
themselves of them, if they can, by all natural human means, and yet they may
be likewise Punishments sent from God? And if they may Resist, and decline such
common and natural Judgments without staying for an express Revelation for that
purpose; why may they not for the same Reason rid themselves of such a Judgment
as Intolerable Tyranny, when they are able, and have an Opportunity to do it?
since they proceed from the like Common Dispensations of God's Providence; or
else we must believe that the Wickedness of one, or more persons, for the
Destruction of Civil Society the is more particularly derived from God, than
the Power of the whole People for their own Preservation, and the common Good
and Happiness of the Commonwealth: By which means, Princes would have the same
Power, and Right over their Subjects Bodies, and Estates, as they have over
those of their Beasts, to sell, kill, and devour them at their Pleasure.


M. Though I grant it may be lawful for a People to remove Natural Judgments by
human Means, yet does it not follow, that they may therefore remove by Force,
such Punishments as God pleases to lay upon them from the Abuse of Civil
Authority, by the Supreme Powers, since He has particularly enjoined them to
bear such Punishments patiently without any Resistance, because they are
inflicted by those whom God has Ordained for our Temporal Governors, and
Masters, and whose Violences and Oppressions, as long as they continue in their
Sins, God has very good reason to continue upon them, and if they Repent, they
may be assured that in his good time, he will either remove them, or turn them
to the best: For all things (even Afflictions) work for the good of them that
fear him. And God will not suffer those that trust in him to be afflicted
beyond what they are able to ^ear: And if this Doctrine of yours might take
place, both Servants and Children in the State of Nature, might upon the like
Pretense both Resist, and turn their Father, and Master out of doors, because
(forsooth) their Government was so severe, and Tyrannical, that it was not any
longer to be endured by them; And though such severe Fathers or Masters may be
Ordained by God for the Punishment of such wicked Children, and Servants, yet
that being no more than other natural Judgments, they may be without any Sin
removed by Force, or Resistance, when ever they thought themselves strong
enough to do it: And if this Doctrine be wicked, and absurd in private
Families, then is it much more so in Kingdoms, for certainly there is as
perfect a Subjection due to a Sovereign Prince, as to a Father or M^ster, for
he is more Eminently the Minister of God, and Acts by a more Sacred, and
inviolable Authority. And notwithstanding what you have said to the contrary,
that the Precep given to Servants by St. Peter, does not concern Subjects, I
think I can very well prove that it does; as appears from the Example of
Christ, which the Apostle there recommended to our Imitation, who was the most
innocent person in the World, and yet suffered the most barbarous Usage, not
from the hands of a private Master, but of the Supreme Powers. And therefore,
when he commands, in the same Chapter, to submit to Governors, as to those who
are for the punishment of Evil doers, and the praise of them that do well, it
is evident, that he did not intend this, as a Limitation of our Subjection, or
as if we were not bound to be subject in other Cases, since in the very same
Chapter he requires Subjection not only to the Good, and Gentle Masters, but
also to the froward, in Imitation of the Example of our Lord, who suffered
patiently under unjust, and Tyrannical Powers. I observe therefore, that the
Apostle does not allege this as the Reason of our Subjection, but as a Motive,
or Argument to reconcile us to the practice of it. The Reason of our Submission
to Princes, is, that they are advanced by God, that they are his Ministers,
that those who Resist them, R^sist the Ordinance of God, and therefore, we must
submit for God's sake, out of Reverence to his Authority. But it is only an
Encouragement to Subjection to consider the great Advantages of Government,
that Rulers are not a Terror to good Works, but to the Evil. But though this
Motive should fail in some Instances, yet whilst the Reason of the Subjection
lasts (and that can never fail whilst we own the Sovereign Authority of God) so
long it is our Duty to be subject, whether our Prince do his Duty, or not.


F. Although what you have now replied, is no more in effect than ^ Repetition of
what has been said before* yet I forgive it, since your Cause will admit no
other, nor can I see any Reason, why Natural Judgments may (...) removed by
Force, or Natural Means, but not Moral or Civil ones, unless you could also
prove* that it is God's Express Command that we may remove the one, but not the
other: nor have you proved it otherwise than by telling me, that Princes are
God's Ordinance, and are endued with Irresistible Power, all which has been
already considered. And I have already shown you, it is neither Commanded by
God, nor yet Ordained for the Common Good of Mankind. And though I own that
Afflictions may sometimes serve for a Punishment of a sinful Nation, yet it is
as likely that such a great, and lasting Punishment, as a merciles^ Tyrant, may
as well bring the People to Repentance, and when they are s^fficiently amended,
they may very well enjoy the Benefits of it, and they may as well expect, that
God will bless all Lawful Means, for that end, whereof I take Resistance, or
self-defence to be the Principal; since Miracles are ceased. And of this we
have an Example in the 2 d. of Kings, chap. 18. For though Ahaz the Father of
Ezekiah had submitted himself, and become Tributary to the King of Assyria, yet
when H^zek^ah his Son turned to the Lord, it is said, that he was with him, and
that he rebelled against the King of Assyria, and served him not, and yet he
was then as much subject to him as Iehoiachin, or Zedekiah, were afterward to
Nebuchadnezzar. So that all that is new in this Answer of yours, is only the
fatal Consequences, that it would bring upon all Families in the State of
Nature, for then (forsooth) Children and Servants might likewise pretend, that
the Government of their Fathers and Masters were so insupportable, that it was
no longer to be endured, and so might Rebel against them, and depose them,
which does by no means follow, for I have already proved at our first
Conversation, that some sort of Resistance for the Preservation of Life and
Limbs, may be lawful against the Outrages or Violence of a Father, or Master of
a Family; Yet do I by no means allow, that they should Resist them for any
other Correction or severe Usage which they shall inflict upon them, since
Servants, or Slaves whilst they continue under their Masters Power, can have no
Liberty, or Property of their own to defend; and a Son whilst he remains part
of his Fathers Family, I grant, differs not from a Servant, so that all that
ought to be done either by Sons or Servants in case the Government of their
Father, or Master grows so Cruel and Tyrannical as not to be endured, is to run
away, and leave their Family. And thus we read that Hagar upon the severe Usage
of Sarah her Mistress, fled from her, nor was blamed by the Angel for so doing.

Nor is what you have now said, to prove the Subjection of Servants, and Slaves
to be as absolute the one as the other, at all convincing for I have long since
proved, that a Family and a Kingdom are very different things, and that
Oeconomical and Civil Power do not only differ in Specie, but in Genere too.
For though I grant, that Slavery might begin by Compact as well as by War, yet
Subjection to Civil Power, could Regularly commence by Compact only; and
therefore, since the Natural State of Mankind is that of Freedom from Slavery,
all Subjects are supposed to be in that State of Freedom, and to have a Right
both to their Liberties and Properties; which, if the Supreme Powers go about
forcibly to take away, they then cease to be so, since they take away the main
End of their Institution, I mean, this of such a People, who are properly
Subjects, and not Slaves: For of those, who own themselves to be Slaves to
their Prince, I told you already, I would not take upon me to meddle: Since I
doubt whether such an Empire can be called a Civil Government, or not: So, that
for all that you have hitherto said, I must still believe, St. Peter did not
direct this Precept to Subjects but to Servants under the Yoke, that is, to
Slaves, such as had no Property, in any thing, nor Power over their own
Persons, but might be sold, and assigned with their Wives and Children to whom
soever their master pleased; which, though not of Divine Institution, Yet since
it was so ordained by the Civil Laws of the Empire, neither Jesus Christ nor
yet his Apostles would make any Alteration in it. Nor has he thought fit to do
so, in any of those things, which we enjoy as our Civil or Natural Rights, by
the Law of Nature, or the Municipal Laws of our Country: and therefore it is
not true, that there is as perfect a Subjection due to a Sovereign Prince as to
a Master, unless the People of that Nation have made themselves absolute Slaves
to him, instead of Subjects, which could never be but by their own Consent. It
is true, a Prince is more eminently the Minister of God, and Acts by a more
sacred, and inviolable Authority, than a Master; Yet does it not therefore
follow, that he acts as God's Minister, or by this sacred or inviolable
Authority, when he destroys, or enslaves the Subjects. Nor can you say that God
has given him any Authority so to do. And as for the Example of Christ's
Suffering, which you urge as a Reason of our absolute Subjection to Princes,
without any Resistance I have answered that already, and therefore need say no
more to it; But do own, that in that great Point of suffering for Religion,
when we are lawfully called thereunto, we are to follow his Example, yet does
it not prove, that we are to suffer in all other Cases whatsoever, concerning
which he has given us no express Precept or Command.


M. I have something more to say to you about this matter of Suffering for
Religion, but I shall defer it at present, and shall only now consider the Evil
Consequences of your Arguments for Resistance of the Supreme Powers in any Case
whatsoever, the sum of which, B. P. P.. 8.
if I can well remember, is to this Effect; Shall a Prince be free from all
Correction till God Almighty is pleased to chastise him? Must I sit still, and
suffer my Throat to be cut, my Estate ruined, and not dare in any Case to
defend my self, till God is pleased to i^terpose, and that in an Age in which
Miracles are ceased? God is for the most part pleased to respite the Punishment
of Opp^esso^s, till the next World, and if I be ruined in this, what comfort is
it to me, or mine, that the Injury shall be punished when I shall reap no
Advantage by it. Ibid.. 9.
And suppose the Subjects of such a Prince should succeed in their Rebellion,
and prevail against him, they must then submit to another Prince, of whom they
have no more Assurance they shall be better treated, and if they set up many,
they are all Men, and subject to be corrupted by Power and Greatness: And in an
Anarchy every Man will become a Tyran^ to his Neighbors, so that this Doctrine
of curbing, and Resisting Princes, is calculated for the Ruin of Mankind, and
tends to no bodies good but theirs, who design thereby to gain a Power of doing
to others* what they pretend to fear: And when all is done, the Punishment of
Princes, who abuse their Power must be left to God Almighty, who only can and
will punish his own Ministers.

Now suppose all this were just as it is stated, if the Injuries a Man suffer
are insupport^ble under any Government he may Petition for relief, and in all
probability find it; if not, he may fly into another Country for succor* if
he cannot do that neither, he will scarce be able to resist: So that if it were
never so justifiable, it could be of no use to any such miserable man, for no
Prince, though never so ill natured, will attempt any such thing against any such
number of Men, as are in a capacity of revenging the Wrong done them, when they
will, only out of hopes, they will not, because they ought not. Nor will the
Histories of all Ages put together, afford one Instance of a Monarch that ever
injured any Man at this rate; whom he believed able (if willing) to revenge the
Wrong, but that he took care as far as he could to prevent it* and either to
take him out of the way, or to put him out of a Possibility of a Retaliation.
So that all discontented, fretful Rhetoric, is of no use in any such Case.

But then, on the contrary, if every Ambitious, and Factious Man might be left
at Liberty to insinuate into the Rabble, and the Great, and little Vulgar; that
Princes are to be punished when they do amiss, that they are bound to Act
according to Laws, and to their Oaths, and if they do otherwise are presently
to be treated as Tyrants, and the Common Enemies of Mankind: That it is Lawful
for a Man to defend himself against the Injustice and Oppression of his Prince,
etc. This can only serve to fill the World with Rebellions, Wars, and
Confusions in which more thousands of Men* and Estates must of Necessity be
ruined, and Wives ravished, and Murdered in the space of a few Days, than can
be destroyed by the worst Tyrant, that ever trod upon the Earth amongst his own
Subjects in the space of many years, or of his whole Life.


F. I perceive you think this place of Scripture will not carry you through:
and therefore you would fain confute my Arguments by ridiculing them. But in
answer to the Expedients you have now proposed, I think I may make this return.
1. As for petitioning when a Government grows insupportable, suppose then the
Prince declares he will not be petitioned in this matter, but as the French
King lately did, when the Protestants would have petitioned him against the
Violation of the Edict of Nantes, delights to see men ruined, or suppose he
lays any Man by the heels, that shall offer never so humbly to Petition him
either in his own, or the People's behalf, as King James lately served the
Bishops; then this Expedient can signify nothing. As for the next, flying into
another Country for Succor, that is, a very sorry comfort, that a Man must be
forced to go, and beg his Bread in a strange Land; and whatever this may be a
Duty for Private or Single Persons, yet it cannot extend to a whole Nation,
since if all the People should go away, the Commonwealth, or Civil Society
would be dissolved; and farther perhaps, as now in France, and in all
Tyrannical Governments, it is commonly practiced, the Prince should forbid his
Subjects to go out of his Kingdom upon Pain of Death, or being sent to the
Galleys, then I think this expedient would signify nothing neither. But now,
if nothing else will do, you say, Resistance can be of no use fo such miserable
People, because a Prince will not dare to attempt any such thing against such a
number of Men, as are in a Capacity of revenging the Wrongs done them, where
they will, only out of hopes, that they will not, because they ought not to do
it. I grant indeed that never any Tyrant when he went about thus to oppress his
People, designed they should be in a Capacity to revenge the wrong he did them
when they would: And therefore such Tyrants take very great Care by Guards, and
Standing Armies to prevent it. But yet I can show you a Prince, who very lately
received such encouragement, by the Writing, and Preaching of our high Clergy,
that he seemed resolved to bring in Popery, and Arbitrary Government upon us
chiefly out of Hopes, that the People would not, because (as he thought) they
ought not to resist: And though I also grant, that few Monarchs injure particular
Men so much* but that, if they believe them able to revenge the Wrong, they
took care as far as they could to prevent it: Yet this signifies nothing if
once a whole Nation come to be oppressed, and disgusted against the Government:
For if such a Prince, or Commonwealth have not the Assistance of some other
Power, either his own standing Army, or his Neighbors, his Authority would
soon be at an End: Thus we read of the Massacre, and expulsion of the French
out of Sicily, it was done in the twinkling of an Eye, and before those in
Power had the least Suspicion of it. So likewise in the late Revolt of the
Portugueses from the King of Spain, his Government was at an End in little more
than a days time, and that Nation will tell you, that they look upon the
Benefit of being governed by a Prince of their own, and enjoying their own
Laws, as very well worth that Expense of Blood, and Treasure they were at to
obtain it. To conclude, I do not speak this to encourage the Rabble, or Great,
and Little Vulgar (as you call them) to take Arms, and punish Princes every
time they do amiss: Nor have I at all asserted, that Princes may be punished by
their Subjects unless you can prove to me, that every one who resists the
Violence of another, is his Lord, and Master. Neither do I maintain, that though
Princes are bound to act according to Laws, and to their Oaths, yet if they do
otherwise they are presently to be treated as Tyrants; and the Common Enemies
of Mankind, or that it is Lawful for every Private Man to defend himself
against the Injustice, and Oppression of his Prince: I grant such Doctrine
would serve to fill the World with Rebellions, Wars, and Confusions, and may
produce all those dreadful Consequences you have here set forth.

But on the other side, under such a Tyranny as where the whole People, or the
Major part of them, shall happen to be assaulted, enslaved, and oppressed to
that Degree, that no Man can tell when he is safe; I say, in such Cases a
Tyrant may destroy more thousands of Men, ravish more Women, and ruin more
Families, and Estates, than it is likely to be done by the Highest Resistance
the People can make against him: Since they are Mad if ever they make this
Resistance unless they are also morally sure either by their own Strength, or
the Assistance of their Neighbors of succeeding in the attempt.

Nor do the Consequences of such Resistance, but rarely fall out in the manner
you suppose. For it seldom happens but that the New Prince to whom the People
submit themselves, will (being warned by the Example of his Predecessor) take
Care to govern with greater Mercy, and Moderation, and it is much more
unlikely, that if they choose, or set up many Representatives out of their own
Body, that they will be easily corrupted by Power, and Greatness thus to
oppress the People. And lastly, it is much less probable, that the People can
continue long in an Anarchy without any Government at all. So that to conclude,
this Doctrine of resisting of Princes, or other Supreme Powers in Cases of
Extremity is so far from tending to the Ruin of Mankind that I cannot see how
they can be safe without it; and though the Punishment of Princes who abuse their
Power may be left to God Almighty, yet I am confident the resisting of those,
who though they have the Power of the Sword in their Hand, yet act as none of
Gods Ministers, is neither contrary to the Laws of God, nor Nature.


M. I perceive you want Testimonies out of Scripture to justify your Doctrine
of Resistance, and therefore you are, when pressed by these, forced to fly to
your old Refuge of Self-defence by the Law of Nature, in which though I have been
forced to follow you, and quit the Method I proposed to my self; yet I would
have you to know, it is not for want of more Texts of Scripture, and therefore
I must still farther enforce the true sense of that place of the first of St.
Peter, Chap. 2.13, etc. S. C. R. Chapter 5. p. 141.
Submit your selves to every ordinance of Man for the Lords sake, whether it be
to the King, as Supreme, or unto Governors as to them that are sent by him for
the Punishment of Evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well. For this
is the very same doctrine, which St. Paul taught the Romans, Let every Soul be
Subject to the Higher Powers. For the same Word is used in the Original (...),
and (...), and therefore to submit, and to be subject is the same thing which
as St. Paul tells us signifies, Ib. 142.
Non-Resistance: Only as St. Paul speaks only of not resisting the Higher
Powers, that is, Emperors, and Sovereign Princes herein include all those who
Act by their Authority; and St. Peter, to prevent all Cavils and Exceptions
distinctly mentions both, that we must submit to all Humane Power, and
Authority, not only to the King as Supreme, that is, in St. Paul's Phrase, to
the Higher Powers, to all Sovereign Princes, who are invested with the Supreme
Authority, but also to those, who are sent by him, who receive their Authority,
and Commission from the Sovereign Prince.


F. You may spare your Pains for making any long Explanation on this Text, for
I have already granted that all due Submission is to be given, not only to the
Supreme Powers, but also to all those who are put in Authority under them, and
that not only for Wrath, but for Conscience sake; yet is this place to be
understood in the same sense as the former, that is, as far as they make use of
this Power for the great ends of Government (viz.) the Good, and Preservation
of the People, and not for their Ruin and Destruction, by taking away their
Lives, Liberties, and Properties at their pleasure. So that this Precept is to
be understood, according to the Reason, which both St. Peter, and St. Paul
gives for this Submission, because Rulers are not a Terror to good works, but
to the Evil; and because, such Governors are for the Punishment of Evildoers,
and for the praise of them that do well; and even a Government, where a Heathen
Prince has such Supreme Power may, and does most commonly in respect to most
of its Subjects, give more countenance, and encouragement to good works than
bad ones, and therefore Obedience to such a sort of Governors is not only
Lawful, but a Duty: Nay, though through Ignorance, and Malice, they might
persecute the true Religion: for I have already proved, that at the time of
Writing of these Epistles there was no Actual Persecution begun by the Roman
Emperors against the Christians; and tho they did afterward persecute them,
yet even such as did so, being commonly men of good Morals, and having much of
Goodness, Justice, and Prudence in their Natures (such as was Trajan, and the
two Antonin^u's) they would not fail extremely to encourage the Practice of
such, and other virtues by their Examples, and by good Laws preserve their
Subjects from the Mischiefs of Immoralities, and keep them in Order, Peace, and
Sobriety. But is it true when Tyrants (be they Usurpers or not) not only govern
contrary to, but also subvert all the Ends of Government?


M. If this be the Sense you put upon this place, I think I shall easily show
you not only the Absurdity, but perniciousness of this Interpretation, which
indeed does undermine all that Obedience and Subjection that is due from
Subjects to their Sovereigns, unless they rule well, that is, according to
their Humors, or Fancies. Now I pray, Consider whether these great Apostles
intended to oblige the Christians of that Age to yield Obedience to those
Powers, which then governed the World. If they did, (as I think no Man will be
so hardly as to say, S C. R. p. 149, 150.
that they did not) then it will be proper to inquire whether, what they here
affirm, and assign as the Reason of their Subjection, That Rulers are not a
Terror to good works but to the Evil, were true of the then Roman Emperors,
and Governors, or not. If it were true, then I believe it will hold true of
all Kings in all Ages of the World; for there cannot well be greater Tyrants
than the Roman Emperors were at this time: and so this will prove an Eternal
Reason, why we should be Subject to Princes, notwithstanding the many faults,
and miscarriages of their Government. And if it were not true, it is very
strange; that two such great Apostles, should use such an Argument to persuade
Christians, to submit to the Powers as only proved the quite contrary, that
they ought not to be Subject to the present Powers, because they were unjust*
and Tyrannical, and which indeed in contradiction to the Original design, and
Institution of Civil Power, we^e a Terror to good works, and not to the Evil.

The Christians were at this time actually persecuted by the Jews in Palestine,
and if they were not then also persecuted by the Emperors, yet it was that
which they might daily expect, considering their extraordinary wickedness, and
Cruelty: And yet the Apostle exhorts them not to resist the Powers, because
they were not (that is, should not be) a Terror to good works, but to the
Evil. If by this he only means, Ibid.
that they should be Subject to them, while the, encouraged virtue, and
virtuous Men, but might rebel against them when they did the contrary: How
could the Christians of those days think themselves obliged by this to submit
to the Higher Powers*

For this was not their Case they suffered for Righteousness sake, the Supreme
Powers were a Terror to them, though they were Innocent, though they could not
charge them either with breaking the Laws of God, or Men; and therefore upon
your Principles they were not bound to submit to them whenever they could find
it safe to resist. So that either you put a false comment upon the Text, or
while the Apostle undertakes to deter them from Resistance, he urges such an
Argument, as was proper only to persuade them to rebel.


F. Had you been pleased to have minded more attentively, what I said last, you
would not have thus misrepresented my sense; for I have already proved, that
there was no Persecution in the Roman Empire, against the Christians when those
Epistles were written, nor for many years after, and I have also granted that
if the Emperors had so persecuted them they ought not to have resisted: And
therefore by good works, and Evil doers, etc. in both those Texts of St. Peter,
and St. Paul, is not to be understood, only believing in Christ, or behaving
themselves as became Innocent Christians, but in general that at that time when
the Apostles wrote these Epistles under Claudius, and the beginning of Nero,
(and indeed through his whole Reign where he governed by his Deputies) the
Supreme Power was then really a Terror to Evil Works, that is, to all offenses
against good manners, and the public Peace of the Commonwealth, and were also
a Punishment for Evildoers, that is, those that did transgress against the
Public Laws ordained for the restraining Men from committing any sort of
public Wickedness, or Immorality. So that I own that neither the Heathens, nor
the Christians had any Reason to take Arms or resist the Supreme Power at this
time.

But admit there had been at that time great Miscarriages, and Abuses committed
under their Government, and that good Men had been often times punished, and
Evil ones Rewarded, and the Ends of Government to some Degree perverted,
especially at Rome, where the Emperors took a Liberty of doing many unjust,
and Tyrannical Actions* Yet I have no where (that I know of) affirmed, that
Princes ought, to be Resisted only for being Evil, or Wicked, or that all the
evil Actions and Mis-government of Princes or their Subordinate Ministers ought
to be Resisted by the People; but I have all along asserted the contrary,
S.C.R. p. 153.
for I own that no human Government can be so exact, and perfect, but it may be
Guilty of great Miscarriages; Good Men may suffer, and bad men may flourish
under a virtuous Prince, much more under those that are themselves wicked, and
unjust: and there are many Degrees of evil Government and Tyranny, some of
which may consist well enough with the common Safety of the People, which was
the Condition of most of the Subjects of the Roman Empire under the Reigns of
Claudius and Nero. Since they did then enjoy the Protection of the
Commonwealth, and all the Civil Rights of the Subjects; and therefore, you
very much mistake me in supposing, that I maintain, we are only bound to be
subject to those Supreme Powers, who rule well, or who punish Wickedness, and
reward Virtue: Since I grant this was scarce ever performed exactly even under
the most Regular Governments, yet there is a great deal of difference between
bearing with the common Infirmities of all Governments; and such intolerable
Violences that dissolve the Government it self, as by making War upon the
People, and invading their Civil Liberty, and Property. As for Example, no Man
doubts, but the King may pardon a Robber, or a Murderer, but if instead of
hanging, he should pardon all Thieves, and Murderers, that should rob or murder
in a year or two together, and should likewise list them in his Guards to kill
and rob whom they pleased, provided he had a share of the Bo^^^y; I would very
fain know of you, or any other reasonable man, whether the People were bound to
bear it, and whether they might not Resist them, though they had the King's
Commission for so doing.

To conclude, when the Apostle here says, that Rulers are not a Terror to good
Works but to the Evil, and that they are for the punishment of Evildoers, and
for the praise of them that do well; the Apostles only mean in general, the
great Advantages of Civil Government for the Suppression of Wickedness, and
Encouragement of Virtue, which is the true End, and the h^st improvement of
Human Power. But this also is in great measure obtained under Evil, and (to
some degree) Tyrannical Princes, and therefore this Argument for Subjection is
good, even under a Tyrant. Public Justice was administered under the Government
of Nero, and good Men were then commonly rewarded, and bad men punished. And
tho Justice be not so equally, and so universally administered under a bad
Prince, as under a good one, though such a Tyrant may oppress many of his
Subjects, and be the occasion of diverse Calamities, yet while the main ends of
Civil Government are maintained, it lays a great Restraint upon the unruly
Lusts, and Passions of Men, and gives great security to the Just, and Innocent.
And therefore, good Men are concerned to promote the Peace, and security of
Civil Government, though the Prince be in some degree a Tyrant, for there is more
security to be had under such a Tyrant, than in a Civil War.

In ordinary cases it is very possible for private good Men to live easily and
tolerably under a very bad Prince, and though it should be their Lot to suffer,
yet since the Peace, and Quiet of human Societies is in it self so great a
Blessing, and the public Good may be better consulted by the Preservation of
Government, than by Resistance; it becomes every good Man rather to suffer
patiently under such a Tyrant, than to shake and unsettle Civil Government, and
disturb the natural Course of Justice, by Sedition and Tumults.

Yet all this is to be understood of such Degrees of Tyranny, or evil
Government, as may consist with the main Ends of a Civil Society, or
Commonwealth, and as far as the public Good of the People may be better
consulted, and preserved by the Preservation, than Resistance of it; I grant it
to be every Man's Duty patiently to suffer many Injuries and Abuses, rather
than to make any public Disturbance: So on the other side, when the main Ends
of Civil Government, viz. the Common Preservation of the Peoples Liberties and
Properties are actually, or about to be destroyed, I think every honest man
that is careful of his own, and his Posterities well-being, and Happiness may,
nay, ought (if no other Remedy can be had) to make Resistance, not for the
Destruction, but Preservation of Civil Government, which I already look upon as
good as dissolved, before such Resistance, can be Lawful.


M. I must confess your Doctrine, as you have explained it, is not so bad as I
supposed at the first hearing, but if People may never Resist, till things come
to such a State, as that by a general Invasion of Men's Lives, Liberties and
Properties the Civil Government be in a manner destroyed (as you suppose) the
People may stay long enough before ever they shall be in a Condition to make
this Resistance. For in all the small Observations that I have made out of
History, I never could find the People generally reduced to so sad a Case, as
this you have put: most of the Rebellions and Alterations of Government that I
have read of, having begun from a few Tyrannical Actions committed upon the
Persons, or Estates of some Great and Powerful Men, who being beloved by the
People, were able to stir them up to revenge their particular Injuries; Thus
one single Act of Lust in the younger Tarquins ravishing Lucretia, gave
occasion to Brutus, and her Husband Colatine, to take Arms against Tarquin, and
by expelling him and his Family to set up a Commonwealth. And therefore, since
this Case of such as an extreme intolerable Tyranny as you mention, can never,
or at least very rarely happen, I think I may still maintain, what I first
affirmed, that it is much better to put this mischief to the venture, and
suffer all the Inconveniences that may happen from it, than by allowing the
People to be their own Judges, when the Government proves insupportable, to
give them a Right of Judging and Resisting whenever they shall pretend that it
is so, which they may make use of not to secure their own Liberties, and
Estates, but to gratify their own Humors, or else the Ambition or Revenge of
great and factious men. S.C.R. p. 160.
So that unless there is some Power that is irresistible, from whence there
lies no Appeal, Ib. p. 161.
it is impossible for any Government to subsist. And though it is not necessary
that this Power should be always in the hands of one Man, yet if God has
placed it in the hands of a Prince, there it must be irresistible too, however
he uses it: For if once it be made lawful to resist the Supreme Power where
ever it is placed, you dissolve human Societies, or at least expose them to
perpetual Disorders and Convulsions. Factious and Ambitious Men will still find
Pretenses to resist good Princes as well as bad, and no Government can be any
longer secure than whilst ill-designing men want power to resist.

Now then to pass a true Judgment on this whole Matter, we must not only
consider what present Inconveniences, we may suffer from the irresistible Power
of the worst Tyrant, but also what an irreparable Mischief it is, for ever to
unsettle the Foundations of Government. We must consider whether Civil
Government be the greater Blessing to Mankind, or a Tyrant the greater Curse:
whether it be more desirable to endure the Insolence, and Injustice of the
greatest Tyrant, when the Power falls into such a hand, or for ever to be
deprived of the Security of Government, and the Blessings of Peace, and Order.
And therefore, there is great Reason why God should so severely forbid the
Resistance of all Princes, though the Cruellest Tyrants you can imagine; and why
we should quietly, and contentedly submit to this Divine Appointment, because
the Resistance of the Supreme Powers, (were it once allowed by God) would
weaken the Authority of all Human Governments, and expose them to the Rage, and
Frenzy of Ambitious, and discontented States Men, or wild Enthusiasts. And
this, I think, is a sufficient Answer to this Pretense, that the Apostle limits
our Subjection to Princes to the regular Exercise of their Authority.


F. I see we are even come where we set out, to the necessity of an
Irresistible Power, and the mischief that must follow if the People ever Judge
for themselves, which indeed is but the same Argument in Politics, which the
Church of Rome makes use of for the necessity of an Infallible Judge in
spirituals, because otherwise if the People should judge for themselves, in
matters of Religion, there would nothing follow but Anarchy, and Confusion in
the Church, and that there would be as many Religions as there are Men; And so
you likewise urge, that if the People may ever once come to Judge, when they
are assaulted, enslaved, or oppressed, and should have a Right of making
Resistance, nothing but Anarchy and Confusion must follow in the Common wealth.
And truly I think the Argument is as good for the one as the other, and as I
hope we may be always good Orthodox Christians without such an infallible Judge
in matters of Faith, so I think we may be Loyal Subjects to our Prince without
investing him with an Irresistible Power, of doing with us what ever he has a
mind to.

But since you have only repeated, what you have said at our last meeting, when
we first began to debate this Question, so I must beg you pardon, if I refresh
your Memory, and again repeat my Answers. In the first place, I deny that it
must follow, that if once it be made Lawful to resist the Supreme Power, where
ever placed, this must dissolve Civil Societies, or expose them to perpetual
Disorder, because (forsooth) some Factious and ambitious Men will find
Pretenses to Resist good Princes as well as bad. For first I have all along
supposed the Civil Society as good as dissolved, before such Resistance is
Lawful: And therefore, the Convulsions or Disorders of a Civil War can scarce
be worse than such a State, and until the People are under this Condition, I
grant factious, and ambitious Men may make Pretenses to Resist good Princes, as
well as bad, and may find some followers as wicked as themselves, to take the^
part. Yet this Infection seldom, or never seizes upon a whole Nation, who has
always Power, and Affection enough for the Supreme Powers to join with them, to
Suppress such Rebels. I grant, we ought always to consider, whether Civil
Government be the greater Blessing to Mankind or a Tyrant, the greater Chrs^;
But I do never suppose, such Resistance to be Lawful, but when the Power falls
into such hands, that though they may call themselves a Civil Government, yet the
People are almost as totally deprived of all that Security, and those Blessings
of Peace, and order, which they may justly expect from it, as if they were in a
State of War. And therefore, as you suppose that God Almighty forbids the
Resistance of the most cruel Tyrants, because this Resistance, were it once
allowed, by giving the People a Power of Judging, would weaken the Authority of
Human Governments, and expose them to the Rage, and Frenzy of Ambitious, and
discontented Statesmen, or Wild Enthusiasts, And this, you think a sufficient
Answer.

So on the other side, if this Resistance be in no case lawful, though in never
so great Extremities, and that the People must not judge, when they are so
cruelly used, as that it is no longer to be endured, not only the Persons of
Princes are Sacred, and irresistible, but also all those Instruments of Tyranny
whom they may hire, and employ to that purpose, by which means all Government
whatsoever will not only be Absolute, but Arbitrary, and without any sufficient
Obligations to other Mercy, Justice, and the Common Good, than what the
Tyrannical Will, or Humor of one, or more men shall please to allow. So that
the Lives, Liberties, and Estates of a free People or Nation shall be in as bad
or a worse Condition, than if they were Slaves, if all means of defending
themselves by their own Resistance, or joining with those that would assist
them be wholly denied them. And whether God can ever be the Author of such an
Institution, I appeal to your own Reason to judge, when you are in a more
sedate and equal Temper.


M. I see it is in vain to argue this Matter any longer with you, And therefore,
I must tell you, that I cannot but look upon these Doctrines of Passive
Obedience, and Non-resistance, as true Christian Doctrines; since the Ancient
Fathers of the Church, and Primitive Christians did always both believe, and
practice them, and in imitation of whom our own Church of England (which I
think of any in the World comes nearest to the Primitive) does likewise
maintain it in her 39 Articles, Canons and Homilies, whereas you can show me no
Express Text of Scripture, nor Testimonies of the Fathers, nor Examples of the
Primitive Christians to justify this Resistance, which when ever you can do, I
shall be of your Opinion; and if you doubt the Truth of what I say, I have here
by me the Lord Primate Usher's Book of the Power of the Prince, and Obedience
of the Subject, which you may, if you please, take home with you, and consult
at your Leisure, in which I doubt not but you will meet with full Satisfaction
in this matter.


F. I have already proved at our last meeting, that Resistance for self-defence
against those, who have the Power of the Sword, is a Right of Nature conferred
by God on all Mankind, and unless you can show me (...) place of Sculpture,
which takes it quite away. I think I may very well maintain, that it is still
left entire to us, and is not abrogated by the Law of the Gospel, and that it
was lawful before our Savior's coming into the World, I have proved by those
defensive Arms made use of by David, and the Maccabers; And as for the
Testimonies of the Fathers, and the practice of the Primitive Christians, of
which the Reverend Primate has made so ample a Collection, in that Treatise
you know show me; I thank you for your kind offer of it, but I do not now need
it; for since I began to consider this Controversy with you, I have carefully
read over that Treatise, and I cannot find, that this vast Collection out of
Profane, as well as Ecclesiastical Writers, will prove any more, than those
Principles, which I own to be true, and yet will not impugn this Principle I
here defend.

In the first part of this Discourse it is proved by Scripture, as well as
other Testimonies, that the Authority of all Sovereign Powers is from God,
which I also allow; yet does it not hinder, but that the Consent and Submission
of the People, is a necessary means, or Condition of conveying this Authority
when God does not please, to make or Nominate Kings himself. 2 dly. That the
Persons as well as Power of Sovereign, though wicked, Princes is also Sacred, and
Irresistible, yet this is to be understood, whilst they continue to act toward
their whole People, as the Ordinance of God, and by virtue of that Divine
Commission which they have received from him.

In the second Part of this Discourse, it is proved from Scripture, Testimonies
of the Fathers, and other Authors, that particular Subjects are bound to obey
the Supreme Powers in all lawful, and indifferent things, or else to submit,
and suffer the punishment in case of their unlawful Laws, or Commands. As also
to bear with any Violence, and Injury that may be offered to them, rather than
to disturb the public Peace, and Civil Government of the Common wealth,

2 ly. That in the time of the Primitive Church, and before the Christian
Religion was settled By Law, and become part of the Civil Constitution of whole
Kingdoms and States; It was unlawful to Resist the Supreme Powers in case of
Persecution, though to death it self, for the Testimony of Christian Religion:
which I have also allowed through this whole Conversation: Yet none of these
Quotations, as I can see, do reach the matter in Controversy, between us, and
assert it expressly to be absolutely unlawful for the whole People of any
Kingdom, or Nation to make use of defensive Arms, and Resist the Intolerable
Violence, and Tyranny of the Supreme Powers, if they shall happen to make War
upon their People, and go about to take away and subvert the main Ends of all
Government, viz. the Preservation of Men's Lives, Liberties and Civil
Properties. Neither do they any where assert, that in limited o^ mixed
Governments such as most of those now in Europe, where the People, by the
fundamental Constitutions of the Government, or the aster Concessions of
Princes, restraining their own absolute Power, enjoy diverse Privileges, and
Liberties, unknown to those who live under absolute Monarchies: That the People
may not upon the manifest Invasion of such Legal Right by force, Resist, and
defend themselves, and their just Right against the violent Invasion of the
Prince.


M. I cannot deny but you have fairly enough represented the Chief Heads, or
Principles, which the Reverend Primate ^ndertakes to prove in this Excellent
Treatise: And I think you have your self granted enough to confute all you have
already said For in the first place, if it be unlawful, for every particular
private Subject to Resist the Supreme Powers, it will likewise follow, that it
will be also unlawful, for a whole Nation. For a whole Nation, is only a
Systeme or Collection of particular Persons, and Universals have no real Being
in Nature, but only in our Ideas: So that if it be unlawful for every
particular Person to Resist, and defend himself, in case he is injured, and
oppressed, it must be also unlawful for a whole People, which consists of
individuals to make such Resistance; and it is a Rule in Logic, that nothing
can be affirmed of Individuals, which may not also be affirmed of the whole
Species.

So likewise if you grant, That the Primitive Christians ought not to have
Resisted the Supreme Powers in case of Persecution for Religion, I think it
will likewise as well prove, that they ought not to Resist upon any account
whatsoever, since certainly, there cannot be greater Wrongs, or Violences
committed in the World by Supreme Powers, than to allow them an Irresistible
Power of putting those to death that bear witness to the Truth of the Gospel,
since a whole Nation may be as well thereby destroyed, if they prove firm to
the Christian Religion, and that the Prince continue obstinately Cruel. And you
might as well argue that Patient Suffering without Resistance ought not to be
exercised in this Case, because it is destructive to Mankind, and the Quiet of
a Civil Society, as to argue from the same Reason that a whole Nation is not
obliged to suffer without any Resistance; when their Lives, Liberties and
Properties are invaded by the Supreme Powers. So that if the Primitive
Christians might not Resist the Roman Emperors, when they made so great a part
of the People, and were so vast a multitude in the Roman Empire in the time of
Tertuliian, as that he tells the Emperor Sever^^ in his Apology for the
Christians to this effect, That had they a mind to profess open Hostility, and
to practice secret Rev^nge, could they want numbers of Men, or sorce of Arm^?
Are the Moors, the Marcomans, or the Parthians themselves, or any one
particular Nation whatsoever, more in number than they, who are spread over the
whole World? They are indeed not of your way, and yet they have silled all you
have; your Cities, Islands, Castl^s, Towns, Assemblies, your very Tents,
Tribes, and Wards, yea the Palace, Senate and Place of Judgment.

Nor need I to mention at large the famous Story of the Th^baean Legion, who
all of them suffered Death rather than they would either Sacrifice to Idols, or
Resist the Emperour^s Forces, though they were between six or seven thousand Men,
and might have sold their Lives dear enough. And if an Emperor may murder so
many thousands without any Resistance, I see no Reason why he may not put a
whole Nation of Christians to death by the same Reason.

Nor will one of your Reasons which you bring for it, signify any thing, that
the Christians were to suffer without Resistance, because Paganism was then the
Religion Established by the Law of the Empire; for if a Municipal Law, as this
was, ought to be overruled by the Natural Law or self-defence when they happen
to Clash, then the Christians who lived under the Heathen Emperors, might
lawfully have taken up Arms against the Government because they were deprived
of their Lives and ^^rt^in^s against all Equity and Humanity. For to persecute
men so remarkably Regular, and Peaceable, both in their Principles and
Practices, is as manifest a Violation of the Law of Nature, as is possible. And
if it was Lawful for them to Resist, then they seem bound in Conscience to do
it whenever they had a Probability of prevailing. For without doubt, it is a
great fault for a Man to throw away his Life, impoverish his Family and
encourage Tyranny, when he has a fair*remedy at hand.


F. If you had a little better remembered, what I have already said on this
Subject, you might have spared these Objections, for as to the first of them,
it is rather a Logical Fallacy, than a true Answer. For in the first place, I
have all along Asserted, that no Man ought to give up his Right of self
defense, but in order to a greater good, ( viz. the public Peace and
Preservation of the Commonwealth.) And therefore, Dr. Fern, and others of your
Opinion, do acknowledge, that David might have made use of defensive Arms to
defend himself against those Cutthroats, that Saul send to take away his Life,
though he might not have Resisted Readiness own person, and you your self have
already granted, that no Man can want Authority to defend his Life against him
that has no Authority to take it away. So that if this Law of Self-defence is
sometimes suspended, it is only in Submission to a Higher Law of preserving
the public Peace of the Common wealth, or Civil Society, which being once
br^ken and gone by a general Violence upon all men's Lives, Liberties and
Properties of that Nation, or Kingdom, that Obligation of maintaining the
public Peace being taken away, every Man's natural Right of not only defending
himself, but his innocent Neighbor, again takes place. And therefore, your
Logical Maxim, that nothing can be affirmed of Individuals, which may not be
affirmed of the whole Species, signifies nothing in this Matter; for every
Individual had before potentially a Right of Self-defence, tho they were under
an Obligation, not to reduce it into Act, till the Bonds of that Civil Society
were dissolved, and then it is true, they do not then Resist to maintain that
Civil Government which is already gone, but to get out of a State of Nature,
and set up a New one as soon as they can.

But as to your second Objection, which I confess has more weight in it, than
the former; I shall make this Answer, that you your self have given a
sufficient Reason why a whole Nation or Church, that professes the Christian
Religion, cannot be destroyed by all the Malice and Persecution that can fall
upon it by Persecuting Monarchs, for you tell us, that it is the special
Privilege of the Christian Church above the rest of Mankind that they are
God's peculiar Care, and Charge; and that he does not permit any suffering, or
Persecutions to befall them, but what he himself orders and appoints: And that
it is a great Happiness, to have our Condition immediately alloted by God. So
that it seems it cannot be in the Power of the Cruellest Tyrant utterly to
destroy Christianity, in any Country where it is truly taught, by all the
Persecution that he can use. This was the State of Christian Religion whilst it
was in its Infancy, and in which, we may observe more particular Declarations
of God's Providence by Miracles, and the Divine Inspirations of his Holy
Spirit, than after it was grown up, and that all the World became Christians.
In its Infancy, it is plain that Princes could not destroy it, because it was
supported by Miracles, and supernatural Means, but in the other State, when
Christianity was once grown up, settled and able to shift for it self, by being
made the Religion of the Empire, and the greatest part of Mankind embracing it
in those and other Countries, Princes then could not destroy it, if they would,
because their Subjects had then a Right to it, and a Property in it, as much as
they had to any thing else they enjoyed, and consequently might be preserved by
the same Human Means. Thus during the State of the Jewish Church in the
Wilderness, and for some time in the Land of Canaan, we find the Children of
Israel fed, and delivered from their Enemies by Miracles. But after they had
been long settled in it, and had Renounced the Immediate Government of God,
they were then left to preserve themselves by the same natural means with other
Nations.

And though I grant that such Persecutions, when ever they fall out, are very
Pr^judicial to the Peace and Happiness of those Nations that labor under them;
Yet this is no sufficient Reason against Pa^ient-suffering for Religion without
Resistance. For since our Savior is the Author of our Salvation, and has
ordained that it-shall be propagated not by Force or Resistance, but by
Sufferings, and that he has promised us an Eternal Weight of Glory, for our
submitting our Wills and Natural Affections to his Divine Commands, it is not
for us to dispute the Reason of it, since that he who pleased to bestow upon us
so great a Benefit without our Desert, might propose it to us upon what
Conditions he pleased, though never so hard to be performed. Yet is this to be so
understood, as that this Suffering for the Testimony of Christ may serve for
that great End for which he ordained it, ( viz.) the Propagation of his own
true Religion, by our bea^ing Testimony to it, in our courageous and patient
Suffering, which in a Kingdom or Nation, where Christianity, or any true
Prosession of it, is become the general, and Na^^onal Religion, cannot now be
supposed to be necessa^y. And this may serve also for an Answer to your last
Reply; For though I own, that the Municipal Laws of Common wealths cannot
abrogate any of our Natural Rights; but only in order to some greater good or
Benefit tending thereunto, yet certainly, the Revealed Law of God may, and does
in some Case abridge us of diverse of those Rights, which Men by the Law of
Nature might have made use of.

But as for your Quotation out of Tertullian, tho I have good Reason to
question the very matter of Fact, since I can hardly believe, that how numerous
soever the Christians might be, or whatever mischief they might have done
privately by setting the City on fire in the Night time, which he also mentions
a little before, as one of the ways by which they might have revenged
themselves; Yet do I not think, that they were then either for Strength or
Number sufficient to have made any Considerable Resistance, if they would,
against the Pretorian Bands, and other standing Legions which were then, if not
all, yet for the greatest part Heathens: The most part of the Christians of
those times, consisting of the meaner and mechanical Sort of People altogether
undisciplined, and unarmed, and so perhaps these Christians were under no other
Obligations, to Non resistance, then what the particular Providence of God, had
brought them to, as these French Protestants, who remain still in France, are
now under, that is, Obligations of Fear, and not of mere Conscience.

And as for your Example of the Thebaean Legion, though it is true they might
have sold their Lives dear before they had been killed, yet would this
Resistance have served them to little purpose against the Rest of the Army,
which might consist of 30, or 40000 men, all Heathen, and Headed by the
Emperor himself. But what if after all this stir about this Story, it should
not be true? for Eusebius and Socrates who lived nearer the time in which this
Action is supposed to be done, make no mention at all of it; though they had very
good occasion to do it. The first writer that ever made any mention of this
Story was Eucherius Archbishop of Lions, who did not write this Act o^ the
Martyrs till above 150 years after the thing was done, and he is also followed
by one Ado in his Martyrology, who lived likewise some time after him, when
writing of Legends began to grow in Fashion. But granting all the matter of
Fact to be as you relate it, it proves no more than what I have already
granted, that, the Christians were at that time obliged to lay down their
lives, for the Testimony of Christ rather than to make any Resistance; but that
this Precept is of a Constant, and Eternal Obligation when the Ends for which
it was ordained, are no longer of any use, and when our Religion is established
by such Laws, as the King himself cannot abrogate or dispense with, I utterly
deny: And certainly, if you were not very much blinded with the Prejudice of
these Notions of Passive-Obedience and Non Resistance, you would not leave all
the People of England at the Mercy of a Popish King to be dragooned out of
their Lives, Liberties and Estates as the Protestants have been in France and
Savoy, whenever the King shall please to put them to that severe Trial.


M. You have given me a very long, and I wish I could say a satisfactory
Answer, and I see, provided it would serve your turn, you do not value how much
you vilify the Sufferings of the Primitive Christians by making them not of
Ability to make any considerable Resistance if they would. Though Tertullian
expressly affirms the contrary, and so you likewise take upon you to follow the
Example of a late D^ctor; and to Question the Truth of the Story of the
Thebaean Legion, which though it might not be committed to writing before
Eucherius published it, yet might be very well have received a faithful account
of this matter either by Tradition, or by some Private Memorials that might be
kept of it in that Church; since they suffered this Martyrdom, not far from
Octodurum a place now called Martinach in Valla^s a part of Switzerland, and
not far from Lions, so that he might very well have a sufficient Information of
such a remarkable Action as this was.

Nor does what you say, savor less of a Latitudinarian Principle, whilst you
maintain, that a Patient Submission to the Supreme Powers is not of constant,
and Eternal Obligation in all Circumstances which is contrary to the opinion of
the Primitive Fathers, and also of the Church of England. But if St. Paul's
Doctrine be true, that we are not to do the least Evil that Good may come: And
if our Savior has enjoined us, not to resist the Supreme Pow^rs upon any
account whatsoever, and also to lay down our Lives for the Testimony of the
Truth, we ought certainly to observe his Commands, let the Consequence be what
it will, though it were to the total Destruction of a whole Church, or Nation:
Since God if he pleases may by the just Course of his Providence lay such
severe Judgments upon us, who can also infinitely reward us for our Patient
Suffering of them, in the Life to come.


F. I think I may without any Crime, Question the Truth of Tertullian's account
of the Power the Christians had to make any considerable Resistance in his
time, for sure, he may be out in such a Nice matter of Fact: Since he could be
guilty of such gross Errors in point of Doctrine, for before he turned
Mortanist, he was like our Quakers, and thought all Resistance of what kind
soever unlawful; and therefore, he tells us in his Apologetick, Idem sumus
Imperatoribus qui and vicinis no, (...), and a little after, Quodeunque enim
non licet in Imperatorem, ^d nec in quenq^^m, and he likewise condemned all
^light in time of Persecution, as you may see in the Treatise he writ upon that
Subject.

And as for the bare Practice of Primitive Christians, they are not of any
general binding Example to us, unless the Principle they go upon be true, since
I doubt not but many of them suffered Death out of a pure desire of Martyrdom
of which Sulpitius Severus tells us, they were more Covetous, than Men were in
his time of Bishoprics, in so much, that it was a common thing even for Women,
and Boys to offer themselves to voluntary Martyrdom that the Council of -- was
forced to make a Decree on purpose to forbid it.

And as for the Truth of the Story of the Thebaean Legion, it not being
recorded by any Writer of the Age in which it is said to have been done; I
think a Man may very well question its reality without any Suspicion of
Heresy: And when I can see those Arguments answered by you, or any Body else,
which the Learned Doctor you mention has brought against it, I will give more
credit to it than now I do. But you may call me a Person of Latitudinarian
Principles as much as you please in this matter, until you are able to prove to
me by better Arguments than you have done hitherto, that the Doctrine of
Non-Resistance in Case of Persecution for Religion, is of Constant, and Eternal
Obligation, unless it be in the same Case in which the Primitive Christians,
were obliged to suffer, rather than resist; and till this be done, I fear not
falling under St. Pau^'s Censure of doing Evil, that good may come of it; and
unless God had in downright Terms commanded it, I will never Believe, but that
I may have a very good Right in such a Government as ours to de^end my Life,
against any one that would take it away upon the bare score of Religion; nor
can I think it a Doctrine suitable to the Justice, and Goodness of God to
ordain a whole Nation to fall as a Sacrifice to the Cruelty, or Superstition of
any one, or more Men.

But since you are pleased to urge me with Examples of Primitive Christians,
who chose to die, rather than Resist, or R^b^l against their Prince, pray give
me leave likewise to tell you a few stories, wherein these Primitive Christians
have not showed themselves, so s^aunch in this matter as you would make them.

In opposition therefore to your Thebaean Legion, I may set those Legions that
composed the Army in Gaul, and which saluted Julian (afterward the Apostate)
Emperor contrary to their Allegiance to the Emperor Constantius, renouncing
which, they took an Oath of Allegiance to the former, whilst the latter was yet
alive, and had certainly fought against him and resisted him with a Witness,
had he not chanced to have (...) by the way, before they could meet to decide
the Quarrel,


M. Pray give me leave, Sir, to interrupt you a little, though I cannot deny, the
matter ^f F^ct to be as you say, and likewise that this Army was for the most
(...) yet they were, I suppose, drawn in partly ^ut of hatred to Constantius,
because he was an Arian, and p^rtly out of Compassion to Julian, who was at
that time upon very ill Terms with C^nst^^tius ^is Kinsman, the whole Army
Suffering many (...) for his sake, Vi. Ammian. Marcellin. Lib.
for whom they had a great Love and Esteem. But certainly their Loyalty to
Julian is very commendable, for though immediately after the Death of
Constantius, he openly declared himself to be a Heathen; yet notwithstanding
that, and his Persecution of the Christians during his whole Reign We cannot
find, that either the S^ldiers, or any other Christian ever resisted* or
rebelled against him: but that they looked upon it, as unlawful to resist him
may appear by several Authorities out of the Fathers of that time.


F. Since you cannot deny the matter of Fact, you strive to extenuate it* by
their hatred to Constantius for his Apostasy from the Catholic Faith: and the
severe, and rigid Treatment of Constantius: But if their hatred to Him* because
he was an Arian, could make them join with Julian to rebel against him, pray
tell me why they might not have rebelled also against Julian, after he had
declared himself an Apostate from the Christian Faith? could they have had such
another Leader as Julian himself? But he reigned too small a time, and was too
constantly himself at the Head of his Army, to give them any opportunity to
serve him as he had served his Predecessor.

And indeed this Army of Iulians was but too obedient to him, since we find
that though they had been Christians before, yet at the time of Iulian's Death,
they were then in Profession Heathens, for you will find in all the Historians,
that when after the Death of Julian, they chose Iovian Emperor, he at first
refused it, saying, that he, being a Christian, would not command Heathens,
whereupon they conf^ssed themselves to be all Christians, but certainly, this
had been a very impertinent Objection, had they been publicly known so at that
time.

And though I grant, Julian countenanced the doing of a great many violent things
toward the Christians: Yet it is certain, that he never made any Sanguinary
Laws against them, but rather forbid them to be put to Death, or to suffer any
hardship on the account of their Religion* though I confess the Heathens, because
they thought it would be acceptable to him, put many Christians to death by
Force, and Violence: So that however he might be pleased with it, and connive
at it, Yet did he never enact it by any public Law, or Edict, or if he had, do
I allow the Christians a Liberty to have taken Arms, and resisted him upon the
account of Religion. For though I own the Christian Religion had been established
by Law, by Constantine the Great, yet was it not so thoroughly settled as to
forbid the free and open Profession of the Pagan Superstition; the Heathens
being admitted to all Offices, and Commands, as well as the Christians, and
might freely perform all the Rites of their Superstition, public Sacrifices to
their false Gods only excepted; so that if Constantine by his Edict could
without any Rebellion, shut up the Heathen Temples, and give the Christians the
public Liberty of Pro^^ssing ^^eir Religion, why should not Julian have the
like Prerogati^^ (...) ^is Power was alike Supr^am, and absolute, to recall
those E^icts, and to make quite contrary ones, if he had so pleased?

And though I also own that the Christians did not actually rise in Arms against
Julian yet that there were many of them wou^d have done so, is very like^^
since they openly prayed for his D^struction, and gave him very undict^^ (...)
^ay reproach^ul ^angitage, upon the account of his Apostasy, whene^er (...)
came (...) their way* And thus some of those who are called Fathers, were (...)
opinion that an Apostate though an Empe^our might be put to Death. pray Pread*
what I have lately transcribed out of the Writings of Lucifer ^a^arit^nus (whom
St. Ierom calls, See Biblioth. Vet Patr. Tom. 4. Colon.
a Man (...) a wonderful Constancy and of a Mind prepared for Martyrdom) who
writing to the Emperor Constantius says thus to him. Pray show but one of the
Worshippers of God, that ever spared the Adversaries of his Religion: And then
he reads him his own Doom, out of Deuteronomy. 13.1. If there rise among you a
Prophet, or a Dreamer of Dreams, saying, let us go after other Gods (for the
Orthodox always charged the Arians with Idolatry) that Prophet, or Dreamer of
Dreams shall be put to Death: You see what you are commanded to suffer. [And
again] Hear what God has ordained by Moses, is to be done with you, for
persuading me to revolt from God, Deuteronomy. 13.6. If thy Brother, the Son of thy
Mother, or thy Son, etc. Entice thee secretly, saying, Let us go, and serve
other Gods, thou shall surely kill him, etc. Here it is commanded that my
Brother shall be put to Death, for inviting me to forsake God. [And in
pursuance of this Doctrine, he tells him little farther to this purpose,] "That
if he had been in the hands of Mattathias, or Phineas, and should have gone to
live after the manner of the Heathens, without doubt they would have killed him
with the Sword, which he repeats twice for fear he should forget it.

And this Treatise being sent for by the great Ath^^asius, and being by him
perused, he was so far from condemning any thing in it, that as you may see in
his Letter to this Lucifer, (which is in the same Volume from whence I
transcribed this) he highly praises him for Writing it, and calls his Book,
the Doctrine of the true Faith, besides many other Commendations too long here
to be repeated. And as for Julian himself, Sozomen the Ecclesiastical
Historian, writing of the manner of his Death, says, that it was believed by
many, that he was killed by some Christian Soldier of his Army, whom he
applauds for so doing.


M. I cannot deny, but the carriage of some Christians of those times, even of
those who are called ancient Writers, or Fathers, might be too undutiful, and
may be attributed to the Morose, Monastic temper of the Father you have
quoted, though a great deal of this sort of carriage may be attributed to that
Christian Zeal, which the Jews called the Spirits of Fortitude, and the Greeks
call (...), which we render Boldness of Confidence, and which did often
transport them to say those things to persecuting Kings, or their Governors,
which had been insufferable to any man else on another occasion, and this was
not only in words but Actions too. Thus when the Emperors Numerianus, or
De^^us, (for my Author does not know which it was) would have entered into the
Cathedral Church of Antioch, in time of Divine Service, Babylus the Bishop,
standing in the Church Porch, shut the Door against him, telling him that He
would not suffer him, who was a Wolf, to enter into the Sheep fold of Christ.
And we also read that Valentinian (who was afterward Emperor) being then an
Officer under Julian, and wanting upon him to the Door of a Heathen Temple,
gave the Priest a Box on the Ear, because he offered to sprinkle him being a
Christian, with his Profane Holy Water. Yet I confess, Theodoret commends the
Action, and says, they after chose that Valentinian Emperor, him who had
before struck the Priest* And therefore, I wonder to what purpose, you quote
such Passages ^ut of Ancient Writers* and the Actions of Primitive Christians,
which, if you are a Man of that Loyalty, or good Breeding, as I hope you are,
you will not your self approve of.


F. I do not tell you I quote them for our Imitation, but only to let you see,
that the Actions of those you call Primitive Christians, and Fathers, are not
by your own Confession to be the only Pattern for us to follow; so that indeed
their Practices, can signify nothing to us, unless the Principle they acted
by, were suitable to the Laws of God, and right Reason; unless you will have no
Precedents to be good, but what shall suite with your Humor, and those
Principles you have already imbibed, and if Babylus the Martyr, might without
any sin, shut the Emperor out of the Church by Force, and that Valentinian was
commended for striking the Emperors Priest on the Face, I think here are by
your own Confession two sufficient Primitive Examples of Resistance, both of
the Emperor's Person, as also of those commissioned by him, as certainly this
Priest was, or else he could have had no Right to have exercised his Idolatrous
Worship, after the Temples had been shut up under Constantine, and Constantius.

But I now desire your Patience to let you see, that not long after these
times, the Christians as well Soldiers as others, were not so through, paced
in these Doctrines of Passive Obedience, and Non-resistance, as you would make
them, for it was by the Rebellion of the Christian Legions in Britain, that
Maximus took the boldness to Rebel against the Emperor Gratian, and making
himself Emperor, marched into Gaul against him, where the poor Prince being
also deserted by his Christian Army, and forced to fly away, with a few
followers, was not long after murdered by Andragathius, after which this
Maximus had so good Success, that he possessed himself, not only of Britain,
but Spain, Gaul, and part of Germany, and was also acknowledged for Emperor by
all the Subjects in those Provinces as well Clergy, as Laity, though the Emperor
Valentinian, the Son of Gratian, was then alive. All the Bishops making their
Applications to him, and desiring him to call a Council in Gaul, to suppress
the Heresy of Priscillian, which he did in Compliance with their Desires,
wherein they condemned him, and his Followers of Heresy, who afterward at the
Instance of Ithacius, and some other Bishops by this Usurping Emperor, were
condemned with dive^s other of his Followers to suffer Death; being the first
that ever, suffered that Punishment for Heresy. This Maximus after five years
Reign was overcome, and killed in Battle By the Emperor Theodosius, who
restored that part of the Empire to Valentinian the II.

And farther, to let you see that the common People of these Primitive Times,
though they were not able to make Emperors so well as the Army, yet they were
not so streight-laced, as not to Resist the Emperors Orders, whenever they
thought they entrenched upon their Religion, or that they went about to
persecute them for it; I can give you a great many Examples out of
Ecclesiastical History, of which I will only here set down some few: Chapter 30.
The first is out of Socrates, Eccl Hist. Book 2 d. when the Emperor
Constantius at the Instigation of Macedonius the Arian Bishop, had persuaded
him to send some Bands of Soldiers into Paphlagonis, to terrify the
People^punc; and make them turn Arrians. The Inhabitants of Mantinium, enflamed
with a Zeal for the Orthodox Religion, marched against the Soldiers, with a
good Courage, and having provided themselves with the best Arms they could,
they gave them Battle, in which few, or none of the Emperor's Soldiers
escaped. And though I confess, (the Historians say) these People were most of
them Novatians; yet this Action ought not to be condemned only for that Cause,
since they were rather looked upon as Schismatics, than Heretics, and were in
all things else, except that one point, about reconciling the lapsed, very
Orthodox, but in all other things were more strict and scrupulous, than the
Catholics themselves.

So likewise when the Orthodox at Constantinople, had chosen Paul for their
Bishop, Ibid. cap. 10.
but the Emperor resolving to make Macedonius Bishop in spite of their Teeth,
and had sent Philip the President, to fix Macedonius in that See; as he was
about to give him Possession of the Church, though they were guarded all along
with Soldiers; Yet when they came near the Door, the People made that
Resistance, that they could not get in till several thousands of them were
killed.

And some years after, when the Emperor Theodosius the II. had banished St.
Chrysostom about the Year 404. The People flocked together about the Palace,
so that the Emperor to pacify them, was forced to recall him from his
Banishmen.

And when St. Ambros^ was banished by Valentinian at the Instigation of his
Mother Iustina, Hist. Tripartit. L. 10. cap. 13. Hist. Ruffini L. 11. cap. 15.
the People did Resist such as came to carry him away; and such was their Z^al
for the Truth, and Love to their Injured Bishop, that they chose rather to lose
their Lives, than suffer their Pastor to be taken away by the Soldiers, that
were sent to drag him out of the Church; I could give you more Instances of
this kind, from the e Primitive Times, but these may be suffici^nt to show you,
of how little account the Doctrine of Non-Resistance was in those times* aft^^
Christianity was once settled, and that the People supposed they (...) the Law
on their side. Neither do I produce them as fit to be imitated (...) like
Cases, but only to let you see, that the Example of those times, you call
Primitive, are no Sufficient Argument of what was lawful, or unlawful to be
done.


M. Since you your self do allow All, or however most of these Actions to be
unlawful, I think you might very well have spared the mentioning of them; since
I grant, that about the End of the Fourth Century, when these things happened,
not only the common People, but also the Clergy began to grow very corrupt in
their Manners. And therefore, I cannot much value any Precedents, that you can
bring in that time, to justify Resistance in Christians, unless you could have
shown me any, before the time of Constantine, which I am sure you are not able
to do, much less any Authority from any of the Primitive Fathers, which
justifies Resistance of the Supreme Powers, upon any account whatsoever.


F. It Is a very hard matter to satisfy you by Quotations, for before the time
of Constantine, it is evident, the Christians were not only weak, dispersed and
disarmed, but had also the Laws of the Empire against them. And I have already
granted, That Self-defence against Persecution upon account of Religion was
unlawful; but when, in the time of Constantine's Son and Successor, the People
having the Law on their side, stood upon their defense against those that would
have taken away their Lives, as in the Examples I have brought of the
Inhabitants of Paphlagonia, then the Instances come too late, and the Age is
grown so corrupt, that they are no longer Primitive Christians, than they
observe your Doctrines. But as for express Precepts, or Testimonies out of the
Scriptures, and Fathers, to justify Resistance, I think it is very needless to
bring any, for the great Mr. Hooker, shows us very well, that it is the intent
of the Scripture to deliver us all the Credenda, and Agenda necessary to
Salvation, but in other Matters, within the compass of our Reason, it is enough
if we have evident Reason for them, Scriptura non contradicente; and if the
Scripture does not forbid such Resistance, for Self-defence (as I hope I have
now proved to be Lawful) I do not value whether there be any Express Authority,
to be quoted out of the Fathers for it, or not. For whatever the Scripture
leaves free, I think the Fathers have no Power to forbid.


M. I see it is to no purpose, to argue longer with you from Primitive
Examples, or Testimonies; And therefore, I come now to the last thing I
proposed, H. p. O. c. 2.
which is to show you, that the Doctrine of our Church of England, as it is
contained in the 39 Articles, Canons and Book of Homilies, is as expressly for
passive Obedience, and against All Resistance of the Supreme Pow^rs, as the
Primitive Church it self. And therefore, I shall begin with the Infancy of the
Reformation, under Henry the VIII: For there I begin the Restoration of
Religion to its Purity in this Kingdom.


F. I pray Sir, give me leave to interrupt you, for I must tell you, I will not
be concluded by any thing that the King, or Church in those times did publish
concerning matters of Faith, or Practice, since unless it were in that one
Political, rather than Religions Article, concerning the Pope's Supremacy, the
Church in all other Speculative and Practical Doctrines, was as much infected
with Pop^ry as it was before. And therefore, if you will have me to be
converted by your Authorities, I pray begin with the Purer Times of Edward the
VI. and Queen Elizabeth.


M. I shall comply with your desires, since you will have it so* And therefore,
I shall begin with the 39 Articles of the Church of England, H. P.O. chapter 1.
where in the 37 Article, (as they were past under Queen Elizabeth Anno 1562)
you may find it runs thus. The Queen's Majesty has the Chief Power in this
Realm of England, and other her Dominions, unto whom the Chief Government, of
all the Estates of this Realm, whether they be Ecclesiastical, or Civil in all
Causes does appertain, and is not, nor ought to be subject to any foreign
Jurisdiction.

It is true, this Doctrine is not limited to the particular Case of Subjects
taking up Arms, but it seems to me by two necessary Consequences, to be deduced
from it; First, Because if the Pope, who pretended by a Divine Right, had no
Power over Kings, much less have the People any such Power, who pretend to an
Inferior Right, that of Compact. Secondly, Because the Article makes no
distinction, but excludes all other Power, as well as that of the Pope. And in
truth, the Plea is the same on either side, the Pope says, as long as the
Prince Governs according to the Laws of God, and the Church (of which He is the
Interpreter,) so long the Censures of the Church do not reach him; and say the
People, as long as the Prince governs according to the Laws of the Land, (and
of the meaning of those Laws, they themselves will be the Interpreters) so long
are they bound to be obedient; but as soon as the King does any thing that may
contradict the Pope, then he is (deservedly, say the Romanists) excommunicated,
deposed, and murdered; and when he usur^s upon the Peoples Liberties, then he
ought to be deposed by the People. The Arguments on either side are the same,
and for the most part the Authorities.


F. I must confess this is the first time, that ever I knew any Man go about to
prove Passive Obedience, and Non-Resistance out of the 39 Articles; and indeed
I should have thought you might have deduced any thing else from these
Articles, as well as that. But let us see, how, what I have sai^ in this
Discourse, can come within the Contents of this Article, which only says, that
the King, or Queen of England, is Supreme Governor over all Persons, as also
in all Causes, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, and is not subject to any
foreign Jurisdiction; from whence you raise this Argument, that if the Pope,
who claims by a Divine Right, has no Power over our Kings, much less have the
People, who can pretend to no such Right, as he does, but only that by Compact.
Now pray tell me, whether this be conclusive: I assert, that the People have by
the Law of God and Nature, a Right to defend themselves, against the Supreme
Powers, in case they are violently Assaulted in their Lives, Liberties or
Estates. Now I would very fain have you prove to me, how Resistance for
Self-defence, does subject a Prince to any Jurisdiction, either Foreign or
Domestic, and whether the People can have no Right to Resist such Violence,
unless they have also an Authoritative Power over them*


M. It is not worth while, to dispute this any longer with you to so little
purpose; H. P. O. p. 3, 4.
And therefore, I shall come to the Canons of the Church, and in particular,
those of the year 1640, which I look upon as a full Explanation of the Belief
of our Church in this Point, where you may see in the first Canon, these two
plain Propositions, among others. First, That the most Sacred Order of Kings,
is of Divine Right, being the Ordinance of God himself, founded in the Prime
Laws of Nature, and clearly Established by express Texts, both of the Old and
New Testaments.

Secondly, For Subjects to bear Arms against their Kings, Bo. Sparrow's
Collection of Canons, etc. p. 347.
offensive or defensive upon any Pretense whatsoever, is at least to resist the
Powers, which are ordained of God: And though they do not invade, but only
resist, St. Paul tells them plainly, they shall receive to themselves
Damnation. From which you may plainly see, that this Convocation, which
consisted of as great Men, as I think, had been for diverse Ages, do clearly
maintain Monarchy to be of Divine Right, and Resistance to be in no Case lawful.


F. I should grant the Canons of this Convocation, to be a good Proof of the
Judgment of the Church of England, were it not for two very good Reasons, I
have against them. The one I will tell you presently, and the other I will keep
a while to my self; In the first place therefore, I suppose you cannot but very
well know, that this Convocation sat and passed these Canons, which likewise
received the King's Confirmation, after the Parliament (that was summoned,
together with this Convocation) was dissolved: And, I suppose, you know that by
the Law of England, the Convocation having from all times been looked upon as
an Appendix to the Parliament, was till then always dissolved with it. For
which Reason all Acts, and Proceedings of this Convocation were condemned, Vid.
Rush. Collect. 2 d. part 2. vol. f. 1365.
and declared null and void, by the Long Parliament* that began to fit the
latter End of the same Year. And which is more, was likewise condemned by the
first Parliament after the Restoration of King Charles the second. And
therefore, I think, I have very little Reason to own th^se Canons as Conclusive.


M. In the first place, I might reply to what you have now said, that that very
Parliament, which first condemned these Canons, H. P. O. chapter 2.
afterward ruined the Monarchy it self. In the next place that in old time the
General, or Provincial Synods were not Dependant upon the Assembly of the
States at the same time. And I likewise farther Answer, that these Canons were
made, and confirmed in a full Convocation of both Provinces of Canterbury, and
York, and the making of Canons being a work properly Ecclesiastical, these
Canons were made by the Representatives of the whole Clergy of this Kingdom. 2.
The Canons were confirmed by the King (which was all that was of old required
in such Cases) and though the Convocation sat after the Dissolution of the
Parliament, yet this is not without President even in the Happy Days of Queen
Elizabeth, not to look back unto Henry the eighth, or the Primitive times. And
as for your Objection that these Canons were reprobated since the Restitution
of Charles the II. I say, that I quote them not as Law, but as the known Sense
of the Church of England at that time.


F. Your first Answer in behalf of these Canons is altogether Invidious. For it
was not this Parliament that ru^ned the Monarchy, but only the Rump or Fag end
of it, after it had suffered diverse Violences, and Exclusions of Members by the
Army, and that the House of Lords (being by this Iunto voted useless, and
dangerous) were shut out of doors; nor is your second Answer any more true, for
anciently in the Saxons time, the Wittena Gemot, or Great Counsel, and the
General Synod made one and the same Assembly consisting both of Clergymen, and
Lay men and then all matters of Ecclesiastical Discipline were enacted and
confirmed by the King, as also the Spiritual, as well as Temporal States: Nor
can you show me an Example of any General, or Provincial Synod which met
independently, and without the States of the Realm, until after the Reign of
Henry the first, when the Popes took upon them to encroach upon the Royal
Authority, as also upon our Civil Rights, and by his Lega^s to call Synods, and
make Ecclesiastical Constitutions, in which neither the King, nor the States of
the Kingdom had any thing to do. And though, I grant, that upon the Reformation
the King was restored to those Rights as Supreme Governor of the Church, which
the Pope had before usurped, yet is not this Act of the Supremacy to be so
understood* as to give the King all that Power, which the Pope unjustly took
upon him to execute before, for that had been to make their Case no better than
(...) was before; and therefore, this Act of the Supremacy being only an Act of
Restoration of the King to his Pristine Rights (of which that of Calling Synods
and Convocations was one of the Principal) the King could not call nor continue
those Assemblies in any other form, or after any other manner, than they were
held before the Popes Usurpation, in taking upon him to call such Independent
Synods, and notwithstanding what you tell me, I am confident you cannot show me
any Precedent of a Convocation so turned into a Synod as this was in all the
Reigns of Henry the eighth, and Queen Elizabeth.

But as for your last reply, that you quote not these Canons, for a Law that
obliges the Church, but as the Sense of the Church of England at that time; if
they do not now oblige the Church neither in Point of Belief, nor Practice as
you may seem to grant, it signifies no more to me, what was the Sense of the
greatest part of the Members of that Convocation in this matter, nor does it
any more show me what is the true Doctrine of the Church of England, than if I
should tell you, that because in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth the Major part of
the Bishops, and Clergy of our Church were rigid Calvinists in the
Interpretation of that Article about Predestination, that therefore Calvinism
was then the Doctrine of the Church of England, but is not so now. And
therefore we ought not to take that for a Doctrine of any National Church,
unless the Synod, or Assembly that declares such Doctrine be solemnly, and
Lawfully assembled according to the Laws, and Customs of that Nation, or
Country wherein they are so declared.


M. Since you so much contest the Authority of these Canons, I shall no longer
insist upon them, but I shall here show you out of the Books of Homilies, H. P.
O. p. 8.9.
to which all the Clergy in England are bound to subscribe, by Act of
Parliament (as well as to the Articles and Canons) as containing wholesome
Doctrine, and nothing contrary to the Word of God, so that these Homilies do
indeed thereby become a part of the known Laws of the Land, that in these very
Homilies there are diverse passages so very full, and Plain against all
Resistance of the Sovereign Powers for any Cause whatsoever, that if you are a
true Church of England Man, as I hope you are, you can have no just Reason to
deny their Authority.

The Homily, or Exhortation to Obedience was made An. 1547. in the Reign of
King Edward the sixth, in the second part of which Sermon of Obedience, we are
told in these Words, (which I desire you to read along with me.)

That it is the Calling of God's People to be patient and on the suffering
side, and to render Obedience to Governors, although they be wicked, and wrong
doers, and in no Case to resist, and stand against them* Subjects are bound to
obey them (i. e. Governors) as Gods Ministers* although they be evil, not only
for fear, but also for Conscience sake, and here good People, let us mark
diligently, that it is not Lawful for Inferiors and Subjects in any Case to
resist and stand against the Superior Powers; for St. Paul's words are plain,
that whosoever withstandeth, shall get to themselves Damnation. Our Savior Christ,
and his Apostles received many and diverse Injuries of the unfaithful, and
wicked men in Authority; yet we never read that they, or any of them caused any
Sedition, or Rebellion against Authority; we read often that they patiently
suffered all Troubles, Vexations, Slanders, Pangs, Pains, and Death it self
obediently without Tumult, or Resistance. Christ taught us plainly that even
the wicked Rulers have their Power, and Authority from God; and therefore, it
is not Lawful for their Subjects to withstand them, although they abuse their
Power. Let us believe undoubtedly (good Christian People) that we may not obey
Kings, if they command us any thing contrary to Gods Commandments, in such a
Case we ought to say as the Apostle: We must rather obey God than Man; but
nevertheless in that Case we must not in any wise, withstand violently, or
Reb^l against Rulers, or make any Insurrection, Sedition, or Tumults either by
force of Arms, or otherwise against the Anointed of the Lord, or any of his
appointed Officers, but we must in such a Case patiently suffer all Wrongs and
Injuries, referring the Judgment of our Cause only to God. And see part the
third of the same Homily. Ye have heard before of this Sermon of good order,
and Obedience manifestly proved both by Scriptures and Examples, That all
Subjects are bound to obey their Magistrates, and for no cause to resist, or
withstand, or rebel, or make any Sedition against them, yea although they be
wicked men.

I could find many more such places in our Homilies, but I shall trouble you,
but with one other Passage out of the second Book of Homilies, compiled in the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth, in which Book the Homily against Willful Rebellion is
full to this Purpose.

In reading the Holy Scriptures we shall find in very many, and almost infinite
places, as well of the Old Testament as of the New, that Kings and Princes, as
well the Evil as the Good, do Reign by Gods Ordinance, and that Subjects are
bound to obey them. The farther, and farther any Earthly Prince does swerve
from the Example of the Heavenly Government, the greater Plague he is of Gods
Wrath and Punishment, by God's Justice unto the Country, and People over whom
God for their Sins has placed such a Prince and Governor. What shall Subjects
do then? What a perilous thing were it to commit to Subject (...) Judgment,
which Prince is wise* and Godly, and his Govern^ (...) good, and which
otherwise? as though the Foot must judge of the ^ead; a^ (...) very heinous, and
which must needs breed Reb^^^^^^; and is not ^^^^llion the greatest of all
misc^ief^: A Rebel is worse than the (...) Princepunc; and Rebellion worse than
the worst Government of the worst Prince, that hitherto has been. If we will
have an Evil Prince (when God shall send one) taken away, and a good one in his
Place, let us take away our wickedness, which provokes God to place such a one
over us. Shall the Subjects both by their Wickedness provoke God for their
deserved Punishment to give them an undiscreet, and Evil Prince, and also R^bel
against him, and withal against God, who for the Punishment of their Sins did
give them such a Prince? And this Doctrine is more strictly enforced in the
second part of that Homily, from the Example of King David in his Carriage
toward Saul, from which it will appear, that they did not suppose David to
have used so much as defensive Arms against him, as you may see by this Passage
in it: That when for his most painful, true and faithful Service King Saul yet
rewarded him not only with great unkindness, but also sought his Destruction,
and Death by all means possible, David was fain to save his Life not by
Rebellion, or any Resistance, but by flight, and hiding himself from the Kings
sight. From all which Passages out of the Homilies, I think, we may draw these
plain Conclusions. 1. That as well Evil, as Good Governors are to be obeyed as
God's Ordinance. 2. That therefore they are not to be resisted for any cause,
though they abuse their Power never so Tyrannically. 3. That the People are not
to judge when the Prince thus abuses this Power, so as thereby to make any
disturbance. 4. That not only Offensive, but also Defensive Arms, if made use
of against him, are utterly unlawful, and also against God's express Command.


F. I grant these Homilies seem to be very strictly penned against all
Resistance, and ought to be (like all discourses of this Nature) Positive, and
General, and perhaps if I were to preach a Sermon to the Common People on this
Subject, it should be much to the same Purpose, and yet for all that I might
not believe, that it was absolutely unlawful for a whole Nation to defend
themselves in Case of such extreme Violence, or Oppression as I have already
supposed, for when Preachers speak to Vulgar Auditors, they are not bound like
Casuists to tell them all the reserved Cases in which they may be dispensed
with in their Duty, lest they might use this Christian Liberty for a Clos't of
Maliciousn^ss (as the Apostle tells us.) Thus if a good Preacher makes a Sermon
against Stealing, or Murder, he may very justly tell the People, (a^ the
Authors of these Homilies do) that they ought not in any wise, or for any Cause
to commit Theft, or Murder; without telling them all those Cases of mere
Necessity, in which it may be Lawful to make use of the Goods of another, and
also to commit Homicide; as when a Man is forced to take Victuals though without
the owners consent for mere Preservation of Life, or to kill a Thief, or any
other Man that assaults him, to save his own Life. So though the Authors of these
Books of Homilies do say, that we may not in any wise, and for no Cause
withstand Violently, or Resist the Supreme Pow^rs, but that we must suffer
patiently all Wrongs, and Injuries, referring the Judgment only to God; yet
since they have not particularly put the Case as I have now done, viz. what is
to be done in Case a whole Nation, or People are about to be destroyed, ruined
or enslaved, and made Heathens, or Papists, by the unjust, nay illegal Violence
of the Supreme Pow^rs; we may rationally suppose, that since they were good
Men, and never intended to urge these things further, than what the Scripture,
and Fathers have already done, that they never really intended that a whole
People, or Nation together with the Religion established should be thus ruined,
and destroyed, rather than that such Resistance should be made.


M. But pray tell me, can there be any thing more express against your
Interpretation, or more plainly oblige us to a patient Suffering without
Resistance of the cruellest and most intolerable Tyranny, than these Words I
last read. The farther, and farther any Earthly Prince does swerve from the
Example of the Heavenly Government, the greater Plague be is of Gods Wrath, and
Punishment, by Gods Justice, unto the Country, and People, over whom God for
their Sins has placed such a Prince and Governor. And by what there follows,
you will see that though such a Prince be so great a Plague to them: Yet they
cannot without Sin judge such a Prince, or Rebel against him, but must
patiently wait God's Leisure to remove him.


F. I confess, this is the strictest Passage of any in the whole Book, yet does
not this expressly reach the Case here put; or if it had, do I think my Self,
or any Body else, obliged because of one, or two unwary Passages in this
Homily, which perhaps neither the Parliament nor Convocation closely considered
the evil Consequence of, or so much as knew they were there; things of this
kind usually passing such great Assemblies by the Lump, as relying upon the
Testimony of some Leading Bishops or Clergy men, without considering the Book
of Homilies strictly, Or reading over the whole: So that the Parliament might
very well declare, that they contained sound Doctrine, and nothing contrary to
the Word of God, without asserting the literal Truth of every particular
passage in them, much less that all, that is contained therein is to believed
upon pain of Damnation; and therefore, I must beg your pardon, if I cannot
suppose that all Resistance whatsoever, though in the most necessary Cases of
Self-defence which I have now pu^, is absolutely unlawful, and rebellious; or
that the Fathers of our Church ever intended to lay so hard a Yoke upon the
Neck of this Nation, which neither they, nor their Fathers were ever able to
bear, much less that there is thereby taken away from this Nation, defending
those fundamental Rights, and Privileges, which are essential to the Nature of
the Government, and which as it distinguishes it from a Despotick Monarchy, So
it does the Subjects likewise from those of other Nations; for if the
Scriptures themselves were never intended to alter Civil Constitutions, much
less certainly can either our Canons, or Homilies do it. And therefore, to deal
freely with you, if the Canons, and Homilies had been never so express on your
side; yet as long as no such Consequence can be drawn from the Holy Scriptures,
I should not much value what they say, unless you can prove the Church of
England to be infallible. And for this, I have the sixeenth and twentieth
Article of the Church of England (made in the Year 1562.) to bear me out. The
former of which concerning the sufficiency of the Holy Scriptures, for
Salvation runs thus, The Holy Scripture contains all things necessary to
Salvation. So that whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby,
is not to be required of any Man, that it should be believed as an Article of
Faith, or be thought necessary or requisite to Salvation. Therefore if I have
plainly proved by sufficient Authority, that your Doctrines of
Passive-Obe^ience* and Non Resistance are not expressly found in Scripture, nor
by necessary Consequence may be rationally deduced from thence, they cannot be
required of any Man to be believed, or practiced as necessary to Salvation. And
therefore, if either this Church or any other, imposes such a Burden upon me, I
am not obliged to bear it: And this, the latter of these Articles of the
Authority of the Church expressly asserts in these Words: It is not Lawful for
the Church to ordain any thing contrary to Gods Word Written, etc. (after which
it follows thus.) So besides the same, it ought not to enforce any thing to be
believed for necessity of Salvation. Where Note that besides the same, is to be
understood any thing, that is not found therein, or may be proved thereby, by
necessary Consequence as was said before; and if the whole Church it self
cannot do this, certainly no Particular Church can.


M. Methinks Sir, it is a great Presumption in you, and those of your Party to
make your selves the sole Interpreters of those Places of Scripture, which so
expressly forbid all Resistance of the Supreme Powers, and then, when you have
wrested the Scriptures to your own Mind, to cry out, that you are not bound to
believe these Christian Doctrines, because you suppose they are contrary to
Men's humane Reason, and the too great Love they have to their own concerns,
which is but the same way of reasoning, which the Socinians, and Arians, make
use of against our Savior's God head; because their narrow Understandings
cannot comprehend it* But besides all this, I could show you out of the best
Writers of the Reformed Religion, both in this, and other Protestant Churches,
who interpret these Places of Scripture, against all Resistance in the same
Sense, as our honest Homilies have done, but I find it grows late, and I have
not time now to show you them, or if I had, do I believe you would be much
Edified by them; since you make so slight of the Authority of our Homilies.


F. You are very much in the Right of it, and indeed, I do not desire you
should put your self to that trouble, for the Papists themselves, will not own
any thing for a Doctrine of their Church, which is not expressly found in the
Council of Trent, or the Catechism, composed according to its Decrees, and
therefore, will not be concluded by the Sermons, or Theological Treatises, of
any of the Divines of their own Church, as to any thing, or matter in debate
between us. And I think, I that am a Protestant, may certainly claim alike
Christian Liberty, especially, since I am very sensible upon what account, too
many Men have carried these Doctrines of Passive Obedience, and Non-Resistance,
to so great a height, as they have done of late years: But since you tell me,
that so many Learned Writers both of this, and other Protestant Churches, have
been of your Mind. So I could also (if I had a mind to Cap Quotations with you)
produce a sufficient number of places out of Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius, and
other first Reformers, as also of our own Writers at home, who have in many
places of their Works allowed Resistance for self-defence, in case of
Intolerable Violence, and Oppression to be Lawful, and of these I can give you
a Large Catalogue, whenever you please to command me. But since they will
convince you, as little as I suppose your Writers would do me, I shall forbear
mentioning them any further.


M. I value not much, what Luther, Calvin, or any other violent Men of that
sort, may out of Passion, or Inadvertency, have written on this matter, and yet
I can show you a Passage out of Calvin's Institutions,, which expressly forbids
Subjects, or private Persons to take up Arms against the Supreme Powers, as you
may see by his own words, in the fourth Book, cap. 20. Neque enim si ultio
Domini est essraenata Dominationis correctio ideo protinus de mandatam nobis
arbi^remur. Quibus nullum aliud quam parendi and patiendi datum est mandatum,
de privatis Hominibus semp^r loquor, and though I grant, some Divines of our
Church have allowed Resistance in some Cases, where the People by the Laws, and
Constitutions of their Country, might lawfully have made such a Defense of
their Liberties, yet have they denied it in ^ll other Cases, and particularly
in our own Government, which is sufficient to show, that what ever your
Thoughts may be of it, yet that they thought it absolutely Unlawful, for the
Subjects of this Realm to take up Arms against the King, or those who acted by
his Authority, upon any Account whatsoever; and therefore, I must needs confess
to you, that I look upon these Doctrines of Passive Obedience, and
Non-resistance, as the distinguishing Characters of the Church of England, from
all other Churches.


F. Though I do not much value the Opinion of Divines in matter of Politics,
since most of them that I have met with have been very unhappy, when they have
undertaken to meddle with that Trade; Yet I doubt not, but I can show you, that
some Learned Men of our Church have not thought all Resistance to be unlawful,
in case the main, and Fundamental Constitutions of our Government, shall happen
to be assaulted, or our selves in respect of our Liberties, and Estates, like
to be reduced to absolute Vassalage, and Slavery. And therefore, if your
Divines will own Resistance, where by the Constitution of the Government it is
allowed, to be Lawful, I think I can also prove, that it is not only lawful,
but necessary, in some Cases in our own, for the Preservation of the Original
Constitution; and if this should prove so, I know not what your distinguishing
Character of the Church of England will signify, unless you will make it
necessary for particular Churches to have other distinguishing Characters, than
the Scripture requires, or the Constitution of the Government will allow of;
and if so, I doubt the Church of England would get as little Credit by such
distinguishing Characters, as the Calvinist Churches abroad do by making
absolute Predestination one of the Terms of their Communions, the Scriptures
(without their rigid Interpretation) teaching no such Doctrine. But as for your
Quotation out of Calvin, it amounts to no more than what I have all along
granted, That single private Subjects, ought never to take up Arms, or resist
those in Power, but when the good of the whole Commonwealth requires it. And
therefore, he in the same Book, places a Power of Resistance in Subordinate
popular Magistrates, whereby you may see he grants the thing lawful, but will
not leave the Power of judging only in the common People, or Mobile, and so far
I confess he is in the Right, tho I grant those Magistrates are in respect of
the Monarch, as much subject as the People.


M. I should be glad to know what Divines of our Church they are, who have
granted Resistance of the Subjects of this Kingdom, to be in any Case Lawful,
for if there are any such, I confess they are Authors unknown to me, nor do I
know any, but one, who was seemingly in the Communion of the Church of England,
who has asserted this Doctrine in his Book of Julian the Apostate; But you see
he was presently confuted, by those learned Men of our own Church, who
undertook him, and I think have so well performed it, that I cannot tell
whether it has been more for their Eternal Glory, or his Disgrace

But as for what you say, against making Passive Obedience, the distinguishing
Character of our Church, I confess, indeed, it is very bad for a Church to hold
evil or indifferent distinguishing Doctrines, but it is as certain, that it is
very convenient for a Church to have distinguishing Doctrines, provided they be
good ones, unless a Church can be obliged to Err for Company; and to avoid
distinction, which will not very well agree with the Text, that forbids us to
follow a Multitude to do Evil, nor with the Practice of the Primitive
Christians, when the Orthodox were so few in comparison, that had there not
been some Names of Note among them, they would hardly have been reckoned a
Number. But it agrees admirably well with the Principles of Popery, thus to
avoid Distinction, which has its Numbers to boast of, when nothing else is to
be said.

But there is one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, and St. Paul reproves the
Corinthians, because one cried, he was of Paul, and another of Apollos, a third
of Cephas, and the fourth of Christ; And must not then those that held one
Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, necessarily distinguish themselves, from all that
held more than one? And if some would say, they were of Paul, and some of
Apollos, and some of Cephas, might not others distinguish themselves from them,
by saying they were of Christ?

But by this Doctrine, you pretend we distinguish our selves from all other
Churches in the World, and so from the Catholic Church; and therefore, you
cannot comprehend, why any one should value a Doctrine, so much on that score;
but you may comprehend, if you please, that it was never pretended that this
Doctrine is taught no where, but in our Church. And as I hope I have proved,
that it was taught in the Primitive Church, and is taught in other Protestant
Churches at this day; But this is evident, by fatal Experience, that Passive
Obedience, is the distinguishing Character of the Church of England, by Law
Established; whereby it is distinguished from the Separate Congregations among
us, both of Fanatics, and Papists, and to justify this Distinction, we have
the express Testimony of several of our Princes, since the Reformation, and of
the Laws themselves too, that are still in force, which abundantly show how
dangerous the Principles of other Persuasions are to the State, as well as to
the Church^ Yet if other Churches have not so well preserved this Doctrine in
its Purity, as ours has done, as we would not provoke them to a comparison, so
we have no Reason to be ashamed of it. But that many among them have taught
this Doctrine, might be proved from the Writings of many of the most Learned,
and Pious Foreign Divines, and particularly from a Book of a French Protestant
lately written, Traite du Pouvoir absolu des Souverains, etc. Cologne, 1685.
who in the midst of Persecution, writes in defense of Passive Obedience, when
he at the same time suffered, what we have feared.


F. Though I confess at a time, when it was made criminal for any Man publicly
to maintain, that it was lawful to Resist, in case the King should go about to
introduce Popery, and Arbitrary Government, among us by Force, and that
whosoever went about to assert the Lawfulness of such Resistance, was sure to
meet (if not with Punishment) at least with loss of Preferment, and Disgrace;
when the Doctrine of Passive Obedience ran so High, both in the Press and
Pulpits, it was no wonder if any of our Church, who consulted their own Safety,
durst stem so violent a Current; and yet even in these times, the Learned Dr.
Falcone^, in his Treatise of Christian Loyalty, Chap. 5. Sect. 2. does, though
cautiously, allow Resistance in such great Cases, as of a Prince's Alienating
his Kingdom, or of destroying his People in an hostile manner, to be Lawful, if
ever it should happen; But out of a needless fear, lest this Doctrine of
Resistance may be made use of as a Pretense for Rebellion, will not allow it
can scarce seem possible ever to happen in a King. Compo^ mo^t^, toward, his
whole Dominions. But I think I have already proved the possibility of it, and
why they may not do the same in an absolute Empi^e, where the Prince would make
them Slaves and Beggars, by invading their Liberties and Properties, I can see
no Reason, but think, I have given very good ones for it.

But as for the other Person you mention, who did openly in Print oppose this
Doctrine of Resistance, whether He, or his Opponent, had the better in this
Dispute. I leave to the indifferent Readers, who I believe will acknowledge,
that the Author of that Treatise, did not so much forfeit his Reputation, by
asserting a Right of Defense, where the Religion, and Liberty are Established
by Law, and became a part of the Civil Constitution, as his Opponent did, by
introducing an Arbitrary Imperial Power in this Nation, unknown to our Laws,
whereby a few M^r^^nar^ Red Coats, either of the, or a Foreign Nation, should
have by the King's Commission, an irresistible Power over the Lives, Liberties
and Estates of all Protestants. But since he went about to make us all Slaves
by his Imperial Law, I do not (...) all envy him so generous a Performance: And
yet for all that, I had much rather have that man's Reputation, whom he appyled
tho with all his Suffering, than the Gentleman's, though attended with all his
Learning and Preferments.

But as for what you say in (...) of the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, and
Non-Resistance in all Cases whatsoever; it signifies little, since it is
grounded upon a wrong Supposition, for you still take that for granted, which
is the Question yet to be proved, that because the Primitive Christians were
against R^sistance, in case of Persecution, therefore, this must needs extend
to whole Nations, and Common we^lths in all States, and Conditions whatsoever:
which, whether you have well proved, or not, I leave it to your own Conscience
to judge; for my own part, I cannot say you have convinced me, with what you
have said on this Subject: So that if these Doctrines, as you have put them,
are neither good in themselves, nor necessary to be b^lieved, nor practiced in
all Cases, I doubt God may justly ask those, who either practice or impose them
on others, Who has required these things at your hands? And as for those
Divines of Foreign Churches, who you say, have writ for these Doctrines, as
well as ours, as I know not who they are, nor in what manner they have defended
them, so do I not much value their Opinion; since there are many more
altogether as Learned, and Pious, as they, who have held the Contrary; Nor are
all Divines who maintain Passive Obedience and Non-resistance of your side, who
write (which I also allow) that for particular Private Subjects, to R^sist
Princes in Revenge of private Injuries, and Rebel against the Supreme Powers,
for not being of their own Religion, or to take upon them to call Princes to an
Account, or pass Judgment upon them, or punish them for their Actions, is
altogether wicked and unlawful: Ye^ does it not therefore follow, that they
have maintained all Resistance to be unlawful, in any Case whatsoever; though
perhaps, if you were to make use of their Authority, you would produce them of
your own side.

To conclude, I own my self for Non-resistance, in that limited Sense I have
now given, as far as it extends to particular, private Men: Yet that this Rule
does not extend to the whole Civil Society, or People, And therefore, although in
my own private Capacity, I ought to submit, to, and suffer the greatest
Injustice, rather than Resist, and disturb Government, yet when the Main
Foundations thereof are once begun to be pulled up: As I am an English Man, I
think I am more obliged, by all Ties, both Sacred and Civil to defend, and
maintain the Government, or Constitution, of which I am a Member, than I am to
obey the King's personal Commands; and that being the Primary Obligation ought
to be discharged in the first place.


M. I shall no longer compare, whether the Divines that write for, or those
that write against Resistance, are the wiser, or more Learned; since you your
self, it seems, at last are feign to own a limited Non-resistance, which you
will have extend to private Persons, but not to the whole Civil Society, or
People; But I think I may venture still to maintain, that the Supreme Power,
where ever it is placed, must be Irresistible, and that a whole Civil Society,
or People, who are not invested with part of the Sovereignty, can have no more
Right to Resist, than single Persons: For to say, that whole Societies have a
Power to Resist, and that particular private Persons, as Members thereof, have
it also, is such a Diminution of Supreme Power, as can never be consistent with
it, for all Inferiors, whether Private Persons, or whole Societies can have no
Power, but what is derived from the Supreme, and therefore, if they have a
Right to Resist, even that must be derived from the Supreme Power, and so that
Power, must destroy it self.

But as for what you allege in your Justification, that Resistance may be
Lawful, to avoid Subversion of the Government: To this I may reply, that if
Subjects be no longer in Subjection, to the Supreme Powers, the Government is
hereby destroyed for what more manifest Subversion can there be, than this,
That Subjects are now no longer in Subj^ction, nor Governors can be no longer
able to Govern? So that this Argument tends only to prove, that Subjects may
Subvert the Government one way, rather than suffer the Sovereign Power to do it
another. So that upon the whole matter, if the Government m^st be Subverted,
you would have no body, have the doing of it but your selves.


F. However false your Premises are, and however weak the Proofs that you have
brought for them, yet I see you are resolved to stick close to your Conclusion,
(i. e.) That all Supreme Powers are absolutely Irresistible. In which Dispute,
whether you or I, have been in the wrong, I dare appeal to any indifferent
Judge; for I think I have sufficiently made out, that Resistance, by the whole
People, or Major part of it, against a general, and Intolerable Tyranny, is no
Diminution of Supreme Civil Power, nor inconsistent with it; nor is your Reason
for your Opinion, any truer than the rest, that Private Persons, whether taken
single, or in a whole Civil Society, can have no Power, but what is derived
from the Supreme, which is by no means so, for every private Man of the
Society, then acts by a Power precedent to it, viz. the Natural Power of
Self-Preservation, or Defense; which no man ever absolutely gave up neither for
himself, nor his Children, when he became a Member of that Commonwealth: Though
he was obliged for the Peace of the Government, or Civil Society, to suspend
that Right in order to a greater Good, which once failing, upon the Dissolution
of the Government, every Man's Original Right takes place.

As for what you say against my Notion, that Resistance is Lawful, when it may
prevent the Subversion of the Government, your Reply to this is really
Equivocal, and consists in that false, or wrong Notion, you have of the Nature
of our English Government, which you suppose only consists in the Preservation
of the King's Personal Power, without any respect to the Laws, or Fundamental
Constitutions of the Kingdom, and that as long as the People are in Subjection,
whether to Legal Government, or illegal Force; it is all one, the Government is
still preserved, which is a great mistake, for the King receiving his Power
from the Law, and having no Authority but what that gives him, when he
overthrows the Fundamental Constitutions of the Kingdom, he does himself
destroy the Government. And therefore, when in that Case the People do resist,
it is either to maintain it, or else to restore it to the state that it was in
before; so that it is not the People, in this Case, who have subverted it, but
the King.


M. It now grows late, and it is high time to give over, but if you please to
give me another Meeting, I doubt not but to show you, that by the Original
Constitution of this Government, the King not only has the sole Supreme Power,
but that by several Acts of Parliament all Resistance of the King, or those
Commissioned by him, is absolutely against the Laws and fundamental
Constitutions of this Kingdom; and that they are all by our Laws Rebels that
dare presume to make such unlawful Resistance: And I desire, that you would
give me a patient bearing in this matter, because I have so great a Kindness
for you, that I would not have you lie under so dangerous an Error, which may
happen to prove fatal to your Happiness, not only in the World to come, but
also to the Safety of your Self, and Family in this Life, if you should offer
to put in practice, what you have here maintained.


F. Sir, I give you many thanks for your kind Intentions toward me, since I do
believe it proceeds from that real Friendship you have for me, though as for the
former of those Judgments you mention, I hope I shall have no Reason to be
afraid of it; for any thing I can yet see from th^se Arguments you have
hitherto urged: But as for what may happen to me in this Life, I hope I have as
little Reason to fear it, since I believe this great Revolution will not only
Justify, but for the future defend those Arms that have been taken up for the
restoring the true Ancient Government of the Kingdom.


M. I confess, Sir, that you have now too much the advantage of me during these
times of Anarchy, and Confusion; but yet I hope one day to see this unhappy
Nation again recovered from this sad Apostasy; into which I confess too many
have lapsed, and then I doubt not, but these Primitive, and Loyal Doctrines of
Passive Obedience, and Non-Resistance will be again restored to their former
Integrity, and Vigor.


F. Well Sir, all I can say to you is, that I see you are not only in Love with
Slavery, but also with th^se that would bring it in upon us; yet however I
think: I may give you this good Advice, that if you are not pleased with what
has been already done, since you have had no hand in the doing of it, you
would be contented quietly to sit still, and enjoy those Benefits, that may
thereby accrue to the whole Church, and Nation; since I thereby expect a firmer
Settlement of the Protestant Religion, as also of our Civil Liberties, than we
ever yet enjoyed.


M. I thank you for your Advice, and you know as my humor is not to be
Troublesome, or Clamorous against that which is not in my Power to help, so on
the other side, I heartily wish that the Prince may now agree with his Majesty
upon such Terms, as may prove for the good of the Church, and security of the
State. But pray tell me, when I may be so happy as to see you here again, that
we may fully resolve this last Question?


F. To Morrow I shall be engaged, but the day after being one of the Christmas
Holy Days, I shall not fail to wait on you at the same hour, and I am very well
pleased to wait on you here, since I foresee a great part of our next
Conversation, will depend upon Authorities out of Books, with which your Study
is very well furnished, and my own are not in Town.


M. I shall expect your Coming with Impatience, and in the mean time, I am your
humble Servant.


F. Sir, I am yours.


FINIS.
Bibliotheca Politica: Or, A DISCOURSE By way of DIALOGUE, WHETHER The King be
the Sole Supreme Legislative Power of the Kingdom; and whether our Great
Councils or Parliaments, be a Fundamental Part of the Government, or else
proceeded from the Favor and Concessions of former Kings.

Collected out of the most Approved Authors, both Ancient and Modern.

Dialogue the Fifth.

LONDON, Printed for R. Baldwin in Warwick Lane, near the Oxford-Arms; where
also may be had the First, Second, Third and Fourth Dialogues. 1692.

THE Bookseller's Advertisement to the READERS.
THE Author has ordered me to beg your Pardons on his behalf, that he has made
bold in this Discourse to deviate from the method he at first proposed for the
subject of the ensuing Dialogue, since instead of treating of the Original of
Civil Authority, and in what sense it is derived from God, and in what from the
People (as he promised in his Epistle to the first Discourse) he has now made
the Supreme Legislative Power, and the Fundamental Constitution of our
Government, together with the Antiquity of Great Councils or Parliaments in
this Nation (whether they always consisted of Bishops, Barons, or Temporal
Lords and Commons or not) the Subject of this as well as of the ensuing
Dialogue; so that th^se grand Questions taking up two entire Discourses, had
the Author persued the Method he at first proposed, he could not have brought
his whole design within the compass of Eight Dialogues, as he at first
intended, and still hopes to do; and therefore to ease you of the trouble of
buying, or reading more Discourses on these Subjects, then what he takes to be
absolutely necessary, he has reduced all that he had prepared for the Fifth
Discourse upon the Subject above mentioned, into the two last Dialogues,
wherein he designs to treat of the Justice, and Lawfulness of the late
Revolution, and the Settlement of the Crown upon their present M^jesties, where
the then Questions he intended to treat of will properly enough fall in.

But it is time to speak somewhat concerning this present Discourse, since it
treat of a Question to be decided only from the History and Laws of this
Nation. And the Author bids me assure you, that he has laid down nothing
therein on either side, but what he has produced good Authorities for; either
from the Histories and Governments of our own or other Neighboring Nations, or
from the Colle^^ions of our English Saxon Laws, and ancient as well as modern
Writers upon the Laws of England, and lastly from our Statutes or Acts of
Parliament since the reputed Conquest, which he found necessary to these
Subjects, without omitting any Authority that he judged material to be urged on
either side.

But as for the Quotations themselves, I hope they are truly cited, for the
Author assures me upon the word of a Ge^tleman, that he is not conscious of any
unfair dealing in that kind, either by any wilful omission, or concealment; and
as for the Books, Chapters or Pages here quoted, if there be any error or
mistake of that kind, I pray impute it to the Press, and not to the Author as
well in this, as all the rest of these Discourse; since he could not be in Town
to correct them himself, but he intends God willing) to rectify all such
mistak^s by a Table of Errata at the end of the whole work, to which he intends
also to add an Exact Index of all the Principal Matters that are debated in it;
but though I take the Author for an honest Gentleman, and one who scorns the
mean advantage of a false Quotation, yet since many Writers (like Montebanks)
are apt to cry up their own sincerity even when they deceive you most; the best
advice I can give you is, that if you have the le^st distrust of any thing here
quoted, you consult the Authors or Books themselves, from whence he has
transcribed them, and then you will be best able to judge how far you may trust
him another time.

As for those Parliamentary Records here cited, they are either such as have
been already Printed from the Rolls in the Tower, or other Offices at
Westminster, and so are allowed for Authentic, or else are such as have not yet
been made public, as for which as well as the former, if you have the least
distrust of any of them, I leave you to search the Records themselves, which
are I hope now communicated without any reserve to all that are willing to take
the pains to consult them; I have no more to add; but to assure you (not from
my own, but better Judgments) that you will find more in this small Treatise
than ever was yet published at once (or perhaps at all) upon these important
Subjects.

Note. If the Author has made one of his Opponents call the Entrance of King
William 1. into England, and his taking the Crown upon the same condition as
his English Predecessors, a Conquest; it may be understood in the largest
Acceptance of that word, and for Brevity sake only.

Authors made use of, and how Denoted.
1. Harmony of Divinity and Law. H. D. L. 2. Dr. Iohnstons Excellency of
Monarchical Government. I. E. M. G. 3. Huntons Treatise of Monarchy. H. T. M.
4. Sir R. Filmers Freeholders Grand Inquest. F. F. G. Anarchy of a mixed
Monarchy. F. A. M. M.
5. Dr. Heylin's Stumbling Block of Rebellion. S. B. R. The Folio Edition. 6
Mr. Petyt's Preface to his Ancient Rights of the Commons of England, Asserted.
P.P.R.C. 7. Dr. Brady's Answer to the said Treatise. B. A. P.
The Folio Edition.

THE Fifth Dialogue BETWEEN Mr. MEANWELL a Civilian AND Mr. FREEMAN a Gentleman.
M. YOU are welcome Sir, I pray set down by the Fire; I was thinking before you
came in, of the best method of managing this Important Question, whether by the
Laws and Constitutions of this Kingdom, it can in any Case whatever be Lawful
to Resist the King, or those that Act by Virtue of his Commissions. I shall
therefore proceed in the next place, to the Proof of the Second Proposition, in
the Argument I at first proposed, or to speak Logically, the Minor in the
Syllogism, viz. That the King of England is the Sole Supreme, or Sovereign
Power in this Kingdom; and therefore is irresistible, and that not only as to
his own Person, but also with respect to all such who act by his Orders or
Commissions, though the things commanded be in themselves Illegal.


F. I do not dislike your method, though if you could never so plainly make out
to me the truth of this Minor Proposition, yet it will come too late to prove,
that all Resistance of Supreme Powers is unlawful in all Cases whatever, since
I think you have failed in the Proof of that your first Proposition: But since
I do not deny the truth of this second Proposition in some sense; I pray be as
short as you can in the proof of it.


M. I shall observe your desire, and shall briefly recite some Authorities, as
well Ancient as Modern, as also Acts of Parliament, which declare an Absolute
and Imperial Power, to be Solely in the King. To begin with the Saxon times:
I.E.M.G. chapter 17. p. 122. et. ^ein.
First, as to the Title of King or Emperor used Promiscuously: Our King Edgar
frequently in his Charters, ca^s himself Albionis and Anglorum Ba^ileus, and
the Grecians esteemed the word (...), to be of full as Eminent a Signification,
as Emperor; and King Ed^ar^ the Confessor, in a Charter to the Abbey of
Peterburg Styles himself, Rex Anglorum, and his Government a Monarchy: Cad.
Vigorn. and Mon^st. Ang. part. 2. p. 64.
And King Ethelred in his Charter to Canterbury, Styles himself Angligenum,
Orcadarum, necnon in Gyrojacentium Monarcha, and Anglorum Induperator. So that
you hereby may see, that the Kings of England long before the Conquest, looked
upon themselves as Emperors, or absolute Civil Sovereigns. So likewise after
that time, we find W. Rufus Dates his Charter to the Monastry of Shaftsbury;
Secundo anno Imperi^ mei: And though the Title of Emperor has bin disused, yet
we shall find the Substance of it, sufficiently Challenged in that Letter of W.
Rufus to Archbishop Anselm, telling him, That he had all the Liberties in his
Kingdom, which the Emperor* Vi. Mat. Paris in vita Will. 2^.
challenged in the Empire: And the like was challenged by Henry the First, in
all his Disputes with the Pope concerning the Investiture of Bishops and
Abbots; and in all the Statutes of Praemunire, made by Edward the Third, the
King's Sovereignty independent from the Sea of Rome, is expressly Asserted; and
the Statute of the 16th. of Richard the Second, expressly declares: That the
Crown of England has ever bin so free, that it is under no Earthly Subjection;
but immediately subject to God in all things, touching the Regality of the
Crown, and to no other. And the Statutes of the 24th, and 25th. of Henry the
Eighth, expressly declare: That this Realm of England, is an Empire Governed by
one Supreme Head and King; and the Crown, or Royal Authority, is also thereby
declared Imperial, and the Kings of England are therein Sti^ed Kings or
Emperors of this Realm. So that I think, no Man needs to doubt where the
Supreme, or Sovereign Power of this Kingdom resides.


F. I will not deny any of those Authorities, you have now made use of: Since,
Titles alone are no proofs of Power; for it is very well known, that the
Germane Emperor, yet, notwithstanding that great Title, is not therefore
Unaccountable, or Irresistible; Since the College of the Princes Electors may
Depose him for Maladministration, or for Violating any of the Fundamental
Constitutions of the Empire. And Mr. Seldom has very well observed in his
Titles of Honor, that this Supremacy or Freedom from all Subjection is not
only challenged by our English Sovereigns; but also by the Kings of Denmark,
Sweden and Poland: The former of which, yet was so far from being an absolute
Monarch, that before the Reign of this King's Father, he might have bin Deposed
for Tyranny, for Misgovernment by the Estates of the Kingdom, as the King of
Poland may at this Day: And therefore these Titles may indeed, prove a Freedom
from all Foreign Jurisdiction; but does not prove that the King is Endued with
an Absolute Sovereign Power within the Kingdom, as you may see in these
Examples I have now given you.


M. If you are not Satisfied with these Proofs; I doubt not but to give you
other Authorities, both out of Ancient and Modern Lawyers, as also Acts of
Parliament, which sufficiently declare, where the Supreme or Sovereign Power
Resides. In the first place, I suppose you will not deny; but that it has bin
the Prerogative of the Kings of England, time out of mind, to Co^^ Money,
Dispose of all Offices, and Create new Dignities, as he should think fit, as
also to make War and Peace, to make Laws, and in short, to do all things
whatsoever that are Essential to a Monarch; and that he alone, is the Sole
Sovereign Power in this Kingdom, Exclusive of all others: Our Ancient Lawyers,
Gla^vil, and Fortescue, plainly declare; The former of which, Lib. 7. c. 10.
says thus. Rex nullum ^ab^re potest* parem multo minus Superiorem. The same
thing is also repeated by Bracton, and a very good Reason given for it, in
these words; Lib. 3. c. 9.
Omnis quidem sub eo, and ipse sub nullo, nisi tantum Sub Deo, parem non habet
in Regno Suo, quia Sic amitteret praeceptum, i. e. His power of Commanding.
cum par in parem non ^abe^ Imperium Item n^c multo fortius Superiorem nec
Potentiorem habere debe^, quia sic esset inferior sibi Subjectis and inferiores
pares esse non possunt potentioribus.


F. But pray read what immediately follows: Ipse autem Rex non debet esse Sub
bomine, Sed Sub Deo and Sub L^ge, quia Lex facit Regem, attribuat igitur Rex
Legi quod Lex attribuit ei, viz. Dominatiorem and Potestatem, non est enim Rex
ubi dominatur Voluntas, and ^on Lex. And though I grant the King is Subject, or
Inferior to no particular private Man: Yet that he has a Superior, or Master
within the Kingdom, besides God and the Law (and so is not the Sole Supreme
Power) appears by a Passage out of the same Author, C. 16.
in the Second Book: Rex habet Superiorem Deum item legem per quam factus est
Rex, item Curiam Suam, viz. Comites and Barons, quia Comites dicuntur quasi
Socie Regis, and qui habet Socium habet Magistrum, and ideo si Rex fuerit sin^
froena, i. e. Lego, debent ei froenum ponere. From which words, it seems
apparent to me, that this Author thought the King was not only Inferior to the
Law; but was also to his Court of Parliament, called here Curia Baron^^, who
might Bridle or Restrain him if he Transgres't the Laws, which are here called
the King's Briale* Nor can I conceive how this could be done without some kind
of Force or Constraint, if he refuse to receive this Bridle, they would lay
upon him.


M. I do not desire at this time, to enter upon this Question, concerning that
Power; which I know some Parliaments have pretended too, of C^^bing and
Resisting the King by force, if they supposed He Invaded the Fundamental Rights
and L^b^r^ies (as they call them) of the Nation; and that for two Reasons:
First, because it is not pertinent to our present purpose, of proving that the
King is not the Sole Supreme Power, as also* because you very well know, that
both Houses did in 13 Car. 2. by an Act of Parliament concerning the Militia,
Solemnly Renounce all Coercive Power over the King, or any Right in either, or
both of the Two Houses, of making Offensive or Defensive War against him. But
if you have a mind hereafter to course further on this Subject I doubt not, but
to prove to you from diverse other Passages out of Bracton, H. D. L. p. 41.
and that old Treatise called Fleta, that it was no Political Superiority in
the Curia Baronum; but only a Directive Power or moral Superiority, which they
had of Advertizing the King of any Arbitrary Proceeding, or Injustice he should
happen to do; and by Complaint, Admonition and Entreating to impose upon him to
amend the same, according to his Oath, but not by Coaction, or Constraint; And
in this Sense they may be said (in a Moral way) to put the Bridle of the Law
upon him, which may be called Civil Resistance; but as for Military Resistance
against an Unjust King, it is as Inconsistent with our English Government, as
with any other Monarchy in the World.

But you very much mistake, if you suppose that the King of England is not
Supreme; H.D.L. p. 29.
because he is Limited by Laws, which realy is no Objection; Because a
Sovereign without any Diminution to his Sovereignty, may be limited in the
Exercise of his Sovereign Power, either by his own Acts, or Condescensions, or
else by those of his Predecessors, under whom he claims. This is so certain,
that there is no Supreme Power in Heaven, or in Earth, which is not limited and
confined in the exercise thereof. Thus the Omnipotent Power of God himself, is
limited by his own Wisdom, Goodness and Justice, which are himself: So likewise
the Powers of all Absolute unlimited Monarchs are only so comparatively with
respect to positive Laws; but as for the Laws of God and Nature, which bind
their Consciences as firmly, as any Civil Laws, they are bound to observe them,
and exercise their Sovereign Power within those Limits, which they set and
prescribe. For whether they have their Supreme Power from Go^, as we say, or
from the People, as you allege it; it is all one as to this matter, for they
can have no Right neither from God, nor the People to make Unjust and
Tyrannical Laws. And this Political Limitation of their Power in the exercise
of it, does no more destroy the Essence thereof, than its flowing in Pipes or
Channels, destroys the Essence of a Spring, since it is still the same, whether
it runs confined through Pipes, or flows free and unconfined through the open
field. The Application is obvious.

But as for the precedent words in this place of Bra^ton, which seems to
intimate, that the King ow^ his Authority to the Law. He there only means the
King, in Opposition or Contradiction to a Tyrant, who makes his Will, his Law;
according to that of Chancellor For^escue, Rex est ubi been regit, Tyrannus,
dum populum sibi oredi^um violenta opprimi^ Dominatione, quod hoc sanxit Lex
humana quod Leges ligant Suum Latorem. Where you may observe, that this Author
makes a King's governing well, i. e. according to Law, a mark of Distinction
from a Tyrant, who oppresses his Subjects by a violent Domineering over them.
And though he here supposes the King to be obliged by the Laws, yet that this
Obligation is only Moral, appears by what immediately follows, when he says,
the Laws do oblige their Legislator. Now if the King be the Sole Legislator (as
He here seems to intimate) He must also be the Sole Supreme Power, and if so,
cannot be accountable to, or under, the Coercion of any Superior Power; for
then he would not be Supreme, as you your self have granted long since.


F. Since you are not willing to enter upon that Ancient Power which you cannot
deny; but the Great Council formerly had, of putting a Bridle upon the King,
and Restraining his Actions, in Case he Invaded the Rights or Liberties of the
People: I shall not ^^sist farther upon it now, for the Reasons you have given;
only I must make bold to tell you thus much, that if they have not a Power of
defending their just Rights, if forceably Invaded by the King, it would be all
one; as if they had none at all: Though I grant, that what you have said
concerning the Limitation of the Exercise of Sovereign Power, that it does not
Derogate from the Absoluteness of the Power it self, is very true in all such
Limitations; which proceed from the Intrinsic Nature and Perfection of the
Being, in which it Resides, as in your Example of God's infinite Power, being
Limited by his other Attributes. So likewise all Human Powers (I own) are
limited by the Revealed Laws of God, or those of Nature: But as to positive
Laws, you your self assert, that absolute Monarchs are only obliged by them, as
long as they please; and consequently, that they may alter them, or Derogate
from them, as often as they think good, as the Roman Emperors could revoke any
Privileges or Immunities they had formerly granted to particular Persons,
Cities, nay to Tributary Kings, or Commonwealths; and all this very justly,
because as all such Grants were made only for the public good of the Empire:
So they being the sole Judges thereof, when ever they found such Confessions to
prove prejudicial to it, they might justly alter or revoke them. Now if the
Power of our Kings be as absolutely Sovereign, as that of the Roman Emperors:
and only limited by their own free Grants or Condescensions to the People, and
not from any Power ab extra; Such Grants or Condescensions, though never so
Solemnly past into Laws in the Parliament, or Assembly of the States, are still
no more than positive Laws: And then if the King is the Sole Sovereign Power
(unlimited by any thing, ab extra) how can He so tie up his own Hands, as that
he may not Break or Rescind all those Concessions he had made, and those
limitations which he had put upon himself, if he think, or declare it is for
the better benefit of the Commonwealth so to do. I cannot Comprehend, if He be
by the Original Constitution, the sole Lawmaker and Judge of what is for the
public Good? Much less can I understand, how he can oblige his Successors (who
must still be supposed as Absolute Monarchs as himself) to observe them. And
therefore if all our Civil Rights and Liberties, were no other than what you
would have them (the free Condescensions, or Self-Limitations of Sovereign
Power) I desire you would show me what security we can have for the Enjoyments
of them, longer than the King pleases: For it seems plain to me, that when ever
He shall fancy the Liberties and Properties of the Subjects (both which you
suppose were derived from him) to be injurious to, or inconsistent with, his
Prerogative, or Sovereign Power, he may lawfully Disannul, or revoke them; and
in what Case we then should be (considering how things had like to have gone
lately) I leave any indifferent Man to Judge.

Nor Is your Interpretation of Bracton's words, Lex facit Regem, etc. Any more
than an absolute Wresting of them, from their true meaning, which is not (as
you would have it) to Distinguish a King that governs by Law, from a Tyrant
that makes his Will his Law; for every absolute Monarch that does so, is not a
Tyrant, provided he direct his Actions according to the Laws of God and Nature;
as you your self assert, and a Prince may as well govern thus, as the Great
Turk, Czar of Muscovy, and all the Eastern Monarchs do at this Day, who are not
counted Tyrants in so doing; But certainly you will say, that He would make a
very Scurvy English King, who would observe no other Rule. Nor do you less
wrest Fortescue's words, when you render them, Rex est, ubi been regit,
Tyrannus, etc. Supposing the meaning of it to be, that this Author makes a
King's governing (that is, say you) according to Law, the only thing to
Distinguish him from a Tyrant, etc. Whereas he says no such matter: but only
Rex est, ubi been regit, which he may do without any Set Laws, as well as with
them, as the first Kings you suppose did before they were limited by Laws.

But as for Fortescue's supposing the King to be the Sole Legislator, that word
Sole, is of your own Addition; for if he had said so, he would have
contradicted himself, as I shall show you presently; It is true, the King has
a great share in the Legislative, yet has he two other Bodies to join with him
by a Concurrent or Cooperative Power in it: And I think I have all the Ancient
Lawyers of England on my side. To begin therefore with Ranulph de G^anville,
who was Chief Justicear in the Reign of Henry the Second, He gives us in his
Prologue to his Treatise of the Laws of England, this Testimony. Leges namque
Anglicanas lice^ ^on Scriptas. Leges appellari non videtur absurdum (cum boc
ipsum Lex sit, quod Principi placet and Legis habet vigorem) ^as Scilicet quas
super dubljs in con^ilio definiendis Procerum quidem consilio, and Principis
accadente Authoritate, constat esse promulgatas: So likewise Bracton in his
very first Chapter, speaks much to the same purpose; Cum Legis vigorem habeat
quicquid de Consilio, and de Cons^nsu Magnatum, and Reipublicae comm^ni
Sponsione, Authoritate Principis pr^ce^^nte, just fuerit defini^um, and
approbatum. And also in his third Book, Chap. 2. When he speaks of the Ancient
manner of making Laws in England, he says; Quae quidem fuerint approbate
concensu utentium, and Sacramento R^gum confirma^ae non possunt mutari, at^
destrui fine communi consensu utentium, and consilio eorum. quorum consilio,
and Consensu fuerint promulgata. Where you may see these Ancient Authors
plainly declare, that nothing has the force of a Law in this Kingdom, but what
is approved of, and consented to, by all Orders of Men, either by themselves,
or their Representatives: And which is very Remarkable, Bracton supposes the
King's Authority, or Royal Sanction of a Law, may precede the Consent of the
Great Council; which quite destroys that Notion, That it is the Kings giving
his last Assent, which gives it the Essence and Vigor of a Law.

And with these more Ancient Sages of the Law, Fortescue also agrees in his 9th
Chap. D^ Laudibus Legum Angliae, where he says; Rex Angliae Populum guberna^
non mera potes^^ to Regid sed politica, Populus and enim ijs Legib^ guber^^tur
quas ipse fert, etc. What follows, is word for word the same with what Bracton
had before in his first Chap and therefore needs not to be Repeated, so
likewise in the 18 Chap. speaking of the Absolute Legislative Power of Kings in
some other Kingdoms, he thus proceeds: Sed non Sic Angliae Statuta oriri
possunt dum nelum Principis voluntate, sed and to^ius Regni Assensu ipsa
conduntur, quo Populi laesuram nequiunt, vel non eorum Commodum procurare. But
if they after prove inconvenient, he immediately adds: Concito reformari ipsa
possunt, sed non fine Communitatis and Proterum Regni illius Assensu quali ipsa
primitus emanarunt. To which I may also add an Authority out of that Learned
Author St. German, who in his Dialogue, called the Dr. and Student, written in
Latin, in the 10th. Chap. Entitled de Sexto fundamento Legis Angliae. The
Student thus speaks, Sexium Fundamentum Legis Angliae s^at in diversis Statutis
per Dominum Regem, and Progenitores suos and per Dominos spirituales, and
Temporales, and per Communitatem totius Regni in Parliamentis Editis ubi Lex
Rationis, Lex Divi^a, Consuetudines, Maxima, sive alia fundamenta Legis Anglia
prias Sufficere minime videbantur. Where you see the Legislative Power is here
Attributed to the Lords and Commons, jointly with the King. And therefore my
Lord Coke in his Notes upon the Statute of Westminster, I* calls it a Complete
Parliament, as consisting of all the Estates necessary thereunto; for says he,
a Parliament concerning making or enacting Laws, Consists of the King, the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, and (...) is no Act of Parliament,
unless it be made by the King, Lords and Commons.


M. I shall not much concern my self with what your Common Lawyers, either
Ancient or Modern have writ upon this matter; much less what Sir Edward Coke, a
known Enemy to the Kings Prerogative, does maintain: Since I have as good, or a
better Authority than he, p. 3. a. b.
viz. that of the Year-Book of 22 Ed. 3. Wherein it is expressly declared by
diverse Earls and Barons, and by all the Justices, in the Case of one Headlow
and his Wife, who had a Suit with the King, That the King makes the Laws by the
Assent of the Lords and Commons; and not the Lords and Commons, and that He
could have no Peer in his own Land, and that the King ought not to be Judged by
them: So that it is, I think, evident, that the Laws are primarily and properly
made by the King, and that the two Houses have a Cooperation; but no
Co-ordination of Power with him. And though at this Day, I grant that Custom
has made the Assent of the Lords and Commons necessary to the passing of all
Laws, yet it is still the King's word, or le Roy^le veul^, that makes them so;
and I much doubt, whether even this were part of the Ancient Constitution of
this Kingdom, or not, or proceeded at first from the Gracious Favor and
Permission of former Kings, as I could show by the whole Series of Councils, in
the Saxon times, if it were not too tedious to mention them particularly,
therefore I shall only Select some of the most Remarkable.

For though I confess the English Saxon Kings, performed all Great and
Considerable things by the Counsel, and Advice of their Bisho^s and Noblemen,
comprehended under the general names of Wits; yet you will find by the Titles
of almost all the Councils in Spellman, Lambard, and that these Kings alone
made their Laws, though by the Advice and Council of their Wittena Gemote;
which was then no other than the King's Greater Council, Since He called what
Great Men and Bishops he pleased to it, and omitted the rest. And it is never
mentioned, that they were made by their Consent, as necessary thereunto. Nay,
sometimes we find that some of the Ancient Saxon Kings, made Laws without the
Assent of their Great Council. I. E. M. G. p. 151. vi. Mat. Paris in vita Offe
p. 171.
Thus Off^ King of the Mercians, being at Rome, out of his Royal Munificence,
gave to the Support of the People of his Kingdom, that should come thither, a
penny to be paid Yearly for ever, out of every Family, by all whose Goods in
the Fields, exceeded the value of Thirty pence. And this He made a perpetual
Constitution, throughout all his Dominions, excepting the Lands Conferred upon
the Monastery of St. Albans. This Imposition and Law, continued a long while in
force, though we find it not Confirmed by any great Councils in the time of his
Successors, only in the Laws of King Edgar, Vi. Spelman 's Councils.
and King Edward, it is enjoined to be paid, as the King's Alms; which implies
it was the King's Gift, and that Solely without the consent of a Great Council.

But to give you a more particular Proof of the Supreme and Absolute Power of
our Saxon Kings, I. E. M. G. p. 190. and dein.
as well during the Heptarchy, as afterward, in making ad establishing Laws: I
shall begin with the first we have extant, which are those of Ina, King of the
West Saxons, who began his Reign, Anno. 712. In the Preface to his Laws, Vi.
L^mbard. Archaionom. in the Laws of K. Ina. p. 1.
we find it thus expressed; which I shall render out of the Saxons Copy,
Published by Mr. Lambard. I Ina, by or with Gods Gift, King of the West Saxons,
with the Advice or Council of Cenred my Father, and Heddes my Bishop, and
Ercenwold my Bishop; and with my Aldermen, and Eldest Wites, or Wisemen of my
Kingdom do command, etc. Then in the first Chapter the King speaks in the first
person plural, We Bid or Command, that all our People shall after hold fast, or
observe these Laws and Dooms. From this Preface, you may observe: I. That Kings
are the Gift of God, and that Gods Gift signified the same with Dei Gratia,
they are not the Creature of the People, 2. That Princes or the better
Government of their People, in the Settling of Laws in Church and State, did
then Consult, Deliberate, and Advise with their Bishops, Noblemen, and
eminently Wise Men of their Kingdoms; whom for their Wisdom, they Honored with
public Employments in their Dominions. 3. That after such Consultation,
Deliberation and Advice to the Sovereign, Establishes and makes the Laws.

The next Instance I shall make use of, is out of the same Author, Ibid. 21.
in the Laws of King Alfred, where, in the Conclusion of his Laws about
Religion, and Prefatory to the Secular Laws; He says, I Alfred King, have
gathered these (Sanctions) together, and caused them to be written; and then
Recites, that those that he liked not, with the Council of his Wits, he had
Rejected; and those he liked, he had or commanded to be holden. And we may
observe, that the King here speaks in the Single Person, that He himself
Collected or Chose, aad also Rejected what Laws he pleased. The next material
illustration where: the Legislative Power then Resided may be found in the Laws
of King Edward the Elder, where after the Charge given to the Judges; the first
Law begins, I will, and so in others; in the fourth, it is thus expressed:
Edward the King, with his Wits, that were at Exeter, strictly enqui^ing by what
means it might be better provided for Peace and Tranquillity, etc. In the 2d.
and 3d. Chap. it is: We also Declare, Pronounce or Sentence; And in the 7th.
and I will. In which Laws we have none mentioned with the King, but his Wits;
and his Commanding, Willing or Pronouncing in the Imperative Mood, is
observable.

The next Laws I find, Ibid. p. 45. Spel. Council. p. 396.
are those of King Athelstan, which begin thus: I Athelstan King, with the
Advice of Walfelm my High Bishop, and other my Bishops, Commanded, or bid all
my Rieves (i. e. Praefects) of what degrees soever to pay Tithes, etc. And this
He commanded his Bishops, his Aldermen, and Praepositi (who were the Judges in
the Country Courts) to do the same: In these Laws, We cwaedon is used; which I
suppose, is something more than Somner understands by his ^uide: a Saying,
Speech or Sentence, and properly is, we will. But the absoluteness of the King,
appears most in the 26th. Chap. wherein it is expressed, That if any of the
Graeves (i. e. Judges do not perform these Commands, or be more Remiss in the
Execution of those he has enjoined, He shall be punished for his Excess of
Contumacy, according to the Fines there set down.

King Edmund is the next of our Kings, whose Laws are Transferred to us, Spel.
Council. p. 419.21. An. Chapter 944.
and the Proem tells us, that King Edmund Assembled a Great Synod, or Council
to London, on the Holy Easter-Tide, and the Persons Summoned are Styled
Godskind, and Worldskind, i. e. Clergy and Laics. After the first six Chapters
of Laws, in the Proem to the 2d. part of them; the King Signifies to all Men,
Old and Young, That he had asks Advice in the Assembly of his Wites; both
Ecclesiastics and Laics; and in the Laws, it is often said, Thonne cwaedon*
These we pronounce or appoint, and sometimes the single person is used; and in
other places, us betweonan Heol^an, it is holden betwixt us. Here we find the
Great Council Summoned by the King, and the Constituent Parts of it, to be the
Clergy and Lai^y; yet still we find the Legislative Power in the King alone.

So likewise in the Title to King Edgars Ecclesiastical Laws, Spel. Council. p.
444. An. Chapter 967.
it is thus; The Laws which King Edgar in a frequent Assembly or Council of the
Servants of God has ordained, Spel. Con. 455.
whereby you may see, that the Enacting Part Relates wholly to himself. The same
King Edgar in his Charter to Glastonbury Abbey, concludes it thus, ^a^e
privilegij paginam Rex Edgarus XII. Regni sui, sacro scripto apud Londo^iam
communi Concilio optimatum suorum confirmavit. So that though it appears this
was in the Presence of a Great Council: Yet the Granting and Enacting part,
proceeded wholly from himself.

The Preface to the Laws of King Canutus, by Sir Henry Spelman runs thus:
Council. 552.
These are the Worldly Constitutions, that I will with my Wites advice, that
Men hold all over England. In most of the Chapters it is said, We Teach, We Bid
or Command, We forbid; and in the Conclusion, it is in the single Person of the
King. Now I command all, and bid every Man in God's Name. And the Preface to
the Latin Version of them, says; Haec sunt Instituta Cnude Regis Anglorum,
Dacorum, Norwegarum, vene rando Saplentum Concilio ejus, ad Laudem, and Gloriam
Dei, and suam Regalitatem, etc. Of this Canutus; William of Malmsbury, says;
that He commanded to be observed for ever, Gest. Regum Lib. 2.^.11.
all the Laws of Ancient Kings, especially those made by King Ethelred his
Predecessor, under the Penalty of the Kings Fine, to the observing of which, He
says in his time, it was Sworn under the Name of King Edwards Laws, not that
He had appointed them; but had observed them. So that I think upon the whole
matter, nothing is more plain, than that our English, Saxons and Danish Kings,
did not only call Councils, and preside in them, but that the Legislative Power
was lodged solely in themselves.


F. I perceive the Authority of our Ancient Lawyers, is a little too hard for
you to answer with your usual Distinctions; and therefore you seemingly deny
their Authority, though in effect, you grant it as I shall show you by and by:
But as for your Quotation out of the Year-Book, which you think sufficient to
Counterballance all the Authorities I have brought; I think I may much better
question the Judgment of those that gave that Opinion, since I can show you,
that you your self cannot allow it in all points for Law; For in the first
place, it is not there said, that it was so judged by all the Lords and Judges
who were appointed to hear the Cause there mentioned; but only Fuit dit, que le
Roy, etc. By which it seems to have bin the private opinion only of some one,
or more of the Lords and Judges there present; For it is not said, fuit adjuge.
And if you will have it to have bin the Opinion of them all, pray read what
follows after. Fuit dit quen temps le Roy Henry, and devant, le Roy fuit
implede comme Seroit auire homme de People. Mes Ed. Roy son fills ordeign que
home sueroit verse Roy per Peticion, Mos unques Roys ne seront adjugez Si non
per eu^ melmes and lour Justices. So that if the former part of it ^e Law, the
latter must be so too, and then it will directly contradict what you have
quoted before out of Bracton. That in the time of Henry the 3d, (in which he
lived) there lay no Remedy against the King, but only by Petition: Whereas this
Opinion, makes him before the time of Edward the First to have been liable to
the same Legal Process with other Men. But notwithstanding this Passage in the
Year-Book, may very well bear a legal Interpretation, only by supplying what is
indeed to be understood after the Words, non pas les Peers, and le Commune
[viz. Sans assent du Roy] which as it was then true, So I hope it will ever be
so.

But I think I can give you a much better Authority than this Year-Book, to
prove, where the Power of Making and Dispensing with Laws, Chap. 21.
does truly reside, viz. The Solemn Declaration of the King, Lords and Commons,
in the 25th. Henry 8. (a Prince as Jealous of ^is Prerogative, as any of his
Predecessors) where in the Preamble, read these words: It stands therefore
with Natural Equity, and good Reason, that in all and every such Human Laws
made within this Realm, or induced into this Realm by the said Sufferance,
Consents and Custom, your Royal Majesty, and your Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
and Commons, Representing the whole State of your Realm, in this your High
Court of Parliament have full Power and Authority, not only to dispense with
those, and all other Humane Laws of this your Realm, as the Quality of the
persons, and matter shall require. And also the said Laws, and every of them to
Abrogate, Annull, Amplify and Diminish, as it shall seem to your Majesty, and
the Nobles and Commons of your Realm, present in your Parliament, Meet and
Convenient for the Wealth of your Realm, etc. Whereby you may plainly see, that
the Power of Making, Abrogating, and also Dispensing with Laws, is by this Act
ascribed jointly to the King, and the Two Houses of Parliament.

But though I do not affirm, that they have a Coordinate Power with the King
in making Laws, yet they have a Co-operative Power therein, which yet is no
more than your Cooperation; for what is a Cooperation, but a Power of working
together; and how can three Distinct Bodies work together, without each
contribute their share, to produce the Intended effect.


M. Perhaps I may have bin too unwary in my expression; but pray answer the
Authorities I have brought from our Ancient English Saxon Laws: Wherein it
seems plain to me, that the King had then the Sole Legislative Power.


F. I grant he had a chief share in the Legislative Power; but not the Sole
Power, that is, He could make no Laws, but in the Great Council, and by their
Consent; And this you might have seen as well as I, if you had not slyly past
by what made against you; and therefore in the first place, to begin with your
Instance of Offa's giving that Boon to the Roman School, I think the Authority
you bring for it, is very Slight; for though I own that Matthew Paris who
writes his Life, Relates this Donation, to have been made at Rome, without
mentioning any Consent or Confirmation of his Great Council: Yet this seems but
an imperfect account of the matter, and according to the usual way of the
Writers of those times, who are not so exact in such matters, as they should
be: And therefore, though Offa did give, or vow these Pence at Rome; yet the
Gift might receive its force from the Consent of his Great Council, after he
came home: Since all his Laws, and the Acts of his Councils are lost, unless it
be one, which Sir H. Spelman has given us from such Remains as have bin saved
out of the Libraries of several Monasteries at their Dissolution; And this
contains no less, than the Consent and Confirmation of his Great Council
Assembled at Calcuith, Anno 940. for the Foundation and Endowment of the Abbey
of St. Albans, as also that of another Council at Verulam; for the Conferring
of diverse other Lands of his own to that Monastery. Now I leave it to any
indifferent Man to judge: Whether that King who could not bestow his own
Demesnes upon the Church, without the Consent of the Common Council of the
Kingdom, could give away at once, the 30th, Penny of all his Subjects Estates
for ever, without their Consents: I am sure the Donation of the same sort of
Pence by King Edward the Confessor, which is now to be found among the Laws of
King William the First, is said to be granted, Communi Confilio Regni, and that
the Saxon Kings could not bestow their Lands upon Religious Uses: Spel. Council.
1 vol. p. 340.
See Sir H. Spelmans Councils, where Baldred King of Kent, is an evident
Example, who though he had given the Manor of Mallings in Sussex, to
Christ-Church in Canterbury: Yet because his Principes and Great Men, that is,
his Great Council consented not thereto, it was revoked until King Egbert, and
his son Ethelwulf did afterward renew the said Grant, Ibid p. 340.
with the Consent of a Great Council held at Kingston, An. 840. as you may see
in the same Volume, last cited. And I am sure after the Heptarchy, when our
Kings were more Powerful, the same King Ethelwulf, could not by his mere
Prerogative, Grant the Tithes of his Subjects Estates to the Clergy, without
the Consent of a Great Council of his Bishops and Principal Men, held at
Winchester. An. Gratia 855. and Entitled thus, Celebris il^ donatio Ethelwulfi
Regis decimae manfionis and omnium benorum per terram suam Deo and Ecclesiae
factae confirma^^^. Vid. vol. p. 348.



M. I Grant, that perhaps these Kings could not dispose of their own Lands, or
the Estates of their Subjects, without the Consent of their Great Council, any
more than the Kings of France could formerly; yet I hope they were Absolute
Monarchs for all that.


F. I beg your pardon, if I have bin somewhat long in answering your Example of
King Offa. But I will now show you, that they could no more make Laws, than
dispose of their own, or their Subjects Estates, without their Consent, and
which you your self might easily have seen, if you had pleased to have
Consulted Sir Henry Spelman, as Diligently as you have done Mr. Lambard; for
there you might have found that about the Year 712. Spel. Con. Tom. 1. p. 219.
King Ina, Assembled a Great Council or Parliament, wherein he made
Ecclesiastical Laws concerning Marriages, etc. and did other things, ad
concordiam publicam promovendam pe^ commune Consilium, and Assensum
Episcoporum, Pri^cipum, Procerum, Vid. Chronic. Bromp. Col. 848. lin. 54.
Comitum, and omnium Sapientum Se^iorum, and Popillorum totius Regni. So
likewise, if you will please to look into the Decem-Scrip^ores, you will find
how Althesian's Laws were made, by the Title of them, which runs thus: Haec
sunt judicia quae Sapientes Exoniae Consilio Adel^^^i Regis instituerunt, and
iterum apud Feuresham, and tertia vice apud Thundresfeldium, ubi hoc definitum
simul and confirmatum est. So also King Ethelred held at London, Flor. Wigorn
A. D. 992.
a Great Council, and made Laws, Consilio Iussuque Regis Anglorum Aethelredi,
Procerumque suorum de tota Anglia, etc. Look also into the Title of King
Ethelred's Laws in Bromptons Chronicle, where you will read these words, hoc
est Concilium quod Ethelredus Rex and Sapientes sui condixerunt ad Emendationem
and augmentum pacis omni populo apud Wodestocam in Mircena Landa, Brompt. ut
Sup. Col. 893, 894.
id est in terra Mircenorum, etc. Where by Concilium, must be understood Law or
Decree. To Instance in one more out of the same Author still, from the Title to
another Set of Laws made by the same King; Id. Col. 895.
Hae sunt Leges quas Ethelredus Rex and sapientes sui constituerunt apud
Venetyngum ad Emendationem pacis and felicitatis Incrementum. See likewise in
Monasticon Anglicanum, the first Volum. Anno Dom. 1024. where Canu^us, Rex
Angliae cum Consilio and Decreto Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, and Primatum
Suorum expulit Clericos inhones^e viventes ab Ecclesia Sancti Edmundi, and
Monachos in illa constituit. And the same King C^^te, bestowed diverse Lands,
and other Privileges on the Monastery then called Briadricesworth (afterward
St. Edmunds Bury) cum consilio, and Decreto Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum,
Abbatum, Comitum aliorumque omnium Fidelium. The like we find in a Charter of
King Edward the Confessor, by which He granted diverse Lands and Privileges to
the Abbey of Westminster; Cum Consilio and Decreto Archiepiscoporum,
Episcoporum, Comitum aliorumque Optimatum.

From all which it manifestly appears, that under the English Saxon Kings, the
Legislative or Enacting Power, was in the Council of the Sapientes or Wites,
Conjunctly with the King; and that none of these Saxon Kings could pass any
Laws, or make any considerable Alteration in the State, without, not only the
Advice, but Consent of their Great Council; which then consisted of their
Bishops, Great Lords, principal Freeholders, and the Representatives of Cities
and Towns, as I shall prove another time, and was not left to the King, ad
libitum, to call whom he pleased thereunto. And as the word Decretum, signifies
Decree or Order: So likewise may the word Consilium here signify something
more than bare advice, viz. Agreement, or Appointment, which if you please to
peruse any ordinary Dictionary, you may presently satisfy your self in.

But before I Dismiss this Argument: I cannot but Remark upon your instance, of
King Edmunds making Laws alone, because he there speaks in the first Person
plural; Vi. Goldmans Dictionary.
whereas if you will but Consult the Proem to those Laws once again, you will I
doubt not be satisfied of the contrary, for the words are, that having ask
advice of the Council or Assembly of Clergy and Laics* that is seemed good to
them all, as well as to the King, and therefore we thus Ordain, by which it
appears, that the last words wherein the Ordaining part Resides, refer as well
to the whole Assembly, as to the King.


M The Government of our English Saxon Kings, is, I confess, very dark and
obscure; for according to our Ancient Historians, they seem to have bin very
absolute; though when we come to look in o^ the L^ws themselves, I confess they
seem rather to have bin limited Kings than ab^oli^^e Monarchs, though whether
that Limitation proceeded from the Original Constitution of the Government, or
their own free consent and Concessions is a very great question, though I
rather en^line to the former; and shall give you my Reasons for it, when we
come to Discourse on that Subject; but in the mean time, I must tell you in
Reply to what you have said, that if we consider the time; not long after the
Conquest, you will find the Supreme Legislative Power, to have bin then wh^ly
in the King (as it is so still) notwithstanding some Ambiguous expressions to
the Contrary; or else our Kings would not be, what I think they really are,
Absolute Monarchs. But to descend to times less obscure, H. S. B. D. p. 720,
721. and d^in.
it is certain that when the Norman Conqueror first came in, as he Won the
Kingdom by the Sword, so did he Govern it by his Sole Power: His Sword was then
the Sc^pter, and his Will the Law. There was no need on his part, of an Act of
Parliament, much less of calling all the Estates together, to know of them
after what Form, and by what Laws they would be governed. It might as well be
said of him, as in the flourishing, and best times of the Roman Emperors: Quod
Principi placuit, l^gis habet Vigorem, that whatsoever the King Willed, did
pass for Law. This King and some of his Successors being then (...), and having
a Despotical Power on the Lives and Fortunes of their Subjects, which they
disposed of for the benefit of their Friends and Followers; Norman, French and
Flemings, as to them seemed best. But as the Subjects found the Yoke to be too
heavy and insupportable; so they addressed themselves in their Petitions to the
Kings their Sovereigns, to have that Yoke made easier, and their burden
lighter, especially in such particulars, of which they were most sensible at
the present time. By this means they obtained first to have the Laws of Edward
the Confessor; and by the same (that is to say, by pouring out their Prayers
and Desires unto them) did they obtain most of the Laws and Statutes, which are
now remaining of the time of K. Henry the Third and K. Ed. I. From whom a^ also
from Hen. I. and K. John we may derive all those Privileges we now enjoy, most
of which as they were issued at the first, either in form of Charters under the
Great Seal, or else as Proclamations of Grace, and Favor: So do they carry
still this mark of their first procuring by these Expressions the King wills,
the King commands, the King ordains, the King provideth, the King grants,
etc. And when the Kings were pleased to call their Estates together, it was not
out of an opinion, that they could not part with their Power or dispense their
Favors as they thought good, or abate any thing of the Soverity of their
former Government without the approbation and consent of their People; but out
of a just Fear, least any one of the three Estates ((...) mean the Clergy
Nobility and the Commons) should insist on any thing which might be prejudicial
to the other two. The Commons being always on the Craving Part, and Suffering
as much perhaps from their immediate Lords, as from their King, might possibly
have asked Somethings, which were as much derogatory to the Lord (under whom
they held) as of their Sovereign Liege the King, the chief Lord of all. In this
respect the Counsel and Consent as well of the Prelates as the Temporal Lords
was accounted necessary, in passing of all Acts of Grace and Favor to the
People; because that having many Royalties and large Immunities of their own, a
more near relation to the Person, and a greater Interest in the honor of their
Lord, the King; nothing should pass unto the prejudice and diminution of their
own Estates, or the disabling of the King to support his Sovereignty.


F. I confess you have given a plausible Account concerning the Government of
William I. whom you call the Conqueror; whereas if it be more exactly looked
into, it will be found, that he had no more Power of making Laws without the
Consent of his Great Council* than any of his Predecessors; Neither had he any
such Despotical Power as you imagine over the Lives and Fortunes of all his
Subjects; for whether we consider them as Normans, French or Flemmings, or
whether as English, it will be all one; For if as Dr. B. supposes, these latter
were quite turned out of their Estates, and that they were by him wholely given
to the former; then these French and Normans, being Conquerors, together with
him would never have submitted to any other Government than what they enjoyed
in their own Countries, each of which was then governed by Kings or Dukes
together with a Great Council, or Assembly of the Estates; and we find, that
when succeeding Kings would have oppressed and tyrannized over their Heirs and
Descendants, they together with the old English took up Arms, and defended
their Liberties, and never laid them down, until they had obtained their Just
Rights and Liberties contained in the Great Charters of King John, and Henry
the 3d. And which (as Math. Paris himself tells us in the Reign of King John)
contained for the greatest part the Ancient Laws and Customs of the Kingdom;
An. 1215.
And therefore by the Statute, called Confirmatio Chartarum, 25th. Ed. 1st. it
is adjudged in full Parliament, That the Great Charter, and Charter of the
Forest, shall be taken as Common Law. So that they were not any new Grants, but
rather Confirmations of their Ancient Rights and Liberties, as my Lord Coke
very well observes in his excellent Preface to his 2d. Institutes, where he
tells us, that Magna Charta is for the most part declaratory of the Principal
Grounds of the Fundamental Laws of England, and for the Residue, is Additional
to supply some Defects of the Common Law; so that the Learned Chancellor
Fortescue, had very good Reason to affirm in his Treatise, De ^audibus legum
Angliae, that it was then Governed in all King's times, by the same Laws and
Customs, as it is now, with whom likewise agrees one of his Learned Successors,
Chap. 24. p. 110.
the late Earl of Clarendon, in his Survey of the Levi^than, when he tells us,
that those Laws and Customs which were before the Conquest, are the same which
this Nation or Kingdom have bin ever since governed by to this Day.

And as for the Laws of Edward the Confessor, though it is true, that William
the Conqueror Re-granted and Confirmed them; Yet was it no more than what he
was obliged in conscience and honor to perform and observe, since he was
admitted to the Crown by the General Consent of the Clergy, Nobility, and
People, and at his Coronation (as well as afterward) swore to observe the Laws
of King Edward; And by the way, tho these Laws are called the Laws of King
Edward, yet William of Malmsbury long since observed, That they were called his
Laws, Non qu^ ^ulit, sed quas observaverit, that is, he had only collected them
into one body, and ratified them with the Assent of his Great Council. And that
these Laws were more than once sworn to, and confirmed by King William himself,
appears by the Story of Frederick Abbot of St. Albans, who frighted him into a
confirmation of them by Oath, for fear of a general Insurrection of the People:
So that if he, or his Son Rufus made any Bre^ches upon their Liberties, they
were, as it were, ex post liminio restored to them by the Magna Charta's of
Hen. I. K. Stephen, K. Hen. II. K. John, and K. Hen. the III. And those
oppressions contrary thereunto, are branded by all Historians as Notorious
Perjuries, and Wrongs to the Subjects.

But that King William the First altered nothing material in the Fundamental
Constitutions of the Government, whatever he might do in some less material
Customs, or Laws; which he brought with him out of his own Country, appears
plainly by this, which you cannot deny that he often assembled his Great
Council (as his English Predecessors had done) and that in them were dispatched
all the Great Causes and Complaints of the Kingdom. And for this I will give
you the Testimony of two very ancient Historians. Hist. Ang. Script. X. Col.
483.
The first is R^dolphus de Diceto, who in Anno 1071, tells us, That the Plaint
of Wulstan Bishop of Worcester, was heard and ended in Consilio celebrato in
loco qui vocatur Pedreds, coran Rege, and Doroberniae Archiepiscopo, and
Primatibus totius Regni. The next is Gervasius Dorobernensis, who thus relates
it, Lanfranc Archbishop of Canterbury, Ib. Col. 1653.
Eligentib^s eum Senioribus ejusdem Ecclesiae, and Episcopis, at Priacipibus,
Clero, and Populo Angliae, in Curia Regis, in Assumptione Sand^ Mariae. Here
the Episcopi and Principes, Bishops and Princes, the Cleri and Populus, the
Clergy and People, or Laity, were the same Persons, and only expressive of one
another, and all had Votes in this Election.


M. I pray give me leave to interrupt you a little. I will not deny but that
the Conqueror did often assemble Great Councils of his Bishops, and Great
Lords commonly called in Historians Principes, or Primates, B. A. P.
yet I think I may boldly affirm that there were no Englishmen in those
Councils, or that they made any Laws for the Benefit of Englishmen, who were
kept under by those Normans who then enjoyed their Estates; much less was there
any such thing as Commons either by themselves, or their Representatives in
those Assemblies, which then consisted wholly of the King's Feudal Tenants in
Capite, and of no other as Dr. B. has very plainly shown us: And when King
William made Laws, it is much to be doubted whether he made them so much as
with the Consent of his Great Council, or not; for the Title to the French and
Latin Copies of his Laws runs thus, put into English, I.E.M.G. page 206.
These are the Laws and Customs which William the King granted to all his
People of England after the Conquest or Subduing of the Land: They are the same
which Edward the King his Kinsman before him observed. In this Preface we have
only to note, that the Laws are expressly said to be the King's Grant, and the
Supplemental Laws writ in the Red Book of the Exchequer, are by way of Charter,
or Grant, thus, Wilhelmus Rex Anglorum, etc. Omnibus hominibus suis Francis,
and Anglis, salutem, and all along the Authoritative parts are expressed by
Statuimus, volumus, interdicimus, probibemus, praecipimus. So that by these
Expressions in his Laws, the absolute sovereignty of the Conqueror in the point
of Law-giving is manifest. I shall content my self with a very few Authorities,
because the matter is so plain; Ordoricus Vitalis says thus, Eamque (i. e.
England) Gulielmus Rex suis Legibus commodo subegit. Fol. 853.
And Eadm^r, Contemporary with the Conqueror in his History, thus, Fol. 6.
Vsus atque leges, quas patres sui, and ipse in Normannia soleb^nt, in Anglia
scribere volens. Cuncta divina, simul and humana ejus nutum expectabant. From
whence you may see that all matters, as well Spiritual as Temporal, depended
upon his sole will.

And tho we have no particular account of what Laws his Son William Rufus made,
yet we may presume according to the Testimony of Historians, that he was
altogether as absolute in those Councils he called as his Father, Eadmer. Hist.
Novel. L. 1.
as may be seen in Eadmerus his account of his Transactions with Archbishop
Anselm. So that it is certain he governed by his own absolute Authority,
raising what money he pleased upon his Subjects: It Is true, that in the Reign
of his Successor Henry the First, the People found some little relaxation, by
reason of the Charter he made them, containing several mitigations of the
severity of the Feudal Laws, as also those of Forests, yet even these are said
to be made, by his own single Grant and Authority, tho I confess it was granted
in a great Council. So likewise in Florence of Worcester, we find that in 28
th. of Hen. I. That King confirmed the Acts of a Synod or Council of the Clergy
of the Province of Canterbury, Page 503.
and gave his Royal Assent to them.

As for King Stephen, tho he was a Notorious Usurper, and Set up, I.E.M.G. Page
215.
and Crowned by a Faction of Bishops, and some few Temporal Lords, and that not
long after his Coronation he in a Great Council at Oxford granted to all his
Subjects another Charter of diverse Privileges, and Freedoms from the former
Exactions* yet the words of the Charter are in his own name, and by his own
authority solely, as appears by these words, Observari praecipio, and
constituo. But Richard, Prior of Hexham, alias Hagulstad in his Chronicle,
closes his Charter thus, vid. X. Scrip. Col. 314. Anno 1136.
Haec omnia concedo, and confirmo salva Regia, and justa Dignitate mea. From
which words it is plain, that he never meant to part with any of the just and
necessary Prerogatives of his Crown.

viz. Spelm. Council. Tom. 2. fol. 54.
So likewise King Henry the Second in a Great or General Council held at London,
confirmed the Great Charter granted by King Henry the First, his Grandfather;
but this Charter also runs wholly in the King's own name, without any mention
of its being assented to, either by the Bishops or Nobles: And as for the
Constitutions made at the Great Council of Clarendon, tho that King made the
Archbishops, Bishops, with all the Clergy, as also the Earls, Barons, and
Nobility, all swear to observe them, yet the Enacting part proceeded only from
the King; as appears by their very Title thus, Assissae Henrici Regis factae
apud Clarendon, etc. And Mat. Paris concludes these Constitutions with,
Decrevit enim Rex. From whence it appears, that it was the King alone that
decreed and Constituted those Laws.

I shall not say much of the Great Councils in Richard the First's time, since,
he did not reign long enough to call many, In R. Hoveden. Page 419.
but in that held at Notingham, we find, that the King diseized Gerard de
Canville and others, and that the King appointed to be given him two Shillings
on every Carucate of Land throughout England, etc. From whence I shall observe,
that the words Rex praecepit, consti^uit, etc. as they are in this Historian,
show, that the King then had solely the Authoritative Power of passing all
Consultations of these Councils into binding Laws, even where money was to be
levied on the Subjects, and that seizure was to be made of their Estates. But
to come to the more troublesome and perplexed Reign of King John, in which there
were many Great Councils holden, yet I shall instance but in some few of them
mentioned in Mat. Paris, Fol. 201.
as that of St. Albans held by Ieffery Fitzpeter, and the Bishop of Winchester
in this King's Absence, where ex part Regis it was firmly enjoined under
penalty of Life and Limb, that the Laws of King Henry his Grandfather should be
kept by all in his Kingdom. From whence we may observe, that the Laws had their
force only from the King's Authority, as appears by this expression, ex part
Regis firmi^er est praeceptum. And when afterward at Runningmead he was
compelled to sign the first Magna Charta, I own it was done in a Great Council
of Bishops, Earls and Barons, as well those who stood for him, as against him.
Yet that it proceeded wholly from his own good will, is plain from the Charta
de Foresta of this King, as appears by these words, Ad emendationem Regui
nostri, spontanea, and bona voluntate nostra dedianus, concessimus pro nobis,
and haredibus nostris, has libertates subscriptas. From all which Charters of
Liberties we may conclude, I. E. M. G. P. 211.
that the Petitions of the People were drawn into the form of a Charter, and
passed under the King's Seal, as his mere voluntary free Grants, and
Concessions, without their Votes, Suffrages, and Authority. And sometimes such
Rights or Liberties have been bestowed and declared by our Kings by way of
answer to the Petitions of the Lords, and Commons, and that this custom is not
yet discontinued appears by the Answer of K. Charles the first to the Petition
of Right, when no other answer would please the Commons, but the King's
expressed Assent to their Petition in these words: Sole Dro^^t faict comme es^
desire. But to return to the Reign of Henry the Third.


F. I beseech you, Sir, give me leave now to answer what you have already
alleged out of our Hi^^o^i^ns for the Supreme and Absolute Power of our Kings,
before we proceed further to less obscure times. And therefore I must tell you,
that you have in this long speech of yours, made use of all the Artifice of an
Advocate for a Party, viz. in urging all that can any way make for you, and
slyly passing over whatsoever may make against you. And to begin with your
story of King William the First, I shall not now dispute whether there were any
Englishmen in those Great Councils, or whether they consisted only of Tenants
in Capite, since I shall defer that Question till anon. But as for the English
you have put upon the French Title of the Laws of this King, it is not fairly
rendered; for in the French it is, Apres le Conquest d^ la ^erre, which does not
always signify a subduing by force, but by any other ways of acquisition
different from that of Hereditary Succession; which Mat. Paris was long since
aware of, Matt. Paris, Page 941.
when, writing of this King, he says, Rex Angl^ae ex Conquestu dicitur, tame^
quod beatus Edwardus, co quod haerede caruit, Regnum legavi^ Willielmo Bastardo
Duci Normannorum. Sir Hen. Spell. Gloss. Tit. Conquestus.
With whom Sir Henry Spellman in his Glossary agrees, Willielmus primus
Conquestor dicitur, quia Angliam conquisivit, i. e. acquisivit, purchased, ^on
quod subegit. And the learned Sir John Skene in his Book de verborum
significatione, Page 39. Tit. Conquest.
writes thus, Conquestus, signifyes Lands qui^ilk any Person acquiri^ and
Possess^s, privato Iure, vel singulari titulo, vel donatione, vel singulari
oliquo contractu. And therefore I very much doubt, whether or no, the Latin,
Version of these words, Apres le Conquest d^ la verre, post subactam tetram, be
as ancient as the French Original, and be not rather the Version of some Clerk
or Monk who lived long after.

But whether these Laws were not intended as well for the benefit of the
English as Norman Subjects, I appeal to this Title it self; tho you have
omitted part of it, V. Leges Guil. I. Edit. ad sinem Lambardi Archaionom. per
Rog. Twisden.
Hae sunt Leges and Consuetudines quas Gulielmus Rex concessit Vniverso Populo
Angliae post subactam terram. So that unless the English were none of the
People of England, these Laws were as well intended for the one as the other.
And I appeal to that Charter of King William you have now quoted, whether or
no, it does not begin, Omnibus hominibus suit Francis and Anglis; by which
words certainly the English as well as Normans had an interest in those Laws
and Privileges therein granted. I mention this only by the by in answer to
what you have said.

But to return to what I am chiefly concerned to speak of, The King's sole
Legislative Power in the first place. I shall not deny, but as this Kingdom is
a limited Monarchy, so it is suitable to the Honor and Dignity of the Monarch,
that all Laws and Constitutions should run in his Name, and are often said to
be made by him, tho in a Political or Legal Sense, they could not be made
without the advice and consent of his Great Council, or Parliament. And that
this was the custom in the time of William the First, as of all others his
Successors, I need quote only the 55 th. Ibid. p. 170.
Law of this King in these words: Prout Statu^um est eis, (scil. Liberis
hominibus) and illis a nobis datum and concessum jure haereditario in
perpetuum, per Commune Concilium totius Reg^i ^^stri praedicti. From whence you
may observe that this King could not then make Laws, without the Consent of the
Common Council of his whole Kingdom. And tho he might do many Arbitrary and
Illegal things to the prejudice of the Old English Liberties, yet this was no
more his Right, nor any more to be quoted as a precedent, than his Seizing upon
the Bishops, and Abbots Lands, and violently taking away the Pla^e out of
Churches and Monasteries (as Historians tell us he did) could give him a Right
to them.

I have not much to observe upon the Reign of William Rufus, since we have none
of his Laws left us, if ever he made any. But thus much we plainly find from
the Historians, and especially Eadmerus, that he called divors Great Councils
of all the Nobility of the Kingdom; especially about his difference with
Anselm. whom it is plain he could not condemn without the Consent of this Great
Council. But to come to the Reign of King Henry the First, it appears plainly
by W. Malmsbury and Mat. Paris, that he was Elected and Crowned King by the
Common Suffrages, and favor of the Clergy and People; and certainly that
Council whose Vote^ could make a King, was also necessary to all such Laws as
he was to make: And you your self have granted, that this Charter of his was
made in a Great Council; and it appears in Mat. Paris, as also in the Laws of
this King published by Mr. Lambard, P. P. R. C. Page 62.
Tha^ the Archbishops, Bishops, Barons, Earls, Vicounts, or Sheriff^,
Optimates, and totius Reg^i Angliae, were Witnesses to this Charter. And I can
tell you of a very ancient Charta moderationis feodi Magni Sigilli. An^, 1.
Johan. in Ar^hivis Cant. Archiepiscopo.
Charter of King John, which recites that those Laws were made de Communi
Consilio, and Assensu Baronum Regni Angliae. It being usual in succeeding Ages
at the Coronations of our English Kings to confirm, make and ordain Laws, de
Assensu Baronum Regni, vel per Commune Concilium Regni, i. e. the Parliament as
it was afterward called.

As for Henry the Second's Reign it is apparent by the Laws of this King in
Spellman's Councils, that he granted his Charter in a Great or General Council,
and consequently they must likewise give their Assents to it, as well as to
that of his Grandfather Henry the First. And tho in the Constitutions of
Clarendon, the King alone is said to have made, on decreed them, yet nothing is
plainer than that the King could not make them, without the advice and consent
of his Great Council, or else to what purpose were they to be called; and if
their Assent was necessary, certainly they had also a ^^nd in making those
Constitutions.

But that the King could not condemn any Peer, or Great man of the Kingdom in
those days, without a Legal Trial in the Great Council of the Kingdom, I need
go no further than a Council Summoned by Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury, as
the King's Commissioner in his absence, where Log. Hoveden tells us, that
having showed the Letters of Earl John, to the Bishops, Earls and Barons, per
Commune Concilium Regni definitum est, quod Comes Johannes dissaisietur, which
interprets that passage you have quoted out of the same Author, that the King
in a Great Council disseized Gerard Canville, and others, that is by the
Authority and Sentence of the said Council. And so likewise in the same sense
is to be understood, those words you mentioned, the King appointed to be given
him, constituit sibi dari, two Shillings on every Plough-land; that is, he
desired it to be given him by them. For if he could have taken it without their
Consent, to what purpose did he propose it there? if he could have absolutely
demanded it, why should he only request or desire it of them?

So likewise for the Great Council in King John's time, nothing is more plain,
than that they were parties to all the Laws that were made in his time, and
that even the Great Charter, was a Statute to which their Assent was likewise
necessary, I shall show you by and by, when I come to speak of the Great
Chrrter of King Henry the Third, and the several Confirmations of it by his
Successors. But if either William Rufus, King John, or any other King, ever
levied any Taxes upon the People, without consent of the Great Council, or
Parliament, it was contrary to our ancient Laws, and the Liberties of the
Subjects, and particularly to the 55 th. Law of William the First (part of
which I have already cited) it begins thus, Volumus etiam ac firmiter
praecipimus and concedimus, ut omnes liberi homines totius Monarchiae Regni
nostri praedicti habea^t, and teneant terras suas, and p^ssessiones suas, been
and in pace libere ab omni exactione injusta, and ab omni Tallagio; ita quod
nihil ab ois exigatur, vel capiatur, nisi Servitium suum liberum, quod de jure
nobis facere debent, and facere tenentur, and prout statutum est eis, etc. So
that whatsoever was done at any time contrary to this Statute, was illegal, and
consequently ought not to be quoted as any part of the King's Prerogative. But
that the Nobility and People of England had diverse Rights and Liberties before
the time of King John, and of his granting that Charter, appears by its
conclusion, in these words, In Mat. Paris in vita R. Johannis, Page 259, 30.
Salvis Archiepiscopis Abbatibus, Prioribus, Templariis, Hospitalar^is,
Comitibus Baronibus, Militibus, and omnibus aliis tam Ecclesiasticis, Personis
quam sec^laribus libertatibus, quas prius hab^erunt. And as for the rest of the
Liberties granted by this Charter, tho they are said to have been granted from
the King's mere good will, yet that is recited only to make it more strong
against himself, since the Nobility and People of England claimed those
Liberties as their ancient, undoubted Right. And the same Author (as I have
already hinted) expressly tells us, Idem 254.
that this Charter contained, Maxima ex part leges antiquas. -- And a little
lower he relates where those Liberties were to be found, Capitula quoque legum,
and libertatum quae ibi Magnates confirmari quaerebant partim in Charta Regis
Henrici superius scripta sunt, partimque ex Legibus Regis Edwardi a^^iquis
excerpta. So that they were not only the effect of the King's mere Grace and
Favor, as you suppose. But if you please now to descend to the Reign of Henry
the Third, and so downward, from which time our Eldest Printed Statutes bear
Date, let us see if I cannot answer all those Arguments which the Gentlemen of
your opinion have thence brought for the King's Sole Legislative Power.


M. Tho I do not allow of your notion of the Conqueror's not being properly and
really so, as I shall show you another time, when I shall more particularly
consider that Argument of the Right of Conquest in King William, and all his
Successors; therefore I do at present readily assent to your Proposal, and it
was the very thing I was coming to. And therefore I shall begin with the Magna
Charta of Henry the Third, which begins thus, Know ye, that We of our Mere and
Free Will have given these Liberties. The Statute de Scaccario Anno 51 Hen. 3.
begins thus, The King commands that all manner of Bailiffs, etc. The Statute
de Districtione Scaccarii made the same year runs thus: It is Provided and
Ordained. The King wills. The Statute of Marlbridge 52, Hen. 3. And he, i. e.
the King has appointed all these Acts, Ordinances and Statutes to be observed
of all his Subjects. If we come to the Reign of his Son Edward I. and begin
with the Statute of Westminster I. it is there said in the Preamble, These are
the Acts of King Edward I. made at his first Parliament by his Council, and by
the Assent of the Archbishops, Bishops, etc. And in the first Chapter it is
said, The King has Ordained, and Established these Acts. And tho I grant that
in diverse Statutes of this King, at in this of Westminster, it is recited that
the King by the advice of his Counsel or Assent of the Archbishops, Bishops,
Earls, Barons, etc. have Made, Provided, Ordained, or Established such and such
Laws; yet it is plain, that the Enacting or Decreeing part is wholly ascribed
to the King in all those Statutes wherein such words are found, as I shall make
it appear more plainly by the Statute of Act on Burnel made in 13 Edw. I. where
it is said, The King by himself, and all his Council has Ordained and
Established. And in the Statute of Westminster, 3.18 Edw. I. Chap. I. Our Lord
the King, in his Parliament at Westminster, at the Instance of the Great Men of
the Realm, has Granted, Provided and Ordained. In the Statute De iis, qui
ponendi sunt in Assizes, 21 Edw. I. Our Lord the King in his Parliament holden,
etc. has Ordained that, etc. The Statute of Quo Warranto 18. Edw. I. runs
thus, Our Lord the King, at his Parliament holden at Westminster, of his
special Grace, and for the Affection he bears unto his Prelates, Earls and
Barons, has granted, That, etc. I Edw. II. begins thus, Our Lord the King has
Granted. The Statute of Gavelet, 10 Edw. II. begins thus, It is provided by our
Lord the King, and his Justices. The Statute of Carlisle, 15 Edw. II. begins
thus, The King unto the Justices of his B^nch, sends Greeting. Whereas of
^ate We have Ordained, etc.

But if we come to the Reign of his Son Edw. 3d. The Prefaces to most of the
Statutes made in his Reign, run thus. Our Lord the King, by the Assent of the
Prelates, Earls, etc. and at the Request of his People, has granted and
established, or else at the Request of the Commonality, has ordained, etc. The
like Style continued during the Reigns of Richard the 2d. Henry 4th. and Henry
5th. with very little Alteration, only it was commonly at the Request of the
Prelates, D^kes, Earls and Barons, and at the Instance and Special Request of
the Commons, the King has Ordained, etc. Whereby we see a plain difference in
the Phrases of the Statutes of those times: for it is the Lords that give their
Assent, whereas the Commons only Petitioned; but it is the King alone, who
Ordains and Establishes. I confess indeed, that under some Princes of bad
Titles, as in particular, under the Minority of Henry 6th. there began some
Alteration in the form of penning the Enacting part of most Statutes that were
then made, and that unto those usual words, which were inserted ordinarily into
the Body of the Acts, from the beginning of the Reign of that King, S. B. R. p.
721.
viz. by the Advice and Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temp^ral, and at the
Special Instance and Request of the Commons, there was added by the Authority
of the said Parliament. But it is still to be observed, that though these words
were added to the former Clause, yet the Power of Granting and Ordaining, was
still acknowledged to belong to the King alone, as appears by these Acts of
Parliament of that King, viz. the 3d. Henry 6th. Chapter 2. 8th. Hen. 6. Chap. 3.
Where it is said, our Lord the King, by the Advice and Assent, and at the
Request aforesaid, has ordained and granted, or Ordained and Established by
the Authority of this Parliament. And thus, it generally stood (but every
General Rule, may have some Exceptions) till the beginning of the Reign of
Henry 7th. about which time, that usual Clause at the Special Instance or
Request of the Commons, began by little and little, to be lai^ aside, and that
of their Advice or Assent, to be inserted in the place thereof: For which I do
refer you to the Statute-Book at large; which Form, I confess, continues to
this day, yet even in Hen. 7ths. time, in the first of that King, and the 7th.
Chap. it runs in this Style. The King our Sovereign Lord, of his Noble and
Abundant Grace, by the Advice and Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
at the Supplication of the Commons in the said Parliament Assembled, and by
Authority of the same, Ordains. And though the Statutes of Hen. 8th. do
generally agree in their Style, with those of his Father: Yet in his time also,
many Acts were drawn up in Form of Petitions, as 3 Hen. 8th. c. 14. Prayen your
Highness, the Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and 5 Hen. 8. c. 4.
Prayen the Commons in this present Parliament: And in the Reign of his Son ^d.
6th. though I grant, that most of his Acts do run in the usual Form; yet this one
is very Remarkable, I Edw. 6. c. 4. Wherefore the King our Sovereign Lord, etc.
At the Humble Petition and Suit of the Lords and Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, does Declare, Ordain and Enact by the Assent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament Assembled,
and by the Authority of the same: Which last words, S.B.D. p. 722.
though they may seem to refer to the Parliament, and may make Men think, that
the Lords and Commons did then pretend some Title unto the Power of making
Laws: Yet neither Adviseing nor Assenting are so Opperative in the present
Case, as to Transfer the Power of making Laws, to such as do advise about them,
or assent unto them; nor can the Alteration of the Forms and Styles used in
Ancient times, import an Alteration of the Form of Government, unless it can be
showed (as I think it cannot) that any of our Kings did Renounce that power
which properly and solely did belong unto them, or did by any Solemn Act of
Communication, confer the same upon the Lords and Commons convened in
Parliament: And therefore upon the whole matter, F.F.G.I. p. 41.
since in almost all our most Ancient Statutes; it is precisely expressed, that
they were made by the King himself, the meaning of those general words used in
latter times, that the Statutes are made by Authority of Parliament, are
particularly explained in former Statutes, viz. that the King Ordains, the
Lords Advise, the Commons Consent, as by comparing the Writs with the Statutes
that expound the Writs, will evidently appear.


F. In answer to those Authorities, you have now brought; I doubt not, but I
shall give you others of as great weight, that prove the direct contrary to
what you now Assert. To begin with your Instance of Magna Charta, I shall show
that those Charters that were granted and confirmed by Henry 3d. were not his
Acts or Grants alone; but the Grants also of the whole Kingdom, Represented in
Parliament. We have two Express Declarations for the one, Mem. 38.
in the 25th of King Edw. (...) Where is to be found in the Parliament Roll of
that Year, a Confirmation of the Great Charter of Liberties and Forests, in
these Words which I shall render to you in English, out of the Old French, for
your better understanding. Know ye, that the Honor of God, and Holy Church,
and for the profit of our whole Realm: We have granted for us, and to our
Heirs, that the Great Charter of Franchises and Forests, which were made by the
Common Assent of the whole Realm, in the time of King Henry our Father, should
be held in all Points, without any Blemishment. So likewise we find another
Confirmation of those Charters in the Parliament Rolls, N. 50. Dorso.
of the 15th. of Edw. 3d. which being in Old French, I shall render it into
English: Imprimi^, it is Accorded and Assented, that the Franchise of Holy
Church, and the Great Charter of Forest, and the other Statutes made by our
said Lord the King, and his Progenitors, the Peers, and the Commons of the
Land, for the Common profit of the People, shall be firmly kept and maintained
in all Points. So that you may hence plainly see, that the King himself, with
the whole Parliament, declare, and that in two several King's Reigns, that the
Great Charters were not only the Free Grants of King Henry; but also the Joint
Acts of the Common Council of the whole Kingdom, and why King John's Charter
should not be made by the like Authority, being one of his Progenitors: I see
no reason, especially if we consider, that that Charter was first drawn up by
the Barons in the Form, in which we find it; and was past by that King, under
his Great Seal, in that vast General Council, or Assembly at Running-Mead. And
certainly, whoever can draw up a Law, and can offer it to a Prince to Confirm,
and without which consent of theirs, it would not be good, must necessarily
have a share in the making of it.

As for your other Instances of those Old Statutes made in the Reign of He^.
3d. though I grant they begin as you say, in the Kings Name: Yet if you would
but have read a little further, you would have found that in diverse of them,
the Bishops* Earls and Barons, gave their Consents to them. And for the Proof
of this, I shall begin with one of the Antientest Statutes we have left us, 20
H. 3.
viz. that of Merton, in the Preamble of which, it is recited, Provisum est in
Curia Domini Regis apud Merton, where after the parties that were present at
the making of the Laws, it concludes thus in the Latin Copies, ita provisum est
and Concessum tam a praedictis Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Comitibus, Baronibus
quam ab ipso Rege, and aliis, where you see the Providing and Enacting Part* is
Ascribed to the Bishops, Earls and Barons, as well as to the King, who is here
mentioned almost last of all. And though I confess that there was then no Set
Form of Penning of Statutes in that honest and plain Age, when Parliaments did
not last so many Days, as they do now Weeks, and that the King's Judges and
Council, drew up the Acts after the Parliament was up, in what Form they
pleased; sometimes leaving out any mention of the Bishops, sometimes of the
Temporal Lords, and most commonly of the Commons: Yet that they did all give
their Consents to such Acts, appears by the Statute of Westminster the 1st.
which you have already Cited where the Assent of the Archbishops, Bishops,
etc. Counts, Earls, Barons, and all the Commonalty of the Land, is expressly
mentioned. So likewise the Statute of 51. of King H. 3d. concerning Measures,
begins thus. Per ordinationes totius Regni Angliae fuit mensura Domini Regis
composita.

But farther to convince you, that in the Opinion of the Lord Chancellor, and
those Learned Judges who framed the Writs that were issued out upon any of
these Ancient Statutes, you will find that they who lived in those very times,
believed that those Statutes were made, not by the K. alone; but by him and the
Common Council of the Kingdom, which Writs as you may see in the Register of
Writs, run thus. Rex Vicecom. etc. Salut. Si A. fecerit, etc. tunc summonias,
etc. B. quod sit coram Iusticiarijs, Vi. Regist. Brev. p. 174. and dein. per
tot. Titulum Brevia de Statuto.
etc. Ostensuris quare, cum de Communi Concilio Regni Nostri Angliae provisum
sit, etc. as you may see in the Writs Granted upon the Statutes of Magna
Charta, Marlbridg, Merton, Gloucester, etc. which have all of them this, or the
like Recitals, cum de Statuto, or juxia formam Statuti, de Communi Concilio
Regni nostri Ang. inde provisi. The like Instance I could give you, upon the
Statute of Marlbridge, and diverse other Old Statutes, in which the King by the
Statute it self, seems only to have Enacted it, and yet you may see, that our
Sages of the Law, were very well Convinced, that those Statutes were made not
by the King alone; but by the whole Common Council of England: So that there is
no avoiding the Conclusion, that the Great Council or Parliament had then a
Great Share in the Legislative Power, unless you can suppose the King alone, to
have bin the whole Common Council of the Kingdom, mentioned in these Writs.

But as for the rest of your Instances of Edw. 2d. and Edw. 3ds times: I think
I can show you, that there is no General Rule to be drawn from some few
Examples; For though it is very true, that the first of Edw. 2d. begins thus,
Our Lord the King has granted, etc. Yet it is plain by the Statute it self,
that it was made in, and by, Parliament. The like I may say of the rest of the
Statutes of this King's Reign, though they do not all agree in Form, as you may
see by the Statute of Sheriffs 9th. Edw. 2d. Our Lord the King by the Assent of
the Prelates, Earls, Barons and other Great Estates, has Ordained and
Established. And though you would fain draw some mighty Consequence from those
Phrases in the Statutes of Edw. 3d. and many of his Successors, by the Assent
of the Lords, and at the Request of the Commons, as if the Consent of the
latter, were not as necessary as the former: Yet indeed it is a mere difference
in Form, and proceeds only from hence, that that Estate which found it self
grieved, always Petitioned the King for Redress; and which amounted to as much
as a Consent: For you shall always find, that the Petitioning Part still refers
to that Body which was then oppressed, without giving any other Assent: For
certainly their Requesting to have an Act made, does necessarily express their
Consent. And to prove what I have now said by Examples, pray see the 8th of
Hen. 6. c. 1. Where it is Recited in the Preamble, that our Sovereign Lord the
King, Willing Graciously to provide for the Security and Quiet of the said
Prelates and Clergy, at the Supplication of the said Prelates, etc. and of the
Assent of the Great Men and Commons aforesaid, has Ordained and Establishs't,
where you may see that the Assent of the Prelates, is not here at all
mentioned; because it was needless, as being made at their Request. And if
Praying and Requesting, should destroy the Legislative Power, I doubt whether
Edw. 3d. did not give away his, when in his 14th. Year, in a Statute concerning
the Subsidy of Wools: The Preamble runs thus, nevertheless the King prays the
Earls, Barons and all the Commonalty, for the Great Business which he has in
Hand, etc. that they would grant him some Aid upon Wools, Leather, etc. Where
upon Deliberation being bad, the said Prelates, Barons and Commons of the
Kingdom, have Granted him 40 Shillings to be taken on every Sack of Wool.

But to return to the Matter, to let you see that not only the Commons but also
the Lords have bin oftentimes Petitioners, as well as the Commons, Pray see
these Authorities. The 1 is the Statute of Provisors 27 Edw. 3d. runs thus. Our
Sovereign Lord the King, with the Assent and Prayers of the Great Men, and the
Commons of the Realm of England, has ordained, etc. And in the 4th. of Ed.
4th. i. e. It is Recited thus. The King by the Assent, Advice, Request and
Authority of his Lords Spiritual, Temporal and Commons, etc. has Ordained and
Established in the Preamble of the Statute of 1. Edw. 6. c. 4. it is thus.
Wherefore the King our Sovereign Lord, minding and entirely desiring -- at the
Humble Petition, and Suit of the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament
Assembled, does Declare, Ordain and Enact, by the Assent of the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and by the
Authority of the same. And that the Assent of the Commons, was always necessary
to the making of Laws, not as bare Petitioners, but as Assenters too, as well
as the Lords, appears by this Protestation, or Declaration of the Commons, N.
46.
to Edw. 3d. which is still to be found in the Parliament Rolls of 51. of that
King; which I shall read to you in English, out of the Law-French; which
perhaps you are not used to; Also the said Commons do Petition our Lord the
King, that no Statute or Ordinance may be made, or Granted at the Petition of
the Clergy, unless it be by the Assent of the Commons; Neither that the said
Commons should be obliged by any Constitution, which they may make for their
Advantage, without the Assent os the said Commons: For they will not be obliged
to any of your (viz. the Kings) Statutes or Ordinances made without their
Assent.


M. I do not deny, but that the Assent of the Commons, as well as Lords, has
bin allowed as necessary for a long time: But whether the Consent of either, at
first was so, is a great doubt, since we find the first Ancient Statutes (as I
have already observed) to have bin made wholly by the King alone: And I think
the most Ancient Laws, are the best Interpreters of the Original Legislative
Power: F.F.G.I p. 50.
And thence it appears, that many Provisions, Ordinances and Proclamations made
heretofore out of Parliament, have bin always acknowledged for Laws and
Statutes. We have among the Printed Statutes to this purpose, one called the
Statute of Ireland, Dated at Westminster, the 9th. of February, 14 Hen. 3d.
Which is nothing but a Letter of the King to Gerard, Fitz Maurice, Justiciar of
Ireland. The Explanations of the Statute of Gloucester, made by the King, and
his Justices only, were received always for Statutes, and are still printed
with them: Also the Statute made for the Correction of the 12th. Chapter of the
Statute of Gloucester, was Signed under the Great Seal, and sent to the
Justices of the Bench, after the manner of a Writ Patent; with a Certain Writ
closed, Dated by the King's Hand at Westminster, 2 Mai^ 9 Edw. I. Requiring,
that they should do, and Execute all and every thing contained in it, Ibid. p.
51.
though the same does not accord with the Statute of Gloucester in all things.
19 Hen. 3d. a Provision was made, de assisa praesentationis, which was
continued and allowed for a Law, until the Statute of Westminster 2 which
provides the contrary in express words. So that in the Old Statutes, it is hard
to Distinguish what Laws were made by Kings in Parliament, and what out of
Parliament, especially, when Kings called the Peers only to Parliament, and of
those how many, or whom they pleased (as it appears Anciently they did) it was
no easy matter to put a Difference between a Council Table, and a Parliament,
or between a Proclamation and a Statute. Not but that I own in Old Times, there
was a Distinction between the Kings Special, or Privy Council, and the
Common Council of the Kingdom; and yet his Special Council did Sit with the
Peers in Parliament, and were as part thereof, and were of Great and
Extraordinary Authority there, as may appear by diverse Acts of Parliament, some
of which I have already Recited, as the Statute of Westminster I. Where it is
said: These are the Acts of Edward, made at his I. Parliament, by his Council.
The Statute of Acton Burnel, 13 Ed. 1st. has these words: The King for
himself, and by his Council, has Ordained and Established: And in Articulis
Super Chartas, there are these Provisions. Nevertheless, the King and his
Council do not intend: And both the King and his Council, and all they that
were present, Will and Intend, that the Right and Prerogative of his Crown,
shall be saved to him in all things. 1 E. 3. Stat. 2. preamb.
And before these, the Commons often Petitioned the King: As 1 Edw. 3d. where
Magna Charta was confirmed, the Preamble is thus: At the Request of the
Commonalty by their Petition made before the King, and his Council in
Parliament by the Assent of the Prelates, Earls and Barons, etc. I could give
you many more Examples of this Kind, but that it is needless, only these may
suffice to let you see, That the King's Council had a Great Authority in those
times, and perhaps was more Ancient than the Great Council it self.

Yet I cannot forbear to give you one or two Author^t^es more to prove*
I.E.M.G. p. 234.
that the King with the Advice and Consent of a Council of his Earls, Barons,
and other Wise Men, has sometimes taken upon him to Rep^^^ a^ the Statutes
made in a Precedent Parliament, as contrary to the Laws and Customs of this
Realm; and to his Prerogatives, and Rights Royal, though Granted by him in
manner of a Statute. And for this, Pult. p. 111.
you may see the Statute of 15th. Edward the 3d. at large in Pulton's
Collection. So likewise in the Preface of the Statute of Westminster, 20 E. 3.
that We, viz. The King by the Assent of our Great Men, and other Wise Men of
our Council* have Ordained, etc. Where you may observe, that here is no mention
either of Lords Temporal or Commons. I could give you more Examples of this
kind, were it not too tedious. From which statutes, it seems plain to me, that
this King did sometimes Exercise a Prerogative of Making and Repealing Laws,
without Consent of Parliament.

In the next place, I desire you to take notice that these words you so much
rely upon (viz.) by the Authority of this present Parliament, H.S.B.D. p. 721.
and be it Enacted by the King, Lords and Commons, as if they were three
Coordinate Estates, was never in use, till the Reign of Hen. 6th, and Hen.
7th. two Notorious Usurpers. And that the King's Single Answer to the Lords and
Commons Request, is a Sufficient Act of Parliament, without any mention of the
Concurrent Authority of the Lords and Commons Enacting the same the President I
gave you of King Charles's Answer to the Petition of Right, may suffice, though
you have not vouchsafed to give me any Return to it. So that I think these
Instances may serve instead of many Arguments; for the proof of this Truth,
that the Legislative Power (as We Phrase it now) is wholly and solely in the
King, although Restrained in the Exercise and use thereof, by constant Custom
unto the Counsel and Consent of the Lords and Commons: For Le Roy le veult, or
the King will have it so, is the Imperative Phrase, by which the Propositions
of the Lords and Commons, are made Acts of Parliament. And let the Lords and
Commons Agitate, and propound what Laws they please for their Ease and Benefit
(as generally all Laws and Statutes are more for the Ease and Benefit of the
Subject, than the Advantages of the King) yet as well now, as formerly, in the
time of the Roman Emperors, only, quod Principi placet, Legis habet Vigorem,
nothing but that which the King pleases to allow of, is to pass for Law: The
Laws not taking their Coercive force (as Judicious Hooke^, well observes) from
the Quality of such as Devise them; H.D.L. p. 49.
but from the Power that gives them the Strength of Laws. So that to Determine
the matter Logically: The Legislative Power, is either largely and improperly,
or Strictly, and Properly taken: Largely taken, it signifies any Power, which
has the Authority to provide the Materials of a Law, and to Judge what is
Just, Convenient or Necessary to be Enacted; and to declare when any Matters
duly prepared, are made and granted into a Law; and this Ministerial sort of
Legislative Power improperly so called, the two Houses have, and Exercise yet
by Authority front the Grown: But then the Legislative Power, is Strictly and
Properly taken for the Power of Sanction, or for that Commanding, Ordaining,
Power, which gives Life, and Being to the Law, and force to oblige the
Conscience of the Subject; and this is radically and Incommunicably in the
King, as Sovereign. And therefore (as I have already said) all the Ancient
Acts, run in the King's Name alone; And from the Legislative Power thus
properly taken, the Laws are properly called the King's Laws, and the Violation
of them is punishable as such.


F. You have made a very long Speech, and taken a great deal of pains to
perplex a Question in it self very easy to be Resolved; and to which I need
return you no other Answer, then what Bracton tells us, in his 3 d. Book, cap.
9. de actionibus Nibil aliud potest Rex in terris su^^, cum sit Dei minister,
and vicarius, nisi id solum quod de Iure potest, n^^ o^sta^ quod dicitur, quod
Principi places, legis habet vigorem, quia sequ^^u^ in fine legis; cum Bege
reg^a quae de Imperio ejus la^a est i. e. non qui^quid de voluntate Regis
te^^ere praesumptum est, sed quod consilio Magistratuum suo^an Rege
Authoritatem praes^a^^e, and bab^^a super ho^ deliberat^one. So that you see in
the time when this Author Writ, the King could do no more by his Prerogative.
then the Law allowed him to do; and though it is true, it is his Will, and
Authority that gives Vigor to the Law, yet this only, as it is declared in
Parliament, and in those Acts which had before received the Consent of his
Great Council, here called the Kings Magistrates: And therefore you have done
what you can, to confound the difference between the Kings Declaration, or
Writs Explaining and Enforcing the Common Laws of England, or else Interpreting
former Acts of Parliament already made; which was a Prerogative often exercised
by the King and his Council in Parliament, which then consisted of all, or most
of the Judges, and Great Officers of the Kingdom, of which, I shall speak more
at large, by and by: And I confess we are much in the Dark, because our Ancient
Parliament-Rolls are almost all lost, and consequently the Statutes therein
contained: So that we have almost nothing left of them, but such Copies or
Remains, as were preserved by Judges and Lawyers in those and Succeeding times,
whilst they were still in Being. And therefore I think I may at present boldly
affirm, that if that, which you call the Statute of Ireland, was not founded
upon some former Statute not now in being, it was no Act of Parliament at all;
but only the King's Writ, to the Chief Justiciar of Ireland, Commanding and
Enforcing the Common Law of England, in the Case of Coparceners, to be observed
in Ireland. The like I may say to the Explanation of the Statute of Gloucester,
which might be no more than the Interpretation of the King and his Justices, of
the Sense of some Articles in that Statute; and this for its Greater Authority.
Exemplified under the Great Seal, and so sent to all the Courts at Westminster,
and often to the Sheriffs of all the Counties in England, yet without altering
that Statute in some Points, as you would have it. The like I may say of the
Statute of Acon Burnel; and therefore it is very rashly done, to conclude, that
though we have not the Original Acts and Records of Parliament, of that time,
that therefore such Statutes were made by the King alone, in his Privy Council;
So that I must still continue of the same Opinion with the Great Seldom in this
Point, who in his Mar^ Clausum, tells us. It is most certain, that according to
Ancient Custom, no Answer is given either by the King, or in the King's Name to
any Parliamentary Bill, before that Bill, whether it be brought in first by the
Lords, or by the Commons, has past both Houses, as is known to all that are
versed in Parliamentary Affairs. Which if it has bin the Fundamental Law of
this Kingdom, it signifies very little, in what Form the Law is expressed,
whether in the King's Name only, as giving the last Assent thereto, or else as
his Concession to the Lords and Common's Petition, as long as you grant that
their Assent was necessary; For sure, whosoever Petitions another to do a
thing, which he cannot impose upon him without his Request, must give his
consent to the Doing it, unless you can prove, that it could be done whether
the Petitioner would or not: And this by the way, will serve to answer an
Objection; which though you insist much upon it, is scarce worth it, viz. The
King's Answer to the Lords and Commons Petition of Right, which was indeed no
Grant or Concession of any New Rights or Privileges from the King to the
People; But only a Declaration of several Ancient Rights and Liberties of the
Subjects, which had been very much broken and infringed of late; and therefore
the King's Answer was very proper, soit Droict faict comme est desire.

The next mistake you fall into proceeds from your confounding the King's
extraordinary Council in Parliament, with the King's Special, or Privy Council,
and in a manner making this a fourth Estate; by whom, as well as by the Lords
and Commons Laws are often made; whereas indeed neither the one nor the other
is true. For tho I grant that there is often made mention in our Ancient
Statutes, or Records of the Kings Council; yet this is not to be understood of
his Privy Council, but of a Special Council, with whom our King's formerly sat
during the time of Parliament, and before whom, and to whom we find by diverse
Records that both the Lords and Commons did often Petition, as you your self do
truly affirm. But that this was not the King's Privy Council, but another quite
different from it: And to which it seems to me, that Fle^a refers in his 2d
Book, Cap. 2. Habet enim Rex curiam suam in Concilio suo in Parliamentis suis:
praesentibus Praelatis, Commit. etc. And this Council consisted of all the Great
Officers of the Kingdom, viz. The Lord Treasurer, Chancellor, and Keeper of the
Privy Seal, Master of the Wardrobe, the Judges of the King's Bench, Common
Pleas, Barons of the Exchequ^r, Justices, Itinerant, and Justices of Assizes,
with such of the Dignified Clergy, as it pleased the King to call: Which that
they were altogether distinct from the King's Privy Council, appears plainly by
this, that the later never included all the Judges, nor did the Privy Council
ever exercise any Judicial Authority in Parliament, as this Council did in
those days; but that this Council consisted of the Parties above mentioned, see
the Statute of Escheators made 29 Edw. I. In Rastals and Pultons Stat. fol.
52.83. Pla. Parl. 29 Edw. I. fol. 273. Rot. Claus. 29 Ed. I. M. 15 Dorso.
and in the Placita Parliamentaria of that year the Statute runs thus, Per
Consilium Regis concordatum est coram Domino Rege ipso consentiente, etc. But
in the Close Roll of this year it is clearly explained who were of this
Council, their Names being there particularly recited, viz. all the Great
Officers abovementioned, together with the Judges of the King's Courts, and
Justices Itinerant, etc. Which is likewise explained by the Parliament Roll 9.
Edw. 2. Rex voluit quod Dominus Cancellarius, Thesaurarius, Barons, Soaccarii,
Iusti^iarii, and alii de Consilio Domini Regis Londin* Numb. 9.
existente convenirent. I could give you many more Examples of this kind, but I
shall give you but two more, to prove that this Council in Parliament could not
be the King's Ordinary Privy Council. Ro^. 97.
The first is in Placit. Parliament. 2 Edw. 3. in a Cause betwixt Thomas
Fitz-Peter, and Alienora Wife of John de Mowbray, Coram Rege. The Record is
long, but concludes thus, to the Justices, Et si difficultas aliqua subfuerit,
quare praemissa facere non poss^tis, tun^ placitum ill^^d usque in Prox.
Parliamentum nostrum udjornetis, ut ibidem ^unc inde fieri valeat, quod de
Consilio nostro fuerit faciendum.

By which we may very well gather that this was none of the King's Ordinary or
Privy Council, or else to what purpose was this Cause adjourned to the meeting
of the next Parliament; Since, if it had been to be determined by the Privy
Council, it might have been done forthwith.

I shall give you but one Instance more out of the Close Roll of the 41 of this
King, M. 12.13.
wherein a Cause between Elizabeth Wife of Nicholas D'Audley, and James
D'Audley in a Controversy between them (touching certain Lands contained in in
the Covenants of her Marriage) is said to have been adjudged, Devant Son
Conseil, c'est a scavoir Chanceller, Thresorier, Justices, and A^ires Sages
assemblez en la Chamber des Etoiles: i. e. Before his Council, viz. the
Chancellor, Treasurer, Justices, and other wise men assembled in the
Star Chamber. So that when any thing in our old Statutes is said to be Ordained
by the King, and his Council, it is always to be understood, not as if this
Council were a fourth Estate, whose Ass^nt or Advice was as necessary to the
making of Laws, as that of the Lordi Spiritual; Temporal and Commons, for then
they would have had the same Power still, but only according to the Custom of
those times, when most Acts of Parliament were drawn by them, and that the King
past none without their advice; it was then said to be done by the King, and
his Council ( viz. in Parliament) and I conceive the Power of this Council
continued till the beginning of the Reign of Henry the Seventh, when this
Court, being by Act of Parliament annexed to that of the Star Chamber, where
also this Council of the King used to meet before (as appears by the Case I
have last cited) and having afterward only to do with Criminal Causes, and
that as well out of, as in Parliament: and that King Hen. 7 th. not caring to
exercise his Judicial Power in private Causes as his Predecessors had done, or
to make use of their advice either in the drawing, or passing of Bills, which
now began to be drawn by Committees in either house wherein those Bills were
preferred, this Council came by degrees to grow quite out of use, as it is at
this day. I hope you will pardon this long digression, which I have been drawn
into, to rectify a Common mistake of the Gentlemen of your opinion, who when
they find any thing in our ancient Statutes, or Records wherein the King's
Council is mentioned, presently entertain strange fancies of the Antiquity and
Authority of the Privy Council.


M. I am so far from thinking this Discourse you have now made to be at all
tedious, that I give you many thanks for it, since it gives me a light into
many things which I confess I did not know before, and I shall better consider
the Authorities you have now given me, and if I find they will hold, shall come
over to your opinion in that point, tho I am not as yet satisfied as to the
Legistative Power of the two Houses, and therefore pray proceed to answer the
rest of the Presidents I have brought on that Subject.


F. I shall readily comply with your Commands; and therefore to come to those
Statutes of the 15 th. and 20 th. of Edw. 3. which you suppose to have been
repealed by that King without the Consent of the Lords and Common^; I grant
indeed that the Statutes you mention were intended to be repeal^d by the King,
without Assent of Parliament; Yet was this not done, by himself, and his
Council alone as you suppose, but by a Council of Earls, Barons and Commons,
which the Kings of England in those days were wont to call upon emergent
occasions, and for the doing of that which they thought Parliaments could not
so speedily perform; as in this pretended repeal of the Statute you mention:
And tho I grant this was a great br^^ch upon the fundamental Constitutions of
the Kingdom, yet that it was done in such a Great Council, as I have now
mentioned, I refer you to this pretended Statute its self, and to your recital
of it. And that the King often called such Great Councils appears by an
agreement of Exchange, made for the Castle of Berwick between King Hen. IV. in
the fifth year of his Reign, and the Earl of Northumberland, where the King
promises to deliver to the Earl, Lands and Tenements to the value of the
Castle, by these words (which I shall render out of French from the Original
which remains in the Tower), By the advice and ^ssent of the Estates of the
Realm, and of his Parliament ( so that the Parliam^nt happen before the Feast
of St. Lucie) otherwise by the Assent of his Great Council, and other Estates
of his said Realm, which the King will cause to be assembled before the said
Feast, in case the Parliament do not happen, etc.

And yet notwithstanding this high strain of Prerogative King Edw. III. himself
was not satisfied with this repeal of those Statutes you have mentioned, but in
the next Parliament held in his 17 th. year he procured a formal and Legal
repeal of them, as by the Parliament Rolls of that year, Numb. 23.
remaining in the Tower, does plainly appear. And which I could give you at
large, did I not fear to be too ted^ous. But I think it fit to let you know
this, because most ordinary Readers seeing no more appear in Print in our
Statute Books, are apt to imagine, that the Kings of England in those days did
often take upon them without Authority of Parliament to make and repeal Laws.
But as for your next Instance of the Statute of Edw. III. it is much weaker:
since, tho I confess that in the Preface to these Acts, there is only mention
of the Great Men, or Grantz (as it is in our old French) and other wise Men of
our Council, yet I shall prove at another time that under this word Grantz were
meant the Lords in Parliament, as by the wise men of our Council are understood
the Commons. And therefore it seems most reasonable to interpret the sense of
many ancient Statutes wherein the King alone is said to make and ordain Laws,
by those later or more modern ones, wherein the King by the Consent of the
Lords and Commons, or by Authority of Parliament, is said to have Ordained
them: Since the true Style and Meaning of ancient Laws, which were penned with
the greatest brevity, ought to be still Interpreted by the Modern ones, and not
the Modern ones by the Ancient. So that I am of the Learned Mr. Lambard^
opinion, who in his Arcb^ion, or Discourse upon the High Courts of Justice in
England, expressly tells us, That whether the Laws are said to be made by the
King, Page 269. Edit. 1635.
and his Wise Men, or by the King and his Council, or his Common Council; or by
the King, his Earls, Barons, and other Wise Men, or after such other like
Phrases, whereof you meet with many in the Volumes of Parliaments: It comes all
to this one Point, namely, That the King, his Nobility, and Commons did Ordain
and Enact the same. And which is more if you shall find any Acts of Parliament*
seeming to pass under the Name and Authority of the King only, as there be some
that have that show indeed; yet you must not by and by judge that it was
established without the Assent of the other Estates.

As for the rest of your Insinuations, rather than Arguments against the
Antiquity of those Expressions, Be it Enacted by Authority of Parliament, or Be
it Enacted by the King, Lords and Commons; which bear so hard upon you, to
prove that these last have a share in the Legislative, that they were
introduced in the Reigns of Henry VI. and VII. two Usurpers, and but in the
Nonage of the former, I think I shall be able to show you that you are very
much out in your account, for I will show you much ancienter Authorities,
wherein the same words or others equivalent have been used in our ancient
Statutes. And first pray call to mind the Statute of Measures already recited,
where it is said, That by the Consent of the whole Realm of England, the
Measure of our Sovereign Lord the King was thus made, etc. which certainly must
mean the Assent of all the Estates assembled in Parliament. And my Lord Come
tells us in his Third Institutes of an ancienter Record that he had seen of the
7 th. of this King, Page 27.
wherein it was Enacted by the King, the Lords Spiritual, Temporal and Commons.
But since I have given you Presidents enough of Statutes which are said to be
made or ordained, by the King with the Assent of Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
and Commons; I will show you one, where the King is not at all mentioned; and
that is in Rastal's Statutes, 4 Hen. 4* cap. 24. concerning Aulnage of Clothes,
wherein it is said, to be ordained, and accorded by the said Parliament,
without any mention at all of the King. And to let you see that these fatal
words you except against were in use before the Reign of Hen. 6. pray see 9
Hen. 5. cap. 4. concerning the Misprision of Clerk^ in writing, which runs
thus, The King has now declared, and ordained by Authority of this Present
Parliament that the Justices, etc. which must certainly refer to the Lords and
Commons unless you can make the King alone to carry the whole Parliament in his
own person. But whereas that Phrase had began from Usurpation it would have
been first found in the Statutes of Henry the 4 th. But to let you see that
Edward the 4 th. tho no Usurper, yet did not think that these words did abate
any thing of his Royal Prerogative, pray see in the 4 th. of that King, Cap. 1.
wherein it is recited, That the King by the advice, assen^, request and
authority of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in Parliament
assembled has ordained and established: But that by Assent of Parliament, and
by Authority of Parliament, is all one and the same, since the Assent of
Parliament makes its Authority; Pray see the express Judgment in this point of
the Lord Chief Justice Crew, Page 104.
and Justice Doderidge given in the Great case of the Earldom of Oxford,
reported in Judge Iokes's Reports.

To conclude, tho I do not deny His Majesty's Negative Vote to all Acts of
Parliament, yet this Prerogative can be concluded only from his giving his last
Assent to a Law, for when a Bill begins from himself, the two Houses have
likewise a Negative upon him, which is evident, in an Act of Pardon, which
proceeds from the King first, and sent down to the Parliament, this neither the
Lords nor Commons can add, or alter one tittl^ to; yet may they notwithstanding
his prior Asent, refuse the whole Bill if they please; tho already past under
the Great Seal. And tho I likewise grant, that it is the Le Roy le Veult, that
by yielding the highest, and last Assent gives the Enacting force to the Law,
and thus the King may in a Logical sense be said thereby to make the Laws
according to that known Maxim, Quod dat formam, dat esse ^ei; Yet this does not
hinder but in a Legal sense according to the express declaration of our old
Lawyers, and Acts of Parliament, the Laws owe their obligation to the joint
consent of King and Parliament, and his giving his last assent, or form to the
Law, no more proves his sole Legislative Power than it would do, that of the
Lords or Commons, if either of them by the Constitution of the Government were
to give their Asents last thereunto. So that I think upon the whole matter, no
man can reasonably deny but that Legally the Two Houses of Parliament have also
their share not only in framing, but Enacting of all Bills that shall pass; for
otherwise they would signify no more than the Committee of Estates in
Scotland, or the King and Council of England in relation to Ireland; the former
of which draws up all Bills that are to pass in the Parliament of that Kingdom;
and the latter must approve or reject all Bills that shall pass in the
Parliament of Ireland: Whereas the Authority of our Parliament consists in
their consenting to, and Enacting together with the King all Statutes
whatsoever. And this Distinction I think may very well reconcile Bracton, with
Fortescue, the former of which says, Quod leges ligant suum L^torem (meaning
the King) and the latter (in the place I have already cited) affirms, that the
People are governed by those Laws, quas ipse fe^t, which they themselves make;
and this I think is to ascribe to the King as much Power as is requisite to a
Civil Sovereign, and yet to leave a sufficient share to the People to secure
themselves from Tyranny.


M. I must beg your pardon if I cannot be satisfied with your division of the
Legislative Power beiween the King and the Two Houses of Parliament, since it
is against the sense of our old Lawyers Glanville and Bracton, who as you your
self confess make the King the Sole Legislator. And tho I confess Fortescue
gives the People a share in it, yet he is but a Modern Author in comparison of
the other two, and writ to support the Usurped Title of Henry the Sixth. So
that I cannot comprehend how the Two Houses can have any share (properly
speaking) in the Legislative Power, without falling into that old error of
making the King one of the three Estates, and so coordinate with the other two
whereas; if the King be a Monarch, that signifies in Greek the Government of
one person, whereas by giving the Two Houses a part in the Legislative, you
divide it into three several shares. Whereas there is so close a conjunction
between all the Parts of Sovereign Power* that the one cannot be separated from
the other, but it will destroy the form of the Government, and only set up an
Irregular Commonwealth in its place, which will scarce be able to hold long
together, without falling into perpetual quarrels, and disputes about the
Encroachments upon each other's Power and Privileges.

But it appears as well by the whole Tenor of our Laws, as also by diverse
Express Statutes, that the King is the Sole Supreme, or consequently the Sole
Legislative Power: The first of these I shall prove from the common Indictments
of Treason, Murder, Felony, etc. Which run always, Encounter la Corone, and la
dignity de Roy, and the Process against such Offenses, are called the Pleas of
the Crown; because they are against the Crown and Dignity of the King. So that
it is not the Dignity and Authority of the Lords and Commons, which is
Violated, but the Dignity and Authority of the King.

In the next place, this Opinion is contrary to the express Declaration of
diverse of those very Parliaments, which you pretend have Exercised a Share in
the Legislative: For you cannot deny, that many of our Ancient as well as
Modern Statutes, were made and drawn up in the Form of a Petition from the
Lords and Commons, or both of them to the King. And it is very strange, that
one Fellow in the Supreme Power, Ibid p. 32.
should so humbly Petition the other. But 2. Though time has altered the Form
of Petitioning into Bills, yet both Lords and Commons have bin often used to
call the King, Our Dread Sovereign, Our Sovereign Lord, Our Liege Lord, and the
like, and to Style themselves, We your Majesty's most Humble and Faithful
Subjects, or most Dutiful and Obedient Subjects; and in that Humble Style, to
beseech him to Enact such and such things, which sure they could have done
alone, had they bin Coordinate with him in Law-making: Lastly, if they were
Copartners with him in the Supreme Power, how came they to declare (as they
did in the Preamble to the Statute of the 25th. Hen. 8. which you your self
have quoted) that the Realm of England is an Empire, Governed by one Supreme
Head and King, unto whom the Body Politic of the Nation, Compacted of several
Sorts and Degrees of People, divided in Terms of Temporality and Spirituality,
owe and bear next unto God, a Natural and Humble Obedience? Now how came they
here farther to declare this Supreme Head of the Clergy and Laity to be
furnished with Plenary, Whole and En^ire Power by the Goodness and Sufferance
of Almighty God. Certainly they can have no share in it, if it be Plenary,
Wholly, and Entirely in him, or how came they in the 1st. Statute of Queen Eliz.
c. 7. (being a Recognition of the Queens S^premacy) to acknowledge that all
Power Temporal and Spiritual, was Deducted from her, as the Supreme Head, and
that they were her most Faithful and Obedient Subjects, and that they did in
Parliament Represent the Three Estates of this Realm, and that She was the only
Supreme Governor thereof: Which was pursuant to a Statute to the same purpose,
in the 2d Ed. 6. c. 2. wherein it is declared, That all Authority of
Jurisdiction Spiritual and Temporal, is divided and Deducted from the Kings
Majesty, as Supreme Head of these Churches and Realms. Not to mention the Oath
of Supremacy it self, That the King or Queen's Highness is the only Supreme
Governor of this Realm: Which these Statutes would never have acknowledged,
had it not bin Consonant to our Ancient Common Law, by which it is expressly
declared in that Old Law-Book and written as it is supposed by Bishop Bre^ton)
in the very first Leaf whereof it is thus expressed in the Name of King Edw.
1st. himself: We Will, that our Jurisdiction be above all other Jurisdictions,
which had been spoken in vain, if all other Powers had not bin Derived from,
and so Subordinate to, the Kings. Besides I could prove this farther from
History, and matter of Fact.


F. I thank you Sir, and I desire I may answer what you have now said, before
you pass to another Head, for I doubt the time will not give us leave to
Discourse much further on this Subject to Night. In the first place therefore,
I must tell you, that the main Foundation of your last Arguments, is founded
upon a Supposition, which I altogether disown, viz. Co-ordination or Division
of the Sovereign Power, between the King, and the Two Houses. For I have always
supposed, that the King continues still Supreme, and that (as the Modus tenendi
Parliamentum declares) He is Principium, Caput and Finis Parliamenti; that is,
he can call and Dissolve Parliaments when he pleases; and likewise, that the
Executiv^ part of the Government, rests solely in Him, as also the Power of
making War and Peace: And even in the Legislative it self, that the King has
more eminently (though together with the Parliament) a Supreme Enacting Power,
without which, it cannot be a Law. This being considered, you will find, that
here is no Division of the Legislative Power: Since neither the King, nor the
Two Houses, have it Solely and Completely in themselves; but it is jointly
Executed by them all three, as one Entire Politic Body or Person. So that
neither can they make any Law without him, nor He Enact any without their
Consent; and he by giving his Consent last, gives it the Force and Sanction of
a Law, and he is therein the Supreme, i. e. the Last, or Vltimate Power (in the
true Sense of that word) nay, the only Supreme Power, unless you could suppose
two Supreams, that is, two Highest Powers at once in the same Kingdom: But that
for all this, the Two Houses are not Subject to the King in matters relating to
Legislature, may hence farther appear, that the King cannot Command them to
give him what Money, or to pass what Laws he pleases: Since if he should go
about to do so, they might (as I suppose, you your self will grant) Lawfully
Disobey him; which they could not do without Apparent Disloyalty, and High
Disobedience, were they in this, as they are in other indifferent things,
Subject to his Commands, when Legally issued.

But to return you a more particular Answer, to what you have said to prove the
King to have the Sole Legislative Power As to what you pretended I have quoted
out of Glanville, if you please better to consider of it, you will not find,
that he gives the King any more than an Enacting Power, together with his Great
Council. For though he tells us, quod Principi placet, Legis habet vigorem; yet
mark what follows; eas Scilicet quas super dubijs in consilio definiendis
Procerum quidem consilio, and Principis antecedente A^thoritate consta^ esse
promulgatas. Where by the last consilio is meant, some what more than mere
Advice, as I have already proved. But as for Bracton, it is true he agrees with
Glanville, in making the Kings Authority, necessary to the Essence of a Law:
Yet he is more express than the other in making the Advice and Consent of the
Great Council or Commonwealth, also necessary to its being, as you may
remember by these words, Cum Legis vigorem habeat quicquid de C^nsilio and de
consensu Magnatum, and Reipublicae communi Sponsione, Authoritate Principis
praecedente, just fueri^ definitum.

But further to let you see, how much you are out in your Argument, whereby you
would prove from the Form of our Indictments of Treason, etc. That the King
has the Sole Legislative Power of the Kingdom. I shall show you, that all our
Ancient Laws, as well Common as Statute, do declare the contrary: Since diverse
A^ts of Parliament have expressly affirmed, that such and such Offenses were
Trea^on, not only against the King, but against the King and the whole Realm
too; Pray take these instances, see the Statute 1 Edw. 3. c. 1. Wherein Hugh de
Spencer, both the Father and Son, are by the King and Parliament declared
Traitors and Enemies of the King, and of his Realm: See likewise 28 Hen. 8. c.
7. Wherein the Crown is settled by Act of Parliament, on the Heirs of his Body,
begotten on Queen Jane, or by any other after Marriage, and that the Offenders
that shall interrupt such Heirs in their Peaceable Succession, they with their
Abbe^tors, Maintainers, etc. shall be declared and adjudged, High Traitors to
the Realm. And therefore diverse Ancient Indictments in Stanfords Pleas of the
Crown are laid contra pacem Regis and Regni. And that the Parliament has
reserved to it self a Power, by the Statute of the 25th. of Edw. 3d. to
Determine what Crime shall be Adjudged Treason, besides Conspiring to kill the
King, and those other Offenses specified in the same Statute; you may Consult
the Statute at large. But that these Offenses can be no other than an endeavor
to alter the Government, or Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, I think is
evident, since all Offenses relating to the Lives, or Honor of the King,
Queen, and their Eldest Son are there particularly specified, and it was by
Virtue of this Statute, that the Late unfortunate Earl of Strafford, was first
impeached by the Commons, and afterward Attainted by Act of Parliamen^, in the
Year 1641. but whether justly or not, it is not my Business now to determine,
it is sufficient that it was then granted by the King himself, that if the Earl
was really Guilty of Destroying the Government, and Introducing an Arbitrary
Power, he might have bin deservedly Condemned.

But that the Power of Making and Dispensing with Laws, is particularly
applied, not only to the King, but to the Lords Spiritual, Temporal and
Commons, pray remember the Preamble of the Statute I have already cited of the
25th. Hen. 8. c. 21. wherein it is so expressly declared, as also by the 24th.
of this King. Chap. 12. the Preface of which Statute, runs thus: And whereas
the Kings most Noble Progenitors, and the Nobility and Commons of the said
Realm, at diverse an^ sundry Parliaments, as well in the time of King Edward
1st. Edward 3d. Richard 2d. Henry 4th. etc. made sundry Ordinances, Laws,
Statutes and Provisions, for the entire and sure Conservation of the
Prerogatives, Liberties and Preheminences of the said Imperial Crown of this
Realm, etc. where pray note, that the making of all these Statutes, is ascribed
to the Lords and Commons, as well as to the King: Which is also farther
acknowledged by the said King Henry, when in a Set Speech to the Parliament,
Reported by Crompton (in the Case of Errors) he said these words, We being
informed by our Judges, that We at no time stand so highly in our Estate Royal,
as in the time of Parliament, wherein, we as Head, and you as Members, are
Conjoined and knit together into one Body Politic. And sure then, if the
King's Simile be true, whatsoever Functions are performed by the whole Body,
must be done by the Members, as well as by the Head. I shall Sum up all I have
said into this Syllogism, That Power which cannot make or Enact any new Law,
without the Advice and Consent of two other Bodies, is not the Sole Legislative
Power. But the King is that Power which cannot, etc. Ergo, the King is not the
Sole Legislative Power.


M. I shall not longer Dispute this Question with you: Since I own the two
Houses have Claimed for some Ages past, a Share in the Legislative, though in a
large and improper Sense, as you your self do partly grant: And though for the
more just and equal Course, our Kings have for a long time admitted the 3
Estates, viz. the Lords Spiritual, Temporal and Commons, into a seeming Share
of the Legislative Power: Yet this was not by Constraint, nor by any
Fundamental Constitution of the Government, as you suppose; but only from their
own mere Grace and Favor, to make Laws by the Consent of the whole Realm,
because that no one part thereof, should have any Cause to complain of
partiality: And though I grant the King is bound to observe these Laws when
made, by virtue of his Coronation Oath, so as that he cannot alter them without
their Consent, yet is he still above the Law, by Virtue of his Absolute
Monarchical Power, and is not Subordinate to it, or so bound by it, as to be
Responsible to the People, for any Breach committed by him upon it; for that
were Derogatory to the Sovereign Power, and inconsistent with the Nature of
Monarchy; and were to set up the Law (which is but a Creature of the Prince's
making) above his Sovereign Authority: And this would make our Monarchy, a Kind
of Government which would neither be Monarchical, nor yet a Republic, but some
Mungrel thing made up of both. So that I take the Notion of a mixed Monarchy, to
be a Contradiction in adjecto: A limited Monarchy I confess there may be either
by the Monarch's own Voluntary Grant or Consent, as in this Kingdom, or else on
Conditions imposed upon a Prince by others, either by a Foreign Power, as in
Tributary and Feudatary Kingdoms, or else by the Natives of the same Country,
as in some Elective Kingdoms and Principalities; but then such Limitations of
Monarchical Power, represent a Prince as it were fettered, and who cannot Act
as he would, and ought for the Advantage and Welfare of his People, if he had
his Liberty, and the full Exercise of his Sovereign Power: And therefore in
most Governments limited after this manner, the Sovereignty still remains in
the Senate or People that Elected him; which makes me think it Solecism in
Politics to affirm, that a Monarch (properly so called, and still continuing
so) could be thus limited by Laws, or Fundamental Constitutions, as you call
them at the first Institution of the Government: For if he were thus limited,
that Power that could thus limit him, must be either Superior or Inferior to
him. Superior it could not be, because both the Prince and the People that
could put those Conditions or Limitations upon him, could not be his Superiors
in the State of Nature, before they made him King, neither could they be his
Inferiors, because an Inferior Power, can never limit a Superior: And since
all our Laws, (as well as the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, we take to the
King) do own him to be the Sole Supreme Governor of this Realm; I cannot
understand how this Limitation can consist with the King's Supremacy; for if he
be thus limited and restrained. how is he Supreme, and if Restrained by some
Law, is not the Power of that Law, and of them that made that Law, above his
own Supreme Power? And if by the Direction of such Law only he must Govern,
where is his Supreme Power? So that when the Law must Rule and Govern the
Monarch as a Superior, and not the Monarch the Law, he has at best, but a
Gubernative and Ex^cutive Power.

Lastly, if this Power of the Prince, were Limited at the Original
Constitution, there must be a Power appointed in some Council or Senate (call
it a Parliament or Assembly of the States, or by what Name you please) whose
business it must be, to see them exactly kept and performed* Now these Men must
either have a Power barely of Advising the Monarch, and persuading him to
observe these Fundamental Limitations, or else they must also have a Power of
Forcing or Compelling him, if he will not hearken to their Advice and
Remonstrances: if they have no more than the former Power, that you say,
signifies nothing, since the King may refute to hearken to them if he pleases,
and may do what he will notwithstanding; but if they have also a Coercive Power
over him, and may Resist or punish him for his Transgressions, he will then
cease to be a Monarch: Since he cannot be so, who is accountable to any Power,
either Equal or Superior to himself; And this our late Parliaments have bin
well aware of, when they Renounced all Coercive Power over the Person of the
King, and any Right of making War, either Offensive or Defensive against him:
So that besides the History of matter of Fact, which I can further give you, to
prove, our Kings to have bin at first Absolute Monarchs: I think the very
Hypothesis of a mixed or limited Monarchy* labors under such insuperable
Difficulties and Absurdities, that I cannot conceive how those Limitations by
which we find the King's Prerogative now Restrained, could ever proceed from
any Higher Cause, than the free Grants and Concessions of the Kings
Predecessors, confirmed by his own Coronation Oath: Which though I acknowledge,
he is bound to observe, and that if he breaks it, he commits a great Sin
against God: Yet it is only He, that must punish him for so doing, since the
Oath is not made to the People, but to God alone.


F. Notwithstanding what you have now said, I hope I am able to show you, that
all your Arguments against a Mixed or Limited Monarchy, are more subtle than
true: For as to your first Argument from the word Monarch, I grant indeed, that
strictly speaking, the Word Monarch and Monarchy, signify a single Ruler, and
the Government of one alone: Yet in Common Acceptance, or according to the
Laws, and Constitutions of several other Kingdoms, besides England, as in the
Empire, in Denmark, and Sweden, the Emperor, and those Kings have bin called
Monarchs, and those Kingdoms Monarchies; though by the Original Constitution of
those Governments, those Princes have not bin invested with a pure Imperial
Authority, such as that of the Roman Emperors of Old: Yet since they had the
Executive and Gubernative part of the Government committed to them, and that
they were looked upon as the Heads of those Kingdoms, and that the Government
did therein partake more of Monarchy, than of any other Form, those Princes
have bin always reputed (and that justly) Monarchs, notwithstanding there was a
very great mixture of Aristocracy in the Empire, and in Denmark, and both of
Aristocracy and Democracy in Sweden. The like may be said of England, France,
and those Kingdoms in Spain, that were instituted by the Goths and Vandals, the
Francs and Saxons, after the Ancient Gothic Model of Government. And though I
grant this sort of mixed Monarchy, is not to be Reduced to any of the three
distinct Kinds of Government laid down by Aristotle, yet are they not for all
that, to be Condemned, but rather the more approved of, since by this mixture,
they were capable of diverse Benefits, and free from several Mischiefs, which
are incident to any of those Forms of Monarchy, Aristocracy or Democracy, when
exercised purely, and without any such mixture: And that this, as to England it
self, is no Invention of the Common-Wealth-Men (as you call them) you may read
King Charles the 1st's Answer to the 19 Propositions, p. 96.
sent him by the Parliament, for the words are Remarkable. This Kingdom, says
he, is mixed of Monarchical Aristocratical, and Democratical Government, and
that so wisely, that we have all the Conveniences, and none of the
Inconveniences of any of those Forms taken single.

Nor does this at all Derogate from the Nature of the Monarchy, nor make any
Division between the necessary Functions of Sovereign Power: For I have already
granted, that the executive or gubernative part, is wholly in him, as also the
Power of making War and Peace; and as for the Legislative, as long as the King
has a Negative Vote in all Laws that pass, and that they cannot be made
without his Royal Sanction, the Legislative Power is not divided, as I have
already proved.

But as for your other Argument against a Prince's being limited by the
Original Constitution of Government, tho as I yield it is more Subtle, so it
is also more Sophistical and fallacious than the former. For your Dilemma, by
which you would prove the Absurdity of that Nation, will not do, because a
Prince at the Institution of the Government, may be limited by those who are
neither Superior, nor Inferior to himself: but only equal in the State of
Nature, as I suppose the People to be with a King, before he was made so by
them; And that Equals may thus limit each other, you your self will not (I
suppose) deny in the Case of Princes, who are Equals in the State of Nature: As
Queen Mary (for Example) made such conditions with King Philip of Spain, before
she Married him, that if he offered to meddle with the Government of this
Kingdom, without her Consent, it would be Lawful for her to part herself from
him, and to send him home into his own Kingdom; and might she not with a Safe
Conscience, have done so upon the Breach of the Conditions on his side? Apply
this to the People in the State of Nature, and the person they are about to
make King before the Politic Marriage of a Coronation or Admission to the
Crown, and see if they do not exactly agree, or whether the People can be
blamed, if they repudiate their Politic Husband, for Invading that part of the
Government, which they had reserved to themselves? Nor does this argue any more
Superiority in the People, over the King in the State of Nature, than it does
for a Creditor in the like State, to compel by force, his Debtor to pay him a
Sum of Money which he owed him, in case there were no Civil Jurisdiction for
him to Appeal to. And let us farther suppose, a Council or Parliament
appointed, who may Remonstrate to the King his Transgressions, or Violations of
the Law: Yet this may be without any Coercive Power over his Person, or of
making War upon him; since the King may, if he please, remedy all these
Disorders, by Redressing their Grievances, and punishing the Authors of them.
So if he will wilfully persist in such Violations, as strike at the Fundamental
Constitution of the Government, and do also go about to execute them upon the
People by force, this being in effect, a making War upon them; I suppose they
have then a just Right to defend themselves against his Tyranny. So that if
these Rights or Privileges we now enjoy, were not the mere Concessions of the
King's Grace and favor, as you affirm, but reserved as part of their
Birthright, at the Original Constitution of the Government (as I shall prove
all our Fundamental Laws were) the People have then as much Right to defend
them (their Allegiance to him being upon that Condition, either express or
implied) as any other Nation has to defend their Lives, Liberties and
Properties, against the Violence of the Supreme Powers, or any Commissioned by
them, as I hope I have already proved to you: So that notwithstanding all that
you have said to the Contrary, I think the Notion of a mixed or limited Monarchy
in the very institution, may be agreeable to Reason and practicable too, either
in this or any other Kingdom: And when you can prove the contrary by History,
or Matter of Fact, as you promise, I will give up the Cause.


M. You have Broached a parcel of Special Commonwealth Notions, in which you
are every way out: As first, in making the King's Authority derived, either
from, or by, the Peoples Consent: Whereas all our Ancient Lawyers call him
God's Vicar or Lieutenant on Earth, and not the People's; and in the next
place, in supposing he may be Resisted by Force of Arms, whenever the People
shall think themselves Oppressed, or their Fundamental Rights and Liberties, as
you call them invaded, it is contrary to the Express Declaration of the
Parliament, by two serveral Statutes, in the 2d. Year of the late King Charles:
And though you disclaim all Coercive Power of the two Houses over the King, yet
it is only to place this Right of Resistance in a more fallible and
ungovernable Body, viz. the whole People in their Natural Capacities, which as
it is more consistent with your Principles, so it is more dangerous to all
Supreme Powers, as well Commonwealths, as Monarchies, as I have partly showed
you already; and I hope may farther convince you, before I have done. But since
I have not now time to show you the falsity and absurdity of these Notions, and
to urge the Statute at large, against Resistance in any Case Whatsoever: I pray
go on in the Method you have proposed, and let me see how you can make out,
that even our Parliaments do not derive that Privilege they now enjoy of
giving their consent to Laws, as also their very being, to the Gracious
Concessions of our former Monarchs.


F. That I shall do with all my Heart: But first let me tell you, that though I
own the King to be God's Lieutenant in these his Dominions: Yet I must likewise
aver, that it was only by the Consent and Voluntary Submission of the People of
this Nation, that the first Monarch (begin where you will) could obtain that
Title. And as for those Statutes you mention against all Resistance in any Case
Whatsoever, I doubt not but to show you, that it was never the intent of that
Parliament, to debar us from all necessary Resistance, and Self-defence in
cases of illegal Violence, and intolerable Oppression; unless you can suppose,
they were resolved to alter the Government, and to put it into the King's
Power, to destroy all our Laws and Liberties; and instead of a Lawful King, to
Set up for a Lawless Tyrant, when ever he pleased.

But to come to the matter in Hand, I shall show you that it is not at all
impossible or improbable, that without any hinderance of that Power, which is
necessary to the King as Supreme, that he might for all that, H. T. M. h. 3.
have bin limited as to the Legislative, at the first Institution of the
Government, which I shall thus make out.

I do therefore in the first place suppose, that the English Saxons being a
free People, after their Conquest of this Island, as well Nobles, as Commons
did agree by their free consents, and public Compacts, to set over themselves
a Prince or Sovereign, and to Resign up themselves to him, to be governed by
such and such Fundamental Laws: Here is a Supremacy of Power set up, though
limited as to the manner of its Exercise.

2. Then because in all Governments after Cases will arise, requiring an
Addition of Laws, suppose them Covenanting with their S^veraign, that if there
be any Cause to Constitute any New Laws, he shall not by his Sole Power,
perform that Work; but that they will reserve in themselves, a Concurrent or
Co-operative Power: So that they will be bound by no Laws, but what they join
with him in the making of.

3. I suppose, that though the Nobles may personally conven^: Yet since the
Commons being so Numerous, cannot meet together in Person, therefore for the
doing of this Work, it be agreed, that every City of Considerable Town, should
have Power to Depute one, or more to Act for the whole Body in the Legislature.
That the Nobles by themselves in Person, and the Commons by their Deputies
Assembling there, may be Representatively the whole Body of the Kingdom, with
Power to execute that Authority reserved for establishing new Laws.

4. Since the Occasion, and need of making such Laws, and Expounding the Old
Ones could not be constant and perpetual, therefore we may farther suppose, for
the avoiding of the inconvenience of three standing Coordinate Powers, they
did not Establish these Estates to be constantly existent, but occasionally, as
the Causes for which they were ordained, should require.

5. Because a Monarchy was intended, and therefore a Supremacy of Power (as far
as was necessary) must be reserved in One, it was concluded, that these Estates
should be still Ass^mblies of his Subjects, and Swearing Allegiance to him; and
that all New Laws, which by agreement of these Powers, should be Enacted,
should run in his Name, and be called his Laws, and they all bound to obey him
in them, when thus Established.

And Lastly, it being supposed, that He who thus was to govern by Law, and for
the furtherance of whose Government such New Laws were to be made, should best
understand when there was need of them; and that the Convening and Dissolving
of the Assembly of the Estates, was a Power of Great Trust, it was put into the
Prince's Hands, by Writ to Convocate, as also to Prorogue or Dissolve such
meetings. But in Process of time, some Princes not caring much to have their
Government looked into, or to have any Power in Being but their own, taking
Advantage of this Power, of Assembling these Estates, did more seldom then need
Required, make use of it: Whereupon provision was made, and a time set by New
Statutes, within which, an Assembly of Parliament was to be held: Now when you
have made these true Suppositions in your Mind, you have the very Model and
History of this Monarchy, and we shall easily find, what to answer to the
Arguments before produced on either side. For first, it is his Parliament;
because an Assembly of his Subjects Convocated by his Writ to be his Council,
and to assist him in making Laws for him to govern by: Yet not his, as other
Courts are, as deriving their whole Authority from the King. So likewise his
Power of Assembling and Dissolving them, proves him thus far above them;
because, though as to the time of their meeting, it depends on him; Yet their
Power and Authority quoad Specificationem, i. e. the Being, Kind and Exercise
of it, is from the Original Constitution. For as to that, they expect no
Commission and Authority from him; but only for their meeting, to proceed to
Act, but when met, they Acts according to the Original Rights of their
Constitution: and those Acts proceed from their Conjunct Authority with, not
from their Subordination to, the King in the Legislative, as also in laying of
Taxes, etc. on the People.

The Oath of Allegiance indeed binds them, as his Subjects to obey him,
governing according to Established Laws: But yet it supposes them to be built
upon the Foundations of his Legal Government, and must not be interpreted to
Undermine and Destroy it. He is hereby acknowledged to be Supreme, so far as to
Rule them by Laws already made, or to be made, but not without them. So that
this is no Derogation to the Legislative Power of Parliament: And I believe of
these things, no unprejudiced Man can make any Question. And herein consists
the accurate Judgment of the Contrivers of this Form, that they have given so
much into the Hands of the Sovereign, as to make him truly a Monarch; Yet have
reserved so much in the hands of the People, as to enable them to preserve
their Laws and Liberties.


M. I confess you have given a long and plausible account of the Original and
Form of our Government, though if it come to be examined, I doubt it will prove
a mere Romance, and not at all agreeable to true History, or Matter of Fact:
Since if we look to the Eldest times, either after the Saxon or Norman
Conquests, We shall find the Power of our Kings, to have bin still more
Absolute, then they are now; And I think I could easily trace the Steps, by
which the People have attained to all the Power and Privileges they now enjoy,
which as I do not grudge the Nobility and People of this Nation. Yet they ought
to exercise it with a due respect and Subordination to that Power, from which
they were all at first derived, least if they should ascribe them to
themselves, the King should be tempted to destroy those Great Privileges, and
taking away the very Being of Parliaments, to make Laws without them.

But to show you farther, that this Notion of an independent Power in the two
Houses, by the Original Constitution of the Government, is altogether
inconsistent with the King's Prerogative, appears from clear Matter of Fact,
even as you your self have put it; For when Kings thought fit not to have their
Power Controuled, you acknowledge they called Parliaments, less frequently than
usual; and that thereupon there were diverse Laws made, appointing certain times
for their meeting; from whence it appears, that before this, the times of their
meeting, were wholly left to his Discretion. Nay farther, that the King's
Prerogative of Assembling them, or omitting it when he pleases, cannot be
limited by any Act himself can make, appears from hence, that notwithstanding
all those Laws that have bin made for Annual and Triennual Parliaments, our
Kings have never thought themselves obliged to call Parliaments, of^ner than
they saw their own occasions, or the necessities of the People (which they
themselves were Sole Judges of) required: Nor did any Parliaments ever find
fault with this, till that Rebellious one in 1641. which had the confidence to
present to the King a Bill to be past, whereby it was not only Enacted, that
there should be a Parliament every third Year; but that upon the King's
omitting to issue forth Writs of Summons, the Sheriffs, nay Constables, might
Summon the Freeholders, and proceed to Election, and that the Lords might also
meet without any Writs from the King; which was quite contrary to the Original
Constitution, by which (as you your self grant) there could be no Parliaments,
without his Summons, he being Principium, Capus and finis Parliament: And if
so, it seems wholly improbable, nay impossible to me, that your Two Houses
should have by the Original Constitution, any Power of meeting or doing any
thing, without his Majesty's Consent and Allowance; and we know, that at this
day, the Sp^aker in the Name of the House of Commons, desires of the King.
Liberty of Sp^ech: And King Henry 8th. and Queen Elizabeth, did sometimes
Rebuke the House of Commons, and sent to them to Desist, when they were about
to pass any Bill they did not approve of, or to meddle with those things, which
did not belong to them: Which plainly declares, that (contrary to your
Affection) neither of the Two Houses have any Power to proceed upon any
Business, or to pass any Bill which the King disapproves of: And though I
grant, that they do not ask the Kings leave for the bringing in, or Passing of
all Bills whatsoever in either House, or that the King can command them to give
him what Money, or pass what Bills he pleases; Yet this Privilege must needs
proceed from his Grant or Concession to the contrary: Whereby, though he has
discharged them from an Active Obedience to such Commands; Yet has he not
thereby divested himself of any of the Essential Rights of Sovereignty, or at
all discharged them from a Passive Obedience, or Submission to his Power,
supposing the worst that can happen, that he should take away what share he
pleased of the Subjects Estates, without their Consent; or make his own Edicts,
and Proclamations to be observed for Laws: Since the King's Authority is prior
to all others, and that (as the Statutes of Edward the 6th. and Queen
Elizabeth; which I have already quoted, expressly declare,) All Power, Authority
and Jurisdiction Spiritual and Temporal, is derived wholly from the King, so
that unless your Legislative Power of Parliament be somewhat, that is neither
an Authority, nor a Jurisdiction, it is by this very Body, acknowledged to be
wholly derived from him: Nor have you yet answered this Argument, nor I believe,
can you do it.


F. As for your History which you promise to give me, of the absolute Power of
our first Saxon, and Norman Kings: I desire you to defer the speaking of it,
till another time, it being now late: Yet I do not doubt but to prove, that
what I assert concerning the limited Power of our Kings, even by the Original
Constitution of the Government, is no Romance, but true History: Nor are the
Reasons that you have now urged to the contrary, prevalent enough with me, to
alter my Opinion, for I think I am able to prove somewhat more than I but now
Asserted, viz. that the Wittena G^mote, or Great Council met constantly once a
year, or oftener, when need was, under the Saxon Kings, without any Summons from
them, as when we come to the particular History of this matter, I shall show
you more at large; And also, that for the first Hundred Years after the Coming
in of the Normans, the Great Council or Parliament used to meet of Course at
the King's Court, at two or three of the Great Feasts of the Year. without any
other notice by Writ or Summons. The first mention we find of such Writs, being
in King John's Magna Charta: But that when these Assemblies became less
frequent, by reason of the King' Discontinuing of them; and because of the case
the Nobility and People found, in being Discharged from so constant and
chargeable an Attendance, they came to be so discontinued at last, that as you
your self confess, there were fain to be Express Laws made for their more
frequent Meetings, and though the Power of Summoning them, was (I confess) left
wholly in the King; and that he did very often Dispense with the Calling them
according to the intent of those Statutes: Yet does not this prove any Legal
Prerogative in him, so to do, but that it was a High Breach of Trust, and also
of his Coronation Oath, when he thus omitted to call them; Since our Kings were
formerly Sworn to keep, and observe those Laws, quas vulgus elegerit, which the
People either have, or should choose, construe it which way you will, Rot.
Claus. 1. E. 2. m. 10. pars vnica.
though I own in French, it is in the Preterit, auera eleu, should have chosen;
And as it is an Old Maxim a Facto ad Ius non valet consequentia; So it is no
true way of proof, to argue from an illegal Exercise, or abuse of Power, to a
Legal Right or Prerogative. And though the Parliament might not always actually
question, or find fault with their Kings for thus neglecting to call them;
because, perhaps the Public Sustained no present Damage from it, and that they
thereby escaped the giving the King those Taxes and Aids which he usually
demanded of them at such times: Yet when the long Forbearance of Omissions of
Parliaments, became a general Grievance, by reason of those Encroachments, that
the King and Great Men often made, upon the People's Liberties in those
Intervals, and that the King looked upon it as a Piece of his Prerogative, to
abuse this Trust as far as He pleased: I grant then (and not till then) there
was need of a Law, that there should be a Parliament every Year, and that in
Case of any failure of Summons on the Kings part, the People might proceed to
Election without it, which was not so properly a New Law, as the Restoration of
the Old Constitution, since Anciently the People met the King at these Great
Councils, at such Set times of the Year, as I shall prove, when we come to the
History of matter of Fact; which I am not at all afraid to be judged by, and
then also I shall show you, that though the King is now Principium, Caput and
Finis Parliamenti (that is, the Parliament properly so called) yet that the
Great Council or Assembly of the Estates, had from the first Institution of the
Government, a Power of Assembling themselves in cases of necessity, such as are
Doubtful or Disputed Titles to the Crown, or the absence of the Successor; and
then they have often met by their own inherent Authority, Vi. Walsingham and
Mat. Westminst. in the beginning of this Ks. Reign. Vi. Hen. of Hunt and To.
Hoveden.
and have either Settled the Succession of the Crown, as they thought good, or
else have Recognized an Hereditary Right, in the Absence of the Heir, as when
King Edw. 1st. was absent, being in his return from the Holy Land: Or else to
Depose the King's Iusticiar, as in the Case of William Longchamp, Bishop of
Ely, who was left Chief Iusticiar by King Richard 1st, when he went into the
Holy Land.

And though I own that some High-Spirited, and yet Well-beloved Princes, might
take upon them a Power of Rebuking the House of Commons when they meddled with
Business they did (...) like: Yet this Submission proceeded from the Great
R^verence they had for their Persons; and confidence they placed in their
Government: Since we find that only these Princes that were Wise and Successful
in their Government, and so became the Darlings of their People, Such as Queen
Elizabeth and King Edward 3d. (for as for Henry 8th. I remember no Instance of
it) who durst venture to Act thus. As for the desire of Freedom of Speech, it
is but a Compliment: for how can the Grievances of the Kingdom be Redressed,
without speaking freely of them? And if one Great End of Parliament was to
Redress these Grievances, it were altogether in vain, for them to Attempt any
thing in this Kind, if the King could Brow-beat them from it, when ever he
pleased. But Bract on does not only tell us, Rex habet Superiorem, Legem, and
Curiam suam Baronum, etc. in the Place I have already Cited; but the Old Book
called the Mirror of Justices, also teaches us the same Lesson in his 2d.
^ection, where speaking of the King's Power, he tells us, that though the King
can have no Peer in the Land, yet nevertheless if by his own Wrong, he offends
against any of his People, none of those that judge for him, can be both Judge
and Party. It is therefore agreeable to Right, that the King should have
Companions to Hear and Determine in Parliaments, all Writs and Complaints
concerning the Wrongs of the King, Queen, and their Children, and of them
especially, of whose Wrongs they could not otherwise have Common Right. These
Companions are therefore called Counts, after the Latin Comites, etc. Not can I
think, that any King would have Erected a Court, to have Redressed the Wrongs
done by himself, or his Family, whether he would or not. But as for your main
Argument, from the words of the Statutes of King Edw. 6. and Queen Eliz. That
all Authority and Jurisdiction, as well Spiritual as Temporal, is derived from
the King: I do own it true, that is, if meant of all Derivative Authority, such
as that of all inferior Counts, as well Civil as Ecclesiastical. For I suppose,
you your self will not affirm, that the Ecclesiastical Authority of Bishops, as
to their Right of meeting in public Synods or Councils, is derived from the
Crown. But the Truth is, the Sense of this Statute is no more, then that all
such Jurisdiction is immediately derived from the King, though Originally from
the People (which Fortesoue calls Potestatem a Populo effuxiam) and by them
entrusted with him, as the Supreme Magistrate to Distribute it to all Inferior
Courts; which yet he cannot at this Day Create anew, without an Act of
Parliament: so that this will not extend to the whole Assembly of the Estates
themselves: Since I doubt not, but to prove by undeniable Testimony, that that
Constitution is as Ancient as the English Nation it self.


M. I see you have a mind to wrest the true sense of this Statute, by a forced
Interpretation; but I hope at our next meeting to prove to you, that our first
Saxon and Norman Kings were Absolute Monarchs, and that not only all the
Liberties and Privileges we enjoy, but also our Civil Properties were wholly
derived from him; and if so, it will also necessarily follow, that all
Difference and Distinction in Honor or Power, by which the Bishops and
Temporal Lords can claim to Sit in Parliament, is wholly derived from those
Kings: For as to the Commons, I need not go so high for their Original; since
it is the Opinion of our best Antiquaries, and I think the Learned Dr. Brady
has sufficiently proved it against Mr. Petyt, that they are no Ancienter than
the latter end of Henry the 3ds. or perhaps the 18th. of Edw. the 1sts. Reign.
Nor do the Authors you have quoted for the Independent Authority of Parliaments
( viz. ^^acton and the Mirror) mention any other than the Curia Baronum, or
that of Counts or Earls, as the Author of the Mirror has worded it, by which
can be meant no other than the House of Lords; for as to that of the Commons,
had they bin then in Being, or had they had any thing to do in the Government,
it is not likely, these Ancient Authors, as well as our Acts of Parliament of
those times, would have omitted particularly to mention them. So that the
higher I go, and the more I look on the History of our Ancient English Kings,
the more Absolute I find their Power, and the less dependant upon the People:
Therefore I have very great reason to believe, that our first Kings were
Absolute Monarchs, not only by the Original Constitution of Parliaments, but
also that our very Liberties and Properties proceeded at first from their mere
Grace and Pavour.


F. I know you have Asserted the same things more than once; All the Difficulty
lies in the Proof. And therefore I would not have you be too positive, or rely
too much upon the conciseness or Silence of the Ancient Monkish Writers of
those first times. For since as I own, they have never given us any exact
account of our Ancient Civil Government, nor yet of the History of their own
times: We are forced for the most part, to pick out the Truth from other
Circumstanc^s, or such Passages as we can meet withal in their Ancient Laws and
Customs, nay sometimes from those of their Neighbors, who lived under the same
kind of Government and Laws, with our Saxon Ancestors, as proceeding from one
Common Stock or Original, as I shall show you before we have done. But since we
are already in Possession of our Ancient Laws and Liberties, and of a Right to
Parliaments once every Year, or oftener if need be, by two Ancient Statutes yet
in force, at farthest once every three Years, by a late Act of Parliament it
ought to be your Task, to prove to me the Absolute Power of our first English
Monarchs; and by what Steps and Degrees, they came to part with their Power,
and to be thus limited as we now find them; and when you can show me this, I do
assure you, I will come over to your Opinion.


M. I shall observe the Method you prescribe; And therefore to begin with the
first Entrance of the English Saxons into this Island, I suppose you are not
Ignorant of so Common a piece of History, that all the Title they had to this
Island, was by the Sword or Conquest of their first Princes or Generals, who
being sent by Lot, together with the Armies that followed them out, of their
own Country; because it was too narrow or barren, to sustain such great
Multitudes, they came over hither to seek new Dwellings. Now whether these
Princes were made Kings before they came over, or that they made themselves so
immediately after their Conquest, will be all one; since if we consider them as
Military Captains or Leaders of Armies, their Power was Absolute, as that of
all Generals ever was, and must be by the necessary Laws of Military
Discipline: If we look upon them as Kings or Princes (as it is very likely they
were also before they came over) since they were certainly of the Blood Royal,
all of them deriving their Pedigree from Woden their God, as well as first
King, being thus made Kings by their Fathers, or other near Relations, there is
no Ground to believe they owed their Titles to the Votes, or Suffrages of their
followers: But after they had Settled a Heptarchy, or Seven Kingdoms in this
Part of Britain called England: We find them Governing, and Leading their
People like Absolute Kings and Monarchs over their little Principalities: And
since each Kingdom was Conquered from the Britains under the Conduct, according
to the Laws of Nations, and Right of Conquest, all the Lands of each Kingdom,
belonged to the Conquerors, who though they cantoned them out into shares to
their Captains and Soldiers, according to each Man's Valor or Desert: Yet did
this wholly proceed from their Bounty and Favor, who might have kept the whole
to themselves, if they had pleased; and hence it is, that not only since the
Norman Conquest, but also long before, all the Lands of England were holden of
the King, as the Supreme Lord: And if, so, I suppose you will not deny, but
that according to your own Principle, all our other Privileges and Liberties,
must have been derived from him, since you have already Asserted, that whoever
is Lord of the Soil of a Country, he is so also over the Persons of the People.


F. Before you proceed any farther, I pray give me leave to answer what you
have now said, I doubt with greater show and appearance of Truth, than the
matter will justly bear, when well canvassed. But since I grant our earliest
Writers are very short* in giving us the true Form or Original Constitutions of
our Ancient Saxon Government, it is necessary we look into the Roman Authors
who treat of the Laws and Customs of the Ancient German Nations a Stirp of whom
our Ancient English Saxons certainly were, and in those Authors, you will find,
that they as well as other Nations of the Gothic Original, were never Governed
by Absolute Monarchs; but by Kings or Princes limited by the Laws and
Common-Councils of their own Nations as were all those that descended from this
Gothic Original.

In the first place therefore, see what Tacitus says in his Book de Moribus
Germanorum, Vide Grotis Prolegomenain Historiam Gothicam.
who sufficiently proves, that it was a Fundamental Constitution of all the
German Nations, to order all public Affairs in General Councils or Assemblies
of the whole People. Wherefore the same Author there tells us, De Minoribus
rebus Principes consultant, de Majoribus omnes; it a tamen, ut eaqubque quorum
penes Plebem Arbitrium est apud Principes praetractentur. As also that in this
Council, Cap. 4.
they Tried Great Offenders for Capl^a^ Crimes. Licet apud Consilium accusare
quoque and discrimen capitis intendere. Nor was the Power and Right of their
Kings, Absolute or Arbitrary; Id. cap. 12. Cap. 7.
but limited and Elective as appears by these Passages in the same Author:
Reges ex Nobilitate, Duces ex virtute sumunt. Nec Regibus infinita, aut libera
Potestas, etc. And speaking of the manner of their holding these public
Councils, after silence commanded by the Priests, Mox Rex (says he) vel
Princeps, Cap. 11.
prout aetat cuique, prout Nobilitas, prout decus Bellorum, prout facundia est,
audiuntur, authoritate suaedendi magis quam jubendi potestate: Si displicuit
Sententia, fremitu aspernantur; Sin placuit, frameas concutiunt. Honoratissimum
assensus genus est armis laudari. page 634.
So that you may here see their Kings had no Negative Votes in their Councils,
whatever they might have afterward among the English Saxons; and that they did
not so much as preside in them, but the Priests you may see in the same place;
Silentium per Sacerdotes, quibus tum coercendi jus est, Imperatum. And
therefore it is altogether unlikely, that they should have had that Absolute
Power you fancy over the Lives and Fortunes of the People: Since you plainly
see, that they could neither make Peace nor War, Accuse or Condemn any Man, nor
raise Taxes, without the Approbation or Consent of those Councils.

Now since all the English Saxon Nations were from Germany, I leave it to the
Judgment of your self, or any indifferent Person to consider, whether a People
so free as this, who come over hither not as Subjects, but only as Volunteers
under so many Captains or Generals, who went out merely to seek new
Habitations, should be so fond of a Government, they never knew at home, as to
give these Captains (whom they made their Kings) an Absolute Despotick Power
over their Lives and Estates; which they never could endure in their own
Country; but that they were not then Kings, I thus prove. First of all, no
Ancient Writer that I know of, ever mentioned any such thing, but rather the
Contrary; for who will believe, that before it could be known what the Success
would be, they should make mere Soldiers of Fortune, or Leaders of some Bands
of Adventurers, Kings, before the Country they were to Govern was Conquered, or
that they knew whether ever they should Arrive there or not? And as for the two
first of these Princes that came over (viz.) Heugist and Horsa, our Histories
make them Brothers in joint Command over those Saxons, who were sent hither as
Auxiliaries to the Britains, against the Picts; nor is Hengist ever called
King, or the time of his Reign reckoned, till near Eight years after his coming
over hither, viz. after the Death of Vortimer, Vid. Polychron. Rad. Higden An.
456.
and the driving of Vortiger into Wales: And therefore I can give no account,
how these Princes should become Kings, but by the Consent or Election of their
Soldiers or Followers; for, as for themselves to Create themselves Kings,
without the Consent of their Army or People, is altogether improbable and
absurd, and not at all to be relied on upon your bare word for other Authority
you yet give me none; But for the main part of your Assertion, that the first
Saxon Kings were Absolute Monarchs, because all the Land was Conquered for
them, and to their use, and that all Land was held of them, is altogether as
precarious, our Histories being herein wholly Silent: But though we do not
certainly know which way they divided their Conquest to their Followers; since
Authors mention nothing of it: Yet this I think, I may positively Assert, that
whatever was done in this Kind, by the first Saxon Kings, was not as Absolute
Proprietors of the whole Country, but as public Trustees, for those over whom
they were sent, for since (as I have already observed) these People were
utterly Strangers to a Despotick Government at home, it is altogether unlikely,
that their Followers would confer upon them an Absolute and Unlimited Power
abroad, which they were never used to before: And therefore they could not be
Kings by Right of Conquest, over the Estates or Persons of those who were
fellow Conquerors with them, and set them up for what they were, nor yet over
the Britains: Since they were either totally driven out into Wales or Cornwall,
or else those few that were left, being reduced to a State of Servitude, were
by Degrees Incorporated with the Saxons.

And though for want of Ancient Histories, as well as Letters, among so Rude
and Barbarous a People, as these were at first, we have no Records upon what
express Conditions these Captains were by them Elected to be their Kings: Yet
thus much we may find out by those few Remains we have left us in Bid, and
other Ancient Historians, that they had all of them the same Kind of
Government, and Laws with very little difference from each other,: Since we
find in all the Several Kingdoms of the Heptarchy, there were the same kind of
Wittena Gemots, or Great Councils, by whom they were Elected, and without whose
Advice and Consent, their Kings could do nothing of Moment, either in Peace or
War, as any one that will but read those Laws that are left us, Collected by
Mr. Lambard and Sir H. Spellman in his Saxon Councils, may easily observe.


M. I own indeed, that our Saxon Ancestors, when they had Conquored this
Kingdom, brought in their Saxon Laws along with them; B. A. P. p. 3.
but it does not from thence follow, that they brought their Popular Government
in with them too: And those Assemblies Tacitus mentions, might be Councils of
the German People in General, no not of the Saxons, which Name is not to be
found in all that Author. But what if it be granted, that those People which
were afterward called Saxons, were governed by such Councils, was not this
Government a Democracy? And the People so far from not having their Votes and
Shares in these Councils, as they only had Voices in them. And if any had any
more Power here than others, they were the Priests, who were a sort of
Chair-men in them, commanding Silence, and who had a Coercive Power, as Tacitus
says. In these Governments, no Man can doubt of the Suffrages of the People,
but under such as you mention, you would I think* scarce be contented to live,
where the Priests bare so much sway, where there were no Cities or Great Towns,
but only scattered Houses, and Habitations by Rivers, Fields and Woods, made of
Dirt or Clay, Arms of Trees and Stubble, where there was no literature,
especially among the common People, nor scarce Civility, where there was no
Clothing, but with Garments made of Beasts Skins; No Food but Milk, Pulse and
Flesh, without Art or Cookery, where there was no Propriety in Lands, no Money
no Work for Lawyers, as you will find if you read on in Tacitus, and the 6th.
Book of Cesar's Commentaries.

And as for what you say concerning the beginning of the Saxon Kingdoms in this
Island. B. P. P.. 19, 20.
To this I Reply, that Hengest and Horsa and those other Leaders, who brought
the Saxons into England, were all of them of the Royal Line of the Saxons, as
appears by all our Historians, and so if not Kings, yet well able to Subsist:
Math. Westminster. ad annum 449.
And it was not the manner of those Countries, to thrust out their
Supernumeraries by force, but to draw them out Regularly by Lot, at such a Rate
and Proportion, and to give them Generals and Officers of Great Birth and
Degree.

Nor is it probable, if they had made Articles with their Followers, that these
Princes should have had such Absolute Authority, as they had over the Lives and
Fortunes of their Subjects, in the more early times, almost all the Privileges
of the English Nation, being granted long since that time, nay, most of them
since the Conquest; Yea, since the Barons Wars. But as for what you say
concerning the Gothic or Vandal Kingdoms, since they relate nothing to our
Government, I need not say any thing to them, nor does it follow, that if their
Kings were limited, or but upon Condition, that ours must be so too.


F. I see you would fain evade the Authority of Tacitus, concerning the
People's having any share of the Government amongst the Saxons, Vi. Verstegan
Restitution of decayed intelligence. p. 23.
because forsooth, that Nation is not particularly named in his History; But
tho the Saxons are not particularly named by Tacitus: Yet the Angli are there
mentioned among those German Nations, who Worshiped their Common Goddess
Hertha, which that Author interprets to be Terra, the Earth: And you very well
know, that from these Angli, or Angles, the English Nation as well as name is
derived. But tho Tacitus who lived about the beginning of the Emperor Trajans
Reign, Tacit. de Mor. Germ. Vi. Ptol. in Tab. 4. Europ.
names not the Saxons, yet P^olomy who writ within 40 years after expressly
mentions them placing their Country not far North of the River Albis, and near
the Place where all agree the Angli were Seated, so that they were either all
one and the same Nation, or very little different. But Etheliverd Qu^s^or, one
of our Ancientest English Saxon Historians, in his first Book, makes this
Nation of the Saxons, of a far wider extent, and that it reached from the River
Rhine all along the Seacoast up to Donia, now called Denmark.

But since I see you cannot well tell how to evade this Testimony of Tacitus,
but by affirming that the Government in Germany, was a Democracy, and that the
People had the only Sway in it, is a great mistake, since he expressly mentions
their Kings and Princes; and there only speaks of the manner of Transacting all
public Affairs, in which it is true, the People (as it is very well known by
our Ancient Histories) had formerly a greater Share than now: Yet does he not
thereby exclude the Prince and Nobility, from having also their Shares in it.
And as for what follows in Tacitus of the Royal Power, auctoritate sua^endi,
magis quam jubendi Potestate; I suppose you cannot deny, but that Privilege
yet remains to us, since the King cannot command the Parliament to make what
Laws, or give him what Money he pleases; and therefore that does not make it a
Democracy, much less the Priests presiding in their Assemblies, which is no
more to be wondered at, than that the Bishops have still Votes, and their share
of Legislature in the House of Peers: Or that a Bishop, when Chancellor or
Keeper should be Speaker in the House of Peers. Or supposing that their Priests
had more Power among them, than the Christian Clergy had after they were
Converted, does it therefore follow, that it was not the same Government, or
that it must therefore be so intolerable, that I would not have bin willing to
have lived under it? Since I must tell you, I am not against Civil Offices,
though exercised by Clergymen, as far as the Business of their Function, and
the Canons of the Church will permit. As for the rest which you object
concerning the Barbarous living of the Ancient Germans, it either makes nothing
to the matter in hand, or else against you; since it proves plainly, that
Absolute Monarchy, was not the first Government among all Nations, as you
suppose. Nor does it therefore follow, that because these People were Rude and
Barbarous; therefore they had not the Wit to prefer Absolute Monarchy, before
all other Governments, since their Conquerors the Romans (who sure were a
Civilized People) did likewise as much abhor it.

But as for what you say against Hengist, and those other Leaders, who brought
the Saxons into Britain, being Elected Kings by their Followers, is nothing but
mere Guess, and Conjecture. For that they were not Kings at home, you your self
grant; and whether they were able well to Subsist at home, or not, is nothing
to the Purpose: It is plain, they thought they could mend their Condition, or
else would never have left their Country. And tho it be granted, that Hengist
with his Followers, came not over as Enemies, but Auxiliaries to the Britains;
Yet it is not therefore more likely, that they were chosen by the King of their
own Nation, than that their own Followers should afterward Elect them,
especially when the one is agreeable to our own Historians, and the other not:
For Mattheus Florilegus tells us, that Horsus being slain, the Saxons Fratrem
suum Hengislum in Regnum Cantiae sublimaverunt, that is, they Elected or
Advanced him to be King, if I understand any thing by that word, and this
agrees with the Polichronicon of Ranulph Higden, who places the beginning of
Hengists Reign, immediately after the Death of his Brother Horsus, viz. An.
Dom. 465. Eight years after the coming of the Saxons into Britain; and that the
rest of the Saxons who came hither after, had no better Title then Election. I
could farther prove, if the time would give me leave: For they that will read
the Ancient Accounts of the Saxon Nation, and what Government they had among
them, long after the time of Caesar and Tacitus, will find that it was
impossible, that they should be thus Created Kings, before they came over;
since at that time, they had no such things as constant Kings amongst them, for
in those times it was rather an Aristocracy, then a Monarchy; for as Johannes
Pomarius in his Saxon Chronicle shows us, for which I refer you to Verstegan,
where this passage is made use of at large. Verstegan p. 68. So that if this
were the Government of the Saxons; as low as the time of Charles the Great, I
durst leave it to any indifferent person to judge, whether the first Saxon
Kings in this Island, were made so by their own Princes before they came over,
or were chosen by their Followers, since no Historians mention the former, tho
all of them agree of the latter: They commonly using this Phrase, Regem
fecerunt, or elegerunt. And that all the first Kings of the Heptarchy were
Elective, Vid. Earl of Stamfords speech at the General Quarter Sessions at
Leicester, 1690. and the Notes thereupon. Vide Bromton f. 770. Chron. de
Mailros. f. 137.
nothing is more plain, since the Great Council of the Nobility and People did
not only Elect them, but often Depose them too, when they grew intolerable,
through Tyranny or Misgovernment, as may appear by the Example of Sigibert,
King of the West Saxons and diverse others I could Instance in, who were
Expelled this Kingdom (as Brompton, and other Ancient Chronicles tell us) by
the Unanimous Consent and Deliberation of the Nobility and People. Many like
Instances I could give you in the other Kingdoms of the Heptarchy, but that it
would be too tedious.

Nor does your Reason signify any thing, that it is not probable, that the
first Princes were made Kings upon Condition, because of the Absolute Authority
they had over the Lives and Fortunes of their Subjects; since it is altogether
false in matter of Fact; none of the Saxon Kings being able alone to make Laws,
or impose Taxes upon their People, without their Consents in their Great
Councils, much less to make War without it; for then the War tho begun by the
King alone, must have signified little in an Age, when there were no standing
Armies, nor Money in the Princes Power to pay them, there being then but little
Coin of any sort, and their Revenues being mostly paid in Victuals.


M. Pray Sir give me leave to interrupt you a little, I own indeed, that the
particular Laws and Constitutions of each of the Kingdoms of the Heptarchy, are
not particularly known, and perhaps some of their Kings might be Elective, and
consequently liable to be Deposed by their People; whether by Right or Wrong, I
will not now Dispute, but if we consider the State of things, after these Seven
Kingdoms became reduced into one; you will find them much altered: And as
Egbert our first Saxon Monarch, Reduced all those Kingdoms into one, So it is
to be supposed, that having no Right to them, but by Conquest, and the
Submission of their Kings, when overcome in Battle, both he and his Successors,
must needs have become far more Absolute, than they were before, and if they
were Elective before that time, did now certainly become Hereditary Monarchs;
The Crown Descending from Father to Son, for diverse Descents: And so
Consequently, these Princes granted diverse Privileges and Liberties to the
People of those Kingdoms they Conquered: And that they were no other than the
free Grants or Concessions of our former Kings, upon Petition or Request of the
People, and accepted by the Clergy, Nobility and People of the Kingdom in their
Great Councils. For this I need go no farther than the Coronation Oath, taken
by the Kings of England, when the Archbishop of Canterbury asks the King, Sir,
will you grant and keep, and by your Oath, confirm to the People of England,
the Laws and Customs granted to them, by the Ancient Kings of England your
Predecessors, and namely the Laws and Customs and Liberties granted to the
Clergy, and People by the Glorious King Edward your Predecessor?

From whence we may observe, that all the Bishops, Earls, Barons and People
there present, do own and confess; that their most Ancient Laws, Customs and
Liberties, were granted to them by Edward the Confessor, and other Ancient
Kings.


F. I doubt you will prove as much out in the account you give me of our King's
Power, after the Seven Kingdoms were reduced into one, as you were before. For
though I grant that the Title of the West Saxon Kings over all the rest,
proceeded from Conquest, and the Submission of the Kings and People they
Conquered, yet were they not all actually reduced into one Kingdom or Monarchy,
till a good while after; the Kings of Mercia, and of the East Angles,
continuing in Being, till the Coming in of the Danes, as you will find by our
Saxon Annals. And though it is true, the West Saxon Kings made those Kings
Tributary to them: Yet that they did not become more Absolute thereby, appears
from the Testimony of our Ancient Histories, Since we find them Transacting all
Affairs in their Wittena Gemots, or Great Councils, as well after their
Conquest, as they did before. And therefore we find in an Old Register of St.
Leonard Abbey in York (cited by Mr. Dodsworth in the Monast^^on Anglic. put out
by Mr. Dugdale) this Memorable passage: Vol. 1. p. 367.
Memorandum quod Anno Domini 800. Egbertus Rex totlin Britanniae in Parliamento
apud Wintoniam mutavlt nomen Regni (de consensu Populi sui) and jussit illud de
Caetero vocari Angliam. And Will. of Malmsbury, Chapter 6.
that Ancient and Exact Historian, says expressly of this King Egbert. Lib. 11.
Has omnes Regnorum Varietates Egbertus animi Magnitudine composeuit, and ea uni
quadrans Imperio ad uniforme Dominium, servans unicuique proprias Leges,
vocavit [Angliam.] It is therefore most evident, that upon the Submission of
those Kingdoms he Conquered, he promised and agreed, to govern them according
to their Ancient Laws. And hence we find the Mercian Laws, called Merchen Lage,
to have continued in force long after that Kingdom was united to that of the
West Saxons.

Nor will your Inference from the Coronation Oath, prove of any greater Moment.
For tho it be therein recited, that diverse of the Laws, Liberties, etc. we now
enjoy, were granted by King Edw. the Confessor, and other Kings: Yet must it
not be so understood, as if the People of England had no Laws, or Civil Rights
before his time; for that were to contradict plain matter of Fact, and the
Histories themselves I have already Cited. But why they were called his Laws,
and his Customs: Will. of Malmsbury has very well observed, when speaking of
the good Laws made by Ancient Kings, and especially by King Ethelred, which
were confirmed by King C^^^e, he has this remarkable passage, In quarum
custodiam etiam ^unc temporis Bonarum. Sub nomine Regis Edwardi juratur, non
quod ille Statuerit, sed quod observaverit. The like I may say for the Laws of
diverse other Saxon Kings, which tho they go under their Names, Yet were made by
the Assent of the Great Council of the Kingdom, as by the Titles of the Laws
themselves in Mr. Lamberts and Sir H. Spelman's Collection of them, you may be
satisfied if you please.

But for a Taste, pray see the Laws of King Alfred (which you Cited) which tho
said to be made by him (as indeed it is true, he compiled them out of diverse
other Laws, formerly in force in the other Kingdoms of the Heptarchy) Yet that
they were also shown, and assented to by the Wittenae Gemots, pray see the
Conclusion of these Laws, in Sir H. Spelman: The words are Remarkable. Ego
Aelfredus West Saxonum Rex, ostendi haec omnibus Sapientibus meis, and dixerunt
places ea custodiri. So that the calling them the Laws of King Alfred, or King
Edward, does no more prove, that they alone made them then our now Citing such,
or such a Statute of K. Henry 8th. or King Charles the 1st. do therefore
suppose, that those Kings made Laws by their own Sole Authority: such Phrases
among Ancient Historians, as well as our selves at this Day, being used only
for Brevity sake, and signify no more then their Confirmation of them.


M. I shall not deny, but that our Ancient English Kings, did for the most part
make no Laws, without the Consent of their Great Council: Yet I think I can
give you an unanswerable Argument, to prove that the very Being and
Constitution of Parliaments or Great Councils, did in the beginning, wholly
proceed from the Grace and Favor of some of our Ancient Kings; the to which of
them to ascribe, it is not easy to Determine. But if we may believe your own
Author the Mirror, he tells us almost at the very beginning: That King Alfred,
for the Good State of the Realm, caused to Assemble the Counts or Peers, and
then ordained for a perpetual Custom, that twice in the Year, or oftener, for
Business in time of Peace, they should Assemble at London, to treat of the
Government of the People of God, and how folks should keep themselves from
offenses, and live in quiet, and should receive Right, by certain vsages and
Judgments. And According to this Establishment, were made diverse Ordinances by
diverse Kings, until the present King (viz.) Edw. 1st.

But to come to the proof of what I affirm, it is certain, that in those first
times, the Saxon Kings conferred all the Bishoprics and principal Abbeys in
England, per Annulum and Baculum, as Ingulf and Malmsbury expressly tell us. And
as for the Earls or Aldermen of Counties, as also the Great Thanes, Judges or
Noblemen of the Kingdom, they were only Offices held for life in those times,
which the King might Discharge them of at his Pleasure: And hence we find the
Titles of Aldermanus Regis, and Thanus Regis, so frequently to occur in our
Ancient Histories and Charters: These comprehended under the general Name of
Wites, were the only Constituent parts of the Great Council in those times; for
as concerning those we now call the Commons of England, we do not so much as
find the least mention of them, or any Representatives for them, till the
latter end of the Reign of King Hen. 3d. or the middle of Edw. 1sts. Reign, as
I think Dr. Brady has Learnedly and fully proved in his last Edition of his
Answer to Mr. Petyt's Treatise of the Rights of the Commons of England
Asserted. Now if it plainly appears, that every part or Member of the
Parliament, did Anciently receive their very Being, from the mere Grace and
Concession of our Ancient Monarchs; can you, or any Reasonable Man assert, with
any Color of Truth, that our Great Councils or Parliaments, could be a part of
the Fundamental Constitution, and as Ancient, as the Government it self? And if
Parliaments did thus receive all that Authority they now Exercise from the
Kings Bounty, can any Man doubt whether all the Rights and Privileges we now
enjoy, are to be Ascribed to any other Original? For if the very Keepers (as
you will have it) of these Liberties, did all proceed from the King, then
certainly the things to be Kept, must do so too; and when you can answer this
Argument I have now brought, I think I may safely promise you to be your
Proselite, and to come over to your Opinion.


M. I confess, this is the most plausible Argument you have hitherto urged, and
if I cannot answer it, I do likewise promise you to become your Convert. But tho
granting that Parliaments might have received their Being from the Favors of
our Kings, I might deny your Consequence, that therefore it will follow, that
all the Rights and Liberties of the Subjects of England, must do so too; since
they might very well have reserved to themselves both Hereditary Properties, as
also a Right to their Lives, Liberties and Estates, which the King should not
take from them, without just Cause, and Legal Trial; which when they found
invaded by succeeding Princes, they might then (and not till then) find
constant Great Councils, and Parliaments to be necessary for that End, and as
the firmest Bullwark against the Tyranny of Succeeding Princes: But the Author
of the Mirror in the Section, before the place from whence you took your last
Quotation, expressly tells us, that upon the first Election of a King to Reign
over the rest of the Saxon Princes, they first of all mad^ him to Swe^r, that
He would maintain the Holy Christian Faith, with all his Power, and would
govern his People according to Right, without regard to any Person, and should
be liable to suffer Right (i. e. Judgment) as well as others of his People. And
tho I do not give any Credit to all the Story he there relates, of 40 Sovereign
Princes in this Island at once: Yet the Substance of it may be true, that this
Election was made of King Egbert, by the 40 Earls or Counts of Provinces, which
were afterward by King Alfred, called Shires.

But that this Author ascribes the Beginning of Great Councils, to the first
Institution of the Government; pray see what he there f^rther says. And tho the
King can have no Peer in the Land, nevertheless, if by his own wrong, Fr.
nequidant
he offends against any of his People, none of those that Judge for him, can be
both Judge and Party: It is therefore agreeable to Right, that the King should
have Companions to Hear and Determine in Parliament, all Writs and Complaints,
concerning the Wrongs of the King, Queen and their Children, of which Wrongs
they could not otherwise have Common Right. These Companions are therefore
called Counts after the Latin, C^mit^e. Whereby you may see, that this Author
and Bracton, who were Contemp^^aries, were of the same Opinion in this
important Point. And I cannot imagine, how any Prince who had Power sufficient
in his hands, to do what he pleased (as you suppose our English Saxon Monarchs
to have had at the first) would ever, if they could have helped it, have
instituted a Court, one of whose chief Business^s it was, to examine and
redress the Wrongs and Oppressions of themselves, their Wives and Children.

But besides all this, what you say might be somewhat likely, that our
Parliaments or Great Councils did owe their Original only to the Kings good
Will and Pleasure, did we not find the like Constitution, to have bin in all
the Neighboring Kingdoms in Europe, which have bin raised according to the
Gothic Model of Government, upon the Ruins of the Roman Empire, now let us look
into Scotland, and there we shall find this Institution as Ancient, as any
History or Record they have. If we pass into France, we shall find their
Assembly of Estates or Great Council, to have bin as Ancient as their first
Kings, Vi. Hottoma^ Franco Gallia.
and to have had as much Power, as any where else in Europe: Since they not
only frequently Elected, but also Deposed their Kings of the first Race, and
disposed of the Succession of the Crown, as they thought fit. If we look into
Spain, we shall find in the two greatest and most Considerable Kingdoms, viz.
Castile and Arragon, the like Assemblies* the Power of which was so great in
the latter, that they could even Depose the King himself, if he Tyrannized
over, or Oppress't them; If we go more Northward, we shall find in the Ancient
Kingdoms of Denmark and Sweden, and Norway, that their Assembly of Estates, or
Dyets, Elected their Kings, and could likewise Depose them, till those Kingdoms
became Hereditary, which was but of modern times. I shall omit Poland, because
perhaps you may dispute whether it is a Kingdom, or a Commonwealth. But if we
pass into Hungary, which was Instituted by the Huns, a Nation of Gothic
Original, we shall find not only the like Assembly of Estates, as in the other
Kingdoms, but also, that they had a Magistrate called the Palatine, who was as
it were the Conservator of the People's Liberties, and who could Resist even
the King himself, if he invaded them, and which is also very remarkable in all
these Kingdoms (except Denmark) the Representatives of the Cities, or Principal
Towns, (which constituted the third Estate, or Commons in those Kingdoms) had
always a place in those Great Councils.

So that to conclude, it is almost impossible to conceive, how these Kingdoms I
have now mentioned, could all agree to fall into the same sort of Government
about the same time, unless it had proceeded from the particular temper, and
Genius of the Germane and Gothic Nations, from which they were derived. Or who
can believe, that all these Nations, and their Kings finding the like
Conveniences from these Great Councils, and Inconveniences by the want of them,
should all Conspire to set them up in each of these particular Kingdoms.


M. I will not deny, but that the Institution of Great Councils, or Assemblies
of the Estates, might be as Ancient as the Government it self, in several of
those Kingdoms you mention, which were at first Elective; but what is that to
England, where our Monarchy has bin by Succession, from the first Institution
of it, and not Elective, as you suppose. Nor do I much value the Authority of
the Mirror, as to the Great Antiquity he Ascribes to this Assembly of Counts
or (Comites as Bracton calls them) and in which by the way, no Commons are
mentioned.) And tho I grant the Judicial Power of the House of Peers, is very
Ancient: Yet that it wholly proceeded at first from the Indulgence of our Kings,
F.F.O.I. p. 34.
appears from hence, that there was always a necessity of the King's Presence
in Parliaments, which is very well proved by Sir Robert Cotton, in a Learned
Treatise written on that Subject; wherein he proves, that in all Consultations
of State, and Decisions of private Plaints, it is clear from all times, the
King was not only present to Advise, but also to Determine. And whenever the
King is present, all Power of Judging, which is derived from his, cease, the
Votes of the Lords may serve for matter of Advice, the Final Judgment is only
the Kings: But indeed of late years, Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth, by reason
of their Sex, being not so fit for public Assemblies, have brought it out of
use, by which means it is come to pass, that many things which were in former
times acted by Kings themselves, have of late bin left to the Judgment of the
Peers; who in quality of Judges Extraordinary are permitted for the Ease of the
King, and in his Absence to determine such matters as were Anciently brought
before the King himself, sitting in Person, attended by his Great Council of
Prelates and Peers: And the Ordinances that are made there, receive their
Establishment either from the King's Presence in Parliament, where his Chair of
State is constantly placed, or at least from his Confirmation of them, who in
all Courts, and in all Causes, is Supreme Judge. All Judgments are by, or under
him, and cannot be without, much less against his Approbation: The King only,
and none but He, if He were able, should judge all Causes (says Bracton.) so
that nothing seems plainer to me, than that the Jurisdiction which the House of
Peers have hitherto exercised for the Hearing and Determining all Causes, as
well Civil as Criminal, by way of Appeal, not only between Subjects, but also
in all Accusations against the Lords themselves, proceeds wholly from the Kings,
which may appear by an Ancient Precedent, Vi. Script. x An. 1041. Col. 937.
mentioned by Abbot Brampton in his History. It is the Case between King Edw.
the Confessor, and Godwin Earl of Kent, whom the King accused for the Death of
his Brother Prince Alfred, before the House of Peers, and there you will find,
that after the Earl had put himself upon the Judgment of the Kings Court, the
King thereupon said: You Noble Lords, Earls and Barons (i. e. Thanes) of the
Land, who are my Liege-Men now gathered here together, and have heard my
Appeal, and Godwin's Answer: I will, that in this Appeal between us, ye Decree
Right Judgment, and do true Justice: And upon their Judgment that the Earl
should make the King sufficient Satisfaction in Gold and Silver, for the Death
of his Brother, the King being thereof informed, and not willing to contradict
it (the Historian there says) He ratified all they had judged. I could give
you many other Precedents of latter Date, were it not too tedious: But this is
sufficient to show, that what the P^ers acted in this matter, was by the King's
Sole Will and Permission. I shall only conclude with one Precedent more, in
Case of some what alike Nature. It is that of Hen. Spencer Bishop of Norwich, 7
Rich. 2d. who was accused for joining with the French: The Bishop complained,
what was done against him, did not pass by the Assent and Knowledge of the
Peers, whereupon it was said in Parliament* that the Cognizance and Punishment
of his Offense, did of C^mmon Right, and Ancient Custom of the Realm of
England, solely and wholly belong to our Lord the King, and no other. From all
which I infer, that the Judicial Power exercised by the House of Peers, is
merely derivative from, and Subservient to the Supreme Power, resi^^ing in the
King. From whence it also follows, that if the Peers have no Power nor Honor,
but what proceeds from the Prince* and that the Commons were of a much later
Date; then both the Being and Privileges of both Houses, had but one and the
Self-same Original, viz. nothing else but the mere Grace or Favor of our
Kings. I have only added this, the better to enforce my former Argument; And
therefore I desire you would now answer them both together.


F. I am very glad your last Argument does not prove so formidable, as you
suppose, for to remove that out of the way. I must tell you, that you now very
much mistake the Question, which is not only concerning the Judicial power of
the Peers alone, but the Legislative Power of the House of Peers and Commons
taken together, which is the Subject of our present Dispute. And therefore if I
should grant you, that the Judicial Power of the Peers* is derived wholly from
the King, Yet would it not at all ^mpai^ the Legislative Power of either of the
Houses, which no Historian or Law-book that I know of (that is of any Credit or
Antiquity) ascribes to the King's Favor, as you suppose. Nor is it true, that
the House of Peers can give no Judgment, either Civil or Criminal, without the
King's Consent or Approbation, which is never so much as asked, let the Cause be
what it will; nor is his Presence at such Judgments at all (...), but indeed
you confound the King's Council in Parliament (where I have showed you already,
he sat and dispatched diverse Causes in a Room or Chambe^, distinct from that of
the Peers) with the House of Lords.

But to come to your main Argument, that our Parliament must owe its Original
to the King, because each of the Estates of which it consists does so. This I
hope will prove as weak, when thoroughly considered: For first of all, I could
show you, that those Councils could not owe their Original to the K. since the
Saxon Kings rather owed their Original to them, by whom they were most commonly
Elected, as I could show you out of our Ancient Historians, if it were now a
proper time for it. But as for our Bishops and Abbots, etc. which anciently
made so great a figure in our Saxon Great Councils (which I can show you, were
then both Civil and Ec^l^siastic^l Assemblies) I have already proved out of
Tacitus, that among the Ancient Germans (a part of whom our Ancient English
Saxons were) their Priests (who were their Clergy) had a Considerable Authority
in their Common Councils. And can any body believe, that a sort of People so
Powerful and Sub^ile, as the Priests then were, would lose their Power after
they came over into England? L. 2. c. 13.
And we find in Bid that Edwin King of Northumberland, consulted with a
Council of his Great M^n and Priests, concerning his embracing the Christian
R^ligi^n, and when it was generally received, can any body think, that the
Christian Bish^ps and Clergy would not expect to Succeed in the same Station,
which the Heathen Priests before held in their Councils? And that they enjoyed
this Power very early, appears from hence, Vi. Spel. Coun. p. 619, 620.
that the same Ethelbert could not endow the Church and Monastery of
Canterbury, Sine Assensu Magnatum and Principum tam Cleri quam Populi.

But indeed you are as much mistaken in the manner of the Ancient Elections of
Bishops, and Abbots in England. For tho I own that at the time of the Conquest,
and somewhat before there might be no such Elections of them as the Ancient
Canons required, Yet that this was not so at the first you may see in Bede's
Ecclesiastical History, and other Historians, where it is often mentioned, that
Bishops were chosen according to the Canons by the Archbishops and Bishops of
the Province, and Abbots by their Convent: Nor was the Kings investing of them
per annulum, and Bacculum, then looked upon as any Derogation to their Canonical
Election, that being no more than either a Ceremony of investing them with
their Temporalities, or a token of the King's Confirmation of the Election. And
that this was so, appears by King Edgars Charter to the Abbey of Glastenbury,
wherein he retains to himself and his Heirs, jus tribuendi fratri Electo
baculum pastoralem.

But that which so much Scandalized both Ingulf and Malmsbury, was a Custom
then in use, as also long before the Conquest, of confirming the Bishop Elect
in a full Synod or Parliament. And to this Custom, Ingulf refers when he tells
us, A multis annis retroactis nulla eras Electio Prelatorum mere Libera,
Ingulph. Hist. fol. 509. b.
and Canonica: Sed omnes Dignitates tam Episcoporum quam Abbatum Regis Curia
pro su^ complacentia conferebat. Where by Curia Regis, you must not understand
the King's Court in the Sense it is commonly taken, but for the Great Council
or Mikel Synod, as it was then called, and which dispatched Ecclesiastical, as
well as Civil Affairs, in the same Sense as Curia Regis is used by Brompton, in
the Case of King Edw. and Earl Godwin, which you but now cited. And in which
Sense it is always used by Ingulph, when he speaks of the Great Councils under
the two Williams: I will not be very tedious on this Subject, and shall
therefore give you but one Authority on this Head, and it is that of Walslan,
who was made Bishop of Worcester, p. 20.10.
in the time of Edw. the Confessor, and that as Mat. Paris tells us, Vnanimi
consensu tam Cl^ri, quam totius Plebis (Rege ut quem vellent sibi eligerent
praesulem annuente) in Episcopum ejusdem loci eligitur. And then he goes on
thus, Nam licet fratrum non deesset electio, Yet that there concurred to it,
Plebis petitio Voluntas Episcoporum, Gratia Procerum, Regis Authoritas: All
which amounts to no more, than that he was Elected, Chosen and Confirmed by the
King, and all the Three Estates. For here is the Petition of the Commons joined
with the Good Will of the Lords, and both backed by the Kings Authority. Yet
that all this did not hinder him from being invested per Baculum, and Annulum
as the Custom then was, may appear by the Speech this Bishop Wulstan made at
the Tomb of Edward the Confessor, whither he went to resign his Pastoral Staff
after his being deprived of his Bishopric, by Archbishop Lanfrank, and the
Synod. And the Conclusion of this Speech is remarkable, Tibi, (Scil. Edwardo)
Baculum resigno qui d^disti, Curam ^orum dimitto quos mihi commendasti. A like
Example I could give you of the Election of this Archbishop Lanfrank himself
in the Kings Curia, or Great Council not long after the Entrance of K. William;
but for this I refer you to Eadmerus.

But admitting that the King alone had in those days conferred all Bishoprics,
does it therefore follow, that his Nomination of Bishops in the Pursuance of
that Trust, which the Kingdom reposed in him did likewise make them to derive
all the Right they had to sit in the Great Council from the King's Sole
Authority? you might indeed with as much Reason urge, that because the Emperor
Theodosius (as likewise diverse of his Predecessors) did Nominate Bishops to
Sees, therefore they did likewise receive from them all the Authority they had
of appearing, and acting in General Councils, which I am sure you are too good
a Church of England Men to affirm.


M. I must confess, I never did so closely examine the Ancient Form of
conferring of Bishoprics before the Conquest, as I find you have done, and I
will better Examine your Authorities, and if I find this Custom to have been
constant and uniform I shall come over to your opinion; though I doubt it will
not prove to have been so general as you would make it, since by the Authority
you have now brought out of Mat. Paris it appears, that it was the King who
gave leave to this Election of Bishop Wulstan in the Great Council, which I am
not yet convinced did then take upon them to meddle in Ecclesiastical matters
without the Kings Consent: but since you have spoken enough concerning the
Right, and Antiquity of the Bishops sitting in our Great Councils, it is time
you now speak of the Right of the Peers, or Temporal Lords, which certainly
could have no place there but from the Favor and Concession of our Kings: So
that whether we consider those Lords in the Saxon time as Rulers of Counties,
called in old English Earls or Aldermen, in Latin Duces, or Comites, or else as
Judges or Counselors called in old Saxon, Wites, or Wisemen, in Latin
Sapientes; or lastly as Thanes, in Latin Ministri, who were either Military
Tenants, or Civil Ministers, or else Officers of the King in his Court, or
other Employments, none of them were Hereditary in those times, but all of them
either depended upon the King's Will, or else owed their Honors and ^states
to his Favor,


F. I hope, notwithstanding the Confidence you put in this part of the
Argument, that it has no more weight in it, than the former. For though I grant
there was no such thing as Hereditary Earldoms before the coming in of the
Normans; so that tho both the Earls and Aldermen might have places in the Great
Councils, ratione officii (as the Earl Marshall of England has at this day)
and not by Tenure, Vi. Dugdale 's Preface to his Baronage of England.
as they did after that time: Yet I very much doubt, whether they sat there
only ratione officii, and not as Thanes, or by reason of their great Lordships,
or Estates in Lands, but if they sat there as Earls or Alderm^n; yet might
they not be the only Persons that sat in those Councils by that Title: For
there were besides these, Aldermen of Cities and Burroug^s, who were Elected by
those Places, and who it is very likely appeared for them as their
Representatives in those Councils, until by Succession of time those Towns
began to send two Burgesses in their stead, some Footsteps of which still
remain in London, where the Aldermen of every Ward are first proposed to be
Elected Parliament Men before any other, and it is certain that these Aldermen,
in the most Ancient Cities, as London, York, Lincoln, and^. are not Elected by
any Grant or Charter from the Crown, but by an immemo^ial Right of Prescription.

But admitting that these Earls or Aldermen appeared in these Councils, by
reason of their Offices, or Dignities which the King conferred upon them, yet
does it not prove, that the very Office it self proceeded (...) from him, since
we find the Authority of those chief Men, whom (...) calls Princes (and which
Answer these Earls) to have been used among the Ancient Germans long before,
when he tells us in the same Chapter, where we cited the rest: Iura per Pag^^,
Vi^osque [Principes] reddunt, ^enteni Singulis ex plebe Comites Consilium
simul, and auctoritas adsunt. Which exactly answers our County and Hundred
Courts, under the Saxon Kings, wherein the Alderman of the County or his Deputy
the Sheriff pre^ided, and the Free Men of the County or Hundred were the Judges
of all matters of Fact. So that tho the King might appoint these Princes or
Governors of Provinces, or Counties, yet does it no more follow, that they
owed their Being and Place in the great Council wholly to his Will, than (as I
said before) supposing that the King had Anciently the Nom^nation of all the
Bishops and Abbots in England, that therefore they must also owe their Place in
our great Councils, or Synods wholly to them, since the King performed both of
them as a Public Trust committed to him by the Common Weal in the one case, as
much as in the other.

But indeed, I think the greatest part of the Members of this Assembly (besides
Aldermen, and Burgesses for Cities and Towns) consisted of those Thanes, whose
Names are often found in the Subscription of the An^ient Charters of our Saxon
Kings after the Principes, Duces and Com^^^s, and that tho many of them might
be the Kings Feudal Thanes, or (...) Grand Serjeanty, or Knights S^rvice in
Chief, as Mr. S^lden tells us in his Titles of Honor, Seld. Tit. ^on. ^ol.
507, 508, 515.
yet that Author no where excludes the (...) or (...) i. e. middle, or less
Thanes from having Voices in those Assemblies who were afterward Styled
Vavissours, or Lords of Townships (afterward) called Maunors, with Courts
annexed to them under the Names of Sac and Soc; which were the same with our
Court-(...). and Court Baron: Especially if you please farther to consider,
what a vast n^mber of Al^dari^, or Free Tenants there were then, who held their
Lands Discharged of all Services, but the Common Burdens and Taxes of the
Nation, none but the Lands of the Kings Thanes, being held by Military
S^rvices, before the Entrance of the Normans.

So that whoever will but consider the Nature of our Saxon Councils, will find,
that the Greatest part of the Persons that appeared there, did not owe their
(...) to their being the King's Ministers or Officers, as you suppose* but to
their holding such Lands and Poss^ssions as Capacitated them, and gave them a
Right to have places in those Great Councils: And that this was (...) we need
go no further, than the Laws of King Athel^^an, where you will find G^mility it
self* annexed to an Estate in Land. Vi. Lamb. p. 54.
For if you will but be pleased to Consult King Athelston's Laws, you will
there find, that if a Villa^aus or C^eorl could so thrive, as to get an Estate
of five Hides in Lands, he was reckoned a Thane, i. e. a Gentleman or Nobleman,
as they were promiscuoully reckoned at that time.

So that tho I suppose, there might not be in those times that exact
distinction between Peers and Commons, as there has bin established since the
coming in of the Normans; Yet was it the same thing in effect, since the
Bishops. Earls or Aldermen of Shires (tho not enjoyed as Hereditary Honors)
might make then the Greater Nobility or Peers, as the Thanes were the Less
Nobility, Gentlemen or Freeholders; who all appearing in person, might together
with the Aldermen or Burgesses of Towns Represent those which we now call the
Commons; And supposing that then there were no Knights of Shires, yet these
being then the only Proprietors of any considerable Estates of Land in the
Nation, might very well represent all their V^ssals or Vnder-Tenents, as
Tenants for years, and at Will, are at this day by the Knights of Shires, tho
they have no Votes at their El^ction.

To conclude, tho I grant that the King's of England, are the Fountain of that
Honor, which we call Peerage: Yet it is only in Pursuance of that Ancient
Constitution, which their Ancestors brought out of Old Saxony and Normandy,
along with them, as the firmest defense of Kingly Power against the Insolency
and Encroachments of the Common or Meaner sort of People, as well as Tyranny in
their Princes. And therefore in all Monarchies where there is no Hereditary
Nobility, the Prince has no surer ^ay to maintain his Power, than by Standing
Armies, to whose Humors and Pactions, he is more Subject, and is also more
liable to be Murdered, or Deposed by them (when discontented with him) than
ever any limited Prince yet was, or can be by his Nobility or People: As I
could show you from a multitude of Examples, not only from the Roman, but
Moorish, Arabic and Turkish Histories; and therefore to constitute a lasting
stable limited Monarchy (as ours is) it must be according to the Model I have
here Proposed.


M. I shall not contradict the latter part of your Discourse; but I must freely
tell you, that if as (you your self grant,) there were no Knights of Shires in
the Saxon times, I cannot see how those we call the vulgar or Commons of
England, had then any Representatives in the Great Council, since those Thanes
or Lords of Manors, whom you suppose to have Represented their Tenants or
Vassals, were never chosen by them, and consequently could not properly be
their Representatives: But I think it will be easy enough to prove, that none
of your Inferior or middle Thanes, but only the Chi^f or Superior, had places
in those Assemblies. So that these Feudal Thanes, or such as held of the King
in Chief by Military Service, were of the sam: Kind with them that were after
the Norman times, Honorary or Parliamentary Barons, and their Thainlands alone,
were the Honorary Thainlands, and such as were afterward Parliamentary
Baronies. Nor can I find any Footsteps in our Ancient English Histories of
Cities and Buroughs, sending any Representatives to those Great Councils: So
that admit I should own at present, that the Bishops and some Great Abbots, had
from the first Settling of Christianity in this Island, an Indisputable place in
the Great Councils, and likewise that the Earls, Aldermen or Great Nobility,
had also Votes in those Assemblies, and that the Chief Thanes, or less Nobles,
had also their places there, by reason of the Tenure of their Estates; yet
certainly the House of Commons was of a much later Date, and owed its being
either to the Grace and Favor of our Kings of the Norman Race, or else to
those that had Vsurp't their Power: And this I think Dr. Brady has very well
proved against Mr. Petyt; and I think I could convince you also of the Truth of
it by his, as well as other Arguments, were it not now too late to enter upon
so long a Subject.


F. Therefore, pray let us defer any further Discourse of this Question, till
the next time we meet, wherein I hope I may show you, that if you owe that
Opinion to the Doctors Arguments, he has led you into a very gross mistake.
And I shall only at present take my leave of you, and bid you good night.


M. I wish you the like.


ADVERTISEMENT.
A Brief Discourse of the Law of Nature, according to the Principles and Method
laid down in the Reverend Dr. Cumberland's (now Lord Bishop of Peterborough's)
Latin Treatise on that Subject. As also his Confutations of Mr. Hobb's
Principles put into another Method. With the Right Reverend Author's
Approbation.

FINIS.
Bibliotheca Politica: Or, A DISCOURSE By way of DIALOGUE, WHETHER The Commons
of England represented by Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in Parliament, were
one of the Three Estates in Parliament before the 49th of Henry III. or 18th.
of Edw. I.

Collected out of the most Approved Authors, both Ancient and Modern.

Dialogue the Sixth.

LONDON, Printed for R. Baldwin in Warwick Lane, near the Oxford-Arms; where
also may be had the First, Second, Third, Fourth and Fifth Dialogues. 1693.

Authors made use of, and how denoted.
1. Mr. Pettit's Ancient Right of the Commons of England Asserted. P.R.C. 2.
Dr. Brady's Answer thereunto. Edit. in Folio* B. A. P. 3. The said Doctor's
Glossary at the end of it. B. G. 4. Anamadversions upon Treatise Ianii Anglorum
forces novo. B. A. I. 5. The Author of Ianus, etc. his Confutation of the said
Doctor, entitled Ianus Anglorum ab Antique I. A. A. 6. Dr. Brady's Preface to
his History. B. P. H. 7. Dr. Iohnston's Excellency of Monarchical Government.
I. E. M. G.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
HAving in my last Discourse treated of the Legislative Power of this Kingdom,
as also the Ancient Constitution of our English Government by great Councils or
Parliaments; (the former of which questions, I should scarce have dwelt so long
upon, had I then known of a Learned Treatise now (...) to be published on that
Subject) I am at last arrived at the hardest, and most important, though
perhaps in the Judgment of some, the driest, and most unpleasant part of my
Task, viz. Who were anciently the constituent Parts or Orders of Men who made
up th^se Assemblies; That the Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, and Chief Thanes,
or Barons, were Principal Members, is granted by all Parties; but whether there
were from the very Original of these Great Councils, (nay, till long after the
coming in of the Normans) any Representatives for the Commons, as we now call
them, in distinction from the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, is a doubt; which
as it was (for ought I can find) first raised by an Italian, Pol. Virgil.
who writ the History of England in the last Age, so has it been continued by
some Antiquaries of our present Age; though the first that ever appeared to
prove the contrary, was a Treatise published by James Howel in the Cottoni
Posthuma, under the Name of Sir Robert Cotton, about 1654. but whether it was
his or no, I know not; only it was supposed to be so by Mr. Pryn in his Preface
to the Collection of Records, which he published under the Name of the same
Author in 1657. and after him this Notion of the Bishops, Lords, and other
Tenants in Capite being the Sole Representative for the whole Nation in those
Councils, was next printed in the Second part of Sir Henry Spelman's Glossary,
Tit. Parliamentum; where King John's Charter is made use of at the main
Argument to prove that Assertion. The next who appeared in Pr^nt on this
Question, was Sir Will. Dugdale in his Origines Juridiciales, who though he
Transcribed the same Notion and Arguments from the (...)-mentioned Glossary, P.
15.
yet allows the Commons of England to have been always after some manner
represented in Parliament, though not by Representatives of their own choosing;
yet agrees with the Author of the passage in the Glossary, that the Commons
first began by R^b^llion in the 49th of Henry the Third.

Which Opinions being look upon not only as Novel and Erron^ous, but dangerous
to the Parlamental Rights and Liberties of the People of this Nation, were
opposed by William Petyt Esquire in his Treatise, entitled, The Rights of the
Commons of England assertio; which was also seconded by the Author of the
Treatise, called Jani Anglorum facies Nova; but it was not long before both
these Books were animadverted upon by Dr. Brady, in two several Editions of his
Answers to them; and these were again vindicated by the Author of Jani
Anglorum, etc. in another Treatise, entitled Jus Anglorum ab Antiquo; which
has not been yet answered.

I have been the more particular in giving an account of these Authors, because
the Controversy having been largely debated in them, I have for the saving
your trouble of reading so many several Books, reduced all the material
Arguments and Authorities man use of by both Parties in this weighty
Controversy, into this Dialogue, and the next, since so copious an Argument
could not be dispatched in a less compas^. And (...) have not here given you
all the Arguments and Authorities that are there made use of, but only the most
material and indisputable; yet I hope I have used this Liberty with that
sincerity and respect to those Learned Authors, that none of them shall have
any just ca^^t to complain of any Partiality; And therefore I have as near as I
could, confined my self to the Words of those Authors, as you will find by the
Quotations in the Margin.

But I must own, that having had the happiness of a long and familiar
acquaintance with Mr. Petyt, I have been furnished by him with diverse
Authorities (both Manus^^^p: and Printed) not hitherto taken notice of by any
on this Subject: And had I the like opportunity of being personally known to
the Dr: I should have desired the same favor of (...) for such Replies as he
might perhaps make to them. Therefore all I can now do in this Case is, that if
the Dr. or any Friend of his, shall think it worth their while to peruse, and
impartially to consider these Discourses, and shall then remain unsatisfied
with any of the Authorities or Arguments here made use of; if either he or they
shall think fi^ to m^^^ any Observations on them, and will communicate their
Papers to the Publisher of these Dialogues, I do here engage to take care that
they shall be fairly and truly published with Answers to them, if they will
admit of any, in an Appendix at the end of the whole Work, when it is finished.

I have little more to trouble you with, than to assure you, That all the
Authorities here made use of from our English Historians and Records, are truly
cited, without leaving out or concealing any thing that I thought made for or
against either Opinion; but as for the Records, they are either such as having
been sufficiently tried, have passed for current between the Dr and his
Antagonists, or else such as I have seen and examined with my own Eyes, and
considered the purport of them.

But I hope you will pardon me if I seem too prolix in the beginning of this
Dis^^^se, in the interpretation of diverse Words and Phrases used by the Dr. and
his Opponents in a quite different sense from our Ancient Historians, Records
and Statutes; for if the ^^^ous use, and equivocal meaning of those Expressions
be truly stated, and laid open according to the several Ages in which those
Authors lived, or such Laws were made, I reck^^ this great Dispute as good as
half ended.

All that I shall farther desire of you is, carefully and diligently to peruse
the Arguments and Authorities, and to examine the truth of them your self, if
you doubt of any thing in them, weighing and comparing Historian with
Historian, and Record with Record, and sometimes both together, as the
Subject Matter requires, and then I kept you will be able to make a right and
impartial Judgment on the (...); For as I have (...) in my Province fairly to
report other men's Arguments and Notions, so it is yours to judge of them, which
I heartily desire may be without any unjust Bias or Partiality to (...) Side.

THE Sixth Dialogue BETWEEN Mr. FREEMAN a Gentleman, AND Mr. MEANWELL a
Civilian.
M. SIR, You are welcome; and since you were pleased to send me word, that you
would come and sit with me this Evening, I have been looking over all the Saxon
Councils, collected by Mr. Lambard, and Sir H. Spelman, and yet I cannot find
in them any mention of Knights of Shires, or Burgesses for Cities or Buroughs;
the only persons there mentioned, as Members of those Great Councils, being
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, and Great Lords, and Judges; often called by the
general (...) Names of Magnates, Principes, Proceres, Optimates, or Primates
Regni, which were all comprehended under the Saxon Word, VVites, i. e. (...);
Tit. Wites. B. G.
by whom (as Sir H. Spelman shows us in his Glossary) (...) meant only
Senators, or Wisemen; that is, either Noblemen, (...) Great Lawyers; VVite, in
Somner's Saxon Dictionary, being first ^^endred Optimas, Page 66, 67.
a Noble Man; and then Sapiens, a Wiseman. So (...) these VVites, or Sapientes
(so often mentioned in our Ancient (...) Laws) when they are put alone, Et
Sparsim.
signify all the Ecclesiastic, (...) well as Lay-Members of the great Council,
such as Earls, Al^^^men, and Thanes, and Judges, as Dr. B. more particularly
proves, in his Glossary (...) the end of his first Volume. But by Principes,
and Optimates, can only be meant Nobles, or Chief Men, as the Word Princeps,
Magnas, and Optimas do al^^ys signify in the Latin Tongue; That is to say,
such of the King's great Officers, Noblemen, and Judges of the Kingdom, as he
pleased to choose out, and (...) to his Great Councils, either for their great
Wisdom or Estates, to make (...) of their Advice and Assistance for the making
of Laws.

Therefore pray show me where there are any Commons once mentioned in any of
these Councils, B. A. P. P. 9, 10.
or any that represented them. Here are indeed particularly mentioned,
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Aldermen, Wites, Great-men, and Chief-men, or
Noblemen. These were all the Orders of men that were then the constituent (...)
of those Great Councils, Wittena-Gemotes. And if the Commons, as now taken, and
understood, were then Members of them, they must be comprehended amongst the
Wites or Sapientes, the Wisemen. But that it cannot probably be so, I shall
prove (1.) That most of the Saxon Laws, in their Prefaces are said to be made
and ordained by their Kings, with the Advice and Assistance of their VVites, or
Wisemen simply, without mentioning any particular Orders of men whatsoever.
And when any Rank or Degrees of men are particularly mentioned, they are only
the same before rehearsed, both Ecclesiastics and Laics (2.) I note, that it
cannot be denied, but that in every one of these Wittena G^motes, Micel Synods,
Micel Gemotes, or Great Councils, where the Laws are said to be made only by
the King, with the advice of his Wites or Sapientes, without particularizing
any degrees of Persons, the Bishops and Abbots for the Spiritual Nobility, and
the Eorls, or Aldermen and Thanes, for the Temporal, were present at the making
of them; as also the Judges, if there were any of the higher Class, other than
Bishops, Aldermen, and Gereves, or Praepositi. (3.) I note, that it follows
from thence, that these all jointly were the Sapientes, where there are only
Wites or Sapientes in general named, without reciting any particular Orders or
Degrees of Men. Now if you can show me from as good Authorities as I have here
produced, that any of the Commons sat in these Great Councils, at least to
represent the Body of the Commons among the Saxons, I will grant, that during
the Saxon Government, the Freemen, or Commons of England, as now called, and
distinguished from the Great Lords, were an essential constituent part of the
Common Councils of those times.


F. To return you as short an Answer as I can, to those Authorities you now
cite, I must in the first place premise, That tho I grant all Nobility among
the ancient Germans, Saxons, and Franks (who were but so many Stirps or
Branches of the Gothic Nation) were at first wholly Military; yet it is a very
great mistake, and savours of the Prejudices of the Age and Country we live in,
to imagine, that anciently there were the same Distinctions between Peers, or
Noblemen, and Gentlemen, (whom we now call Commoners) as there are now. For if
we go but over into France or Germany, we shall find no difference there
between the greater and the less Nobility; and a Gentleman is as noble as a
Duke, or a Marquess. And if we pass farther, into Denmark and Norway, from
whence most of the Danish Laws are supposed to come, it is certain, that but
few years ago, there were no such Titles among them as Earls, or Barons; every
Lord of a Town, or District, being that which they call an Adelman, or
Nobleman. And so I suppose it anciently was among the English Saxons. The Word
Athel, or Adel, comprehending (to speak in our present Dialect) all Degrees, as
well Noblemen, as Gentlemen; And for this I can give you the Authority of an
Ancient Author, viz. Paulus Warnefridus de gestis Longobardorum, Cap. 21.
who speaking of these Adelmen, or Adelings, tell us; Sic and eos quidam
Nobiles prosapia vocabantur. So likewise Sir H. Spelman in his Glossary, Tit.
Adelingi, Tit. p. 9, 10. writes thus, Anglorum legibus dici pro nobilibus in
genere, quod nec dum apud Germanos antiquatum est, qui omnes nobiles Aedelmen
vocant* a Saxonico Aedel pro nobili; And Mr. Seldom in his Titles of Honor,
makes the Word Aethelum to signify all one, Page 708.
either Gentlemen or Noblemen. Besides, Adam of Bremen, and Lib. 4.
Nitardus likewise, both Ancient Historians, divide the Saxon Nation into three
different Degrees, or Orders, viz into Athelings, i. e. Nobles, Frilings, i. e.
Freemen, and Lazzos, i. e. Villains, Bours, or Bondmen.

Besides which Noblemen, or Gentlemen, there was likewise another sort of men,
who tho of an inferior Rank, yet as Freemen, and having a considerable share of
the Riches and Strength of the Nation in their hands, had likewise a Place in
the Great Councils, as well as the former. And these were the Aldermen, or
other Magistrates of Cities and Buroughs; and in this they resembled the
German Diets, whose constituent Members were, according to Gonterus, an Ancient
German Poet, Praelati, Proceres, missisque potentibus Urbes.
But since this is a Dispute about the Signification of Words, in what sense
they were used in that Age we are now treating of, it will not be inconvenient
to examine from the most Learned Glossarists, the Ancient Signification of
those Words, which are in dispute between us. And therefore, since we are
agreed about the meaning of all other Words except these viz. Aldermen, Thanes,
Wites, Magnates, Optimates, and Principes, Preceres, or Primates, let us
examine each of their Ancient Significations. To begin then with the Word
(...)-man, Alderman, which Word was of a very general Signification; For Sir
Hen. Spelman in his Glossary, Tit. Alderman, tells us, that there was
Aldermannus Regis, Comitatus, Civitatis, Burgi, etc. de quorum potestate non
facile est definire, In his Glossary Tit. Alderman.
Mr. Lambard renders the Word (...)man, in Latin Senator, (i. e. one that had
place in the Great Council) and so does Mr. Somner in his Saxon Dictionary,
from whence you may learn, that this Word is of a large signification, and
might comprehend such as in latter times were called Commons, Tit. Alderman.
to distinguish them from the Lords or higher Nobility, and could not exclude
them.

Verstegan renders this Word thus, (...), So written in our ancient Language,
P. 326.
is properly an Elder, or Senior; yet an (...)man, which we call now an
Alderman, was such in effect among our Ancestors, as was the Tribunus Plebis
with the Romans, that is, one that had chief Jurisdiction among the Commons, as
being a Maintainer of their Liberties. And if so, such persons must certainly
have had a place in the Great Council as Commoners; and therefore must from the
reason of the thing, signify something more in those times than an Earl, or
great Officer of the King only.

So likewise, that the Word Thane comprehended more than the Kings Great
Feudal, or Military Tenants, may appear by these Interpretations of it, which
our Antiquaries have given us. The Industrious Mr. Somner, in his Glossary at
the end of the X. Scriptores, as also Mr. Seldom in his Titles of Honor, P.
267.
do both agree in the difference I now make between the Greater and the Less
Thanes, the former being called (...) Thani Regii, Spel. Council. in Leg.
Canuti p. 69.
the other called (...) Mediocres, vel Inferiores Thani Middle, or Less Thanes,
who were Maneriorum Domini, Nobiles mi^^^es, Vavasores and nonnunquam liberi
tenentes; with whom Sir H. Spelman in his Glossary agrees, Thanorum duo erant
genera, Majores quos Thain^s Regis appellabant, nos Barons Regis, and Thaini
Simpliciter, seu Thaini Minores qu^ iidem erant qui Barons Minores, hoc est
Maneriorum Domini, Nobiles minores, and nonnunquam Liberi Tenentes nuncupantur.
So likewise Mr. Lambard in his Glossary, P. 223.
thus, Thani autem appellatione viri interdum Nobiles, interdum liberae
conditionis homines, interdum Magistratus atque sup^ m^ner^ Ministri notantur.
And also in his Perambulation of Kent, says, (...), was usually taken for the
very same that we call now from the Latin word Gentilis, a Gentleman, that is
(...) A man well born, or of good Stock and Family. So that I think nothing can
be more evident, than that according to the Opinion of our best Critics in the
Saxon Tongue, the word Thane does not always signify a great Lord, or Baron of
Parliament, as he is now called, in distinction to an Inferior Nobleman or
Gentleman. And that there were also Burgh Thanes, Thanes of Cities and
Boroughs, will evidently appear from a Writ or Charter of K. Edward the
Confessor, Sub Effigy Faustinae. A. 3. F. 97. Ex Cartulario Canobi Westmin.
which is still to be found in Sir John Cotton's Library, in these words (...)
Willem (...) all mine (...) on (...), which Charter with diverse other of like
nature, confirming the Privileges of that Monastery, were collected by a Monk
of Westminster called Sulcardus, who lived not long after the Conquest.

In the next place, as for the word Magnates, though I grant it there often
signifies Great men or Lords; Yet not only such as were Lords or Noblemen by
Birth, but as I shall show you by several Instances, as well before as after
the Norman Entrance, that it likewise also comprehended the Gentry, or Inferior
Nobility, and such as were eminent and considerable either in the Countries or
Cities, for Interest, Office or Estate.

As for the word Optimates, I know it signifies the better, or best sort of
men, yet not always great Noblemen, or Lords; For in Monastic Anglic. Tom. 3.
we read of one Goda, who under Edw. the Confessor subscribed himself Optimatem,
and Ministrum Regalem, (i. e. Thane.) And lest you should apprehend that
Optimas should always signify the King's Thane, or Tenent in Capite, du Fresne
in his Glossary defines Optimates to be Vassalli Barons qui ab ullo Domino
ratione Hominu need pendet; but I shall speak more of this word Optimates, when
I come to speak of the times not long after William the First.

In the next place, for the word Proceres, it does not only signify Men Noble
by Birth, but Isidore (a Spanish Author in the Gothic-times) in his Origines,
Lib. 9. Cap. 4. says thus, Proceres sunt Principes Civium; and that this word
often signified in the ancient English Saxon, the Chief Magistrates of Cities
or Burghs, Page 56.
appears by Alfrick's ancient Glossary, where these words Proceres Primates,
vel Primores, he thus renders (...) buph papa. Page 420.
And Du Fresne in his Glossary says also, Proceres app^^labantur qui in
Civitatibus pracipuos Magistratus gerebant.

As for the word Principes, any man that understands any thing of the Latin
Tongue, knows that it does not always signify Princes, or Men Noble by Birth;
but any Chief, or Principal Man remarkable by Place, Office or Dignity; and
therefore we often read in Livy, and other Latin Authors of Principes
Civitatis; and in this sense I suppose every Member of Parliament may be
reckoned inter Principes, among the most Considerable or Chief Men of the
Kingdom: So that when our ancient English Historians, (as well before as
immediately after the Norman Conquest) do often, after the Archbishops*
Bishops, etc. add, and caeteri toti^^ Regni Proceres, and Optimates, or
Principes, as Members of the great Councils of those times; Yet that these
Writers did not then mean what you would understand by these words, only
Princes, Earls, or Great Lords, Mr. Seldom in his Titles of Honor teaches us,
Page 605.
when speaking of this word Principes (as the most comprehensive of any) says,
that though Princeps in the Singular, were proper to every Earl or Alderman;
yet in the Plural Principes is more often applied comprehensively to others
also of less, though of special Eminency, such as were Viri Primarii, or
Thanes. And for this he refers us to the Charter of King Ethelwulf (as it is
recited by W. of Malmsbury, Lib. 2 Cap. 2. And Ingulph) wherein that King
granted Tithes, P. 862. edit. Frank.
and diverse other Privileges to the Church Abbey of Malmsbury, which is said to
be done Consilio Episcoporum, and Principum snorum; as also of Hen. Hunt, P.
364. Edit. Ibid.
who relating the Election of Harold the Son of King Cnute, expresses it thus;
Fuit magnum placitum apud Oxonford ubi Leofricus Consul, and omnes Principes
eligerunt Heraldum.

Lastly, As for the word Wites or Sapientes, there can be nothing in that word
which can limit it only to Men Noble by Birth, since it signifies no more than
the King's Great Council of Wise men or Senators, and might also well refer to
the Chief Magistrates, or Representatives of great Cities and Boroughs. For Du
Fresne in his Glossary tells us, Tom. 3. p. 700.
That among the L^mbards, Sapientes in Italia appellabant, and Civitatum Cives
Primarii. quorum Consilio Respublicae gerebantur. Hieron. Rubeus Lib. Hist.
Raven. Anno 1297. -- Sed long antea illud nomen abt^^uit in aliis
Longobard^rum Civitatibus ut colligere liceret ex Ottone, and Acerbo Morena in
Hist. Rerum L^ndevetium, etc. Nor is this Authority inconsiderable, since the
Lombards were derived from the Goths, Vi. Grotius Prolegomena in Histor.
Gothicam.
from whom also the English Saxons had their Original, and had the like
fundamental Constitution, and were governed by much the same Laws.

But that the Title of Wites or Sapientes, was often attributed to the Commons
of England, I shall explain to you when I come to treat of the Antiquity of the
House of Commons, after the Normans Entrance; where I shall show you, that
diverse Petitions were directed a tres Sages les Communes. And sure whosoever is
chosen by a County, City, or Borough, as their Representative, and is by them
thought wise enough to be trusted with their Purses, and to make Laws for them,
may very well (I think) be called in Old English a VVite, or in our modern
Dialect, a Disercet or Wise man. But let this word VVites signify what it
will, yet it could never mean here great Lawyers or Judges, as your Dr. will
have it; since I very much doubt whether Law was then a Trade or Profession, or
not; And that the Judges in those days had not any more Voice in making Laws,
than they have now, or any more to do in it than in the bare drawing of them
up. I am very well satisfied, since if they had any such Power in those days, I
do not believe our Kings would ever have let them have lost it, since it was so
advantageous to their Prerogatives that they should keep it. I could give you
diverse other Authorities, though of later date, to prove that the Commons were
often included under the word Sapientes in our ancient Statutes and Records;
but I refer those for the times after the Conquest; but I beg your pardon for
being so prolix already, which the abuse your Dr. has put upon these words,
would not permit me to avoid. But now we have cleared most of the Terms in
dispute between us, I hope we may proceed with greater Certainty.


M. Though your Discourse has been long, yet since it is so essentially
necess^ry to the right understanding the matter in hand, I am well satisfied;
and I shall more fully consider the account you give of these words another
time; but a present give me leave to tell you, That suppose I should admit,
that those words on which you have now given Interpretation of diverse Authors,
may sometimes be taken in the sense you have now put upon them; and that
consequently the Commons might be represented under some of those general
Names; Yet am I not satisfied, how the Aldermen and Magistrates of Cities and
Boroughs, could be included under this word VVites, since in the Auctuary to
the 35* Law of Edw. the Confessor, it is said, Erant and aliae potestates, and
dignitates, B. G. p. 67.
per Provincias, and Patrias universas, and per singulos Comitatus totius Regni
constitutae, qui Heretoches apud Anglos vocabantur, Scilicet Barons, Nobiles,
and insignes Sapientes, etc. And Gregory of Tours, Rodovicus, and many of the
foreign, ancient Historians mention, Sapientes only as Lawyers, Counselors,
Judges, and among the modern foreign Lawyers, Hottomon and Calvin, say expressly
they were such. But perhaps not of the Inferior Ran^, no more than the Saxons
Sapientes were, of which their (...) only consisted. And we have at this day
the Judges, and King's Council* and other great Lawyers, that sit in the Lord's
House, and are assistant to the Parliament, when there is occasion. Nor have
you yet brought any proof, that the Cities or Towns then sent their
Representatives to the great Councils in the Saxon times, by this, or any other
Title. But as for the Knights of Shires, though I grant the Treatise called,
Modus tenendi Parliamentum, mentions such Persons to have been present in
Parliament in the time of K. Ethelred; yet by that word Parliament so often
used by the Author of that Treatise, and diverse other Circumstances, it may be
easily perceived that the Author lived but about the time of Edw. 3. or Rich.
2. as Mr. Seldom in his Titles of Honor, and Mr. Pryn in his Animadversions to
Sir E. Cook's 4th Institutes, have very fully proved; so that admitting that
your Thanes, or Lords of Towns, did then appear in those Councils for
themselves, and their Tenants, yet could they not be properly said to be their
Representatives, because (as I told you before) they were never chosen by them;
whereas now the ordinary Freeholders, of forty Shillings a Year, and the
Freemen and Inhabitants in Cities and Towns, have the gr^^test share in the
Election of Knights, Citizens and Burgesses.

And as for those Thanes you mention, they, or those under whom they claimed,
owed their Estates wholly to the Grants of former Kings, and held their
Possessions from them by some Tenure or other. And by virtue of this Tenure it
was, that all the Lands of England were liable, even those that belonged to the
Church, to those three Services, anciently called Trinoda Necessitas, viz.
Expedi^^^, Castelli, and Pontis extructio, that is, Military Service against a
Foreign Enemy and the Repair of Castles and Bridges; and subject to the common
Services of the Kingdom. And that the Earls and Chief Thanes did hold their
Lands by Knights or Military Service, appears by the reliefs of the Earls and
Thanes, ex^^rest in the Laws of King Cnut. in Sir H. Spelman's Councils. So
that if all the persons who held those Lands, owed them wholly to the King's
bounty, it seems plain to me that they must likewise owe their places in the
great Council to the same Original.


F. I think what you have now farther urged will be of no great moment against
my Opinion; for as to the Authority you bring from the Addition to that Law of
Edw. the Confessor; it is plain by the word Barons, that it was added long
since that time, that word not being commonly in use, till some time after the
Norman Conquest. But letting that pass, it is plain by the rest of the Law, if
you would have been pleased to have read it out, that these Heretoches (here
called Barons) were no other than ordinary Gentlemen, or Thanes (which then
answered the word Barons. And these (as this Law it self expressly tells us)
were chosen by all the Freemen in the Folemote, or County Court. And therefore
tho I grant they might be men of Estates, yet there was no necessity of their
being Lords, or Noble by Birth; nor is it likely that the people would have
chosen their Earls, or any other of the like Order to command them, when they
had sufficient choice of Thanes or Gentlemen in their own Country, to command
the Military Forces of it. And tho it is true these Gentlemen are called
Nobles, and remarkable Wise Men, yet this (according to your own showing) does
not exclude others, and those of a far different Profession, viz. Counselors,
Lawyers, and Judges, all which, you suppose had then Places in the Great
Council, as they have now in the Lord House. And if this Word might comprehend
both Swordmen and Lawyers, I cannot see why it may not also take in the better
and richer sort of Citizens and Magistrates, who in that Age, as was notorious,
were elected by their respective Corporations; And I have already proved that
these were called Sapientes in other Countries; and I see no reason why they
any not have been called so here too. But that the King's Judges and
Counselors could have no Votes in the Saxon Great Councils, I have already
given a sufficient Reason to the contrary.

But I shall now farther show you, That the Cities and Boroughs in the Saxon
times being so much more numerous and considerable than they are now, must
needs have had (according to the custom of those Times (a considerable share in
those Great Councils* since in them consisted a great part of the Strength and
Riches of the Kingdom; and were many more than they are at this day; forbid
(...) in the beginning of his History, That there were in England long before
his time, 28 Famous Cities, besides innumerable Castles, and walled Towns of
note; many of which, Vi. Holli^sh Chro. p. 192, 193* where he sufficiently
prov^s thi^ Assertion from diviri ^^nc Authors
tho now extremely decayed, or quite mined, were then very considerable, the
greatest and richest part of the Nation inhabiting in those times for the most
part in Cities, or great Towns, for their greater benefit or security; and the
greater part of the Lands of England in the Saxon times, and long after, ^y
incultivated, and over run with For^sts and Bog^, so that the Inhabitants of
those Cities and Boroughs being them so considerable for Estates in Lands, as
well as other Rich^^, could not ^e excluded from having Places both in the
British, or Saxon Great Councils? what man of Sense can believe, that the
Ancient and Potent Cities of London, T^^, C^nterbury, Lincoln, etc. Should ever
be excluded from having any hand in the Great Consultation of giving Money and
making Laws, and for the public defense of the Kingdom in the Saxon times, any
more than they are now? And therefore we find, that in all the Kingdom of the
German, or Gothic original, the chief Cities and Towns have still sent
Deputies to the Diets, or Assemblies of Estates, as I said but now.

In the next place, tho I do not positively assert, that there were Knights of
Shires before the Conquest; yet am I not convinced that there were none. For
tho I confess the Treatise you mention, appears to have been written since the
coming in of the Normans, yet might the Substance of it have been much older
than the times of Edw III. and Rich. II. or else certainly King Hen. IV. or his
Chancellor for him, would never have been at the trouble of transmitting a Copy
of this said Modus into Ireland under the Great Seal (which is thought to
incroach so much on the Prerogative, had he not been very well informed of the
Antiquity, as well as Authority thereof. And therefore it might very well be
written about the Time of Hen. III. from some Ancient Historians and Records,
not now extant, tho the Copies we have of it, may be of no longer standing than
the time Mr* Seldom mentions.

But admitting that there were no Knights of Shires before the Conquest, and
tho the Thanes (who I suppose made the greatest Figure in the Wittena Ge^^^er)
were not Earls, or chief Thanes, that is, of the Greater Nobility, yet they
were great Freeholders, and tho Commoners, yet Gentlemen, and of the Lesser
Nobility, in the same sense as Gentlemen, or Knights of Shires are now. And the
not elected by the Countries, yet might be as well esteemed their
Representatives, as they are now of Freeholders, under 40 s. per Annum,
Lease-holders and Copyholders for years, who have no Votes at the Election of
Parliament men; whereas these Thanes were then the chief (if not the only)
Possessors of all the Freehold Estates in the Kingdom.

Nor is it any material Objection to say that these Thanes might at first owe
those Estates to the Grant of the First Saxon Kings, and might also after a
sort hold their Estates of them as Heads of the Commonwealth, by such Services
as were settled by Public Laws; yet does it not therefore follow, that they
owed their very right of coming to the Great Council wholly to the Kings
Favor. For in the first place it is to be considered, that tho the First Saxon
Kings conquered this Island from the Britains, yet those that assisted them
being only Volunteers, the chief Officers or Commanders of them, might not only
deserve, but also capitulate for their Shares in the Land so conquered. And
these being given out by the King, according to each man's quality, condition,
or desert, might constitute those who were called the King's Thanes, as those
who held likewise under them, were the Middle Thanes or Vavassors. Supposing
(till you can prove the contrary) that these had Places in the Great Council,
as well as the other; and you might as well argue that they could have no
Places there, but by the favor of their Lords. Whereas I have already proved,
that an Estate of Five Hides in Land, of whomsoever holden, made a Thane or
Nobleman of the Inferior Rank: And we find by the same Laws of King Athelstan,
his Weregild, or Price of his Head, was valued but equal with that of a Mass
Thanes or Priest, ( viz.) at 2000 Thrymsas. So that a sufficient Estate in
Land, did not only make a man a Gentleman, but also give him a place in the
Great Council. And there were besides all these several Alodoril; who held
their Lands, discharged from all Services, and could sell or dispose of them
without the consent of the King, or any other inferior Lord, and are those
mentioned in Domes-day Book; qui potuit ire cum terra que ^^but. Nor is your
Argument conclusive, That because in those times as well as now, all Lands were
held either mediately, or immediately of the King, and were chargeable with
those three general Services you mention for the public safety and good of the
Kingdom, that therefore not only all men's civil properties, but also their
right of coming to the Great Councils must wholly depend upon the King's will;
Since I have already proved, that the first Saxon Kings by their conquest of
the Kingdom, could not acquire the sole property of all the Lands thereof to
themselves, tho they might be made use of as public Trustees, to distribute
them according to those men's qualities and deserts, who had helped them in the
Conquest. So that when they were once possessed of such Estates, they had
immediately thereupon a right to a place in the Great Council, the burden of
the Government lying chiefly on such as had Estates in Land.

And that many others besides the Kings Thanes, or Great Lords, had places in
the Great Council of those times, appears as well by the name of Mycel Synods,
^^ Wittena-Gemots, which are rendered by our Ancient Glossarists Numerosa, or
Popu^^sa Conventio; as also the Titles and Conclusions, to diverse of the Titles
of those Great Councils in the Saxon Times, where are often mentioned after the
Comites, and Proceres Terrae, aliorum fidelium infinita multitudo, which must
certainly take in many more than the Kings Thanes, Judges, or other of his
Great Men, who were then but a few in comparison of all the rest of the
Freeholders of England.


M. I will not longer dispute the probability of what you say, all the
difficulty lies in the proof of the matter of Fact. For in the first place I
deny that any other of a less Degree than the King's Thanes, of chief Tenants,
had any Places or Voices in the old English Councils. Nor can you find (as you
your self are forced to confess) in our Saxon Laws, or Ancient Historians of
those times, any Representatives of the common people mentioned; such as are
now, much less Citizens or Burgesses for any City or Borough in England. And
therefore what you say concerning the Riches or Power of the Cities and Towns
before the Conquest, tho perhaps it might be true, yet does it not therefore
follow, that they must then send their Representatives to the Great Councils.
Nor is it any Argument to prove that they did, because great Cities and Towns
do or did lately send Deputies to the like Assemblies in other Countries, since
our Government might not only originally differ in that from theirs, but that
also the sending of those Deputies might be granted by some later Princes, long
since the time of the first beginning of those Kingdoms, and I do believe will
prove so, if closely looked into.

And in Denmark (which you know was an Elective Kingdom) the Cities and great
Towns never sent any Deputies to their Great Councils at all; and since the
Government of England (as you your self grant) did very much resemble that, why
might it not be so here too?


F. I think your Reply has no more weight in it, than what you have already
urged; For in the first place it lies upon your side to prove, that none but
the King's or chief Thanes had any Places in the Great Councils of those times;
and whe^^ you can prove that, you may do something.

But what I have now brought to prove the great Antiquity of our Cities and
Buroughs in England, is not so little to the purpose as you would make it;
since it confirms that Right of Prescription, which all ancient Cities and
Buroughs is England do claim of sen^ing Members to Parliament; and therefore
pray (...) what Mr. Lambard, a Person whom all the Learned own extremely
knowing in the English Saxon Government tells us on this Subject, Page 256.
Page 257 etc.
in his Archeion in these Words.

That whereas in the beginning of the Law, (viz. those made by the Saxon Kings
he there mentions) all the Acts are said to pass from the King and ^is Wisemen,
both of the Clergy and Laity, in the Body of the Laws, each Statute being thus;
And it is the advice of our Lord, and his Wisemen. So as it appears that it was
then a received Form of Speech, to signify both the Spirituality, and Laity
(that is to say, the Greater Nobility, and the Less, or Commons) by this one
Word Witena, i. e. Wisemen.

Now as these written Authorities do undoubtedly confirm our Assertion of the
continuance of this manner of Parliament, so is there also unwritten Law or
Prescription, (...) does no less infallibly uphold the same. For it is well
known, that in every Quarter of the Realm, a great many Buroughs do yet send
Burgesses to the Parliament, which are nevertheless so ancient, and so long
since decayed, and gone to naught, that it cannot be showed that they have been
of any reputation at any time since the Conquest, and much les^ than they have
obtained this Privilege, by the Grant of any King succeeding the same. So that
the Interest which they have in Parliament grows by an ancient usage before
the Conquest, whereof they cannot show any beginning; Which thing is also
confirmed by a contrary usage in the self same thing; for it is likewise known,
that they of ancient demesne, do prescribe in not sending to the Parliament;
for which reason also, they are neither contributers to the Wages of the
Knights of Shires, neither are they bound by sundry Acts of Parliament, tho the
same be generally penned, and do make no exceptions of them. But there is no
ancient Demesne saving that only which is described in the Book of Doomsday,
under the Title of Terra Regis which of necessity must be such as either was in
the hands of the Conqueror himself, who made the Book, or of Edward the
Confessor, that was before him. And so again* if they of ancient Demesnes, have
ever since the Conquest prescribed not to elect Burgesses to the Parliament
then (no doubt) there was a Parliament before the Conquest, to the which they
of other Places did send their Burgesses.

From whence we may conclude, that the Learned Author did not only believe that
the Lords, but that also the Inferior Nobility, and Representatives of Cities
and Towns were included under the Word VVites, and also that these Place^
claimed that Privilege by Prescription, and not by Grant of any King since the
Conquest, or before


M. I shall not deny but Mr. Lambard was a Learned Antiquary, yet there are
others more in number, and perhaps of greater Learning, who do suppose, that no
Cities or Buroughs sent Burgesses to Parliament, but since the Conquest; the I
confess the time is not exactly agreed on, but whenever they began to appea^^
there, it is certain they could have no right of coming, but from the King's
Summons or Grants; since none but such Cities or Towns, that held of the King
in Capite, B. A. B. Page 38.
had anciently any place in those Assemblies, no^ of them neither any other,
but those whom the King pleased to call. And from thence proceeds that great
Variety we find in the List of those Towns, which send Members to Parliament.
But I shall omit speaking any thing farther of this at present.

But as for those middle inferior Thanes or Vavassours (as they were afterward
called) whom you suppose to have made so great a Figure in the Saxon Great
Councils, I do not believe that they had any Votes there, and I hope I shall be
able to prove to you by and by, that none but the King's Tenants in Capite
appeared in those Meetings, from the time of William the Conqueror, to the 49
Hen. III. Now if it be true (as you suppose) King William made no alterations
in the constituent parts of the Great Council of the Kingdom, after his
conquest of it, it will likewise follow, that the same sort of persons, viz.
Tenants by Knights Service, were the only Members of it before the conquest
too. But if you have any express Authorities, out of our Ancient Saxon Laws or
Histories, to prove that the Commons appeared at the Wittena Gemotes in the
Saxon times, pray let us see them.


F. I shall perform your Command immediately; but in the first place give me
leave to tell you, that what you have said concerning Cities and Towns not
sending Burgesses to Parliament, till after the Conquest, is a great mistake,
built upon a false and precarious Hypothesis, that they all held in Capite of
the King; the contrary of which, I shall make out, when I come to treat of that
Question. So likewise is it as precarious, that none but the King's Tenants in
Capite, had any Votes in our Great Councils, in the times immediately
succeeding your Conquest, till the 49th. of Hen III. and that therefore it must
have been so before the Conquest. For as I own that King William made no
material alteration in the Government of the Kingdom, after his entrance, so I
likewise affirm, that as well after as before that time (if not Knights of
Shires, yet) all Thanes the or Barons, i. e. great Freeholders of England, had
Places in that Assembly before 49th. of Hen. III.

But to proceed to the Authorities you desire, I shall begin with the first,
and most ancient General Council we have left us in the Saxon times viz. that
which was held at Canterbury, A. D. 605. by King Ethelbert, not long after the
settlement of Christianity in this Island; which is recorded by Sir H. Spelman
in his British Councils, in these Words; An. Incarnationis Dominicae, 685.
Aethelbertus Rex in fide Roboratus Catholica una cum Beria Regina silioque ipso
Eadbaldo, Page 126.
ac reverendissimo praesule Augustino, caeterisque optimatibus Terr^
Solenitatem Natalis Domini Celebrant Cantuariae; Convocato igit^r ibidem
Communi Consilio tam Cleri quam Populi; Whence you may observe that the people
then made a considerable part of the Great Council from the very beginning of
the Saxon times.


M. Pray, Sir, B. A P. Page 4.
will you give me leave to answer your Questions, one by one as you go, for
fear I should not only forget them, but also tire you with too long a Speech.
In the first place therefore give me leave to tell you, that you are very much
mistaken to suppose, that by the Word Populus, is here meant the common People,
or Vulgar; Whereas, when Clerus and Populus are used together, in our Ancient
Writers of those times, it signifies no more than a Common Council of the
Clergy and People or Laity, and not the Common People; for then the Lords, or
Great Men would have been quite left out of this Council, as certainly they
were not; and so when Clerus, and Populus, are used together, and thus
contradistinguished, then they are expressive of two different Estates or
Conditions of Men or Christians, the Clergy and Laity, or secular Men; and
those were the Optimates Terrae, the chief Men of the Land before expressed.
Neither was this, Council held under a sole Saxon Monarch, but under Ethelbert
King of Kent only; and that but eight years after Augustin's coming hither, and
above two hundred years before the Seven Kingdoms were united into one Monarchy.


F. I am not at all concerned at this Answer, since I can prove, that by the
Word Populus must be here understood somewhat more than Kings, Noblemen, and
Judges, viz. the Representatives of the Commons likewise; or else the Saxon
Witena-Gemotes were not what their Titles speak them to be, Common, or General
Councils of the whole Kingdom; that is, of all the Estates or Orders of it
there, but only a Convention of the Bishops and Great Lords. And therefore if
the Word Clerus did then comprehend all the Clergy, both Superior and Inferior,
i e. as well the Bishops as Abbots, Priors, Deans and Clerks, for the Secular
Clergy, and Cathederal Chapters, etc. I pray give me a Reason why the Word
Populus, when put alone, must be wholly confined to your Earls, or chief
Thanes, and may not also take in the Middle or Less Thanes, Freeholders, or
Lords of Townships, and the Representatives of Cities and Borough Towns; and
why not with as much reason, as that the Word Populus amongst the Romans, took
in the whole Body of the People of Rome, both Patricians, and Pleb^ians, when
assembled in their Comitiis Centuriatis, to make Laws, or create Magistrates.
The rest of your Argument is not very material; for tho I grant this Council
was held before the Heptarchy was united into a Monarchy, yet I think it is
very easy to prove, that as all the Saxon Kingdoms consisted of several
Nations of the same Language and Original, so were they likewise under the same
Form of Government: And that Councils consisted of the same constituent
Members, (...) I shall prove to you from the Kingdom of the West Saxons, from
which was the Foundation of our present English Monarchy. And for this I shall
give you the Authority of Will. of Malmesbury, and H. Huntingdon, (who it is
highly probable) had seen the ancient Histories and Records of those times) and
they both agree in the Relation of the Deposition of Sigebert, King of the
West Saxons, for Tyranny and Cruelty, Anno. 754. the Words are remarkable,
which pray read; Unde in Anno secundo ipsius Regni congregati sunt Proceres,
and Populi Totius Regni and provida deliberatione, and unanimi consensu omnium
expulsus est a Regno and Kinewulfus satus ex Regio sanguine electus est in
Regem; where you may observe a plain difference made between the Higher
Nobility, here called Proceres, and the Representatives of the People here
styled Populi; as also from another Authority of a Great Council, held under
the same King Aethelbert, as it is mentioned by Roger Hoveden, Domestic to
King Hen. II. in the 2d Part of his Annals; where among the Laws of King Edw.
the Confessor, and which he writes to have been confirmed by King William I.
you will find under the Title de Aptb^^s, and de aliis minutis Decimis (which
are there said to be given to the Clergy by former Kings* and particularly by
this King Ethelbert) these Words; Haec ent^n Sanctus (...) praedicavit, and
docu^t and haec concessa sunt a Rege, Baronibus and Populo. So that it Populus
^ere does not signify an Order of Men, contradistinct from the Barons or Great
Lords, it would have been a Tautology with a witness.


M. I must confess, if this Authority you now urge, had been as ancient as the
time to which it is ascribed, it would be of some weight; but it appears by
this Word Baronibus (not used in England till after the Conquest) that it was
added long after that time (by some ignorant Monk) to the Confessor's Laws, and
therefore will not prove that for which you bring it, viz. That the Vul^^^
understood for the People or Commons, in the sense they are now taken had any
Place in the Saxon Great Councils.

But make the most of it, this was but the confirmation of a Law made by King
Aethelbert,; B. A. A. Page 297, 298.
but how and by what Words the Legislators were expressed near 500 years after
the Law was made; or how they were rendered in Latin after the coming of the
Normans transiently, and without design to give an account of them, cannot be
of much Validity to prove who they were; and that the Laws of King Edw. were
made, or at least translated into Norman Latin, after the Norman Conquest,
appears by the Word Comites, (besides Barons already mentioned) Milite^,
Servientes, etc. all Norman Words, and not known here, till their coming
hither. He that will assert any thing from a single uncouth Expression in one
Case, and upon one occasion only, brings but a slender Proof for that he says;
so* will any man think, because it is said in one of King Edward's Laws, (and
perhaps no where else concerning this King's Coronation) quod debet in propria
persona ^^am Regno, and Sacerdotio and Clero, jurare ante quam ab
Archiepiscopis, and Episcopis Regni coronetur) That the Priests were not
Clergymen, nor the Clergymen Priests; and that the Archbishops and Bishops
were neither. Many other uncoath Expressions do often occur in the old Monks,
which are to be interpreted according to the common usage and practice of the
times in which they are delivered. And therefore seeing before the time of the
Conquest, and for two, or near three Centuries of years afterward, the Commons
(as at this day understood) were not called, nor did come to Great Councils or
Parliaments as I shall prove when I come to speak of those times); So that by
Barons must be here meant the Great Barons, and by Populus, the Communitas
Angliae, or which was then all one, the Communitas Baronum, the Less Barons, or
Tenants in Capite; and the sense of the Words is farther confirmed by several
undeniable Authorities; wherein, by the Communitas Populi, must be understood
not the Community of the People or Commons, but the whole Body of the Less
Tenants in Capite.

But to give you an answer why the Word Populus could not comprehend all sorts
of people among the Saxons, as it did among the Romans, but only the Nobility,
(who were then, properly speaking, the only Freemen) is this, that none but the
Nobility possessed any Lands in Fee-simple; all the rest of the meaner sort of
people (then called Cheorl Folk) holding theirs in Villanage under their Lords
or Thanes, being no better than mere Villains, or Costagers, and who were all
bound to the Good Behavior, every tenth Family being bound one for another, in
the Sheriff's Torn, or Court of Franc-Pledge, under their Head, or Tenth Man,
called the Tything-man, who was to answer for them. So that the common People
of England were not such a Free People, nor had any share in the Government, as
some suppose, there being I believe no such persons as our Yeomen or Fa^^^ers
in those days.


F. Tho perhaps this Law might very well be transcribed from some old Cop^^ of
King Aethelbert's Laws not now extant, and in which there might be the Word
Thanes, instead of Baronibus, which is but a Translation of it, in the sense i^
which it was used not long after the Conquest.

Nor is it true which you affirm, that the Word Barons was never in use before
the coming in of the Normans, in ancient Charters, as I shall prove to you by
this Charter of King Edgar, to the Abbey of Westminster, containing a
confirmation of their ancient Charters and Privileges, collected (...) the
aforesaid Sulcardus, Ex Cartulario Caenob a West. Bib Cotton sub Effigy
Faustin^e. C 3. s. 7.
a Monk of Westminster, as it is to be found in the Cottonian Library; the
Charter it self is long, but concludes thus, In Concilio habito infra Basilicam
Westmonast. Praesidente (...) Filio suo Edwardo, and Archiepo Dunstano, and
universis Episcop^^ and Baronibus suis; where you may see that the Word was not
unknown before the time of William I. and I could give you more Instances of
other Kings Charters, where the same Word is used, before the Conquest, were it
worth the while to trouble you with them.

And so likewise Populus for People or Folk in the Saxon; Yet take it (as you
suppose) to have been writ not long before the time Hoveden writ his History,
(which was above 80 years before the 49th of Hen. III.) This Author, or whoever
else added this Passage to this Law about Tithes, did then suppose, that
according to the custom then used, the People had Representatives in those
Assemblies; which I shall prove from your own sense of these words; for if the
word Populus signifies here another sort of men different from the Lords, then
this word Populus must necessarily signify some that were Commons, and not
Lords by your own concession, and who also must represent others besides
themselves; but it is highly improbable, that by this word Populus should be
meant the Communitas Angliae, or the Communitas Baronum; for then since the
word Baronum would have included all the Tenants in capite, both Great and
Small, to what purpose should the word Populus have been added at all?
Therefore I am so far from believing this way of expressing the several Estates
of the Kingdom, to have been a Monkish Blunder, (as you suppose) that ^t was
rather a common and ordinary way of Expression among the Writers of those
Time^, as well in Records as Histories, who then very well knew the People or
Commons, to be an Estate, or Constituent part of the Common Council of the
Kingdom, quite different from the Lords, and in which sense it is recited in an
ancient Charter of King John, That He being divorced, the New Queen was
crowned, Rot. Cart. 5. Johan m. 5. n. 33.
de communi assensu and concordi Voluntate Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum,
Comitum, Baronum Cleri and P^puli totius Regni; Where by Clerus it is plain
must be meant the Inferior Clergy represented by their Proxies in this Great
Synod or Parliament; and by Populus was understood the People or Commons
likewise present by their Representatives; or else the Words Clerus and Populus
had been idle Tantologies in this Record. And in the like sense it is also used
by Matt. Paris, P. 223.
in the 9th of Hen III. presentibus Clero, and Populo, cum Magnatibus Regionis;
Where this Author makes a plain distinction between the Magnates, and the
Populus, which had been altogether in vain, if the Word Magnates would have
comprehended all your Greater or Less Barons, or Tenants in capite.

But I shall in the next place proceed to that Great Synod, or Council, that
was called by King Edward the Elder, Anno Dom. 905. and is mentioned by Simeon
of Durham, and other Authors quoted by Archbishop Parker, the Compiler of the
British Antiquities, in these Words? Plegmundus Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus,
^^^ cum Rege Magnifico cognominato, Edwardo seniore Consilium Magnum
Episcoporum. Abbatum Fidelium, Procerum and Populorum, etc. convocavit. Which
Synod, or Council was called to divide the large Dioceses of Winchester and
Sherbarn into five other (as I have already told you); where you may plainly
see the Words Fidelium and Populorum, put distinct from the Word Proceres, if
we take that Word to signify only the Greater Nobility.

I shall now conclude with a few Words in reply to your Answer, why the Word
Populus, could not among the Saxons take in all sorts of People, as well as
amongst the Romans; for I cannot take it as a satisfactory answer, for these
Reasons: 1. Because, tho I should grant that the Vulgar sort of People were
greater Slaves than they are now, and that they had no hereditary Properties in
their Estates, but at the will of their Lords; yet does it therefore follow,
that all the Freemen of the Kingdom were Noblemen or Gentlemen, or else
Villains, as now understood; since Nitardus tells us in the place above
mentioned, that there were three sorts of people among the Saxons, Edelingi,
Friling^, and Lazzi, i e. Gentlemen or Noblemen Freemen, and Slaves or
Villains; and this middle sort of men might also possess Lands in Allodio, or
Free-Tenure, tho they did also depend upon other greater men for Protection,
and seem to be those who were after the Conquest called in Doomsday Book, B P.
H. Page 56.
Commenda^^, i. e. such who tho they lived under the Protection, and within the
District of some Great Men, Lord or Patron; yet, as Sir Hen. Spelman tells us,
were free both as to their Persons and Estates, not as sworn to, or holding of
any but the King; And besides these there were also great Bodies of men in
Cities, and Burgh Towns, and those very considerable for Estates, and other
Riches; who tho not nobly born, and yet being Freemen, it was but reasonable
that they should have their Representatives in Parliament, as well as the
former.


M. I shall not at present dispute the matter farther with you concerning the
Word Populus, since I shall refer speaking more about it, till I come to the
times after the Conquest. And therefore to return to the Matter in hand; Had
you but read a little farther in the same Leaf in the Author you have cited,
you might have found who they were, whom King Edward the Elder called to this
Council; The Words are these, Edwardus Rex Synodum Praedictam Nobilium Anglorum
congregavit cui presidebat Plegmundus. B. A. P. Page 7.
Here your own Author tells us in few words, the meaning of a long Title of
this Synod now mentioned, viz. that the Bishops, Abbots, Fideles, Proceres and
Populus, were all Nobiles, Noblemen, that is, the Ecclesiastics* and Lays; or
the Bishops and Lay-Nobility, as I shall make more evident hereafter, and not
the Vulgus, Commons, or ordinary sort of People.

And to this effect Malmsbury, and the Manuscript in the Bodleian Library cited
by Sir William Dugdale, and Mr. Somner, from the Treasury of the Records, and
Evidences of the Church of Canterbury, cited by Sir H. Spelman, do all report
of this very Council, That Edwardus Rex congregavit Synodum Senatorum Gentis
Anglo^^^ cui prasidebat Plegmundus, etc. That King Edward convened a Synod of
the Senators (in the Saxon, Aldermen of the English Nation) that is, such as
were usually called to such Councils, which were only the Nobles, and Great
men, for ought yet appears from this Instance. But what if after all, there was
never any such Synod called, and consequently no such Title to it. For it was
said to have been assembled, by reason of a chiding Letter from Pope Formosus.
Now this Formosus died, Anno 895. that is, ten years before this Council was
supposed to be called.


F. I see this Authority galls you, therefore I do not blame you to do what you
can to be rid of it; but I shall not give it up for all that. For that this
Word Populorum, then signified all the Lay-persons, who were actually Noblemen
that is, of the Greater Nobility, I think is a great mistake; for to what
purpose are all these different Words here heapt together, since the Word
Proceres had done as well alone in your sense, and at once comprehended all
those Lord or Noblemen, that you would only have to be there. But the Word
Nobiles did not in those times, neither does at this day in any other Country
but England* signify none but Great Lords, Barons, or Peers; since in Germany
and France, and other Countries, every private Gentleman is Nobilis. And I
think the Middle or Less Thanes, might then as well be called Nobiles, as the
Great ones. And the Aldermen, or other Magistrates of Great Cities and Towns,
might also very well be styled Nobiles, ratione officii, for the time they
acted in that Employment, and might also deserve the Name of Senators, as well
as the Greater Aldermen, or Earls* And if there were no other Laymen, but your
greater sort of Aldermen, then what becomes of your chief, or Kings Thanes,
which you your self grant were constant Members of those Councils. Nor indeed
does the Word Senator only signify such who were Noblemen by Birth, since
among the Romans there were Senators of the Plebeian as well as Patrician
Order; as any man who has but read Lucius Florus, may quickly see. But as for
your Exception, That there was no such Council, because Pope Formosus is said
to have died ten years before this Council was called, it is a bold Assertion
to annihilate a whole Council, because of the mistake of the Date, or time of
its meeting, or perhaps in the Name of the Pope, or King then reigning,
especially when it was assembled upon so remarkable an occasion, as the
erecting of these new Bishoprics, which all our Historians ascribe to this
Council.

But I shall now proceed to another Authority, and that is to the Great or
Common Council held at Winchester Anno 853. where you will find in Sir H.
Spelman's Councils; Page 350.
as also in Ingulphus's History, that after the Bishops, Earls and other Great
Men, or Thanes, who subscribed to the Law of Tithes, granted by way of Charter
there mentioned, wherein these following Parties are mentioned, Aliorumque
Fidelium infinita multitudo qui omnes Regium Chirographum laudaverunt,
Dignitates vero sua nomina Subscripserunt; and the Learned Commentator upon
King Alfred's Life, published in Latin at Oxford, is so well satisfied, that
the Commons were meant by this Expression, that he has this remarkable
Observation upon this King's granting of these Tithes. Bis videtur Rex Decimas
Ecclesiae concessisse. Primum Anno 844, and 2* vero 855. vel ut alii 854, e
tota Regione, and cum Assensu omnium Nobilium, and totius Populi; where this
Author rightly supposes, that the Words at the conclusion of this Council, did
comprehend the consent of the People or Commons, as well as of the Lords, or
Noblemen. Or else this reciting of this Word Populus; as distinct from the
Nobiles, had been altogether in vain.

So that tho I do not affirm, that the mere Vulgar, or Plebeian sort of People.
did appear personally in the Great Council of those times, any more than they
do now, yet they were there by their Representatives, viz. either by Knights of
Shires, as now, or else the chief Thanes, or Freeholders of the Kingdom; as
also by the Aldermen, or chief Burgesses of great Cities and Towns, who I
suppose did then represent those Politic Bodies, since all men could not
appear there in person.

But I shall give you another Authority out of the same Author, viz.
Archbishop Parker's British Antiquities, Page 87.
where when he relates the calling of the Council of Calne* for the turning of
Married Priests out of Monasteries, and Cathedral Churches, and putting Monks
into their places; He tells us a remarkable Accident that then happened, viz.
The falling down of the Room where the Council was assembled. So that there
fell together all of a sudden; (pray take the words themselves out of the
Authors there cited) Praesules, Proceres, Equites, Nobiles, pariter and
Ignobiles Corruerunt. So that you see here were other sorts of men present in
this Council, beside the Prasules, (i. e. Bishops and Abbots); and the
Proceres, (i. e. the Earls and chief Thanes) viz. the Knights, or Inferior
Thanes, Noblemen or Gentlemen; as also Ignobiles, those that were not Noble by
Birth, such as were the Representatives of Cities and Buroughs; and of this
opinion the Archbishop himself seems to be; for at the end of this Relation,
he makes this Remark; Sed nec hujus domus in qu^ (...) Ordinum, tam Conspicui
Clarique viri, Consulto Convenerunt tam repentina rui^^ ^pe Diabolica carere
potuit; Where by Omnium Ordinum, he must certainly mean the three Estates of
the Kingdom, in the same sense as the word Ordines is used by Camden, and other
Latin Writers, who call our Parliament Conventus Ordinum, that is, the Assembly
of Estates.


M. I Pray give me leave to answer this Authority before you proceed farther; I
must beg your pardon, if I cannot believe that all the persons whom the
Historian relates to have perished by this Fall of the Council Chamber, to have
been all of them actual Members of that Assembly, since there might have been
there diverse persons, who tho of an inferior Rank, might have been presents
Auditors, or lookers on; it not being then the custom to hold those Councils so
privately, as we do now, so that diverse of the Common or Ordinary sort of
People, called here Ignobiles, and perhaps of the Inferior Gentry too being
there, might all partake of this common Ruin, and so pay dear for their
needless curiosity.


F. I must beg your pardon if I do not assent to your opinion in this matter;
for I cannot believe (unless you can show me very good Authority for it) that
ever the common people, or Vulgus in the sense you take them, were let in only
to gaze at such Assemblies. For what Room could have contained so great a
crowd, and if they were in those days so great Slaves, as the Gentlemen of your
opinion please to make them, it is not likely that they should be admitted to
crowd into the Great Councils then, any more than now, when you allow them more
liberty, and greater privileges than they then enjoyed. And therefore I think
I may very well stick to the Archbishops opinion, who supposes them to have
been the whole Assembly of the Three Estates, who were all involved in this
Ruin.

But letting this pass, I shall now give you an Authority of a Great Council
held under King Ethelred, which will farther confirm our Sense of the Word
Populus; which Council you may see in the 1st Volume of Monastic^^ Anglic
contains a concession and confirmation of diverse Privileges to the Monastery
of Wolverhampton in these Words; Vol. 1. Fol. 988. Col. 2.
Haec decreta sunt Sigerich Archiepiscopi in placito coram Rege Ethelredo, and
Eboracensi Archiepiscopo, and omnibus Episcopis, Abbatibus Regionis Britanni^,
seu Senatoribus, Ducibus, and Pop^lo Terrae: where it seems plain to me, that
the Populus Terrae are here put as a distinct order of men from all the rest
a^oregoing.

To come now to the time after the Danish Invasion, and the settlement of the
Crown upon King Knute, who after he was made King, partly by Conquest, and
partly by Election, yet altered nothing of the ancient Constitution And
therefore Florence of Worcester tells us, that Anno 1017 being the first year
of his Reign, Fol. 619.
he divided the whole Kingdom into four parts, and also foedus cum Principibus
and omni Populo, Ipse and illi cum Ipso parcus cess^runt; Where you see the
Populus or Commons is put distinct by this Author from the Great Lord or
Noblemen here called Principes; and this Council is called by Abbot Bromton in
his History Parliamentum apud Oxoniam; Bromton Fol. 908.
And also in his Charter to the Abbey of Briadricesworth (since called St.
Edmundsb^ry) which is still to be seen in the Office of the King's Remembrancer
of the Excheq^er, it is thus recited, Ego Cnut Rex totius Albionis Insulae, and
aliarum Nationum plur^marum, in Cathedra Regali promotus, cum Consilio, and
Decreto Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, Abbatum, Comitum aliorumque omnium
Fidelium eligi Sanciend: Whence it plainly appears, that under the word
Fideles, was then comprehended other persons of an inferior Rank, or Order to
the Comites, or Earls, there mentioned; and these could mean no other, than the
Representatives of the Commons, whom I have proved to have been present in
these Councils.


M. I cannot believe you have yet proved it; for tho I have hitherto omitted to
give you my thoughts of this word Fidelium, yet I must now tell you once for
all, that by this word is not here meant, or any where else in our Saxon Laws,
to be understood the ordinary or common sort of People, or any that represented
them, but only Tenants in Capite, or in Military Service, which were then
called the King's Thanes, and were afterward the same with the Barons Minores,
mentioned in King Iohn*s Charter. But I shall plainly prove, when I come to it,
that the word Fideles, after the Conquest, signified only the King*s Tenants in
capite, and were the same with the Mi^ites, whom we find to be witnesses after
the Dukes, or Earls, to this Charter of King Cnute. And tho I confess this word
Fideles, does in a common, or larger acceptance, signify all such Subjects as
owe Fealty and Allegiance to the King; yet in a strict and Legal Signification
(as it is here to be taken) it signifies only the Barons or Tenants in Capite,
as Dr. B. has very well showed us in his Glossary. And therefore Sir Henry
Spelman himself distinguishes between these and all other Subjects, Gloss. Tit.
Fideles.
in these words, Inter^um Specialiter dicuntur ^dem, qui Vasalli, qui F^udo
acc^pto in Patron* Fide, and cli^ntela sunt, Vicissimque Suamci certi obsequii
nomine fidem astrinxerunt But indeed it is impossible to understand it in your
sense, for then all that swore fealty to the King (and so were called Fideles)
should have had a place in Parliament, and all the men in England above
fourteen years of age, must have been there in person, which would have been a
pretty large Assembly, and such a multitude, as no one place could have
contained them.


F. If what Dr. B. in his Preface to his Norman History, page 157. as also in
his Answer to Mr. P. page 20. be true, page 156.
that Fendal Tenures owe their Original to William the Conqueror, tho in other
places he is of another mind; then certainly this word Fideles, must have been
used in a larger sense, in the times before the Conquest, and must have
extended to all those who were bound to take the Oaths of Fealty and
Allegiance, in the Folk mote, or County Court: as they did long after the
Conquest, and ought to do so still, if required; and therefore this word
Fideles could be then no more limited to Tenants in Capite in that time, than
it is now; who tho I grant they could not all be present in the Great Council
in person, yet they might be there by their Delegates (as well as they are now)
and who might also consist of far greater numbers than they now do; since we
find in the Council of Winchester, (but now mentioned) that after the Dukes,
Earls, and Great Men of the Kingdom, there is also added, alior^mque fidelium
infinita multitudo; which great multitude sure must have signified somewhat
more than your Chief Thanes, or Tenants in Capite alone; or else the words
Comites, and Proceres, might very well have comprehended all the Degrees of
Laymen; And therefore I desire you to show me by some better Authorities than
you yet have done, that before the Conquest, the word Fideles must needs
signify Tenants in Capite and no other; But that it did not signify only so
after that time, I shall join issue with you by and by.

I shall now proceed to my next Authority, which is from Ailrid, Abbot of
Rievallis, Script. X. Col. 372.
who lived not long after the Conquest, who, in his Life of Edward the
Confessor, relating the manner of that King's Election in his Mothers Womb,
tells us, How Ethelred his Father called a Great Council about appointing a
Successor, that hereupon says thus, Fit Magnus coram Rege Episcoporum
Procerumque Conventus, Magnus Plebis P^lgique Consensus; Where you see
apparently, that the Abbots made a distinction between the Assembly of the
Bishops and Great Lords, and that of the Plebs, Vulgus, or Common People.


M. Pray give me leave to interrupt you a little before you proceed to any
fresh Authorities. I grant it is true, that the Abbot in the place you mention,
tells such an idle Tale, that this Edward was chosen King whilst in his Mothers
Womb, and so his Father made the Nobility swear Fealty to him before he was
born. He is the only Author of this Legend, that I know of; and sure you your
self must own that it is a little too gross to be believed; and therefore I
wonder that you should urge that to me for a sufficient Authority, for the
People or Commons having any place in the Great Council in those times.


F. Pray, Sir, observe to what purpose I make use of this Authority; it is not
to make good the Election of Edward the Confessor in his Mothers Womb, but
only to prove who were then supposed (when this Abbot writ) to make up the
constituent parts of the Wittena-Gemot, or Parliament, in the Saxon times,
which was then believed by all men, to consist of the Clergy, Higher Nobility,
and Com^^^, unless you can suppose that the Abbot should mention the Commons by
Prophecy. And granting that it was only according to the custom of his own time
(which the Author of the Preface to the December Scriptores, makes to be about the
middle of King Henry II. Reign) it will sufficiently prove the antiquity of the
Commons in Parliament, to be near a hundred years older than the earliest time
you assign for it, ( viz) the 49th of Hen. III.

But I shall now conclude with the conclusion to King Edward the Confessor's
third Charter to the Abbey of Westminster, in a great Council held in the last
year of his Reign, vi. Spel. Coun. Fol. 625.
as you will find it thus recited in Sir H. Spelman's Councils in these Words,
Hanc igitur Chart^^ meae donationis and Libertatis, in die dedicationis
praedictae Ecclae. recitari jussi coram Episcopis, Abbatibus, Comitibus, and
omnibus, Optimatibus Angliae, omnique Populo audiente, and vidente; where by
the Optimates Angliae, I think can be understood no other than the Thanes, or
Freeholders of all sorts, as well the Kings as others; as also the Deputies of
great Cities and Buroughs, the Words being Optimates Angliae (non Regis) and
tho it is not likely that the Populus, who are here mentioned to be present,
should be the Mob, or Common People, only admitted to stare and harken at such
a great Assembly; yet since the Words are in respect of them only, audiente,
and vidente, I shall not insist upon the Word Populus here, as a part of this
Common Council of the Kingdom.

But yet that the Word Populus does oftentimes refer to the Representatives of
the Commons, I shall conclude with the Answer of K. Harold, the last Saxon
King, to the Message of William, Duke of Normandy, demanding the Kingdom of
England; and that Harold according to his Promise should marry his Daughter;
Will. Malm. de gestis Anglorum Lib. 2. Fol. 52.
The Words are remarkable, and therefore pray read them out of Will. of
Malmesbury, who lived near that time, Contra, (...) scil. Heraldus) quae dixi
de Puellae nuptiis referens, de Regno (addebas) praesumtuosum fuisse quod
absque generali Senatus, and Populi Conven^^ and Edicto alienam illi
hereditatem Iuraverit; now that by the Word Senatus is to be understood the
higher Nobility, such as the Bishops, Abbots, Earls, etc. and by Populus, the
Representatives of the People, we have Mr. Selden's Authority on our side, Cap.
10. Fol. 552.
who in his Dissertations on Fleta, speaking of the great Question that arose
in Parliament in K. Edward III. Reign, concerning King John's Donation of his
Kingdom to the Pope, gives their conclusion to this debate, in these Words,
Ordine universi ^am generis Hieratici, quam Proceres, and Senatus Populus,
s^l^^niqu^ in it a deliberatione in Comiciis illis responderunt unanimes
irritam plane fuissi (...) Donationem illam ut pote tam sine ordinum assensu,
quam Iuran ento ina^gu^a^i advers^n; but of this great Authority I shall speak
more hereafter, when I come to it in order of Time.

Since therefore it is apparent that the Commons had a share in the Great
Councils before the Conquest (as you call it) I desire that you would be
pleased to show me how they came to lose it after the coming in of the Normans,
and to be so long without it, as until the 49th of Henry III. or 18th of Edward
I. If your Authors are to be credited.


M. I must confess the Authorities you have brought out of the Saxon Councils,
would seem to be of some weight, were I not sensible, that the Monks, who were
the only Recorders of these Councils, are very short and careless in giving a
true account of them, and if we go to the Councils themselves, we might be
sufficiently convinced, that all those that are said to be present at them,
could not have any Places or Votes in those Assemblies, as Members of them; for
in some of them (as in this Example) we find the Queen to have been there, and
to have given her consent to the King's Charters; and yet I suppose you will
not allow the Queen to have been there as an Estate by her self, much less to
have been a Member of any of the Three Estates.

The like we may say for those Abbesses we find mentioned to have been present
in diverse of those Councils, and particularly in that of Winchester, you so
much insist upon, wherein Tithes were granted; and these are said to have
approved of the Royal Charter, as well as any of the rest; and sure you do not
make Women to have had Voices in our great Councils in the Saxon Times. So that
it appears plain enough to me, that persons being mentioned as present in these
Assemblies, or being Witnesses to Charters there granted, do not make them to
have been constituent Members thereof: And therefore since the Saxon times are
so dark and obscure, and so little to be collected of certainty from what we
find in the old Monkish Histories, and those Fragments of Laws and Charters
they have left us; I think it is time that we pass over this to the next Period
after the Conquest, wherein I doubt not but to show you, that for above an
hundred years after that time, none but the Bishops, Abbots, Earls, Barons, or
Tenants in Capite, were summoned by the Great Council or Parliament till the
time I have so often mentioned:


F. I see you do all you can to perplex very plain and evident Proofs; For as
to the Queens being often present at the Great Councils of those times, it is
no more than what was usual in these Elder times; and that in France as well as
here, as any man that will but peruse the Charters of some of the Kings of
France, Page 156. Page 158. Page 106.
of the second Race, as they are in Father Mabilion de Rediplomatica, may
easily satisfy themselves; and as for the Abbesses, whom we find sometimes
mentioned to have been there before the Conquest, they might also according to
the Custom of those times have appeared in Person in the Great Councils, in the
Right of their Monasteries, and of those great Possessions they held, or else
they might have been often represented by their Oecomi, or Stewards, who
transacted all business for them; and your own Civil Law does always suppose,
that what any Persons perform by their Lawful Proxies, it is said to be done by
themselves; and that the Abbesses and Prioresses, did together with the other
Spiritual Tenants in Capite, join to grant Scrutage upon the Knights Fees they
held; I shall show you before we have finished this Discourse. But since I
think I have sufficiently proved, the Commons being in possession of this Right
by a long Prescription, I shall now leave it to you to prove, that they did not
enjoy it after the Conquest, and that not until the time you suppose.


M. Since you are pleased to impose this Task upon me, I shall willingly submit
to it; and therefore before I proceed farther, pray let us see how far we are
agreed. In the first place I think you will grant, that till about the latter
end of Edward I. Reign, there is no express mention made in our Records, or
Historians, of any Representatives for the Commons, either by Knights of
Shires, Citizens or Burgesses of Towns; much less the word Commons, mentioned
by them in the sense it is now taken; For if we peruse Ingulph, or Eadmerus, or
any other Ancient Historian of William the Conqueror, or his Sons time, when
they have occasion to mention the Great Councils of that Age, we can find none
mentioned (besides the Bishops) but Principes, Proceres, Primates, or Optimates
Regni; or else in the following Age, under the Titles of Optimates, or Magnates
Regni, by Matt. Paris, and Matt. of Westminster, who are often comprehended
under the more particular Titles of Comites and Barons, or Baronagium Regni,
or else by the more general of Nobilitas, Universitas, or Communitas Regni,
that is, the whole University, Community, or Body of the Kingdom, represented
in Parliament, by the Bishops, Abbots, Earls, and Barons thereof. As for most
of these words, I have given you my sense of them already, in the Times before
the Conquest; and tho I grant there may be other Persons, sometimes mentioned
after the Barons, as Milites, Liberi Homines or Tenentes, yet I think Dr. B.
very plainly proves, by those Authorities he produces in his Answer to Mr. P.
as also in his Glossary at the end of it, that by all the Words
beforementioned, which are used in our Ancient Historians, can only be
understood either the Greater Barons, or else the Less, who were Tenants in
capite, and were a part of the Baronage or Nobility of those Times, and whose
Votes did then conclude all their Subfeudotaries, or Mesne Tenants, who held of
them; and these together with the Bishops and Abbots, etc. did represent all
degrees of Men in the Kingdom, and being often comprehended under the General
Titles of Clerus and Populus, vi. B. G.
or else Pleb^, or Valgus; or else under these Titles, as yet more generally
expressed by Regnum, and Sacerdotium, i. e. the Clergy and Laity of the
Kingdom; the Words Populus, and Plebs, or Vulgus, signifying no more in those
days, in our Historians (when they treat of Parliamentary Affairs) than the
Lay-Earls and Barons, with the other Less Tenants in capite: So that the Vulgar
or Common People, neither by themselves, nor their Representatives had then any
Place in our Great Councils: And therefore I think I may boldly affirm with Dr.
B. first, That the Commons represented by Knights, B. A. P. Introduct.
Citizens, and Burgesses in Parliament, were not introduced, nor were one of
the Three Estates in Parliament, before the 49th of Henry the Third.

Secondly, That before that time the Body of the Commons of England, or Freemen
(as now understood, or as we now frequently call them) collectively taken, had
not any Share or Votes in making of Laws for the Government of the Kingdom, nor
had any Communication in Affairs of State, unless as they were represented by
the Tenants in capite. And these two Propositions I think I shall be able to
prove by undeniable Evidence, drawn from our Ancient Historians, the Laws and
Charters of our Kings, as also from those Parliament Rolls, Records, and Acts
of Parliament, we have yet left us.


F. I confess you have made a very bold challenge, and if you can make it out,
I grant you will carry the day, and I shall then willingly submit to your
Opinion; But since I find the greatest part of our Arguments do consist in the
equivocal use of those words, by which I confess the Commons in Parliament are
generally expressed in our Ancient Historians: I shall in the first place show
you (to avoid all unnecessary dispute about words) that by every one of these
Expressions you have mentioned* the Commons might very well be comprehended as
well after the Conquest, as before. And therefore to take the words in the same
order as you have recited them, I shall begin with the word Principes, which I
have already proved signified before the Conquest no more than Chief, or
Principal Men; and that it means no more after the Conquest, I shall show you
by several Authorities; and though I grant that word is most commonly used by
Eadmerus, yet could it not be meant in the sense it is now understood, there
being then never a Prince, nor so much as a Duke in England; but what was
understood by this Expression in aftertimes, we must appeal to Historians.
Mat. of Westminster, in his Flores Histor. Anno Dom. 1280. Fol. 409.
(being the 7th Year of Edward the First, which was but 15 years after the 49
Hen. 3.) thus reckons up the constituent parts of that Parliament, Rex,
Pontifices, and Principes Anglicani convenerunt in unum, etc. Yet in Rot.
Claus. 7. Edward 1. It is called a Parliament; and at which the Statute of
Mortmain was Enacted. And that the Commons were there as well as they are now,
I shall prove when I come to those times. But as for the word Proceres in the
ancient Manuscript Chronicle of Walter of Coventry 9o. Hen. 3. Anno Dom. 1225.
In Bib. Cotton.
you will find these words; Purificatione Beatae Mariae convocantur apud London
Proceres Angliae ibique tractatu habito diffusiore cum Clero, and Populo ibidem
convocato Rex concessit Libertates tam Ecclesiae quam Regni, quam Forestae
sicut Cartae suae inde confectae and singulis Comitatibus liberatae before
testantur ibidemque con^^ssa Domino Regi a Comitibus, and Baronibus, and Clero
and Populo ibidem praesentibus, Quintadecima omnium mobilium de Communi
assensu, praeterquam de Ecclesiis.

But as for the word Magnates, Mat. Paris in his History of this year relates
it thus: Fol. 223.
Rex Hen. ad natale tenuit curiam suam apud Westminster. Praesentibus clero and
populo, cum magnatibus Regionis solemnitate igitur ut decebat completa,
Hubertus de Burgo ex part ejusdem Regis proposuit coram Archiepiscopis,
Episcopis, comitibus, Baronibus, and aliis universis* etc. But to give you the
rest in English; The King here demanded the fifteenth part of all their movable
Goods; upon which the Parties above mentioned, with one accord answered, That
they would willingly yield to the King's desire, if He would confirm the great
Charters. To which the King having assented, and sealed them; they granted the
said Supply. From which we may observe, that as all the inferior Clergy were
comprehended under the word Clerus; so must, by a like parity of Reason, the
Commons be under Populus* or else it would have been an idle Tautology when it
is put, as it is here, distinct from Magnates.

Now though there be no other persons expressly mentioned by these two
Historians to have been at this Parliament of the Laity, but the Earls and
Barons, comprehended by them under the general Names of Proceres, Populus and
Magnates; yet do but read the conclusion to the great Charter of 9th Hen. 3.
and you will find, that besides the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls and Barons,
there were also present, the Knights, Freeholders, and all others of the
Kingdom, by their lawful Representatives, as I shall show you more at large
when I come to make use of this Charter, as an Argument to prove the Commons to
have appeared in Parliament before 49 Hen. 3. So likewise the Statute of Fines
made 27 Edward. 1. was ordained de Communi Concilio Regni, and yet no mention
made either of the Assent of the Lords or Commons; and yet this Statute was
made but 9 years after the 18th of that King. Since which time the Dr. himself
acknowledges the Commons to have been always represented in Parliament, as they
are at this day; and yet Mat. Westminster speaking of this Parliament, mentions
it is Orders only in general words, thus; Dominica secunda Quadragesima citatis
Magnatibus Regni apud Westmonasterium; and yet it is certain all the Estates of
the Kingdom were there: So that it is not safe to conclude from the general,
and equivocal Expressions either of ancient Statutes, or Historians, That the
Commons were not in Parliament, because not particularly mentioned.

I could give you more Instances of the like Kind, but I will not tire you: But
shall now proceed to show, that notwithstanding the use you make of the
Testimony of Mat. Paris, as to the sense of the word Magnates, yet, that all
those Historians that writ immediately before or after him, and continue his
History, do frequently make use of the word Magnates and Primates, to signify
the Commons, as well as the Lords assembled in Parliament. And for the proof of
this, I shall give the Testimonies of two approved Authors. The First is Thomas
Walsingham, in his History of England, who in Anno Dom. 1313. 6 Edw. 2. has
these words Reced^ns: (Rex) de Berewici partibus pervenit Eboracum, ubi magnum
(...) Clero tenuit Concilium, and Regni Magnatibus Universis.

So likewise Mat. of Westminster, in his Flores Histor. in the 24th of Edw. 1.
Anno Dom. 1296. relates a Parliament held at St. Edmondsbury, at which appeared
Primates, ac Magnates sui Regni, etc. a quibus novum Tallagium postulavit, etc.
I could give you more of the same kind out of this Author, but I fear lest I
should tire you; and therefore I shall conclude with the Testimony of Hen. de
Knighton in his History, De Eventibus Angliae, where in 9 Hen. 3. he thus
speaks concerning this King's granting the Great Charters, Post haec Rex
Henricus concessis Magnatibus terra duas chartas, unam de Foresta, and aliam de
libertatibus, ob quam causam Communes Regni concesserunt quintam decimam partem
Mobilium, and immobili^m. From all which you may observe, that in the time when
this Author wrote, it was generally believed, that this term Magnates
comprehended all the Estates of the Kingdom, and likewise supposed the Commons
(whom he here calls Communes, to have had a principal share, not only in the
paying, but granting this great Tax. And forth farther proof of this, pray see
what VV. Malmesbury says in his History, when reciting the Speech of the Bishop
of Winchester, then the Pope's Legate, speaking of the Londoners, has this
remarkable passage, Londinenses, qui praecipui habebantur in Anglia sicut
Proceres; so that if the chief Citizens of that famous City, were reckoned
sicut Proceres, sure those they chose to represent them in Parliament, might
much better deserve that Title. And thus likewise Walsingham, in his History
in the 17th of Edw. 2. tells us, that he summoned to a Parliament at London,
Regni Proceres, and Praelatos ad Tractandum de variis Regni negotiis; but in
the close Roll of this very year it appears by the Expensis Militum, Rot.
claus. 17. E. 2. m 24. dorso.
that the Commons were there, as as well the Lords. So that you see they were
all then comprehended by our Historians under the general term of Proceru Regni.

I come in the next place to the words Nobiles and Nobilitas. Walsingham, 5
Edw. 2. gives us this account. Post Natale Dominicum convenit universa
multitudo Regni nobilium ad Parliamentum Londoniis. Now what is here meant by
this Multitudo Nobilium may be proved by the Parliamentary Writs of this year,
Mr. Pryn's 2 part of the R. of Par. VV.
as appears by the close Roll of this year, wherein there are Writs of Summons
for the Commons directed to the Sheriffs.

And that the House of Commons were often Styled Noble in latter times appears
by a Speech Recorded in the Rolls of Parliament 7th of Rich. 2. to be spoken by
Sir Mich. de la Pool, Rot. Parl. 7. Rich. 2. part 1. n. 1.
then Lord Chancellor, to the Lords and Commons, which begins thus, Ydist vous
( i. e. I say to you) Messeurs Prelates, and Seigneurs Temporelx, and vous mes
Compaignons les Chivalers, and autres de la Noble commune de Angleterre.

And to prove that this Word was then used in this sense amongst Civilians,
from whom we derive most of our Titles of Dignities, you may see in the large
work of Barthol: Cassaanaeus, called Catalogus Gloriae Mundi, written on this
subject; where, in his 8 th. part, consid. 18. he has this amongst other
Comments on the word Nobilitas; Nobilitas etiam causatur ex loco, quoniam civis
ex urbe splendida oriundus, Nobilis est; for which he there gives many
Authorities. And this Title he looks upon as due also to Country Gentlemen,
living upon the Husbandry of their own Estates, or Annual Rents.

And that by the word Magnates, are often understood the Knights of Shires,
commonly called in old French, Grantz des Countees; I can give you sufficient
Authorities: Now this word Magnates is always rendered in our old French, by
Grantz; P. R. C. p. 94, 95.
For the proof of this, I desire you in the first place to take notice, that
Rot. Claus. 3 E. 2. in 16. dorso, you will find this Title, Inhibitio ne qui
Magnates, viz. Comes, Baro, Miles, (...) abqua alia Notabilis persona transeat
ad parts transmarinas. Where you see the word Magnates is applied to Knights
at least, as well as Earls and Barons. And amongst the Common Writs of
Michaelmas. Term, Anno 34 Edw. I. in the keeping of the Remembrancer of the
Treasury of the Exchequer, the Knights of Shires, and Barons of Cinque Ports
are called Magnates. So also in the Statute, 25 E. 3. de servientibus, it is
there Enacted, per Assent de les ditz Prelatz, Countes (...); and autres
Grandes de la dite Communalte, illonques Assemblez. Also in the Statute-Book
printed in French, in the Statute of the Staple, 27 E. 3. the Knights of the
Shires are expressly called, Grantz des Counties. And lastly, as for the word
Optimates, which is derived from the superlative Optimus, it signifies no more
than the best sort of men in any Commonwealth or City. And in this sense, Page
189.
William of Malmesbury, in his History, speaking of the rich Citizens of
London, has this Remarkable Passage, Londinenses qui pro magnitudine Civitatis
optimates sunt. And that not only Knights, but also such Citizens, as were
remarkable and eminent for their Estates or Offices in Cities, had the
appellation of Magnates, appears from an Ancient Manuscript Book, Liber de
Antiquis Legibus, p. 64.
kept in the Archives of the City of London; where in Anno Dom. 1229. being the
13 th. of Hen. 3. an Act of Common Council was made, per omnes Alderman^aes,
and Magnates Civitatis, per assensum univer-sorum Civium, quod nullo tempore
^ermitterent aliquem vicecomitem admitti in vicecomitem per duos annos
continuos, sicut (...) extiterant. So likewise in the same Book, Anno Dom.
1244. 29. H. 3. mention is there made of a Dissension that then arose about the
Choice of a Sheriff; and the Book says, that quidam de vulgo Elegerunt, Nichol.
Bat. per assensum Majoris, and Magnates elegerunt Adam de ^ently. I could give
you more of a like nature; but I will not tire you; but no doubt but the
Eminent Citizens of York and other Cities, were called Magnates in those times.

From all which we may safely conclude, That not only Knights of Shir^ were
styled Magnates, but also the Representatives for the Cities were often styled
Proceres, Magnates, and Nobiles, in our Ancient Rolls, and Acts of Parliament,
and other public Writings. I beg your Pardon for being thus long; but I could
not make an end sooner, and prove the true Sense of these Words in question,
from Ancient Historians, Acts of Parliaments and Records; by which I hope you
will be satisfied how unsafe it is to depend upon the general and various
expressions of our English Historians (especially, as understood by those of
yo^^ opinion); since if we should depend upon them alone, the Commons would not
oftentimes be found to have been present in Parliament, even when the Records
themselves expressly prove they were there.


M. I must confess you have made me think more on this Subject, than perhaps
otherwise I should have done; yet I must observe, That most of the Quotations
you have made use of, concerning the meaning of the words Proceres, Magnates,
and Nobiles, etc. are from Authors who writ after the time that I (...) the
Commons, as now Represented, to have been constantly Summoned to Parliament; so
that they might very well, through haste or inadvertency, confound them with
the Earls and Lords, and so style them by the same Titles. For I will prove to
you, before the conclusion of this Discourse, by undeniable Records, That by
the words Magnates and Proceres, are understood the Bishops, Earls, and Barons,
as distinguished from the Commons. But I think I can sufficiently prove from
Mat. Paris, and the Ancient Laws of our first Norman Kings as also from the
Magna Charta of King John, That by the words Bartne^ i^ meant the Tenants in
capite, who are there only mentioned to ha^ constantly appeared in Parliament,
till the 18 th. E. 1. the Greater and Less ^^^ons, or Tenants in capite,
together with those of higher degree, ( viz. the Earls, Bishops, and Abbots),
being the only persons who represented the who^e Body of the Nation, in our
great Councils, or Parliaments. And I take this to be (...) evident and clear,
that I cannot quit this Opinion, without you can show (...) better Reasons to
the contrary, than hitherto you have done.


F. I see nothing will satisfy those who have once received a Prejudice; (...)
otherwise I think it may be proved sufficiently, from that Clause in Magna
Chart^ I have mentioned, That other persons were there before the 49 th. of
Henry (...) besides your great Barons, and Tenants in capite. And as for the
use of (...) words you mention, in Historians after the Reign of Hen. III.
nothing can be a plainer proof for me: For if those Historians did comprehend
the Common under those general Words, or Phrases, we have been now disputing
about, I de^sire to know why they might not have been likewise comprehended
under the same terms, by Mat. Paris, and those other Historians who writ other
Historie^ from the Norman Conquest to his time; and why thy might not have then
con^founded the Commons with the Lords, as well as they did afterward. But
since I see you insist so much upon your Barons, and Tenentes in capite, whom
you wi^ have alone to constitute the Baronagium, or the Communitas, or
Universitas Bar^^gii Angliae, pray give me leave to ask you a plain Question,
Were your less^ Tenants in capite, (or Barons minores) Lords or Peers of
Parliament, or were they Commoners only?


M. To give you Mr. Selden's Opinion, in his Titles of Honor, cap. 5. P. 708.
He supposes, that from the time of the Conquest to about the middle of King
John, every Tenant by reason of his Tenure of Lands he held in capite, was
indifferently an Honorary or Parliamentary Baron; but that about the end of
King John's time, some only that were most eminent of those Tenants (sometimes
styled Barons Majores Regni) were summoned by several Writs directed to them
as Lords or Peers of Parliament; and that the rest, being the lesser or lower
Tenants in capite, (sometimes styled Barons minores), were for some time
before this summoned by general Writs directed to the Sheriffs or Bailiffs, as
appears by King John's Magna Charta. B. A. P. p. 18.
Now whether these men were ever really Peers or not, I have reason to doubt;
since I do not find but it was they alone who for some years after the Conquest
served upon Juries in County Courts, and dispatched all the public business of
the Country, which was then (as at this day) a drudgery beneath the Peers to
perform, and therefore I shall not insist upon it. But thus much I think is
certain, That they were a sort of persons much above any other Laymen of the
Kingdom; since they held their Estates immediately from the King, and were so
considerable, as that by the Constitutions of Clarendon, they were not to be
Excommunicated without the King's leave; and so were then in some sort of the
same Order, ratione Tenurae, with the great Barons or Peers, being commonly
styled Barons, and made up but one Estate or Order of Laymen in Parliament.
And from thence I suppose proceeds that common Error of Sir Ed. Coke, that the
Lords and Commons did anciently sit together, and made but one House. Now if
you have any thing to object against this Notion, pray let me hear it.


F. I think you and I are come pretty near an issue in this question; for you
confess that these lesser Tenants in capite, and whom you comprise under the
word Barons, were not truly and properly Barons; and so far you are in the
Right; but yet you will have them to be somewhat more than mere Commoners; as
if there had been some Degree or Order of men in England, in those times, who
were neither Lords nor Commons, but an Amphibious Race between both. But to
prove that they were indeed no more than Commoners, and not Lords nor Pee^s at
all, nor equal with them, we need go no farther than their way of Trial in
cases of Treason or Felony, which was by mere Commoners, who were not Tenants
in capite, as well as those that were; so that a person who was no Tenant in
Capite, and might serve upon a Jury of Life and Death upon them; and as well as
the Dr. in his Answer to Mr. P. as you asserted, that they only served in the
Country upon all Iuries; and that before the time of King John. So after all
this noise of none but Lords and Tenants in capite, appearing for the whole
Commons of England, we find by your own showing, that three parts in four of
the Lay Members of that Council were as mere Commoners as our Knights of
Shires, and Barons of the Five Ports at this day; nor can I see any reason why
these latter might not be as well comprehended under the Word Barons, as the
former, who were mere Commoners likewise; if we consider that it was neither
Nobility, nor Birth, nor the King's Writs of Summons, but only the mere Tenure
of their Lands that gave them a particular right to a Place in that Assembly in
those Ages; or if a mere Citizen could get Money enough to purchase such an
Estate in capite, he was as good a Member of Parllament as the best of them
all: So that the Question then amounts to no more than this, Whether the
Commons of England were then represented by Tenants in Capite, or by Knights of
Shires, and others, as they are now. But since you will have none Commoners,
but Tenants in capite to have had places therein, pray tell me whether you
allow that Privilege to all who held in capite, or not?


M. Yes, I allow it to all who held in capite by Knights Service, and who also
enjoyed a whole Knight's Fee, or so much as was sufficient to render them able
to sustain the Dignity of that Place; not but that the King had also a
prerogative of summoning or omitting whom of them he pleased, to his Great
Council or Parliament, till the Less Tenants in capite thinking it a wrong to
them, it was provided by King John's Charter, that all of them should be
summoned by one General Writ of Summons, directed to the Sheriff. But I exclude
from this Council all Tenants by Petit Serjeanty, who tho it is true held of the
King in capite, yet was it not by Knights Service. So likewise I exclude all
Cities and Towns, tho the Citizens or Burgesses of diverse of them held their
Lands and Tenements by that Tenure; since being neither noble by Blood, nor
having Estates sufficient to maintain the Port of a Gentleman, or Knight, they
had no Right to appear there in Person among the other Tenants, who were owners
of one or more Knights Fees. Yet do I not affirm, that the Commons were not
after some sort represented in Parliament by their Superior Lords, B. A. P.
117. and deim,
tho not as Commoners, since the Bishops, Abbots, and other Barons did then
make Laws, and give Taxes, not only for themselves, but their Feudatory Tenants
also, tho of never so great Estates; and Tenure in capite was then looked upon
as the only true Freehold of the Kingdom, and the Tenants by it as the only
true Freeholders.


F. I shall show you by and by the falsity of this Notion, but in the mean time
pray tell me when a Great Council or Parliament was called, who represented
those Persons, who you say did not appear there; and made General Laws, and
granted General Taxes for themselves, and the whole Kingdom, when there was
occasion. For I see you shut out the greater part even of these your true
Freeholders from this Assembly.


M. As for the Tenants in Petit Serjeanty, I at present conceive (tho I am not
sure of it) that many of them might hold Lands, and perhaps diverse Knights
Fees, by Grand Serjeanty, or Knights Service also; since those Estates which
were given by the Conqueror to his Servants, to be held of him; by such and
such Petit Services, might in process of time fall by Purchase, or Descent,
into the hands of such Great Tenants in capite, as had sufficient Estates to
maintain that Dignity; and as for the rest, they might, for ought as I know,
before the Statute de Tallagio non concedendo, have been taxed by the Kings
Writs, according to the proportion of the Knights Fees, or parts of Knights
Fees, which they then held; and according to the Rate of the Sums imposed in
Parliament, either by way of Aids, upon every Knights Fee; or else by way of
Subsidy, by so much a yard, or Plow Land throughout all England; which has been
the only way of taxing ever since that of Knights Fees has been disused.


F. Then I find after all you have said, that scarce half your Tenants in
capite had any Votes in Prrliament, either by themselves, or their
Representatives; and so having Laws made for them, and being taxed at the
King's Will, were as errant Slaves and Vassals, notwithstanding their Tenure in
capite, as the meanest person of the Kingdom, who was taxed (as you would have
it) at the Will of his Superior Lord; which, whether so great and powerful a
Body of men would ever have sufferd, I leave to any indifferent person to judge.


M. I grant this may now appear somewhat hard; yet since it was the received
Law and Custom of the Kingdom, it was not then looked upon as a grievance; and
it was then no more unjust than it is now, that persons under forty Shillings a
year, tho of never so good Estates in Money, or Stock; or that Tenants for
years, or for the Life of another, should at this day have no Votes at the
Election of Knights of Shires, and consequently be without any Representatives
in Parliament of their own Choice, and yet be subject to all Laws and Taxes
(tho never so great) when made and imposed by the King in Parliament; And I am
able to give you diverse good Authorities to prove, that even London it self,
and all other Cities and Towns which held of the King in capite, and were
called his Demesnes, were often taxed by the King and his Council out of
Parliament, before the Statute De Tallagio non concedendo; And I think Dr. B.
has proved this beyond exception, in his Animadversions upon Mr. A's Iani
Anglorum facies no^e; and he there gives us the Record it self of 39 Hen. III.
now in the keeping of the King's Remembrancer of the Exchequer: That the King
did that year (as he had diverse times before) Talliate or Tax all his Demesne
Lands in England, and then likewise demanded of the City of London the sum of
3000 Marks, in name of the Talliage or Tax so laid; And the Mayor and Citizens
at last yielded, after a great Contest; It appearing upon search of the Rolls
in the Ezchequer, that the Citizens of London had been several times before so
taxed in the Reigns of King John, and the King himself; and so they paid at
last the Sum which the King demanded. By which you see, that the greatest and
richest Cities and Towns in England were taxed at the King's Will; nay, I think
I am able to prove (were it now necessary) that the whole Kingdom was often
taxed by the King and his Council only, before the granting of King John's
Magna Charta; and the Statute de Tallagio non concedendo, above mentioned.

But to return to the Matter from which you forced me to digress.

I think nothing is more plain, than that our Ancient Parliaments were only the
King's Court Baron for the dispatch of the Public Affairs of the Kingdom, and
in which (as in the Lesser Courts Baroa, or Courts of Manor, the Suitors or
Tenants were, together with the Lord, or his Stewards, the sole Judges; So that
at first, after the Conquest, it belonged to the King alone, as the Supreme
Lord of the Kingdom, to appoint or call which, or what sort of those Tenants be
pleased, to attend him with their Aid and Advice, at his Common Councils, or
Parliaments; And I think nothing is more evident (as I shall prove more at
large from our Ancient Histories, Records and Statutes) then, that before the
49th Hen. III. and some years also after that time, none but the Bishops,
Abbots, Earls, and Greater Barons, and some of the Less, called in King John's
Charter, the other Tenants in capite, then constituted the whole Body of the
Parliament, under ^he Titles of Baronagium Angliae, or Communitas, or
Universitas Baronagii Angliae; And for this I can give you so good Authorities,
that nothing but more cogent and evident Proofs can bring me from this Opinion;
And therefore I must tell you, I do not value those loose and inconsiderate
Expressions of Historians either before or after that time.


F. I see the Testimonies of Historians are of no credit, if they make against
your Hypothesis; but I shall show you your Mistakes about the King's Taxing
anon, but the main force of your Argument lies in the signification of those
Latin Words you have last mentioned, and which I must needs tell you, I think
you take in too strict a sense; P. R. C. Page 108.
For first, as to the Word Baro, I grant it was not much in use before William
I. obtained the English Diadem; Baro, says Camden, Britanni pro suo non
agnoscum, in Anglo-Saxonicis legibus nusquam comparet, Page 121.
nec in A^frici Glossario Saxonico inter dignitatum vocabula habetur. For the
English Saxons called those in their own Language, Aealdermen, which in Latin
were named Comites, and by the Danes, Earls; but it was of so extensive an
import in its signification, that we read of Aldermani Regis, Aldermani
Comitatus, etc. as I have already showed you; Spel. Gloss. Tit. Alderman.
So that according to the strict Sense of this Word, we had whole Regiments of
Earls, whose Titles seldom, if at all, descended Hereditary, till the
Confessors Time; and after William I. the Saxon Words, Aealderman, and Thegnes,
began to be changed; and in the room of Aldermanni and Thani, we find Comites
and Barons, as in all our Ancient Laws and Histories; Nor was the Word Barons
only taken in those days for Great Barons; and Tenants in capite, but also for
the Inferior Barons, or Free Tenants, which held great Estates of other Mesne
Lords, as well as of the King, by certain Services, and to whom the Great Lords
or Earls (as Sir H. Spelman shows us in his Glossary, Title Baro) often
directed their Charters, Page 70.
Barombus, and Fidelibus nostris tam Francis, quam Anglis; and we there also
read some Quotations from the old Book of Ramsey Abbey, wherein the Barons of
the Church of Ramsey, as also the Milites, and Liberi homines thereof, are
particularly mentioned; all which (as this Learned Author tells us) non de
Magnatibus sunt intelligenda, sid de Vassallis feodalibus, note Scil melioris.

And the same Author says a little lower, that Barons are often taken pro
libere Tenentibus in genere, hoc est tam in Soccagio quam per servitium
Militare.


M. What then? do you suppose that all the Freeholders in England, by
whatsoever Tenure they held, appeared in Person in Parliament, before the time
Sir H. Spelman in his Glossary, vid. Glossar. Tit.
and Dr. B. Assign for the summoning of the Commons to Parliament? At this rate
every Yeoman, or Petty Freeholder was a Baron; so that this Assembly might then
consist of above 50 or 60 Thousand Persons; Since Spot in his Chronicle tells
us, that William the Conqueror reserved to himself the service of about 60000
Knights Fees, which by the time, I suppose, might have been divided into many
more lesser ones, B. A. P. Page: 19.
by Co-heirship, or by sale; and otherwise parcelled out by the King's License
into Half-Knighs-Fees, Third Part of Fees, Fourth Part of Fees, Eight Parts,
Sixteen, Twenty, Thirty and Forty Parts of Fees, and so have been increased
into as many more; And these, besides the Tenants in Soccage, must needs have
been so numerous that what Room, nay what Field or Place was able to contain so
great a Multitude? Or how could any business have been transacted therein,
without the greatest confusion imaginable?


F. So then you your self must also grant, that when all your Greater and Less
Barons, or Tenants in capite appeared in Person, Parliaments were much more
numerous than they are now; since according to the Dr.'s Catalogue, out of
Dooms-Day-Book, (in his Appendix to the English History, Vol. 1.) of all the
Tenants in capite, or Serjeanty that held all the Lands in every County of King
William, they did (besides the Bishops, Abbots, Earls, and Barons) altogether
amount to about 700. and these in the 49th of Hen. III. by forfeiture, and new
Conveyances from the Crown; or by those other ways you have now mentioned,
might be multiplied into twice as many more, and those also of sufficient
Estates to maintain the Port of a Member of Parliament, or Knight; Since 15
Pounds a year was in the Reign of King John, and Henry III. reckoned as a
Knight's Fee, and he that had it, was liable to be Knighted: And if so, I pray
according to your own Hypothesis, how could so great an Assembly be managed, as
of about 3000 or 4000 Persons, without strange confusion and disorder? but upon
our Principles there will follow no more Absurdities or Inconveniences than in
yours; for either these Barons of Counties, Burgesses and Inhabitants of Towns
and Cities, were always represented by Knights and Citizens, as they are now;
or else these Barons of Counties, appearing for themselves, were Lords of
Manors, or Freeholders of good Estates, who were not so numerous or
inconsiderable as you imagine; the Freehold Lands in England, being in those
days but in a few hands, in comparison to what they are now. And for this
Opinion I have Sir H. Spelman of my side; who in the place already quoted,
under Barons C^^itatus, expressly tells us, Hoc nomine contineri videtur
antiquis paginis, omnis (...) ^eodalium specier, in uno quovis Comitara
degentium; Proceres nempe, and (...) Domini, nec non libere quique Tenentes,
hoc est fundorum proprietarii, Anglice Freeholders ut Superiu^ dictum est.
Normidum autem est hoc libere Tenentes, nec tam ^iles (...) fuisse, nec tam
Vulgares ut hodie deprehonduntur; nam villas, and Dominia, in (...) Hareditates
non dum distrahebant Nobiles; sed (ut vidimus in Hibernia) penes se retinentes,
agros, per precarios excolebant, and adscriptitios.

So that you see Sir H. Spelman then believed, that the Manors, and Great
Freehold in England, were not then parcell'd out into so many small Shares as
you imagine; and that such Inferior Barons, whether they held in ca^^^e, or
not, Lamb. Arch.
were also called Proceres; see the Laws of Henry I. Chap. 25. the Title
whereof is de Privilegits Procerum Angliae. The law runs thus, Si exurgat
placitum inter homines allcusus Baronum foenam habentium, tract^tur placitum in
Curia Domini sui; Now that this Socha was no more than Soc. in old Saxon, see
Spel. Gloss. Tit. Soc. i. e. secta de hominibus in curia Domini secundum
consuetudinem; so likewise in Titulo Socha vel dicitur Soc. a Saxon soc^. i. e
libertas Franchesia and vide manerium quoth. dicitur etiam Soca dictum est. From
all which we may observe, that these Lords of Manors (here called Proceres and
Barons) had Court Barons, which took their Name from their Lords, tho
Feudatory Tenants or Vava^ours.

But granting that about the end of King John, or beginning of the Reign of
Hen. III. Supposing that these Lords of Manors, and Great Freeholders, whether
Tenants In capite, or others, might amount in all to 5 on 6000 persons, I do
not see why such an Assembly might not be as orderly and well managed as one of
1000. or 4000. (supposing your Greater Barons and Less Tenants in capite to
have than made about that number); especially if we consider, that most
business, or Acts of any consequence, (and for which Parliaments were called)
might be prepared, and drawn up by the King and his Council before they met. So
that take it which way you will, fewer Inconveniences and Improbabilities
attend my Hypothesis, than yours.


M. That the Earls and Greater Barons, both Spiritual and Temporal, together
with the Tenants in capite, then made the Body of the Baronage of England, I
have very good Authority on my side; but that any Feudatory Barons or Tenants
of a Lesser Degree, ever had any Places or Votes in those Assemblies, I think
you can give me no sufficient Authority for it.

It Is true Mr. P. in his Treatise of the Rights of the Commons asserted, Page
110.
gives us two Modern Quotations; the one out of Mr. C^^den's Britannia, the
other out of Mr. Seldom to prove it. As for the former, it is in the
Introduction to the Britannia, first published in Quarto; The Words are these,
Verum Baro ex illis non imbus videatur, qua tempus paulatim moliara, and
molliora reddidit; nam longo post tempore non Milites, sed qui liberi erant
Domini, Fol. 16.
and Thani Saxombus dicebantur, Barons vocari caperunt, nec dum magni honoris
erat, paulo autem postea (meaning after the Normans entrance) eo honoris
pervenit ut nomine Baronagii Angliae omnes q^^dammodo Regni ordines
continerentur. But he does not tell us that this Learned Author, in his last
Edition of this Work in Folio, being sensible of his mistake, has added the
Word Superiores before Ordines; whereby it is plain he now restrains it only to
the Earls and Barons, as they are now understood.

Mr. P's other Quotation is out of Mr. Selden's Notes upon Ra^^^rus, Fol. 168.
where commenting on the Word Barons, he says, Vocabulum nempe alio notione
usurpari quam vulgo, neque eos duntaxat ut hodie significare, quibus peculiaris
ordinum Comitiis locus est, but then conceals this that follows, which makes
directly against him; Sed universos, qui Regiae munificentiae, ad formulam
Iuris nostre Clientelaris quod nullius Villae Regiae glebam, sed ipsum tantum
modo Regem spectat, Tenure en Chief (Phrasi forensi dicimus) sive Tenura in
capite lati fundi^ pessidebant; whereby you may see that he expressly restrains
this Word Barons to Tenants in capite only; tho your Author takes no notice of
it; Nor indeed in his Title of Honor does Mr. Seldom give us any other
Description of a Baron, Chap. V.
(I mean such who had a Vote in Parliament) but such in the Sense that is taken
in Henry I. his Charter, as it is recited in Matt. Paris, Siquis Baronum
meorum, Comitum vel aliorm qui de me tenent mortuus fuerit, i. e. One who was
either one of the Earls, or Greater Barons; or otherwise, held in capite.


F. Mr. P. is not at all to be blamed (as you make him) in these two
Quotations, since in that out of Camden, you cannot deny, but he has truly
quoted that Author, as it was in his First Edition; and if he afterwares
altered it, it may very well be questioned whether he did not add the Word
Superiores, rather out of fear of displeasing the Greater Nobility, (whom that
Quotation had before Shockt) than out of any sense of his being in the Wrong;
as it appears by the Words immediately following, when he tells us out of a
nameless Manuscript Author; That Henry III. out of so great a multitude of
Barons, which was seditious and turbulent, called the best and chiefest of them
only by Writ to Parliament. By which it plainly appears, that he supposed all
those Less Barons, or Tenants in capite, tho no Lords, as now understood, who
were thus excluded to have been only Nominal, and not Real Barons; and if so,
Commoners; or else he must extend the Peerage of England to at least Three or
Four Thousand Persons; For so many Tenants in capite might very well be at that
time.

The same I may likewise say as to the Quotation out of Mr. Seldom; for by the
Words, quibus peculiaris in ordinum Comitiis locus est; it is plain he supposed
that all the rest of those Tenants in capite were but mere Commoners; yet he no
where affirms, that none but these appeared in Parliament for all the Commons
of England; for he very well knew the unreasonableness of that Supposition;
Since besides these Barons or Tenants in capite, Chap. 8.
Bracton in his first Book tells us of diverse other Orders of Men, of Great
Dignity and Power in this Kingdom, about the time when you suppose this
mavelous Alteration to have happened; His Words are these, Et sub iis (viz.
Regibus) Duces, Comites, Barons, Magnates, sive vavassores, and Milites, and
etiam Liberi, and Villani and deversa Potestates sub Rege constitutae; and a
little farther, sunt and alti Potentes sub Rege qui dicuntur Barons, hoc est
Robur belli; sunt and alii qui dicuntur Vavassores viri (...) Dignitatis. From
which Words I desire you to observe, that he here makes the Magnates, and the
Vavassores, or Feudatory Tenants to be all one, and also ranks them before the
Milites. Now whether these Vavassores and Milites, who did not all hold of the
King in capite, were men of so great Dignity and Power as these whom he here
reckons immediately after the Earls and Great Barons, should have no Votes in
Parliament, neither by themselves, nor their Representatives, is altogether
improbable.

And agreeable to this of Bracton, Du Fresne, in his Lexicon Tit. Vavasor tells
us, Page 1262.
that Vavassorum duo erant ordines, sub majorum apellatione implectuntur, qui
Barons apellantur, sub ^norum vero, quos vulgo Vavassores dicunt; ut leges
Henrici I. Reg. Ang. Thaines minores, respectu Thainorum majorum qui Baronibus
aequiparantur. But that these Lesser Thanes or Vavassors were also styled
Barons, Sir H. Spelman tells us expressly in his Glossary, Tit. Baro; Page 70.
etiam Barons Comitum, Procer umque, hoc est Barons subalterni, and Baronum
Barons s^pissime leguntur; and of this he gives us many Examples, and
particularly of the Chief Tenants of the Abbey of Ramsey, above mentioned. So
likewise the same Author, a Leaf or two farther, speaking of the Barons of
London, mentioned in the Charter of King Henry I. understands them, pro civibus
praestantioribus qui socnas suas, and consuetudines, i. e. Curias habuerunt,
and Privilegia, eorum instar, qui in Comitatu Barons Comitatus dicuntur, etc.
Nor did this Title of Barons extend to London alone, but he also immediately
tells us in the same place, Sic Barons de Ebaraco, de Cestria, de Warwico de
So Feversham, and plurium Villaram Regiis Privilegiis insignium, cum in Anglia
tum in Gallia, etc. and that Barons of Counties were no more than Lords of
Manors, I have just now proved; for Socna means no more than a Court Baron, or
Court of a Manor; So that here arises a plain distinction between the Barons
Regis, the King's Great Barons or Tenants in capite; and these Lesser Barons,
we now are here speaking of, called Medmesse Thegnes, and Burgh Thegnes, by the
Saxons, till they (...) on the Word Parliamentum, to signify the Common
Council of the Kingdom; who, tho no Peers, yet were Barons Regni, Barons or
Noblemen of the Kingdom, according to the general acceptance of the Word
Nobiles, in that Age; and is such made up the Body of the Baronage, called by
Matt. Paris, and other Authors, Baronagium, or Communitas Baronagit totius
Angliae.


M. I see you do all you can from the equivocal use of the Word Barons, to
crowd in new and unknown men into the Great Council of the Kingdom, viz. your
Barons of Counties, Cities, and Towns, whom (since you dare not affirm there
were then any Knights of Shires) you suppose to have served instead of them;
and these you would have to be, not Barons Regis, but Regni, or Terrae, B. A.
P. Page 161.
forsooth, i. e. of the Land or Kingdom; whereas we never had any True Barons
held by mean Tenures here in England; this if you deny, you must deny all
History, and all our Ancient Laws, and Law Books too; and if you grant it, you
must confess that every Baron was a Tenant in capite, and by your own
Concession he must then be the King's Baron, or Baro Regis: I grant indeed,
there were Nominal or Titular Barons (such as you mention) many in those Times,
such as were Tenants to Great Lords, Bishops, or Abbots, of whom we find
frequent mention in our Ancient Histories, Records, and Charters. But these are
not the men who had ever any Place in our Great Councils, and I desire you
would prove to me, that ever they appeared there before the Times I assign; and
I would also have you inform your self of the Gentlemen of whom you borrow this
Notion, if they can prove that there were any such kind of Tenure, as Tenura de
Terra, or de Regno? or whether there was ever any man that held an Estate de
Regno? Whether forfeitures or Escheats were to the Kingdom? And whether Fealty
was sworn, or Homage done to the Kingdom? Or whether an Earl was invested or
Girt with the Sword of the County by the Kingdom? Or whether the ancient
Ceremonies used at the Creations of Earls and Barons, were done by the Kingdom?
Thus all the Barons of England held of the King, and thus all these things were
performed and done to our Ancient Kings, and by them; which are most manifest
Notes of the King's immediate Jurisdiction over the Barons, and that they were
his Tenants in capite, and by consequence his Barons only, which you cannot
deny; and of which Tenants in capite the Earls and Greater Barons always
created by Investiture of Robes, or other Ceremonies, were summoned by
particular Write, and the other Less Barons, or Tenants in capite ever since
the 17th of King John, were summoned by one Common Writ, directed to the
Sheriff of the County* since which time (if not some time before) I grant these
Tenants in capite were not looked upon as Barons or Peers of the Kingdom,
properly so called; Yet did their Votes in Parliament still conclude, and
charge their Tenants in the making and imposing of Taxes or Laws, which they
alone, together with the Bishops and greater Barons still, performed, until the
Times I assign.


F. I see you are in a Wood, and do not know well under what Class to rank your
Tenants in capite; for if they were at first all Lords or Peers, how could they
serve upon. Juries in Hundred or County Courts? If they were mere Commoners,
then there were Commons in Parliament before the 49th of Henry III. and why
might not others as considerable Commoners, have Places in the Great Council as
well as they* whether they were the Kings Barons, or Tenants in capite, or not?
But in answer to this, you tell me, that we never had any Barons held by mean
Tenure, here in England; this is plainly equivocal; for if you mean it of
Baronies in capite, it is true; if of other Baronies, it is false by your own
Confession; And Sir H. Sp^lman tells us, in the Title last quoted, that the
Barons of Burford pleaded to hold of the King per Baroniam, and yet he was
never any Baron of the Kingdom. Now I desire you to show me, if he and such
like Barons as himself, had no place in Parliament, who it was represented them
there? And therefore in answer to your Dilemma, I grant that every Baron by
Tenure, was a Tenant in capite; but every Tenant in capite was not a Baron; and
this I think is so plain, that you your self cannot deny it.

But in answer to your next Question; I can answer it without asking the
Gentleman, from whom you suppose I borrow the Notion, that there might be other
Barons, or Lords of Manors, who by reason of their Estates might have Places
in Parliament (supposing Knights of Shires were not introduced till after Henry
the II. or King John's Time, when such Freeholders became too numerous all to
appear in person) and yet these might not be Barons by Tenure; And therefore
all your Questions conclude nothing; For you suppose that which is still to be
proved, That because all the Barons of England, properly so called, held of the
King in capite, and were consequently his Barons; that therefore none but
B^rons, and Tenants in capite, had any place in our Great Councils; which is
the thing you only suppose, and I as positively deny.


M. Well Sir, since you put it to that issue, I hope I shall fully convince
you, that none but the Persons I have mentioned were the constituent Members of
the Common Council or Parliament, before 49th Hen. III or 18th Edw. I and who
done gave assent to all Laws that were made, and all Taxes that were to be
imposed on themselves, and their Under-Tenants, who were then concluded by the
Acts of their Superior Lords.

But not to wrangle with you any longer, about the signification of the Word
Barons, B. A. P. Page 116.
I grant there were Nominal or Titular Barons, very many, such as I have
mentioned; nay, that there were several other Great Subjects, who had Tenants
that held 5, 6, 7, 8 (...) nay more Knights Fees under them, and who had the
Name and Title of Barons. But what is this to the purpose? I desire you would
prove to me, by any direct proof, that these sort of men had any Voices, either
by themselves, or their Representatives in our Great Councils, till after the
time we allow them; and this (besides the Proofs I have already brought) I
think is sufficient; Since it is plain, that the Barons Regni, or Terra, and
the Milites, and Homines sui, are all one and the same Persons; that is, they
were the King's Great Barons, or Tenants in capite; who alone constituted the
Baronage, or University of the Baronage of England, or of the Kingdom, in our
Great Councils, or Parliaments: And for the farther proof of this, I need go no
farther than those very Arguments your own Author, B. A. P. Page 111.
Mr. P. has made use of, in his Right of the Commons asserted; wherein he
would prove from certain Letters that were sent from the Baronage, or
University of the Baronage of England to the Pope, against the Church of Rome's
Exactions here in England. And therefore I shall not bring only Fragments,
Phrases, or single Words out of the Records or Histories which seem to
countenance my Opinion* contrary to the true meaning of those Records, and the
sense of the Historians, as some of your men do, but shall give you the
Quotations out of those Authors whole, and entire; and shall make such
reasonable Deductions from them, as I think you will have no reason to deny to
be fairly raised from the Words themselves.

And also, as Matt. Paris relates, in the 29th Hen. III. the Earls, and Barons
sent Letters to the Pope, Fol. 658.
then at the Council of Lions, to complain of the Pope's Exactions; which
Letters are said by this Author to be directed A Magnatibus, and Universitate
Regni Angliae. And tho it is also true, that in the same Year there were other
Letters sent thither, from the same Parties, to the Cardinals there assembled,
which are recited by the Old Manuscript to have sent Messengers to the
Cardinals; and the Old Manuscript in the Cottonian Library; that they sent to
the Cardinals, assembled at the Council of Lions* Let^ers a Baronibus,
Militibus and universis Baronagii Regni Angliae per procuratores (...) Rogeram
Bigod Comitem Norff. Willielmum de Cantelupo, Iohannem silium Galfri^^^
Radulphum filium Nicholas Philippum Basset, Barons, Procuratores Baronagii
Ang^^^ tunc temporis. Innocentio Papa Quarto celebrante Concilium ibi generale.
Anno Gratia 1245. And the Letters are thus directed; Venerabilibus in Christo
Fratribus uni^^sis, and Singulis Dei Gratia Salutem. Barons Milites, and
Universitas Baronagii Regis Angliae. And that Matt. of Westminster does
likewise agree in this Relation; only styles the Persons last named, Milites,
whom Matt. Paris calls Viri Nobiles, and discreti; But this will make no
difference, as I shall show you by and by; And to these Matt. of Westminster
adds Mr. William Powic Clark, who seems to have been their Secretary.

But notwithstanding it will appear that all these Persons so sent, named
Barons and Milites* and universitas Baronagii, Ibid. Page 103.104.
did not represent the Commons of England at all, but only the Great Earls,
Barons, and Tenants in Capite. For first it appears from Sir W. Dugdale's
Baronage of England, Toine 1. Fol. 706. and them.
that every one of the Persons here named, was either an Earl, Baron, or Great
Tenant in capite, and n^^ Common Persons, as your Author would have them; And
tho it true, the Cottonian Manuscript, and Matt. of Westminster calls some of
them Milites; yet this makes nothing against our Opinion; for as I proved
before, the Great Milites were often styled Barons, and the Barons Milites.

Nor was this Earl, and the four Barons here mentioned, chosen or sent by the
Baronage of the Kingdom assembled in Parliament to represent them at the
Council of Lions, but were only pitched upon by a Body of Military men, or
Barons, at a Tornament intended to have been held at Dunstable; which was
forbidden by the King, and these took upon them to warn Mr. Martin, the Pope's
Clerk, out of the Kingdom; as appears by the Account Matt. Paris gives us of
this Business in the Paragraph immediately following: So that the History of
the thing makes it plain, who were the Universitas Regni; to wit the Barons, or
the Universitas Armatorum, who were met to hold the Tournament, and these the
King there called his Barons.

And after this, in the 30th of Hen. III. when the Pope did not give
satisfaction to their Grievances, the King called (as this Author tells us)
(...) Parliamentum generalissimum, Matt. Paris. 696.
totius Regni Anglicani totalem Nobilitatem Londini (viz.) Prelatorum tam
Abbatum, and Priorum, quam Epi^coporum Comitum quoque and Baronium ut de Statu
regni jam (...) efficatiter prout exegit urgens necessitas contrectarent. B A.
P. Page 106.
In this very Parliament the King conferred with the Bishops by themselves; and
the Earls and Barons by themselves about this Business of the Pope's not
keeping his Promise: And certainly if there had been then any Commons in this
Parliament, he would have also conferred with them about the same matter.

The result of all these Conferences was, that yet for the Reverence due to the
Apostolic See, they should again supplicate the Pope by Letters, to remove
their intolerable Grievances, and insupportable Yoke. And this they do in
separate Conferences. The Bishops write by themselves; the Abbots and Priors by
themselves; and the Earls, Barons, etc. by themselves, to the Pope; and if
there had been any Commons, as at this day, they most certainly would likewise
have wrote to the Pope, as well as the other Constituent Parts of this
Parliament did.


F. I hope I shall be able to answer what you have now said: In the first
place, tho I should grant that these Commissioners sent by the Baronage of
England, were all of them Barons, and no Commoners among them; does it
therefore follow that the persons that sent them, must have been all Lords too?
For if those Commissioners were all Peers, who represented your Barons
minores, or Tenants in capite, (who, as you your self have granted, were no
Lords at all) and why might not those Lords as well represent all the Commons
of England, as they did these Lesser Tenants in capite? So that it seems plain
to me, that these Words, Universitas Baronagii Angliae, must needs then
comprehend somewhat more than your Barons, and Tenants in capite only; since
the Words Barons and Milites alone and sufficiently expressed all the
Constituent Members of your Parliament, without adding and Universitas
Baronagii, which would have been a Tautology, but that it was very usual for
the great Lords in those days, to write Letters in their own Names, as also for
all the Commons of England.

I shall show you by and by, when I shall make use of two other Instances of a
like nature, in the Reigns of Edw. I. and Edw. III. And therefore it is no good
Argument to prove, that the Commons had no hand in this Message, or Letters,
because they did not write by themselves; much less is it so, because it is not
expressly mentioned by Matt. Paris, that the King consulted the Commons as well
as the Bishops, Earls and Barons; that therefore they were not there. Since
this Author writing very concisely, comprehends all the Lay Estates, under the
Words Comites, and Barons, or else Magnates alone. So likewise Matt, of
Westminster, when he mentions diverse Parliaments in the Reign of Edw. I and
Edw. II, expresses them under the same Title. And though this Author often
mentions the Earls and Barons to have done this, or that; yet it is no Argument
to conclude, that the Commons were not then there. And for this, pray take
these Examples our of Matt. Westminster, when Anno Dom. 1300. the 28th of Edw.
I. he tells us, the King held his Parliament at Lincoln, where the Comites and
Barons demanded a Confirmation of the Great Charters, and they further asked;
that the Deforestations made by the King should be confirmed; and then he tells
us, that thereupon the Charters of Liberties and Forests, were again renewed;
and being past under the Great Seal, were proclaimed before all the People, in
every Country; Where you see that the Complains were made by the Earls and
Barons; yet it is certain, that the Confirmation of these Charters, must have
proceeded from all the Estates; for the Bishops; and Abbots, and Priors, are
there no more mentioned than the Commons, who were then as Barons, Majores,
Constituent Members of this Parliament. So also Henry De Knighton, Col. 2928.
Anno Dom. 1301. the 30th. Edw. I. tells us of a Parliament this King held at
Stamford, where met the Earls and Barons, and with great courage persisted
until they had got the Charter of Forests fully granted and confirmed to them.
Where note, that tho by way of excellency, the Earls and Barons (who then bore
the greatest sway, are here only mentioned) yet it is certain, that the Commons
were also summoned to this Parliament* Now if these Later Historians pass by
the Commons, tho then Constituent Members of Parliament, without any one
express Mention, why might not Matt. Paris do so too?

But that he did do so, appears very plainly from the Letters of the Parliament
held in 30th Hen. II. to the Pope and Cardinals, being still at the council of
Lions, to remove the intolerable Grievances above mentioned, That to the Pope
is tecited at large by Matt. Paris, Bib. Cott. Sub Effigy Cleopatrae.
tho that to the Cardinals is omitted by him; but in an Ancient Manuscript of
the time extant in Sir John Cottons's Library of both Letters, are said to have
been sent to the Cardinals at Lions, a Baronibus Militibus and universitatib^^
B^^^nagii Anglia; Now who these were the subsequent Letter to the Pope in Matt.
Poris will inform us, which begins thus; Sanctissimo, etc. (...) filii Sui
Richardus Comes Cornubia, Mat. Paris, 696, 700.
etc. together with diverse other Earls there named; but the Barons and Commons
are not particularly recited, but are comprehended under these General Words,
Barons, Proceres, and Magnates, ac Nobiles Portuum, marishabitatores, necnon
and Clerus and Populus universus salutem; And pray note, that Matt. Paris had
before called this a Parliament, Page 698.
Convenientibus igitur ad Parliamentum totius Regni Magnatibus; Which Words
take in the Knights of Shires, as the Nobiles Portuum Maris habitatores, does
the Barons of the Cinq^^ Ports; (which by the way are here called Noble, tho
mere Commoners); and to obviate your Objection, that the Word Clerus after
Barons, may refer to the Bishops, Abbots, and Priors, that could not be; for
they at the same time had already writ Letters apart to the Pope, concerning
this Matter; as you may see in the same Author, immediately before. And
therefore nothing seems plainer to me, than that by these Words, Clerus and
Populus Universus, must be meant the inferior Clergy, and Commons, appearing by
their Representatives in this Parliament, and that so became Generalissimum
Parliamentum, as this Historian calls it.


M. Pray give me leave now to reply.

In the first place I must tell you, that the Instances you have brought out of
Matt. Westminster. to prove that under the Words Comites and Barons, and Baronagium
Angliae, were comprehended the Commons of England, and that after the time I
allow them to have been there, will not do your Business.

And as to the Instance about the Pope's Nuncio, it seems to have been an Order
of the Lords only; the Words being in Latin, de Assensu Comitum and Baronum.

As to the Third Instance, out of Knighton, He said indeed, that the Comites
and Barons met at the Parliament at Stamford; and that might very well be,
since they alone then insisted upon the confirmation of the Charter of Forests.

But as for the Argument you draw from the Direction of this Letter to the
Pope; The Learned Dr. in his Treatise against Mr. P. has given us a very good
Answer to it, Page 106.
to this effect; That tho it is true, that after the Barons, and Proceres,
there are diverse other parties mentioned, yet was this Troop of Words put
together in this Letter to no other purpose, than to make an Impression upon
the Pope, and make him sensible what a general dislike the Nation had of his
Exactions and Encroachments; and to induce him to a compliance with their
Desires, the Multitude or Commons not being any-ways parties, or privy to the
writing of the Letters; For the clamor of the people was a great Argument used
in all these Letters, to affect the Pope, how ungrateful his Impositions were
to the Nation. But in this of the Temporal Barons more especially, who address
themselves to the Pope by Petition, enforcing it by the clamor of the People,
against those Injuries and Oppressions upon the whole Kingdom; It is to no
purpose to repeat all that follows, only observe this Clause, Alioquin necesse
est ut veniant Scandala Clamore populi, tam Dominum Regem, quam nos
intolerabiliter impellente; and the King likewise in his Letter to the Pope and
Cardinals aggravates the matter, by the like Arguments; as appears by this
Clause, in his Letter to them; verum Clamorem incomperabilem Magnatum Angliae
tam Cleri quam Populi non possumus obaudire. From this general Clamor of the
People, and not from their being parties, it was that the beginning of the
Letters from the Baronage, or the University of England, was stuffed with so
many Words and Phrases, to awaken his Holiness, and invite him to redress their
Grievances.


F. In return to what you have said, I must tell you, that I am not convinced,
that in the Parliament mentioned by Mat. Westminster. that the Demand for the
Confirmation of the Charters was made by the Lords only; Since it is not likely
that the Commons (who are there styled Divites Plebis, and are said to have
been grieved by their Infringement) should not have been parties to the
Complaint for their Redress; especially since we find that in all succeeding
Parliaments, the Commons are mentioned as most eager for the confirmation of
these Charters.

But as for the most material part of your Answer to my Authority from the
Parliament's Letter to the Pope, I know the Dr. endeavors all he can, to avoid
the force of this Objection, by making the Parliament top upon His Holiness
mere empty Words, instead of Matter; that is, according to the Dr.'s own
Phrase, they only laid an airy Ambuscade to entrap him. But whether the Old
Gentleman was thus like to be caught, I give you leave to judge. For certainly
both he and his Consistory of Cardinals, knew as well as the Parliament it
self, what were the Constituent parts thereof, and they could quickly have
answered them; that they put a mere sham upon his Holiness, in mentioning the
Noble Inhabitants of the Sea Ports, and all the rest of the people, both Clergy
and Laity in their Letters; whereas they had nothing at all to do with the
matter, nor had shown any dislike of his Holiness's Proceedings. For if they
had no Representatives in Parliament, how could it be known whether they were
aggrieved or not? Or is it likely that the Pope had no Nuncio, or Friends among
the Clergy, to give him an account of the Cheat they there put upon him? And
they might as well have talked of the Clamours of the Tinners in Cornwall, as
of those of the Inhabitants of the Sea Ports, if it was only put in to augment
the Clamor, or to fill up the Number of the Complainants; if the people (I
mean both Nobility and Commons) had not been parties of these Letters? But you
your self have but now recited a Clause in the King's Letter to the Pope and
Cardinals, which makes it plain it was so; when he tells them, that he could
not stop his ears against the Clamor of the Magnates, tam Cler^, quam Populi,
i. e. as well of the Clergy, as of the Laity, as the Dr. renders it. So that
these Words, Clamorem Magnatum, must signify here the clamor of the whole
people in Parliament; or else they signify nothing at all.

And I may as well say that the Clerus and Populus never appeared in Parliament
at all, but that these were also mere empty Words to frighten the Pope. But
what say you to the next Precedent Mr. P. produces to prove that the Lords and
Commons together have writ Letters to the Pope, P. R. C. Page 115.
when he attempted to invade the Right of the Crown or Kingdom, viz. The Letter
from the Parliament at Lincoln to the Pope, in the 29th of King Edw. I. Matt.
Westminster. Ann. Dom. 1301.
wherein they assert the King's Superiority over the Kingdom of Scotland, and
desire that his Holiness would desist from meddling farther with it. Which
Letter, tho subscribed by above a hundred Earls and Barons, as it was the
custom of that Age, yet it is said expressly in the conclusion, In cujus rei
Testimonium Sigilla tam pro nobis, quam pro tota Communitate praedicti Regni
Angliae praesentibus su^t op^pensa.


M. Tho this Authority is after the time we acknowledge the Commons to have
been summoned to Parliament, and therefore I need not speak particularly to it;
Yet tho I grant your Argument has some weight in it, since it here seems that
the Lords did sign this Letter, for the Commons as well as themselves, I shall
endeavors to answer it. I confess it appears very specious at first sight; but
what if I show you, that this Letter was written by the Lords only from
Lincoln, after the Commons had been dismissed from thence by pro^ogation or
Adjournment. For tho it is commonly story'd, but erroneously) that this whole
Parliament, B. A. P. Page, 153.
or at least the Temporal Lords and the Commons wrote to the Pope concerning
the Jurisdiction and Superiority of the Kings of England over the Kingdom of
Scotland: Yet it cannot be so, for this Parliament met on the Octaves of
Hillary, or the 20th of January, and sat but eight days; the Writs for the
Commons Expenses bear date January the 30th of the same Year, vi. Pryn's 4th
part of the Regist. of Parliament Writs.
and the Letter to the Pope signed by the Temporal Lords for themselves, and
the whole Community of the Kingdom of England is dated Feb. 12 th next
following at Lincoln, after the Commons had been discharged 14 Days. So that
you see the Barons still continued to style themselves the Community of
England; and both Spiritual and Temporal Barons, and other of the King's
Council, did stay and dispatch much Business, after all others were dismissed,
according to the Tenor of the there recited Proclamation, and may be fully
proved from the Proceedings of that Pa^liament, as they are to be found in
Ryley's Pl^cita Parliamentaria. Fol. 241, etc.
So that nothing seems plainer to me, than that the whole Community of England,
for whom the Barons there named set their Seals to that Letter you mentioned,
were the Community of the Barons only.


F. I confess Mr. Pryn in his Animadversions upon my Lord Coke's 4th Institutes
was the first who started this Objection, That the Commons could not be present
as parties to this Letter; Page 9:
Yet he still supposes that the Lords who stayed behind, and made a kind of a
Great Council at Lincoln, signed it not only for themselves, but for the
Commons also, tho not actually there; and is not so extravagant as your Dr. to
suppose, that by the Words in this Letter, Tam pro Nobis, quam pro tota
Communitate, etc. are to be understood the Community of Barons only; for that
would have been a Tau^ology indeed: For so the last Word Communitas, etc. would
have signified no more than that they subscribed for themselves, and
themselves, and that the Word Cumma^^tas Regni, (which I can prove to you by
many Examples, did then signify the Commons of England) must here mean more
than your Community of the Earls and Barons. For pray take notice, that the
Tenants in capite had now by your own concession left off to appear in
Parliament in a Body, as being now represented by the Knights of Shires, etc.
So that Sir Edward Coke very well observes in his Fourth Institute, that this
Letter was sealed by above 104 Earls and Barons, by the assent of the whole
Commonalty in Parliament; and Mr. Pryn is so far convinced of this in his exact
History of Papal Usurpations, that he ^tiles this Letter, Page 893.
The Memorable Epistle of the Earls, Barons, Great Men, and Commons of England,
etc.

But to show you farther that there was no change, neither of the constituent
parts of our Ancient Parliaments, nor of the Terms by which they are expressed
our Ancient Records, appears by a Plea among Mr. Ryley's printed Pleas of
Parliament, in 35th of Edw. I. where it is recited, Fol. 376.
that in a Parliament at Carlisle, Will. de Testa, the Pope's Clerk, was
impeached, per Comites, Barons, and alios Magnates, and Communitatem totius
Regni; concerning diverse new and intolerable Grievances laid upon them by the
Pope; Where you see there is no change of this Word Communitas, after the
Commons were (as you suppose) certainly present in this Parliament; and why the
same Word should not signify the same thing in the beginning of this King's
Reign as well as now, you had need give me very good Authority to prove the
contrary against such clear evidence as this; But this Record goes on, and
farther recites, that these Letters were sent to the Pope, Ex part
Communitatis praedictae, and in which, Clerus and Populus dicti Regni set forth
the said grievances to the full. Now as the Word Clerus here expresses all
sorts of degrees of Clergy, as well Superior as Inferior, represented in
Parliament and Convocation, so much Populus here signify the Laity of both
Orders, as well the Commons as Lords, since the Commons were certainly present
at this Parliament; and why the Word Populus should not signify the same thing
long before, I can see no Reason for it, but the Dr.'s bear Assertion.

And as for what you say, that the Commons could be no parties to this Letter,
because it appears by the Writs of Expenses, that they were discharged before
this Letter was written; admitting it were so, it makes nothing against my
Assertion; For why could not the Commons agree upon the Substance of the
Letter, and leave the Lords to draw it up, and subscribe it for them, after
they were gone home? And that it was so, appears by the Letter if self, which
recites, That the King had caused the Pope's Letter, In medio, or pleno
Parliamento exhiberi, ac scriose nobis fecit exponi unde habito tractatu, and
deliberation^ Diligenti super c^^tentis in literis vestris memoratis, communis
concors, and unanimus omnium, and singul^r^m consensus suit, etc. Now every one
knows, that understands any thing of Parliamentary Affairs, that when any thing
is said in an Act of Parliament, or other Record, to have been agreed upon in
full Parliament, that is always understood to have been done, all the Estates
being there present; Nor can I see any reason why this Letter should not be
called the Letter of the Commons, as well as of the Lords, since the very
Statutes of that Age were often said to have been assented to by the Commons,
tho it is clear they, were not drawn up into form till after the Parliament was
dismissed.

But that the Commons were certainly parties to this Letter, appears by a
Record of the beginning of Edw. III. time, printed by Mr. Pryn, keeper of the
Records of the Tower, (and which he tells us he found among the Rolls in the
White-Town) which Record contains the Heads of a Defense compiled by the King's
Council, in order to a stronger Defense against the Pope's taking cognizance in
the Court of Rome, concerning the King of England's Superiority over Scotland;
in the conclusion of the 2d. of which Records, Pryn 's Exact History. Page 895.
there is a remarkable Article relating to this very Letter now before us, in
these Words, Item ad finem quod Nobiles Regni Angliae and Procuratores
Cr^munitatis subditorum Regni praedicti admittantur per ipsum Domi^^^ Regem ad
hujusmodi defensiones propenend prout little Antecessores ab Avo Dicti Dom^^^
Regis nostri ^rant admissi: Now to what Transaction of this kind, in the Reign
of Edw. I. this King's Grandfather, can this passage refer, but to this very
Letter, which was assented, as well per procuratores Communitatis Regni, as by
your Barons, here called Nobiles Regni: And this Application thereof is given
by Mr Pryn himself, when he makes use of these Records.

But to let you see farther, that the Lords and Commons for all this Author
Opinion to the contrary, P. R. C. Page 119.
might join in a Letter to the Pope, I shall show you by that which was writ in
the Name of the whole Parliament to the Pope, in the 17 th of Edw. III. about
the Provisions of Benefices, which then grew so exorbitant, that Walsingham
tells us in his History, Quod Rex and tota Nobilitas Regni pati noluit, etc.
which Phrase the Letter it self will best explain; Vita Edw. III. Fol. 161.
The beginning and conclusion of which I shall give you in English, as you may
find it in Mr. Fox's Book of Martyrs.

To the Most Holy Father in God, Lord Clement, by the Grace of God, of the Holy
Church of Rome, Vol. I. Page 501.
and of the Universal Church, Chief and High-Bishop, His humble and devout
Children, the Princes, Dukes, Earls, Barons, Knights, Citizens and Burgesses,
and all the Communalty of the Realm of England, assembled at a Parliament
holden at Westminster the 15 th Day of May last past, etc. In witness whereof
we have hereunto set Our (...)* Given in the full Parliament at Westminst. on
the 18th Day of May, Anno Dr^ 1343.

And it still appears by the Parliament Roll of this Year, viz. 17th Edw. III.
n. 59. that the Commons petitioned the King, that the Lords might stay at the
Parliament till they had perfected and sealed this Letter*

And that there was such a Letter then written by the Parliament, Tit. Rot.
Rome 17 Edw. III. m 3.
appears by the King's Letter to the Pope about the same Matter, still among
the Tower Records; (In which he imitated his Grandfather Edw. I. and Great
Grandfather Hen. III. who also se^ Letters to the Pope on such like occasions)
but in those to excuse the Archbishop of Canterbury from being the Author of
those Complain, he had this Passage that since it was the Judgment, tam
Procerum and Nobilium, qua^ Communitatis Regni in ultimo Parliamento contra
Provisorum Exercitum.

To conclude; I think nothing is plainer, than that under the Universitas
Reg^^, in the first Letter to the Pope 29th Hen. III. and under the Communitas
Regni mentioned in the Letter of the 29th Edw. I. were meant the same Estates
or Orders of Men, as were more particularly recited in this present Letter,
viz. The (...) Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled.


M. I must freely tell you, I am not yet satisfied with the Sense you now put
upon these Words, Universitas, and Communitas Regni, before the Commons were
summoned to Parliament; for you your self must grant, that as the word
Universitas Regni takes in the whole Representative Body of the Kingdom, so
likewise the word Communitas signifies no more than the same whole Body or
Community thereof. Therefore if I prove to you, that in those times this
Univers^^y or Community consisted only of the Earls, Barons and Tenants in
capite, that word Communitas Regni ought never to be interpreted by the English
word Commo^^lty or Commons of England, till after the time that I allow the
Commons were admitted to make a constituent part of the Great Council or
Parliament, nor always then neither; And Mr. P. in his Book which we have so
often cited, has done very unfairly to make the Universitas and Communitas
Regni to comprehend the Commons of England, before they everappeared in
Parliament at all; and so has he likewise abused the Word Populus, as I have
already observed, to signify the Commons, when indeed there is no more thereby
meant, than the whole Assembly of the Laity, which at that time consisted of no
more than the Earls, Barons or other Tenants in Capite; B. A. P. Page 28.
And tho I grant that by Communitas Praelatorum, or Baronum, are often
understood the Body of the Prelates or greater Barons only, called by way of
Eminency, Proceres and Magnates; yet most frequently, these with all the other
Tenants in capite did make the whole Body of the King's immediate Tenants in
Military Service, and were altogether called the Baronage of England, the
Community of the Land, or Community of the Kingdom; and for this I think I
shall give you undeniable proofs by and by.


F. I am very well aware that the Word Populus often signifies the whole Body
of the Laity, yet not excluding the Commons, as I have already sufficiently
proved; For then the word must signify quite contrary to its genuine
Signification; instead of People, the Greater Nobility only; yet that when it
is put after* as distinct from Magnates, it must mean the Commons, as now
understood, I shall show you by and by.

But that this word Populus does not always signify the whole Body of the
Nobility only, Fol. 55.
but takes in oftentimes the Commons too; pray see Matt. West. who tells us
King Edw. I. in the 34th year of his Reign, making his Son a Knight, Pro hac
melitia silii Regis concessus est Regi zomus Denarius a Populo and Clero,
Mercatores vero vices^mum concesserunt; Upon which your Dr. in his Glossary
very well remarks, that it is evident upon Record, who were the Populus meant
by the Historian, viz. the Comites, Barons and alii Magnates, nec non Milites
Comitatuum. So that unless the Knights of Shires were Lords, it is plain
Populus takes in the Common^ too. But Universitas Regni, and Communitas Regni,
called in French le Commun^ Dangletterre, is often taken for the whole
Community or Body of the whole Parliament; and this Sir Edward Coke owns
expressly in his 2d. Instit. upon these Words, In Articulis sup^^ Chartas: Page
539.
Thus here Le Commune is taken for People; so astout le Commune is here taken
for all the People; and this is proved by the Sense of the Words; For Magna
Charta was not granted to the Commons of the Realm, but generally to all the
Subjects of the Realm, viz. to those of the Clergy, and to those of the
Nobility, and to the Commons also.

And this is a Rational as well as Grammatical Interpretation; For as the Word
Universitas is derived from the Adjective Universus, which signifies the
Whole, (...) Universal; So the Word Communitas is derived from the Adjective
(...) Common or General. So that these two Words when used simply in a
Political (...) Legal Sense, ought to take in the whole Body of the Kingdom, or
all sorts and conditions of Freemen appearing themselves, or their Lawful
Proxies or Representatives in Parliament.

But I have already sufficiently proved, that under those General words used in
our Historians and Records, viz. Principes, Proceres, Nobiles, Magnates,
Barons, and alii de Regno, were then comprehended either all the considerable
Freeholders, o^ Lords of Manners, or else the Knights of Shires, Citizens and
Burgesses: So that if the Sense of these Words have been sufficiently
explained, I think no reasonable man can have any cause to doubt whether these
Abstract Words Nobilitas, Universitas, and Communitas, should be taken for all
Sorts and Degrees of men, when thus represented in the Great Council; or
whether they shall be confined to the Greater or Lesser Nobility only, viz. the
Great Lords, Bishops and Tenants in ca^ite as you would make me believe which
requires stronger Proofs than what you have yet brought.

Besides which Sense of this Word Communitas, or le Commune, it is also more
commonly used at this day, and often then too, in another more restrained and
yet legal sense; and that is when it is used for the Commonalty or Commons of
England, distinct from the Peers; and this may very easily be distinguished, by
observing, that when it is taken in this Sense, it is always set after the
particular enumeration of the other Orders of the Lords or Peers, viz. the
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls and Barons, or when it is put
contradistinct to the Word Magnates. I shall give you some Authorities and
Examples from Historians and Records of both these, P. R C. Page 35.
and that in the Times preceding those that you allow the Commons to have been
summoned in Parliament. Of this sort is that which Matt. Westminster. mentions as a
Parliament held 37th Hen. III. and which is thus recited in the Patent Roll of
this year; Page 352.
where after the Excommunication denounced against all Infringers of Magna
Charta, there is this solemn Clause a^ded, That if to the Writings concerning
the said Sentence, any other thing, or in any otherwise should be added
thereunto, besides the Forms of the said Sentence then to be denounced and
approved of, that then Dominus Rex, and praedicti Magnates, and Communitas
Populi Pretestantur public before all the Bishops, that they would never
consent thereunto; and conclude thus, In cujus Rei Testimonium, and in posterum
Veritatis testimonium, as well the King as the Earl of Norff. Heref. Essex and
Warwick, as Peter de Saba^dia, ad Inslantiam aliorum Magnatum and Populi
Praescripti sigilla sua apposuerunt; where you may see that it was usual before
the 49th Hen. III. for those that were Peers to sign for the Communitas Populi,
or Commons.


M I pray give me leave to answer your Authorities as you bring them, lest I
not only forget some of them, but also tire both you and my self with too long
a Discourse. I hope I am very well able to prove, by the learned Dr.'s
assistance, B. A. P. Page 73. and dein.
that the Communitas Populi here mentioned does signify not the Commonalty or
Commons, but the Community of the Laity there present, consisting of the
Greater Barons, or else the Less, or Tenants in capite. And for proof of this,
pray take notice that Matt. Paris called this Council Tota Angliae Nobilitas;
Fol. 865.
And in this Parliament the King demanding a great Sum of Money of them, after
much contest, and upon promise to reform all Abuses, according to the Tenor of
the Great Charters, thereupon the same Author tells us, The Church granted the
Tenth of the Revenue for three years, and the Knights or Nobility granted for
that year Scutage; to wit, Three Marks of every Scu^u^, or Knights (...): And
then the Archbishops and Bishops in their Pontificalibus, with Light-Candles
in their Hands, in the presence, and with the assent of the King, the Earl of
Cornwall his Brother, and several Earls there named, and aliorum Optimatum Regni
Angliae, and other chief men of the Kingdom excommunicated, and cursed all
those that from thence forward should deprive the Church of her Right, and all
those that should change, alter or diminish the Liberties of the Church and
Anci^^t Customs of the Kingdom, especially those granted in the Great Charter
of the Common Liberties of England, and Charter of the Forest granted by the
King; Ar^hi^piscopis, Episcopis and cateris Angliae Praelatis, Comitibus,
Baronibus, Militibus, and ^^bere Tenentibus, etc. i. e. To the Archbishops,
Bishops and other Prelates of ^^gland; and to the Earls, Barons, Knights and
Free-Tenants, or Tenants in Military (...) Knights Service; For they only were
such a^ paid Scutage, which was at this ^ime a kind of composition with the
King, for the confirming Magna Charta, and was never charged but upon Knights
Fees; and these were such that held perhaps one narrow or scanty Knights Fee
only; or some part of a Knight's Fee; as an half, 3d 4th 6th 8th part, etc. who
all paid a proportionable share of Scu^age to the Great Lords, or Tenants in
capite, for the Land they held of them in Military Service; which was paid
first to the Great Lords, and by them paid to the King.

And from thence I collect, that besides the Barons Majores that came to this
Great Council or Parliament, there were also the Tenants in Capite, according
to the Directions and Law for Summons in King John's Charter, who were
comprehended under the Words tota Nobilitas, and Milites; and that other
Tenants but held of the Tenants in capite by Knights Service, were bound by
their Acts, (...) they all knew how many Knights Fees they held of the King in
capite; and if ^^ey had given any away to others, they held of them as they did
of the Crown, ^^d answered a proportionable rate toward this Tax, for the
Fees, Quantities (...) Parts of Fees they held of them; about which there could
be no mistake (...) the Scutage was ascertained. So that in so Great an
Assembly, where all the Nobility of England were called together by the King's
Writ, and upon so great (...) occasion and solemnity, as confirming the Great
Charter of Liberties, after such an extraordinary a manner, it cannot be
doubted, but besides the Barons, all the (...) in capite, both Great and Small,
which were then very numerous, were ^resent, or at least, most of them; from
whence it is not difficult to tell you to the Communitas were; after the
Prelates, Barons and Magna^^^, they were no other than the Small Tenants in
capite, who were all summoned by one General Writ, nor chosen and sent by the
people, but summoned as the Great Barons in general, by King Iohn' Magna
Charta, as I shall show you hereafter.


F. I hope I shall be well enough able to prove, that what you have now
alleged is pure imagination, or in the Dr. Phrase, an airy Ambuscade, and
quite contrary to the Sense of Matt. Paris, as also of the Lawyers and
Historians of those Times. For in the first place, nothing is plainer, than
that this Author by the Words Communitas Populi, must understand an Order of
Men distinct from the Magnates; or else if the Word Magnates might have
comprehended them all, it would have been to no purpose to have mentioned any
more.

But to answer those Authorities you bring from Mat. Paris; As for the Word
Nobilitas, since you still insist upon it, I have already proved that the whole
Parliament, as well the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, as Commons, were both
before and after this time comprehended under these words, Nobilitas Angliae;
and if you yet doubt of it, I can give you a plain Authority out of
Walsingham, for it is in his Life of Edw. II. Anno 1327. where relating the
manner of that King's Deposition, he tells us, That when the Queen and Prince
came to London, there then met Tota Regni Nobilitas, to depose the King, and
choose his Son in his stead; and then there was sent to the King, being Prisoner
in Kenelworth Castle, on behalf of the whole Kingdom, two Bishops, two Earls,
two Abbots, and of every County three Knights; and also from London and other
Cities and Great Towns (especially the Cinque Ports) a certain number of
persons who informed him of the Election of his Son, and that he should
renounce the Crown and Royal Dignity, etc. This Proof is so plain, it needs no
Comment.

As for the rest of your Argument, the strength of it chiefly consists in this,
that the Tax there mentioned is said to be granted a Militibus, or Tenants in
capite (as you would have it) of three Marks upon every Knight's Fee. But in
the first place I desire you to take notice, that this Scutage is not Scutage
Service, but a general Land Tax, or Manner of taxing according to Knights Fees,
and which was continued long after Hen. III. Reign, as it appears by this
Passage in Sir Henry Spelman's Glossary, Tit. Scutagium; Edwardus primus habuit
40 Soli de quolibet (...) Anno Regni 13 Dom. 1285. pro expeditione contra
VVallos. And it was also granted by the Lords and Commons after the 18th of
Edw. I. when you and the Dr. supposes the Commons to have then came to
Parliament; and if so, I desire to know why a Militibus here mentioned by this
Author, must only signify Tenants in capite by Knights Service, and not the
Knights of Shires, since it is not here said a Militibus qui de Rege tenuerunt
in capite; And therefore it is a forced Interpretation of the Dr.'s, and
without any Authority, to limit these words Militibus, and libere Tenentibus,
and omnibus de Regno nostro (which you omit with an, etc.) as also the omnibus
Hominibus Liberis Regni nostri, only to the Archbishops, Bishops and other
Prelates of England, and to the Earls, Barons, Knights and Free Tenants, or
Tenants in Military or Knight's Service; because they were only such as paid
Scutage; Whereas you have already acknowledged that Magna Charta was granted
to all the people of England, who had all a benefit by it, and who paid toward
the aid there granted, as well as the Tenants in capite.

But if Knights Fees alone were Taxed, and that by the Tenants in capite only*
I desire to know by what Right all Tenants in Petit Serjeanty, and by Burgoge
o^ S^occage Tenure (who made a greater Body of men in this Kingdom in those
Times) could pay this Scutage, since they held not by Knights Service, but by
certain Rents or other Services, and so not appearing in Person, could have no
Representatives in this or any other Parliament of those Times. But if you will
tell me they might pay according to the value that Knights Fees were then
reckoned at, viz. for every 20 l. a years Estate, I desire to know how this
could be called Scutage, or how the Tenants in capite, or other Lords from whom
they held those Lands, could give away their Money for them? And in the next
place I desire also to know how all the Cities and Buroughs in England could
be charged with this Tax; a great many of them (is you your self grant) holding
of the King in capite, or else of Bishops, Abbots or other Mes^e Lords by
Soccage or Bargage Tenure So that this Tax, if granted only by the Tenants in
capite, by Knights Service, could reach them, and no other persons; but if by
this Word a Militibus may be understood Knights of Shires, then the Tax was
general, as well upon Soccage Tenants, as those by Knights Service.

But for the other Words you insist upon, viz. the Liberi Tenentes, which you
translate Tenants by Military Service; if that had been the meaning of these
words, then they had been altogether in vain, since you have already told me,
that the ^^lites were so called non a Militari Cingulo, sed a Feodo; and if it
were no Name of Dignity, then certainly the Word Milites would have served to
comprehend all your Liberi Tenentes, or Tenants in capite, without any other
addition. But that these Words Laberi Tenentes, do not here signify Tenants by
Military Service, pray see Sir Henry Spelman's Glossary, Tit. Liber Homo, and
liber Tenens; where he there gives us a more general Signification of
thesewords thus: Ad Nobilesolim spectabant isti (...), a majoribus ortos omnino
Liberis; and then ends thus, vide Ingenuus, Legalis, (...) Francus, Tenens
Libere, alias Liber Tenent quo etiam sensu occurrit interdum Homo (...); which
upon every one of these Titles he makes to signify all one ^^d the same thing,
viz. an ordinary Freeholder. And therefore it is a very forced Interpretation
of yours, to limit these Words Communitas Populi, only to the Community or Body
of the Earls, Barons, and Tenants in capite.

Tho I confess you are very kind in one main Point, in understanding the
Communitas Populi to mean the Community of the Lesser Tenants in capite, that
were no Barons; and then do what you can, these Words must here signify Mere
Commoners, or Commons, unless you can show us a Third Sort of Men, who, tho
neither Lords nor Commons, yet had a place in Parliament. So that these
Gentlemen, notwithstanding their Tenure, were no more Noble than their
Feudatory Tenants, or Vavafors themselves; my, than the Knights of Shires are
at this day: And then granting (as I doubt not but I shall be able to prove)
that the Cities and Boroughs had then also their Representatives there; I pray
tell me whether or no there were not Commons in Parliament before 49 Hen. III.
or not? which is contrary to your Dr.'s Assertion in diverse places of his
Answer^ to Mr. P.

And that the Word Populus must here signify the Commons, and not the whole
Body of the Laity, appears plainly by this place you have quoted; since it is
restrained by your self, to mean not the whole Community of the Kingdom, but
only the Community of Lesser Tenants in capite, who were not Lords. But that
Matt. Paris does also in another place take the Word Populus for the Commoners,
and not for the whole Body of the Laity, pray again remember what he says in
Anno 1225. where relating the manner how Magna Charta came to be confirmed in
9th Hen. III. he tells us Rex Henricus ad Natale tenuit Curiam suam apud
Westminster. Praesentibus Clero, and Populo, cum Magnatibus Regionis; which pray let
us put into English, and see if it will not prove what I say, viz. the Clergy
and People being present with the Great Men of the Kingdom. Now if the Word
Magnates (as you affirm) did then comprehend all the Barons and Tenants in
capite* to what purpose is the Word People put here as a distinct Member of
this Parliament? But to show you father that this Word Populus is not always to
be understood for the whole Body of the Laics, but Lords and Knights of
Shires, (...) shall show you out of Walsingham, Anno 1297. 24th Edw. I. where
he mentions a Parliament held at St. Edmundsbury, In quo a Civitatibus, and
Burgis concessa est Reg^ Octava, a Populo vero reliquo duodecima pars Bonorum:
Where by Populus (...) not only meant the Peers, but Knights of Shires, or
Grands des (...) also.


M. I am not prepared at present to answer all the Queries and Difficulties
that you can make or raise against the Dr.'s Arguments; yet I think I am able
to give you a very satisfactory answer why all Tenants in Soccage should be
boun^ by the Acts of those of whom they held their Estates. For since (as I
have a ready proved) all the Land in England (except what belong to Religious
Houses) was granted out by King William the Conqueror, to be held in capite by
Knights Service, and was again granted out by these Head-Tenants, to their
Feudatory o^ Mesne Tenants by the like Services, there being very few Lands
granted in Free Soccage at the first; And tho it is true that in process of
time, man of those Estates and Lands became Free Tenements, B. A. I.
or were hold in Soccage, that is, were Freeholds; yet the Lords still retai^
the Homage (which in the Times we speak of was no idle insignificant Word and
by that a Dominion over the Estate, whereby upon Disobedience, Treachery or
Injury done to the Lords, the Lands were forfeited to them; and the^ neither
the Lands nor the Tenants to them (which were termed Freeholder^ were subject
to any base Services, or servile Works; yet the Lords had still great power
over these Tenants, by reason of their doing Homage to them; (...) ^o nomine,
their Lands were many ways liable to forfeiture; and therefore it wa^ but
reason, that the Chief Lords being Tenants in capite, should conclude that
Tenants in Soccage also, and both make Laws and give Taxes for them, without
their being at all privy to it. But admitting I grant, that before 49th (...)
there were in some sense Commons in Parliament, tho not as Knights, Citizen and
Burgesses, chosen by the Common People as their Representatives; Yet (...) it
not destroy mine, or the Dr.'s Assertion; who in the Introduction before the
Answer to Mr. P. only affirms, That before the 49th aforesaid, the Body of the
Commons of England, or Ordinary Freemen (as now understood, or as we now call
them collectively taken, etc. had any share or Votes in making Laws, unless as
they were (...) presented by the Tenants in capite.


F. vi. B. A P. P. 10, 21, 29, 30, 72, 82.
Be it so; But I am sure in many places of the Dr's Boo^ he absolutely denies
that there were any Commons in Parliament till the Time he Assigns.

But as for what you allege in answer to my Queries, how Tenants in Soccage
could have Laws made for them, and Taxes laid upon them (...) their Lords or
Tenants in capite? your answer is wholly grounded upon mistakes; For in the
first place King William did not grant all the Lands in England to be held of
him by Knight's Service; since (as I shall prove hereafter) there were many
subordinate Tenants to Bishops, Abbots and other Great Lords, who never
forfeited their Estates at all, nor were disseiz'd of them by your Conqueror,
^ad who had also great numbers of considerable Freeholders under them; as in
(...) at the greatest part of the Land was Gavelkind, which was Soccage Te^re.

In the next place, neither were all the Lands he bestowed upon his Followers
granted to be held by Knight's Service, since you your se^f own that a great
deal ^land was given by him to his Inferior Servants, to be held by Petit
Serjeanty; and besides this, a great deal of other Lands was regranted by that
King himself, (...) some of those old Proprietors who had been dispossessed, to
be held in Soccage is appears from Fleta, Lib. 1. c. 8.
who speaking of these sort of men, says expressly; In (...) maneriis [seilicet
Regis] erant liberi Hemines, Lab^ri Tenentes, quorum quida^i (...) per
Potentiores a Tenementis fuerant ejecti, eadem post modum in Villenagium
tenen^^ resempserunt; and quia hujusmodi Tenentes cultores Regis esse
d^gnoscuntur, provisa (...) quiet, ne sectas facerent ad Comitatum, Vel
hundredum, etc -- quor^m ^^gregationem tunc Soccam appellarent, hinc est quod
Sokemanni body dicun^^, etc.

Where you may see that these Socmen, or Soccagers were then created by a ^ew
Tenure from this King; Nor did all the Tenants in capite grant their Lands ^o
others to be held by Knights Service, since they as well as the King did at
first, (...) also in process of time, grant Lands to the Old English
Proprietors to be held of ^^em in Soccage; nor was Homage the proper, or only
Badge of Soccage Tenure, but ^ealty (unless the Land had been held by Knights
Service at first) as you may see in Littleton's 2d. Book, Sect. 118. Nor did
this Soccage Tenure give the Lord any more right over his Tenants Estate, to
tax him de alto and b^sso, at his Will, by ^eason of the subjection he was in
to the Lord, in respect of Forfeiture; since ^hen the King should have had for
the same reason the same Rights over all his (...) in capite, to tax them
likewise at his pleasure; and this Right of Forfei^^^ in case of Felony, or for
want of Heirs, continued to the Lords as well of Soccage Tenants, as others,
long after the time you assign for the coming of the Commons to Parliament,
even to our own Times; and yet for all that those Lords could not give taxes
for such Tenants in Soccage at their pleasure.

But that we may proceed, pray consider also the form of the Peace agreed upon
between the King, the Prince his Son, and the whole Body of the Kingdom
assembled in Parliament, to compose all Differences between the King and the
^arons: The Title of which in the Record is thus; Haec est forma (...) a Domino
Rege and Domino Edwardo filio suo, 48th H. III m. 6 dorso.
Praelatis, and Proceri^^^^ ^^^ibus, cum Communitate tota Regni Angliae
Communiter and Con^^^diter approbata. Which Articles were signed by the Bishop
of Lincoln, the Bishop of Ely, Earl of Norf. Earl of Oxon, Humphry Bohun,
William de Monte Canisio, and Majore London; in Parliamento London Mense Iunii
Anno Domini 1264. Haec autem ^rimatio facta est London de Consensu, Voluntate,
and Precipto Domini Regis, nec. non ^^^datorum, Ba^onium, ac etiam Communitatis
tunc ibidem praesentium.


M. I think the Dr. has given us full satisfaction as to this Record, B. A. P.
in his Answer to Mr. P. the substance of which I shall here give you in short.

First, It is certain, that at the making of this forced Peace Simon Mountford
and his Faction then held the King and Prince, as also Richard Earl of Cornwall,
the King's Brother, as good as Prisoners, and made them do what he pleased; and
he carried the King and Prince along with him, until he had taken in all the
strong places of the Kingdom; and when he had done, then he called this
Parliament, which could not be one, in the sense it is now taken, since there
was none there but the Earls, Barons, and Heads of the Rebels, which had the
King and Prince in their power, and (as you your self set forth) were the same
persons that sealed it for themselves and the other Barons, and the whole
Community of the Kingdom of England, which Community must be the Community of
the Barons and Great Men, or Tenants in capite by Military Service, and no
other; for how can the Lords and Barons sign any thing for the Commons, as at
this day understood? They did not then nor now do represent them.

B. A. P. Page 81. Fol. 217.
But I shall give you another Authority to make this clearer, of some years
before, related in Matt. Paris, viz. Anno Dom. 12^^* 42 d Hen. III. where
Letters are said to be sent, a Communitate Angliae, to the Pope concerning
Aymer de Valence, Bishop Elect of Wachester, the Direction is thus, Sanctissimo
in Christo Patri, etc. Communitas Comitum Procerum, Magnatum, Aliorumque Regni
Angliae cum subjectione debita, Pedum Osr^^^, etc. And to put the Matter beyond
all doubt, it is certain that these Letters were sealed by six Earls, and five
Barons only; vice totius Communitatis. I need (...) give you their Names,
since you may find them in the Author himself, as also cited by the Dr. And as
for H. Bigod, the Chief Justice, and the four Persons named after him, they are
proved by Sir William Dugdale in his Baronage of England, to have been the
Greatest Barons in the Kingdom.

Now pray let me ask you this Question; Did these Eleven Persons, all Great
Earls and Barons, represent the whole Commons or Community of England, as at
this day understood, or did they represent the Community of the Barons only,
together with the Alios, the Milites, which held by Military Service of the
Great Barons, and the Less Tenants in capite; for the whole Community here
intended, must be one of them; take which you please, you will lose the Cause; For
certainly these Great (...) and Barons that sealed this Letter, vice totius
Communitatis, were not chosen nor sent by the Commons to this Parliament or
Meeting, nor were the Commons represented as at this Day by them, as you your
self have already granted.


F. I hope I shall not need to make any long Reply to this Answer of you^^* or
rather of your Dr.'s since it is built upon the same false Supposition with the
other, viz. that the Words Cum Communitate tot a Regni Angliae, must always
mean only the Community of the Tenants in capite; which Supposition, if it be
false in your former Argument, is also as falfe in this of the Lords and
Commons too; and therefore it is impertinent to repeat my Answer to it.

But if this were no true Parliament, because Simon Mountford had then the King
and Prince in his power; This would likewise serve to unparliament that of the
49 th of this King; from whence the Gentlemen of your Opinion date the first
coming of the Commons to Parliament; since the King and Prince were as much in
Simon Mountford's power then, as now; and yet no man as I know of, ever
questioned the validity of it, tho I cannot also omit, that you pass by in this
Letter, the words Magnatum aliorumque Regni; under which Words, (as I have
already proved) might very well be comprehended all the Knights of Shires as
well as Citizens and Burgesses, unless the words had run thus (as they should
have done to have made out your Assertion) aliorumque qui de Rege Tenent in
capite.

But to come to the main point you insist upon, which is, How these Great Earl^
and Barons could seal this Form of the Peace, and these Letters to the Pope, in
the Name of all the Commons of England.

Before I answer to that, I pray give me leave to ask you one Question; You
have already allowed that the ordinary Tenants in capite, (of which that
numerous Body chiefly consisted) tho called by courtesy Barons Minores, were
really no Barons, nor Peers of the Realm, and if so, were but Commoners. Now
pray tell me how these Great Earls and Barons you mentioned to have signed this
Peace, and this Letter to the Pope, could put their Seals for those who were no
Barons themselves, by your own confession, and you cannot say they represented
them, for they were as good Tenants in capite as the Greatest Lords? But if you
say, they did it by their order and consent, pray why might not these Great
Lords or Barons as well do the like for the Knights of Shires and Burgesses, by
their appointment? Since I have already proved, that the Lords did act thus in
the Letters which were sent to the Pope concerning the Business of Scotland.
And besides I must here observe, that the Dr. and you do not deal fairly with
your Adversaries, in citing this Authority of the Lords and Barons signing
these Letters to the Pope, Vice t^tius Communitat^s Angliae; since I
acknowledge in this place the Word Communitas being put alone, does mean no
more than the Community of the whole Kingdom. But in the Authority I have
quoted, it is put after the Earls and Barons, and so then must mean the whole
Commonalty or Body of the Commons, in the Sense they are now taken, and as it
has been always used in French as well as in Latin, when it comes after the
Earls and Barons (as I have already noted); And for this pray see the Stat. of
Westminster. I. made 3 d Edw. I. but eleven years after the 49 th of Hen. III. Per
l'ass^ntments des Aechievesques, Evesques, Abbes, Priors, Counts, Barons and
tout le Comminalty de la terre illonques summones; Which Phrase I can show you
to have continued the same in most of our French Statutes, during the Reign of
this King, and all his Successors in many Records and Acts of Parliament,
whilst they were writ in Latin or French; which I shall omit reciting, because
I suppose you your self will allow it.

I have a great deal more to say concerning the true sense of the Words
Communitas, le Commune, and le Communalty, which because it is long, and it now
grows late, I shall defer till another time. But I think I shall be able to
show you from undoubted Records, and Acts of Parliament from the Reign of Hen.
III. as low as Richard II. that these Words when used as I have now said, after
the Earls and Barons, cannot refer to them, but to another distinct Estate or
Order of Men, then called les Communer or les Communes in English the Commons
of the Kingdom, distinct from the Bishops and Lords.


M I shall nor now dispute with you concerning the Sense you have put upon the
words, you mention but I grant they often signify the Commons, after the 18 th
Edw. I. in some Acts of Parliament and Parliamentary Records; but I must beg
your pardon, if I cannot allow Communitas to signify* the Commons at this time
in your Sense; and therefore am not yet convinced that the words la Communalty
de la terre, mentioned in the Statute of Westminster. I. ought to be understood or
englished by the word Commons; who I do not suppose were then above once called
to Parliament, till the 18 th of this King.

But as for what you argue from the Knights of Shires being often called
Magnates, and Grantz des Countees, I allow they are often so styled in our
Statutes and Rolls of Parliament; B.A.I.P. 219.
but if you consider the reason of it, this will do you little Service, since
they were so called from their being most commonly at the beginning of their
Election, chosen out of the Greatest and most considerable Tenants in capite,
under the Degree of Barons in each County, and no other, who were chosen to
represent the Omnes alios qui de Rege Tenent in capite mentioned in King John's
Charter; or them and all the other Military Tenants by mean Tenure; For it is
scarce to be believed that those Tenants in capite, who made such a noise for
their Liberties, would part with this main point of being personally present;
or else the Body of them represented by some of their own number in every
County. And it may be upon this account they had the Title of Notable Knights,
etc. in the ancient Writs of Summons, directed to the Sheriffs; So that only
the Tenants by Knights Service, as suitors to the County Courts, B. A. P. Page
19.
were the Electors. And this was very likely the reason of the Statute of the 7
th Hen. IV. that the Election should be made in the County Court by all the
Suitors; and also why the Statute 18 th Hen. VI. Cha. 15.
by which any man that had 40 s. per Ann. of any Tenure, who was before
permitted to be an Elector, was altered by 10 th Hen. VI. and so explained,
that none but Freeholders of 40 s. per Ann. should afterward be Electors with
respect to the least part of a Knights Fee, cha. 2.
viz. 40 s. per Annum, which were now come into the hands of very ordinary Men.
For anciently, soon after, or near the Conquest, there were very few, or no
great Soc^ag^, that is, such as held great Estates in Soccage, and neither the
small ones, LL: Hen. I. chap. 29.
nor the Nativi, or Copyholders, were reputed Liberi, ot Legales Homines (as
before mentioned) or performed the service proper to such Military Tenants, or
those to whom they had alienated part of their Fees. But since I have tired you
as well as my self, in wrangling about the sense and meaning of the words in
dispute between us, I shall for the future take a shorter cut, and give you two
or three Authorities from our Ancient Laws of William the Conqueror, and Hen.
II. and Rich. I. which together with King John's Magna Charta, will I think,
make it plain enough in conscience, that the Commons, as now represented, were
not summoned to Parliament during the Reign of King John; and whether they were
so summoned before 49 th H. III. (when they were called but once, till above
twenty years after) will be the other part of my Task.


F. I approve of your Method very well, and I assure you I love pedantick
Disputes about the Grammatical signification of words as little as your self,
unless where it is absolutely necessary, as indeed you have rendered it so, by
raising the greatest part of your Arguments from the equivocal use of those
general words whereby our Ancient Laws and Historians have styled the
Constituent Members of our Great Councils, which if they are well cleared, I
think it is high time to fall upon some more solid Arguments. But before you
come to that, I cannot forbear observing that your self do allow, that in all
Acts of Parliament and Records after the 18 th Edw. I. the words Communitas and
l^ Commune, when put after the Earls and Barons, do signify the Commons in the
same sense in which they are now taken; but I must confess it seems incredible
(nay almost impossible to me) that these words should signify the Community of
the Tenants in capite. In the 48 th Hen III or 18 th of Edw. I. (begin where
you please) and yet that the next Parliament after those the same words should
be taken in quite another sense for the Knights of Shires, Citizens and
Burgesses, and that no Statute, Record or Historian of that or succeeding Ages
should take the least notice of it is understood.

But before I conclude this part of the Question, I cannot but rectify a great
mistake you have fallen into by adhering to the Dr. with too implicit a Faith;
For whereas you suppose, that the reason why our Knights of Shires were called
anciently Grantz des Countees, was because they were at first elected out of
the Tenants in capite only, and who with the other Tenants by Military Service
were also the only Electors of them at first, till the Statute of 7 th Hen. IV.
ordained the Election should be made in the County Court by all the Suitors, as
if it had not been many Ages so before; Whereas if you please to peruse that
Statute a little better, you will find it was not made to enlarge the number of
the Electors of Parliament men, for long before that time all sorts or degrees
of Freeholders, as well Tenants in capite, as their Tenants by any kind of
Tenure, or whether holding of such Tenants in capite, or else of others, as
Abbots and Priors, and other Mesne Tenants, did alike owe Suit and Service to
the County Court, and consequently were all alike capable of giving their
Voices there, at the Election of Knights of Shires, however small their Estates
were; Nor was that Statute of Hen. IV. now cited (which requires the Election
of Knights of Shires to be made by those that were summoned, and all other that
were there present) made to confer any new Right upon such Feeeholders but only
to prevent the Abuses of Sheriff^, who were wont before that Statute, to
procure Knights of Shires to be chosen clandestinely, without any due Summons,
or notice given to the Freeholders of the Election; much less does the Statute
of 8 th Hen. VI. confer any new Right or Privilege upon Freeholders of 40 s.
per Annum, to give their Voices at such Election (as you suppose) but only
takes away the Right which the smaller Freeholders of under 40 s per Annum
(whether Tenants in capite or not) had before, and restrains it only to such as
shall have Lands or Tenements to the va^^ of 40 s. by year above all charges.
And it is yet a much greater mistake to suppose, as your Dr. does, that this
Statute of 8 th Hen. VI. was at all altered by that of the 10 th of this King,
which is no more than an Explanation of it, viz. that by 40 s. per Annum, was
meant 40 s. Freehold, and that of Lands lying within the County, where the
Election should be made. So that nothing can prove more expressly, that all
Freeholders, as well Tenants in capite, as by any other Tenure, were all alike
capable of Elections; and being elected by the Ancient Law and Custom of
England, long before those Statutes, and consequently were all alike
Freeholders in the Eye of the Law.

But if you have nothing at present to object against what I have now said,
pray pursue the Method you have undertaken, and let me see those convincing
Proofs you so much rely upon, and which you hope may also serve to convert me.


M. Before I undertake this Task, pray permit me to give you my Opinion, in
answer to the Difficulty you have now proposed, which I confess seems to carry
some weight with it; but those Prejudices will soon vanish, when we consider
that the first time this Alteration was practiced, it was done in the King's
Name, tho by the absolute power of Simon Mountfort, in the 49th Hen III. and
after a discontinuance of above twenty years was again renewed by Edw. I. at
the desire of the Earls and Barons. as I hope I shall show you before we have
finished our Conversation. And therefore it being first done by the King's
absolute Power, and after with the general consent of the Lords, there needed
no Statute to introduce it any more, than there was in the Reign of William
the Conqueror, to give the Bishops and Abbots that held by Knight's Service
places in Parliament among the Temporal Lords, and to bring their Lands which
were held before in Franc Almoigne, under the Yoke of Military Service.

But to proceed in the Design I have undertaken; it is necessary that I show
you first of all who were those Freemen or Freeholders properly so called, upon
whom the whole burden of the subordinate Government of the Kingdom chiefly
relied, and who then constituted the Legal University or Community thereof,
immediately after the Norman Conquest, and during many King's Reigns after that
time.

I suppose you are not ignorant that King William the Conqueror having outed
all the English Nobility and Gentry of their Estates, gave them away to his
French and Norman Followers to be held of him and his Successors in capite,
either by Knights Service, or Petit Serjeanty, reserving to himself the Ancient
Demesnes of the Crown, and adding more thereunto for the maintenance of the
Royal Dignity; and for this I need refer you to no better Author than
Doomsday's Book it self; And then after he had thus distributed the Lands of
England as aforesaid, he composed a Body of Laws still extant, and which are in
great part Addition to the Ancient Laws of King Edward, and his Predecessors. I
shall give you three or four of these new Laws, B. A.A. Page 254.
and then I shall leave you to judge who were the true Freemen or Freeholders
of the whole Kingdom.

Lamb. Arch. Page 170. and them.
The first is the 52 d Law of this King, Tit. De Fide, and obsequio ergo Regem.
Statu^mus etiam ut omnes Liberi Homines, faedere and Sacramento affirmarent
quod intra and extra Regnum Angliae, (quod olim vocab^o Regnum Britannie)
VVil^ielmo Regi Domino suo Fideles esse volunt, T^ras and Honores illius omni
fidelitate servare cum eo, and contra inimicos and alienigenar difendere.

Now who these Freemen were that were thus to maintain the King in his Lands
and Honors, we shall see in the 55th Law following; Tit. De Clienteleri seu
Feudorum Iure, and Ingenuorum immunitate; Volumus etiam ac firmiter
praecipimus, and concedimus ut omnes Liberi Homines totius Monarchiae Regni
nostri praedicti habeant and ^^ meant terras suas, and Possessiones s^^s; been
and in pace, libere ab omni Exactione injusto, and ab omni Tallagio, it a quod
nihil ab eis exigatur, vel capiatur, nisi servitium suum liberum, quod de jure
nobis facere debent, and facere tenentur; and prout Statutum est in and allis,
a Nobis Datum and Concessum jure Hereditario imperpetuum per Commune Consilium
votius Regni nostri; Whereby you may see, that all the Freemen here mentioned
who were to hold their Lands and Possessions in Peace, and free from all unj^.
Exaction and Taillage, were only such who were to perform Free Service, (i. e.
Knight's Service) which was before appointed and granted them in Hereditary
Right by the King in the Common Council of the Kingdom.

So that none were properly Freemen, or exempt from Tax or Talliage, B.A.P. p.
17.
but such as held by Military Tenure, tho not Knighted.

And pray also by the way take notice, that by this Commune Consilium Regni,
you are not to understand a Council of English men, or of English and French
together, but one wholly made up of Frenchmen or Normans, who as well Bishops
and Abbots, as Temporal Earls and Barons, held almost all the Lands in the
Kingdom by Knights Service.

Which is also farther made out by the 58 th Law; Tit. De Clientum seu
Vassallorem prastationibus. Statuimus etiam and firmiter praecipimus, ut omnes
Comites, and Bermes, and Milites, and Servientes, and Universi Liberi Homines
totius Regni nostri pr^^^^tihabeant and teneant se semper been in Armis, and in
equis ut decet, and oportet and qud sint semper prompti, and been parati ad
servitium suum integrum, nobis explendum and p^^^gendum cum semper opus
adfuerit secundum quod Nobis debent, de Feodis and Tene^^^tis suis de Iure
facere; and sicut illis statuimus, per Commune Consilium totius Regni nostri
praedicti and illis dedimus, and Concessimus in Feodo, Iure Haereditario, hoc
praeceptum non sit violatum ullo modo super foris facturam nostram plenam; So
that here all the Freemen of his Kingdom were to perform their Military
Services, Ibid.
with Horse and Arms according to their Fees and Tenures. Therefore they were
Tenants in Military Service only (which in those times were the only great
Freemen, and that Service the only Free Service) which were meant in this Law;
And ^ow different they were from our ordinary Freeholders at this day (for whom
neither of these Laws were made) I dare leave it to the Judgment of every
indifferent person.

These then were the men, the only Legal men that named and chose Juries, and
served on Juries themselves, both in the Country and Hundred Courts, and
dispatched all Country Business under the Great Officers, as will appear by
the next Law with a little Explication: Ut Iura Regia illaesa, servare pro
viribus c^entur subditi, Statuimus etiam and firmiter praecipimus ut omnes
Liberi Homines totius Regni praedicti sint Fratres conjurati, ad Monarchiam
nostram and ad Regnum nostrum, pro viribus suis and facultatibus contra
inimicos pro posse suo defendendum, and viriliter serva^um, Pacem, and
Dignitatem Coronae nostrae, integram observandam, and ad Iudicium Rec^um, and
Iustitiam constanter omnibus modis pro posse suo sine dolo, and sine dilatione
fa^endam. Now the Judgment they were to give, and the Justice they were to do
by this Law (besides that in their own Courts and Jurisdictions) was
principally as they were Jurors or Recognitors upon Assizes, etc. (tho some of
the greatest of their Milites were often Sheriffs, Hundredaries, and other
Under- Judges and Ministerial Officers of Justice in their several Counties) as
may be seen in Glan^ille every where, but especially Lib. 2. c. 10, 11. lib. 9.
c. 7. c. 17. and lib. 13. throughout. This of being Suitors to the County and
Hundred Courts, etc. being a Service incident to their Tenures; and before them
many times anciently in the County and Hundred Courts, and not privately in a
Chamber, were Executed Deeds, Grants and Donations of Lands contained in very
small pieces of P^rchment, witnessed by Thomas of such a Town, John of another,
Richard of a third, etc. which were Knights, and Liberi Tenentes in Military
Service in those Towns of considerable Estates, and not the lower sort of
people: And this Execution of Sales and Assurances in open Courts, was as
public and notorious, and as secure, as if at that time there had been a
public Register for them.


F. Before I answer your Conclusion from King VVilliam's Laws, I must tell you,
I am not at all satisfied neither with the Account you give, how the Common^ of
England could come in to be a part of the Parliament, without any noise or
notice taken of it, either by our Acts of Parliament, or Historians; since it
is not only improbable, but also quite contrary to Matter of Fact, and History
it self; as I shall, I hope, make good, when we come to treat of that Subject.
Nor is your Argument of any weight, since it does not follow, that because
William the Conqueror so subjected the Lands of Bishops and Abbots to Tenure
by Knights Service; that therefore this was done by his sole Power, without any
Law for it, made by the Common Council of the whole Kingdom. Since I observe in
the first Law of King William, which you have now cited, that the very
Services which (you say) were reserved upon the Lands he had bestowed, are said
to be so appointed or settled, by the Common Council of the whole Kingdom; and
therefore certainly the Services of the Bishops and Abbots must be so likewise;
And therefore I must confess my self to be of Mr. Selden's Opinion in this
Matter, who presumes there was a Law for it, tho now lost; and cannot believe
that this King (how powerful soever) should attempt to introduce so great a
yoke upon all the Bishops, and so many of the Abbots and P^^ors of England,
without their consents expressly given to a Law, and made in the Great Council
concerning it, tho that Law (as many others of this King) is not now to be
found.

But to come to the main Design of your present Discourse, which is to show
that none but Tenants by Military Service in capite were in the first times
after the Conquest properly the only true Freemen or Freeholders of the whole
Kingdom. I shall show you that first the Notion is quite new, and never heard
of, till the Dr. (from whom you have borrowed it) first broached it; neither
Mr. Lambard, Mr. Somne^, nor Sir Henry Spelman, nor any of our English
Antiquaries or Lawyers ever discovered any such thing, before your Dr. arose to
disperse these Clouds; every man of the Kingdom, who was no Villain, being
looked upon as a Freeman, and every Owner of Lands of Inheritance, though of
never so small a proportion reckoned a Freeholder, and his Estate called his
Franc Tenement, or Freehold, as well in our Ancient, as Modern Laws; and that
Freehold was not restrained only to Military Service, within a hundred years
after the Conquest, appears by King John's Magna Charta; In which it is
expressly recited, that Nullus distri^^tur ad faciendum majus servitium de Feodo
Militis, nec de alio Libero Tenemento qu^^ inde debetur; and that Socage
Tenants, tho by Villain Services, were as much Freemen as your Tenants in
capite, see Spelman's Glossary, Tit. Socman, where he says thus, Socmannus in
natura brevinan (brevi de Recto) proprie talis est, qui Li^e est, and tenet de
Rege, seu de alio Domino in antiquo dominico terras suas seu Tenement^ in
Villenagio. Libro Sancti Albani Tit. Honcton, Chap I. Rege Angliae manerium de
H^^cton tenuerunt in dominico; omnes Tenentes Liberi, scil. and custumarii per
sokam defendebant tenementa. sua, etc. ex quo patet sokmans liberos (...)
significare.

But since you seem to make a distinction between Freemen and Freeholders,
properly, or improperly so called; since King VVilliam's Laws you have now
cited, do not warrant any such Distinction; I must beg your excuse if I am not
of your Opinion; for the First Law you have quoted warrants no such thing; it
only says, That all Freemen in general, shall take an Oath of Fealty to the
King, to maintain him, his Lands and Honors, against (...) Enemies and
Strangers.

Now it is apparent that this Law extended to all Freemen, (who were by the
Ancient Saxon Laws recited in the Addition to the Laws of King Edward) to take
the very same Oath in the Folkmote, as they were after your Conquest to do
according to this Law, either in the County Courts, or Sheriffs Turn. Nor
will the next Law do the business any more than this; for the Words are, That
all Freemen of our said Kingdom may have and hold their Lands and Possessions
free from all ^njust Taillage Exactions, etc. Which Word Possessions extends
not only, to Lands of Inheritance, (much less to Lands held by Knights Service)
but also to Estates for Life, and all other Chattels or Possessions, as well
real, as personal: Nor does the Words Servitium Liberum, extend only to those
Services which were reserved upon Lands held by Knights Service in capite, but
also to those Common Services (called Trinoda necessitas) which I have formerly
mentioned, ^iz. The building and repairing of Castles and Bridges, and
Expedition against Foreign Enemies, which all the Lands in England were liable
to, as well after, as before your Conquest: Nor will the 58 th Law make more
for you; for tho it ^^ly says that all Earls, Barons, Knights, and their
Servitors or Esquires, and all Freemen of the Kingdom shall always be fitted
with Horses and Arms as they ^^ought to be, and which they ought to do
according to, and by reason of their ^ees and Tenures. Now it is plain that
this Law cannot extend to the Less (...) Capite only, since they, according to
your own sense, are comprehended ^^eder the Word Milites, and their Servientes,
which seems to mean their Feudata^y Tenants, are as much tied by this Law to
find Horses and Arms, as the T^^ants in capite themselves. So that whereas the
Law says expressly, Uni^^rsi Liberi ^^mines totius Regni, it should have been,
to make good your sense, Univers^ Libe^^ Homines qui de Rege Tenant in capite;
And as for the other Freemen who were ^f lesser Estates than to find Horses,
they were to be ready with such Arms as be^^ed their Condition, as we see it
explained by the Assize of Arms of Henry II. which I have now cited; so that
this Law of King William is not to be taken in (...) sense you put upon it,
That all the true Freemen of the Kingdom were obliged to be ready with Horses
and Arms, as if none were Freemen that did not; but referring the Words Horses
and Arms to those who were to ^ind both; and the Word Arms to those Freemen who
were only obliged to keep Arms ^it for Foot^en, which sense the words will very
well bear, tho expressed generally and concisely according to the Mode of those
times, which abhorred more Words than ^eeds: And if these Laws will not prove
what you bring them for, much less till the last you have cited; For if the
Words Omne^ Liber^ Homines totius Monar^^, in the First Law, who were to take
an Oath of Fidelity to the King must ^^tend to all the Freemen of England, (as
certainly it did) all Freemen being a^^e obliged to be sworn in the Court Leer,
and County Court; so must this too, (...) Title being, that Omnes subditi, all
the Subjects should endeavor to main^^in the King's Rights with all their
Power; And tho I grant that Subditi here are the same with Liberi Homines in
the first Law; yet since by that Law all Freemen were to take the Oath of
Fidelity to the King, these must be also the very same Freemen, who were to be
sworn Brothers to defend the Kingdom, according to their Power and Estates. So
that all that you have said to prove your Tenants by Knights Service in capite,
to be the only Freemen that served o^ Juries, etc. being built upon a false
Interpretation of these Laws of King William, are but the mere Fancies and
Imaginations of the Author from whom you borrowed them.

But taking the Words Liberi Homines in the strictest sense, and as they are is
the Magna Charta of King John, and H. III. Chap. 14. where it is ordained, that
Liber Homo non amercietur pro parvo delicto, nisi secundum modum illius
delicti, salv^^h contenemento suo, and mercatar eodem modo, salva marchandiza,
and villanus salv^ VV^nagio; Upon which Words Sir Edward Coke in his 2 d. Inst.
observes, that (...) Homo is here meant such a one as enjoys a Franc Tenement,
that is, any sort of Free^^ hold.

But pray go on to prove by some plainer Authorities, that the Arch-Bishop^
Bishops and Abbots, etc. together with the Earls, Barons, and other Tenants in
capita, were the only Council of the Kingdom, for the assessing of Taxes, and
making Laws in the Times immediately succeeding the Reign of King William the
First.


M. I shall perform your Desires, and will begin with the Great Council (...)
Parliament held at Clarendon, of which Matt. Paris tells us, (...) Dom. 1164.
10 th of King H. II. B. A. P. Page 32. Fol. 100. ^20.
In presentia Regis Henri^s (...) rendon 8 Calend. Febr. etc. de mandato ipsius
Regis, presentibus (...) Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus,
Comitibus, (...) and Proceribus Regni, facta est Recognitio; and which
Quadrilogus, and GErvas^ (...) Canterbury, comprise under the General Terms of
Brasules, and Pr^ceres Regni* the Bishops and Great Men of the King^dom. Lib.
1. c. 26. X. Script. ^oll^ 1385. n. 60. A. D. 1164.


What can be more clear by this Enumeration of the Constit^^ent Parts of this
full Parliament (as Mr. S^lden and other Autho^ agree it to be) than that the
Commons were then none of the^ and that the Clerus and Populus in Hoveden, were
only the (...) and Lay Nobility.

So likewise when these Constitutions were again renewed by this King at
^^thampton, the same Author tells us, (tho by a Mistake it is writt^^
Nottingham) That Rex Pater ibi celebravit Magnum Consilium de (...) it is Regni,
Hoved. Fol. 313. a. n. 50.
and coram Rege Filio Suo, and coram Archiepiscopis, Episcop^^ Comitibus and
Baronibus Regni sui; which Council is more parti^^larly recited by Benedictus
Abbas in his Manuscript History ((...) in the Cottonian Library) Anno. 1176.
(which was the 25 th H. (...) Circa Festum Conversionis Sancti Pauli, Sub
Effigio Iulii.
venit Dominus Rex usque ^^^thampton, and Magnum ibi celebravit Concilium de
Statutis Regni sui (...) Episcopis, and Comitibus, and Baronibus Terrae suae;
and coram eis per (...) Regis Henrici Filii sui, and per Concilium Comitum, and
Baronum and Nilit^^, Hominum suorum hanc subscriptam assisam ^ecit etc.

And Ralph de Diceto, Dean of St. Paul's ( A. D. 1210.) a diligent Searcher into
the Histories and Transactions of his own and former times, Imag. Histor. Coll.
588. n. 40.
does yet more fully declare the meaning of Abbot Benedict, in the Account he
gives of this Great Council, thus; Rex juxta Consilium Filii sui Regis, coram
Episcopis Comitibus, Baronibus, Militibus and aliis Hominibus suis in hoc
consentientibus, etc. Hoc autem factum est apud Northamptonam, ^ino Kal Febr.
From all which Authorities we may collect, that this Council at Northampton, as
well as that at Clarendon, was a Great or Common Council of the whole Kingdom;
to which were summoned of the Laity, only the Earls and Barons of his, ( viz.
the King's) Land, to which is also added for the better explaining, who were
understood under these Titles of Baronum, Militum, and Hominum suorum; that is,
such Tenants in capite as were Knights, and such as were his Men or Tenants,
that is Military Tenants as were not Knighted, and who held Lands either of the
King, or his Son, to whom the King might assign diverse of these Barons and
Tenants in capite to atturn Tenants to him, B. A. I. Page 204.
and to maintain his Court and Kingship; And the King's Comites, and Barons
terrae suae, were the Earls and Barons of his Kingdom that held immediately of
him, or were his immediate Tenants in capite; and that Homo suus and homines
sui, does for the most part signify the King's, or any other Lord's immediate
Tenants by Knights Service; for you may consult Spelman's Glossary, and Du
Fresue's Lexicon, under these Titles.

But farther to confirm, who were then the Constituent Members of our Great
Councils, pray see the Title to the Assize of Forests, under King Richard the
I. which Hoveden recites in these Words; Haec est Assiza Dom. Regis, Hoved.
Fol. 445. b. n. 40.
and haec* sunt praecepta de Forestis suis in Angliae facta, per assensum and
Consilium Archiepiscoporum Episcoporum, and Abbatum, Comitum, and Baronum, and
Militum totius Regni. Where by Militum is to be understood not only those
Tenants in capite that were Knighted, but also all other Tenants in capite; and
if the Word ever signifies any other persons. B A. I. Page 201. Page 61.
they were not ordinary Freeholders, but Libere Tenentes in servitio Militari,
Freeholders in Military Service, as you may find in the Dr.'s Glossary, Tit.
Probi Homines, Milites, etc. But pray remember also what Sir H. Spelman tells
us in his Glossary, Tit. Miles, that these Milites (when put alone) were
properly the Liberi Tenentes, or Tenants in capite; Qui non a Militari Cingulo,
sed a Frodo nomen sumpserunt. So that I think no ingenious man but will confess
that all these Councils were General Councils or Parliaments of the whole
Kingdom, consisting of no other persons than Tenants in capite.


F. To return an Answer to all your Authorities together, I must now repeat
what I often said, that there are no firm Arguments to be drawn from the
doubtful Words, and general Expressions of our Ancient Historians; and I doubt
not but to show you, that all the whole strength of your Reasons consists in
this alone.

But since I have already spoken so much of the various signification of the
Word Barons Regis and Regni, I shall omit that, and now proceed to the rest of
the Words, which you think make so plain for you, and shall only observe at
present, that these Words Barons and Milites, are always stretched or
contracted, according as the Gentlemen of your Opinion find it best to suit
with their Hypothesis.

As for Example. If the Word Barons is put alone, then it must signify none
but Great Barons, and Tenants in capite; if it be joined with Milites, then by
Barons must be only meant the Great Barons or Peers; and by Milites, those
Tenants in capite who were not Lords. If any other words follow Milites, then
this Word must signify only such Tenants in capite as were Knighted. So
likewise you deal with all other Words, tho of never so comprehensive a
Signification.

But why may not I with as much Reason affirm, That by Barons mentioned in
these Authorities, is to be understood the Barons properly so called; and by
the Milites, the Knights of Shires, whether they were Tenants in capite, or
Feudatories to others; For Radulphus de Diceto in Anno 1040. in the Laws of
Malcolm the Second, King of Scots, mentions Milites Vavasores, qui tenent de
Baronibus tetras suas; and that not only Tenants in capite, but all others of
whomsoever they held, who were able to maintain themselves like Knights, might
be then forced to receive Knighthood, appears by two Writs of 24 th and 26 th
H. III. as they are found in the Close Rolls, Rot Claus. 24th H. III. m. 8.
dorso Rot. Claus. 26 th H. III. ps. 1. m. 6. dorso.
under this Title, Forma de Molitibus faciendis; and I desire you would read
the Writ it self.

Rex Vicecomiti Northampton, Salutem Praecipimus tibi quod per totam Ballivam
tuam in Singulis bonis Villis, and similiter in pleno Comitatu tuo clamari
facias, quod omnes illi de Comitatu tuo qui tenent Feodum Militis integrum, vel
etiam minus quam Feodum integrum, dum tamen de Tenemento Suo tam Militari quam
Socagio p^ssint sustentari, and Milites non sunt, Sicut Tenementa sua deligunt,
citra festum omnium Sanctorum Anno Regni Nostri 25. Arma capiant and se Milites
fieri faciant. Et si qui fuerint tales qui citra Terminum illum se Milites
fieri non fecerint, Omnia Nomina eorum Statim a Termino illo, and quantitatem,
and Valorem tenementorum suorum nobit scire facias Test Rege, apud Jews 25
die Iulii.

Similiter Scribitur omnibus Vicecomitibus.

And as for the Words Homines Sui, which you will have only to mean the King's
Tenants in capite, those Words have so equivocal a Signification, that there is
no Argument to be drawn from them; for they may as well signify all the King's
Subjects sworn to him by Fealty and Allegiance, as Tenants by Homage, or
Knights Service only, as Sir H. Spelman in his Glossary observes upon the Word
Homo, dicitur de quovis Praediorum Tenente, sive Socmanno, sive Militari; And
for this he cites the Book of Ramsey, and if Suus be added to Homo, it does
much alter the Case, as appears by the words following, in the same place,
Dicitur Praeterca de Quovis Ministro, and Subdito, and saepe occurrit hoc modo
in Antiquis Privilegiis, non Solum Vassalos, and Tenentes, sed Famulos, and
Subditos quoslibet Significans; and for this he gives us several Authorities.

So that you see these Words do not only signify Tenants in capite, but also
any other Subjects, and so might take in the Knights of Shires* with the
Citizens and Burgesses likewise, at least the Representatives of such Cities
and Buroughs as held of the King in capite, by your own Sense of these Words.

But I shall however say something of the rest of the Words you insist upon,
out of Abbot Benedict. viz. Barons terrae suae, which means no more than Regni
sui before mentioned, and then it will signify no more, than that all the
Barons of his Kingdom were summoned to this Assembly; which Word, Tenants in
capite, I can give Mr. Selden's Authority for, who in his First Edition, P.
276, 277.
2 d Part, has his remarkable Passage, speaking of the several kinds of
Barons, he says, That besides the Barons Regis, there were Barons of Subjects
holding, not of the King, but by Mesnalty, who made a third Rank of such as
were Lords of Manors, etc. Out of this may be understood why, and in what
sense Baronagium Angliae, Rex and Baronagium suum, and sine Assensu Baronagii
sui, so often occur in our old Stories, taken as well for the King, and the
whole State sometimes, as for the Greater Nobility. But if your Dr. had been
pleased to have compared the Authors he quotes with others, nay with the Title
to the very Constitutions of Clarend^n themselves, Page 41.
as he has given them, as in his Appendix to his History out of Quadrilogus,
this Objection would have been needless; Col. 1395.
for if you consult Gervase of Canterbury, he styles the Parties to this
Council Praesules, and Proceres Anglicani Regni. And as for Matt. Paris, Fol.
100.
pray observe that after the word Cl^rus (which there) coming immediately after
the Bishops, Abbots, and Priors must needs signify the Inferior Clergy), he
expresses the Lay Orders thus; Cum Comitibus Baronibus ac Proceribus cunctis,
where we may observe the word Proceres here put distinct from Barons, which
may very well signify not the Less Tenants in capite, but the Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses, as I have already proved the word Proceres does often
signify, both in our Historians and Records; but Quadrilogus gives us the
Title of these Constitutions more exactly in these words, Facta est ista
Recognitio, coram Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, and Clero, and Comitibus, and
Proceribus Regni; and in the next Line he says, That those Customs were thus
recognized, per Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, Comites, Barons and per Nobiliores,
and Antiquiores Regni; where he likewise distinguishes between the Bishops and
Inferior Clergy; and those who in the first place he calls Proceres Regni, In
the next he calls Nibilores and Antiquiores Regni, by which he might mean the
Knights of Shires, Citizens and Burgesses, who were called in the Saxon Times
Seniores and Sapientes, as I have already proved; now if the Inferior Clergy
appeared by their Representatives at this Council (since they could not then
all come thither in person any more than now); to imagine that the Commons of
England should not be likewise there by their Representatives of their own
order, is to deprive the Commons of that Right, which you cannot but allow to
the Inferior Clergy.

To conclude; You your self confess, that your Less Tenants in capite,
sometimes called Barons minores were only nominally, and nor properly Barons
of the Kingdom, in the sense that word is now taken; and if so, pray give me
any satisfactory Reason, why other Commoners as well as they, viz. the Knights
of Shires, Citizens and Burgesses, might not then likewise have had Places in
our Great Councils or Parliaments.


M. I see you use your utmost endeavor from the various and equivocal sense of
the words in question between us, to prove that the Commons in the sense they
are now taken might be comprehended under the words Barons, Mii^a, and Homines
sai, which it is very certain could not be, according to the Constitution of
the Government at that time. And therefore I shall give you a very plain Answer
to your Question, why other Commonrss as well as the lesser Tenants in Capite
could not be present, or have places in those Great Councils, because it was
contrary to the received Custom and Law of the Kingdom at that time, appears by
those Clauses of King John's Charter, which Dr. B. has made use of with so
good success against Mr. P. and the Author of Ianus Anglorum, etc. And
therefore I desire you would read them along with me (...) they stand here in
the Appendix to the Dr's Complete History of England; P. 131.
and as he has transcribed them from an Ancient Manuscript in Bennet College,
and divided them into so many distinct Articles or Chapters; but those we
chiefly insist upon are these.

Article 14. Nullum Scutagium vel Auxilium ponam in Regno nostro nisi per
Commune Consilium Regni nostri, nisi ad Corpus nostrum redimendum, and ad
Primogen^^ (...) filium nostrum Militem faciendum, and ad Primogenitam filiam
nostram semel N^^tandam, and ad hoc non siet nisi rationabile Auxilium.

15. Simili modo fiat de Auxiliis de Civitate Londinensi, and Civitas
Londinens^ habeat omnes antiquas Libertates and Liberas Consuetudines suas, tam
per terras qu^^ per aquas.

16. Praeterea Volumus, and concedimus quod omnes aliae Civitates, and Burgi,
and Villae, and Barons de quinque Portibus, and omnes Portus habeant omnes
Libertates, and omnes Liberas consuetudines suas; and ad habendum Commune
Conclium Regni de A^^liis assidendis, aliter quam in tribus casibus praedictis.

17. Et de Scutagiis assidendis submoneri faciemus Archiepiscopos, Episcopos,
Abbates, Comites, and Majores Barons Regni singillatin. per Literas nostras.

18. Et praterea faciemus submoneri in generali per Vice Comites, and Ballivos
nostr^ omnes alios qui in Capite tenent de nobis, ad certum diem scilicet ad
terminum quadra ginta dierum ad minus, and ad certum locum, and in omnibus
literis submonitionis ca^ sam submonitionis illius exponemus.

19. Et sic facta submonitione negotium procedat ad Diem assignatum secund^^
Consilium eorum qui praesentes fu^rint, quamvis non omnes submoniti venerint.

From which Ancient Monument we may draw these Conclusions.

1. That the King exercised a Royal Prerogative before this Charter, of
Assessing Aids, and Scutages upon all sorts and degrees of Men, without the
Assent o^ the Great or Common Council, (since called the Parliament) from doing
which for the Future, the King by this Charter tied up his own I^^and, unless
i^ the Three Cases here particularly reserved.

2. That there is no mention of any other Members to be summoned to th^^
Council, but the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Earls, and Greater Barons b^
particular Writs, and all the other Lesser Tenants in Capite by one general
Summons by the Sheriff. So that it is apparent that the Great Councils before
this time only consisted of such Earls Great Barons and Tenants in Capite, I.
E. M. G. P. 211.
as the King by special Writ wa^ pleased to summon; and this new way brought in
a greate^ number of the Tenants in Capite than ever had appeared before; so
that if i^ should be true, which you assert, that this Charter was no new Grant
to the People of England, but a Confirmation of their Ancient Rights and
Liberties, it mu^^ then necessarily follow, that Great Lords and Tenants in
Capite, called sometim^^ Barons Minores, were then the only Representatives of
the Commons.

And that the Inferior Tenants consent was included in t^^ Assent of his
immediate Superior Lord, B. A. P.
whose presence was r^^quired in those Great Councils or Parliaments, need not,
think, be doubted, and I can give you, if need be, several Authorities to prove
it. But pray observe further, that here is no mention at all in this Charter of
any Citizens or Burgesses to be summoned to the Great Council, unless you will
have them included under the general Title of all others who hold in Capite,
and then none but such Cities and Towns who held in Capite could pretend to
send any Members; much less is there any mention of any Knights to be chosen
for Counties, which certainly would have been particularly provided for by this
Charter, had they then had any place in this Assembly. So that, I think, it is
very plain, that the Commons were not otherwise represented than by these
Tenants in Capite for the rest of King John's, and most part of King Henry III.
Reign, for ought I can yet discern: For though this Charter was Confirmed in
the second and ninth year of that King last mentioned, per Commune Consilium
(...) Regni; yet there is likewise no mention made of any Knights and Citizens
(...) Burgesses.


F. Before I answer this main Argument of yours, (which I freely grant carries
the greatest show of probability of any you have yet brought) give me ^^^ve to
take notice, that I think you are very much out in your first Conclusion; that
before this Charter, the King exercised a Royal Prerogative of Imposing Taxes
without the Assent of Parliament; for if you mean that this Exaction was
exercised de facto, and from thence you would make it a Prerogative of the
Crown, I grant this was true, not only before, but after this Charter, before
the Statute de Tallagio non concedendo was made; but if you mean de Iure, I
affirm that our Kings were as much tied up by the 55th Law of William the
First, (which you have already Cited) from Levying any unjust Taxes, or
Exactions, (...) Communi Consilio totius Regni, as they could be afterward by
any other subsequent Law that could be made.

But I shall proceed to answer the Authority you have now brought from this
Clause in King John's Charter to prove, That none but Tenants in capite had any
place in our Great Councils, or Parliaments. But though I confess the Charters
of Henry III. and Confirmation of Edward I. are the same with this in the most
material parts, yet there are several Clauses (of which this Clause in question
is one) which are in King John's Charter, and yet are totally omitted out of
both those of Henry III. as I shall show you hereafter. So that let ^^e sense
of this place be what it will, I defy you to show me any Great Council of the
Kingdom, that was ever summoned according to this Imaginary Model of yours; and
that I do not speak without Book, that Parliament or Council of 9. Henry the
Third, when but 11 years after King John's Charter was Con^^^med; M^t. Paris
(as I have already observed) tells us, it consisted of Cle^^, and Populus cum
Magnatibus Regionis.

But give me leave to read this Clause, according as your Dr. himself has
Printed, and Transcribed it, and as your self have now read it; and I doubt
not, but it will appear plain enough, that the Clause you insist on in this
Char^^r, does not at all concern the Great Council of the Kingdom; and for the
proof of this, I desire you only to observe, that by the 15th and 16th Clauses
of this Charter you have now read, both the City of London, and all other
Cities. Bar^^ghs and Towns, had a Right to have a Great Council of the Kingdom
for the ^^^essment of Aids, (otherwise than in the Three Cases there expected.)
And ^ay take the Dr's Paraphrase to this Clause along with you in his Appendix
to his complete History of England, viz. That they, viz. the Citizens,
Burgesses, Page 131. ^.
and Cinque Ports shall send their Representatives or Commissioners to the
Common Council of the Kingdom, for the Assessment of Aids; So that according to
his Concession, there must have been Citizens and Burgesses in the Great
Council, in the Reign of King John; and if so, I desire you to tell me whether
those Gentlemen were Commoners or not?

But I will not insist too much upon his Concessions, for I think it is very
plain from the Words themselves, which point out a distinction between the
Common Council of the Kingdom, mentioned in the first Clause which was to meet,
to grant, or assess Aids or Subsidies; and that other (tho not Common) Council
or Assembly, consisting of all the Tenants in capite, which by the 17 th. and
18 th. Clauses of that Charter, are to meet to assess Escuage, and to do such
other Business as was expressed in their Summons. So that nothing seems plainer
to me, than that this Assembly mentioned in this Charter, for assessing
Escuage, was a distinct Council from the Great Council of the Kingdom, which
was appointed for the granting of other Taxes, called Auxilia, and for the
making of Laws.


M. I confess this Gloss of yours seems at first sight very plausible, and
agreeable enough to the way of Reading and Pointing, with which the Dr. himself
published this Charter; but for all that, I much doubt whether you are in the
right, or not, therefore pray give me leave to put off this Debate till our
n^^t Meeting, since it now grows late; and in the mean while I will take time
to consider the Arguments and Authorities you have now made use of.


F. Pray take your own time, but do not defer it above a day or two; for I have
a great mind to have this Question dispatched off our hands: I am your Servant.


M. Good night Sir.


FINIS.
Books Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane.
A Brief Disquisition of the Law of Nature, according to the Principles and
Method laid down in the Reverend Dr. Cumberland's (now Lord Bishop of
Peterborough's) Latin Treatise on that Subject. As also his Confutation of Mr.
Hobb's Principles put into another Method. With the Right Reverend Author's
Approbation. The Gentleman's Iournal: Or the Monthly Miscellany. By way of
Letter to a Gentleman in the Country, Consisting of News, History, Philosophy,
Poetry, Music, Translations, etc. Complete for the Year 1692. Printed for
Rich. Parker; and are to be sold by Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in
Warwick Lane. Where are to be had the Single Iournals for each Month; or
Complete Setts bound. The Tragedies of the Last Age, considered and examined by
the Practice of the Ancients, and by the Common sense of all Ages; in a Letter
to Fleetwood Shepherd, Edq A Short View of Tragedy; its Original, Excellency,
and Corruption: With some Reflections on Shakespeare and other Practitioners for
the Stage. Both by Mr. Rymer, Servant to their Majesty's.
Bibliotheca Politica: OR, A DISCOURSE By Way of DIALOGUE, WHETHER The Commons
of England represented by Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in Parliament, were
One of the Three Estates in Parliament before the 49th of Henry III. or 18th of
Edw. I.

The Second Part.

Collected out of the most Approved Authors, both Ancient and Modern.

Dialogue the Seventh.

LONDON, Printed for R. Baldwin in Warwick Lane, near the Oxford-Arms; where
also may be had the First, Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth and Sixth Dialogues.
1693.

Authors made use of, and how denoted.
1. Mr. Petut's Ancient Right of the Commons of England Asserted P. R. C. 2.
Dr. Brady's Answer thereunto. Edit. in Folio, B. A. P. 3. The said Doctor 's
Glossary at the end of it. B. G. 4. Animadversions upon Mr. Atwood's Treatise,
Entitled, Iani Anglorum faces nova. B. A. I. 5. Mr. Atwood his Confutatin of
the said Doctor, Entitled, Ius. Anglorum ab Antiquo. I. A. A. 6. Dr. Brady's
Preface to his History. B. P. H. 7. Dr. Iohnston's Excellency of Monarchical
Government. I. E. M. G.
THE Seventh Dialogue BETWEEN Mr. MEANWELL a Civilian, AND Mr. FREEMAN a
Gentleman.
F. YOU are welcome Sir, but I did not expect to see you again so soon.


M. I beg your pardon if I come unseasonably, but the truth is, I have so great
a desire to conclude what we began upon, that important Subject we last
discoursed of, that I could not be at ease till I had done my endeavor to give
you Satisfaction therein, if it be possible.

But to come to the matter that we now meet about, I must now tell you again,
that though this your gloss upon King John's Charter, seems plausible at first
sight, nay, is agreeable to the Dr's own way of dividing and reading the
several Articles of this Charter; yet upon better consideration, I can see no
good reason for making a full, or at least, a half stop in the 16 th Article,
after these words, omnes liberas consuetudines suas; adding the rest that
follows, and ad habendum Commune Concilium, etc. to the following Clause, and
de seutagiis assidendis, etc. much lest for supposing as you do, without any
ground, that there were two sorts of Common Councils, one for Assessing
Escuage, and the other for Granting all other Aids and Taxes; and then, if read
otherwise, it will plainly appear that it was one and the same Council of the
Kingdom that did then both grant Aids to the Crown, and Assess Escuage ratione
tenurae, which I am the more inclined to believe from the fourteenth Clause
here cited, which says. That no Scutage, or Aids shall be imposed, unless by
the common Council of the Kingdom. Now to what purpose is this so-express'd, if
there was to be one Council for the granting of Aids, and another for the
Assessing of Escuage: So that if this Common Council of the Tenants in Capite
might grant Aids, and Assess Escuage upon the Subjects (unless in the case
before excepted) I see no reason why they should not be the only Council, for
the giving their Assent to Laws also; and consequently of concluding not only
their own Tenants, but the King's Tenants in Petty Sergeanty and Socage, nay,
the Tenants of any other Persons whatsoever.

And though I have seriously considered Mr. P's Append^x to the Rights of the
Commons asserted, and Dr. b's Answer to it, as also his Animadversions upon
Iani Anglorum. etc. Yet can I not see any color of an Argument for making any
distinction between the King's Curia of his Great Lords, and Tenants in Capite;
and the Great or Common Council of the Kingdom, but that they were then all one
and the same. It would be tedious to me, as well as you, to run over all the
particular Authorities and Examples which have been urged pro and con in this
Question. But I desire you, or your Friend Mr. P. to show me that there was any
Bishops, Earls, Barons, or other Members of Parliament in the times we now
treat of, that had any place, or Vote therein, but according to their Tenure,
and the ancient Custom of all Feudal Tenants, who by the German* Gothic and
Lombard Feudal Laws (which in substance were the same with ours) were always
summoned to the Court of the King their Supreme Lord.

But farther to prove that this Council for Assessing Escuage, was no other
then the great Council or Parliament of those Tenants in Capite, appears from
Li^tleton's ^enures, where in his second Book, Sect. 97. he tells us, That
after an Expedition Royal into Scotland, Escuage shall be Assessed in
Parliament upon all those who failed to do their Service in that Expedition: so
that if the Parliament did then Assess Escuage, I desire to know why they might
not do it in the Reign of King John? i^ this great Council of the Arch bishops,
Bishops, great Lords and Tenants in Capite, were not the Common Council of the
whole Kingdom in those Times? yet that Escuage was not always Assessed in
Parliament after this Charter of King John, but that the King by his own
Prerogative did often grant his Tenants in Capite a Power to take Scutage of
their Tenants without any Assent in Parliament, B. A. P. p. 117.
the Dr. has given you above a dozen Examples in the Reigns of Hen. III. and
King John.

Thus it was for Aids and Scutage Service, but if it was for Scutage imposed in
Parliament as a Tax upon Land by the Common Council of the Nation, then the
Tenants in Capite were not only the sole Grantors, but the Collectors of that
Scutage too, from their Mesne Tenants: And the Writs to the Sheriff was
different from these in Scutage Service, Ib. p. 121.
though the same in Substance; as likewise appears by those Records the Dr.
has there given us.


F. I doubt not but I shall make good my Assertion, and shall be able to defend
what Mr. P. has in his Learned Treatise asserted concerning this matter. In
the first place, I must stick to that way of reading and pointing of this
Clause in dispute, since it is not only agreeable to the Dr's Manuscript Copy,
but also to the old French Copy, published by Father D'achery in his
Spicilegium, vol. 13. which is written in the French of tha^ time: but to
answer your Objection against this Interpretation, you your self have in great
part helped me to do it, by that true distinction you have now made between a
Scutage as an Aid, or Tax, and as a Service, the latter of which you assert
might be granted to the King, to be raised by his Tenants in Capite upon their
under-Tenants, whereas the former was only grantable in Parliament by the
Common Council of the whole Nation. Which Tax, I Affirm, was always granted to
the King, and imposed by the Common Council of the Kingdom only, and not by the
Tenants in Capite alone, before the Expedition was undertaken. Whereas Scutage
Service (considered as a payment of so much Money) was never due or payable,
till the Expedition was ended; and then only upon such as had failed to serve
in Person, or by sufficient Deputies; and was then to be Assessed by the
Tenants in Capite alone.

And though I grant it may seem to have been a Prerogative as you call it,
exercised by some of our Kings, sometimes to grant his Tenants in Capite a
License to take Scutage of their Tenants, without the Assent of the Great
Council of the Kingdom; yet such Payments or Assessments were either according
to Law, B. A. P. p. 117.
and the express Grant of this Charter it self; as is that Writ of King John to
the Sheriff of Glocestershire for the Assessing of an Aid or Scutage Service of
three Marks on each Scute upon the Tenants of Saber, Earl of Winchester, for
making his Eldest Son a Knight, and which the said Earl, might have claimed of
his Tenants by the Common Law, as also by the 20 th Article of that Charter;
but for Scutage Tax Littleton tells us, Lib. 2. Sect. 101. That because such
Tenements came at first from the Lords, it is Reason they should have Escuage
of their Tenants, and the Lords in such case might destrain for the Escuage so
Assessed by Parliament; or in some Cases they may have the King's Writ directed
to the Sheriffs of the same County, etc. to L^vy such Escuages for them, as
appears by the Register.

But if either King John, or King Hen. III. granted Writs to levy Escuage upon
the under-Tenants of the great Lords, and Tenants in Capite, without their own
Consent in Parliament this ought to be no more cited as a Precedent, than any
other illegal Acts committed by those Kings; since, as our Records and
Histories tell us, it was such illegal Proceedings which were the cause of the
Barons Wars. And it is expressly against the words of this Charter of King John,
which you have now quoted, viz. nullum Se^^agium vel Auxilium p^nam in Regno
nostro, nisi per Commune Consilium Regni nostri.

So that notwithstanding all you have yet said, it does not appear to me, how
Scutage, when given as a Tax upon Knights ^ees alone, and to be levied not only
from the Tenants in Capite themselves, but their under-Tenants as also from the
Tenants of them, who though they held in Capite; yet held not by Knights
Service; such as were the Tenants in Pe^^y Serjeanty, and those who held of the
King in Chief, as of several Honors, and not of hi^ Crown, as in Capite, could
ever charge such Tenants without their Consent^ given either by themselves, or
their lawful Representatives; much less could your Tenants in Capite Tax or
Charge such as did not hold in Capite themselves, viz. Those Abbots and Priors
who held Lands in Right of their Monasteries in Franc Alm^igne, and who
together with their Tenants made at least two third parts of all the Abby-Lands
in England; as also Taxed those, who not holding by Knights Service at all, but
by Tenure in Socage, or Fee Farm, did not hold their Lands, as Knights Fees,
and therefore could never be Taxed by your Tenants in Capite for so many
Knights Fees, or parts thereof. And Braecton (who lived at this very time) has
distinguished to no purpose between those Common Services which all Tenants owe
their Lords, and the general Taxes, or Charges imposed by the Common Consent of
the whole Kingdom. Bract. lib. 2. c. 16. p. 37.
The words are very remarkable, pray read them. Sunt quaedam Commun^s
praestationes quae serv^cis non di^u^i^^, nec de consu^tudine ven^um nisi cum
necessita^ intervenerit, vel cum i. e. When the King comes to Parliament.
Rex venorit, sicut sunt Hidagia. Corraag^^, Carvagia, and alia plura de
necessitate and ex consensu Communi torius Regni introducta and quae ad Dominum
fe^di non pertinent. And therefore I cannot see any Reason why the great Lords,
and Tenants in Capite should ever have Power to lay a general Tax upon the
whole Kingdom, not the tenth part of which did then hold of them by Knights
Service. So that nothing seems plainer to me, than that there was (us our
ancient Historians tell us) a distinct Court, which was held anciently three
times every year, viz. at Easter, Whitsuntide and Christmas; and then the King
was attended by all the Bishops, great Lords, P. R. C. p. 131.
and other Tenants in Capite, and this was called Curis, or Concilium Regis;
and if any difference of Right did arise between the King and his Tenants, or
between Tenant and Tenant; here it was to be heard and determined; and many
other things were there u^ted and done, in relation to the King's Barons, or
Tenants in Capite only.

But under Favor, this was not the Commune Consillum Regni, or Parliament (as
we now call it) for the King held this Court ex More; or by Custom, without any
Summons, as Simon of Durham, and Florence of Worcester, and diverse other
Writers of the Lives of our first Norman Kings do show us. But when they take
notice of the meeting of the Commune Consilium totius Regni, p. 680.
their Expressions after, and then they say, that, Rex ascivi, as it is in
Ordericus Vitalis. Ex praecepro Regn convenerunt: or as E^^merus -- Rex
Sanctione sua adunavit. And Mat. Westminster of later times takes notice of
this Union, or Meeting of this C^ria, or Assembly of Tenants in Capit, together
with the Great Council or Parliament, in his History of Hen. III. Where
relating how the King again confirmed the Great Charter in a Parliament, Anno
Domini, 1252. being the 37 th of his Reign, He has these words, In quinden^
Paschae ( Adunato Magno Parliamento, etc.) So that it seems plain to me, that
this uniting of the great or whole Parliament, must be understood the
Conjunction of both Councils together; and therefore, when this Council of
Tenants in Capite, that thus met ex more took upon them assess Escuage, and
transact other matters of consequence, without the consent of the major part of
the Tenants in Capite, who often failed to appear at these Courts, or
Assembl^es held ex more, it was then and not before expressly provided by this
Charter of King John, that Escuage should not be assessed for the future,
without Summons, or Notice given of it to all the Tenants in Capite, who had
right to be there.


M. I see you would fain prove that there was a Council or Assembly of great
Lords and Tenants in Capite, distinct from the Parliament, and which met ex
more, and that these were the Persons who were by this Charter to Assemble for
the Assessing of Escuage, which is a mere precarious Hypothesis, nor can you,
or those, from whom you borrow this Notion, make it out from any good
Authority; for I have already proved, that the Barons Regis and Regni, were
the same Persons, and that usually the Barons or Tenants in Capite of what
Quality soever, did repair to the King's Court, at Christmas, Easter, B. A. P.
page 113.
and Whitsunday, does appear to have been the Custom of those times, from the
Testimonies of our ancient Historians.

But to prove by examples, out of the Authors you your self have made use of,
that the Bishops, great Barons, and Tenants in Capite, were then alone the
great Council of the Kingdom, Fol. 67. N. 20.
pray read Eadmerus speaking thus. Celebratum est Concilium in Ecclesia Beati
Peiri in occidentali par^e juxta L^n^inum sita Communi Consens^^ Episcoporum
Abbatum, and Principum totius Regni, and bui^ Conventui assuerunt Primates
Regni utriu^que ondinis. And at this Meeting were present, the Prime Men of the
whole Kingdom of both Orders, in this Council, the Bishops and Barons are
called the Principal or Chief Men of the Kingdom, yet these were all the King's
Barons, they all held of him in Capite, and so did all the Chief Men of the
Kingdom. So likewise in another Meeting under this King Hen. ^, when
Archbishop Anselm was to give his Answer to the King, according ^o the Advice
of the Bishops, and chief Men of the Kingdom: The same Author tells us of
Anselm, Fol. 69.
that in Pascha. ad Curiam venit, Communis Concilii vocem unam accepit, etc.
Now pray tell me what Common Council was this? Of the Bishops and chief Men of
the Kingdom, that Anselm referred himself to? Was it not ex more by Custom? You
cannot find in Eadmer any Summons to it, neither Rex as^ivit., nor praecep^o
Regis convenerunt, nor Rex sanctione sua adunavit. In short, not to multiply
Examples, look where you will in Eadmerus, or any other of the ancient
Historians you have cited; and you will still find, that the Persons who met ex
more, and without any Summons, were the same who Assembled by the Kings Summons
at other times, that is the Principes and Episco^i Regni, or Terrae, or called
more generally, Pri^ates utriusque ordinis, or the Barons, or Majores Regni,
who did at these great ^easts pro more, go to Court, and hold a solemn Curia,
or great Council there; And that these made up the University, or whole Body of
the Kingdom; pray see what Matt. Paris says. Fol. 658. N. 40.
In die Pentecostes Dominus Rex Anglorum Lo^dini Festum tenens Magnum, and
serenissimum, ^unc composita per Regni Vniversitatem Eleganti Epistola, etc.
This was about the Pope's Exactions as has been before delivered: And Hen.
III. in his Letter to the Pope, calls the same Persons Magnates Angliae, which
in his Letter to the Cardinals, about the same matter, he calls Magnates
Nostri, as you may see in the former Citations of them.


F. But pray give me leave to ask you this question, might not our first Norman
Kings often Summon the Common Council of the Kingdom at one of the said usual
Feasts, since it was so much for the convenience of the Bishops, great Lords
and Tenants in Capite (who I grant, were then all Members of the Great
Council,) to meet all the rest of the Kingdom, or Representatives of the
Commons at the same time: Though the Writers you have quoted may not mention
their being Summoned at all. And as for the Writs of Summons, those of much
later Parliaments being lost, how can it be expected we should now prove their
being Summoned so many Year before?


M. I confess it might be so, that upon extraordinary business, B.A.P. page 115.
and when the occasion was great, and the King desired a great and full
appearance, they might also receive an express Summons at those times. But then
I must desire you to show us any mention of a Summons to any of these Common
Councils, which when called at other times, are most constantly mentioned in
this Author. And I desire to know of you what you will say to those words pro
more convenit, which is spoken of the most general Councils, when the Community
of the Kingdom met at the King's Court? You cannot deny, but that the Tenants
in Capite, were the Kings Barons, Milites, Magnates, etc. Upon this we will
join issue; And I affirm (without bringing Proofs which are infinite in this
Case) that all the Bishops, Earls and Barons of England, did hold their Lands,
Earldoms, and Baronies of the Crown, or (which is all one,) of the King, as of
his Person, and that was in Capite.

William the Conqueror, as I said before, divided most of the Lands in England
amongst his great followers, to hold of him; he made Earls and Barons, such as
he pleased: They and their Descendants held upon the same Terms with the first
grantors, which was, to find so many Horse and Arms, and do such and such
Services; both Titles and Lands were Forfeitable, for Treason or Felony to the
King, did Homage for them, and every Bishop, Earl and Baron of England was in
those circumstances, and held of the King after this manner.

Other Lands were given to other Persons for meaner Services; as to his
Woodwards, Foresters, Hunts-men, Faulconers, Cooks, Chamberlains, Gouldsinlibs,
Bailiffs of Mannours, in his own hands, and many other Officers, which in
Doomsday-Book, are called, Terrae Thanorum Regis, and sometimes servientium
Regis; And I doubt not, whatever the Notion of Petyt Sergeanty now is, but that
originally, this holding of Lands was the true Tenure; not but presenting the
Lord with a Bow, an Arrow, a pair of Spurs every Year, etc. might also be
called Petyt Serjeanty, though not so properly as the other.


F. Not to multiply words to no purpose, I think your Reply is far from being
Satisfactory; for in the first place, it is very unreasonable to demand, that
we should now show the express Summons to these common Councils which were not
held de more; since you know that all ancient Records of that kind are
destroyed and lost; for if we could produce them at this day, the difference
between us, and those of your Opinion, would quickly be at an end, as appears
by those great Councils, which are said expressly, by the Historians I have
cited, to have been summoned, and yet no such Writs of Summons are to be found;
nor is it any good Argument, that because our ancient Historians mention no
distinct Summons to the great Councils, when met at the usual times of the
meeting of the Tenants in Capite, that therefore there were none such, since we
find they often pass by much more material Matters than this.

And though I grant that the Tenants in Capite were then part of the great
Council of the Barons, Milites and Magnates Regni; yet does it not follow for
all this, that none but the Kings Barons, and Tenants in Capite were Members of
this great Council, since there might be in those times other Barons, or great
Freeholders, who (though they held their Lands of the Tenants in Capite, yet)
might be there as Knights of Shires, or else appear in Person at those
Assemblies as well as the other; and besides, there were others, who, though
they did not hold of the King in Capite, but of some great Honor or Castle, or
else of some Abbot or Prior; yet were Men of very great Estates, and very
numerous, all which must otherwise have had their Estates taxed, and Laws made
for them, without, nay, against, the consent of themselves, or any to represent
them: Nor is your Assertion at all true, That William the Conqueror divided
most of the Lands in England to be held of him in Capite. For besides those
Servants and Officers you last mentioned, above two third parts of the Lands of
the Abbeys and Priories in England were not held, as also much other Lands in
Kent, and other Countries, per Baroniam, or Knights Service, but in libera
Elecmosina only, or Socage, as I have already proved; and consequently neither
they nor their Tenants could, according to your Hypothesis, have any
Representatives in Parliament.

And farther, you your self grant, that those Lands you mention which were
given out by your Conqueror, to his Woodwards, Foresters, etc. did not
capacitate them to appear in Parliament, since their Tenure was only by Petyt
Serjeanty, and not by Knights Service: Nor could they become the King's Tenants
in ancient Demesne, because such Tenants held wholly by Socage Tenure; whereas
it appears plainly by Littleton, that Tenants in Petyt Serjeanty were subject
to Wardship, Marriage and Relief: So that whoever will but consider, that near
half the Lands in England were held by Bishops, Abbots, Priors, etc. and of
whom not a third part held by Knights Service of the Crown; and will then
likewise consider what a vast number of Tenants those Abbots, Priors, Deans and
Chapters (who were not Tenants in Capite at all) must have had; and who either
held Estates in Fee, or else for Life, under them in Socage, as well as by
Knights Service; as also all the other sorts of Tenures I have already
mentioned, which either held of the King as of some Honor or Castle, or else of
other Mesne Lords by other Tenures than Knights Service, must certainly
conclude, that not above one half of the Lands of the whole Kingdom was held
either immediately of the King, or else of other Mesne Lords by that Tenure: So
that if all these Persons which were far the greater Number of the Freeholders
in England, should have been thus excluded from having any thing to do in our
Great Councils, I doubt not but we should have found sufficient Clamor in our
Histories against so unjust a Constitution; and when the whole Body of the
Kingdom was in Arms against King John at Running-Mead, they would likewise have
inserted a Clause for themselves, if they had not had their Suffrages there
before, either by themselves in their own Persons, or by their lawful
Representatives. And therefore upon the whole matter, I durst leave it to the
Consideration of any unprejudiced Man, whether it is not much more probable,
that the Constitution of Knights of Shires, Citizens and Burgesses appearing in
Parliament, should be much more ancient then the time you assign, than that so
small a Body of Men as the Bishops, Lords and Tenants in Capite should
represent all the Freeholders and People of England, who never held of them by
Knights Service at all. Nor have you yet answered the Quotation I have brought
out of Bracton in my last Discourse to the contrary. And whoever will but
consult that Author in his Chapter of Tenures, will find, that the Tenants in
Capite were so far from having a Power of charging all the Mesne Tenants at
their Pleasure, that in his Chapter de Tenuris, it appears, that a Mesne Tenant
in Capite having purchased an Estate for a valuable Consideration, was liable
to no other Services and Conditions, than what his Tenure expressed; which once
performed, the Lord had no more to say to him: and if so be he laid any further
Burdens upon him, he might have had a Writ of acquital out of the King's Court
against him directed to the Sheriffs; several Forms of which you may see in
Glanville, and in the old Register.


M. We are not to rest upon mere Probabilities, for some things that now appear
to us unreasonable at this instant of time, might then be very just; for if the
Feudatary Tenants of the Bishops, Barons and other Tenants in Capite were well
enough contented with the Constitution of the Kingdom, as it then was; and that
it plainly appears by matter of fact, that there was but one Common Council for
the whole Kingdom; and that of the Bishops, Abbots, Great Lords and less
Tenants in Capite only, it is in vain to argue of any unreasonableness in, or
Inconveniences that might arise from, such a Constitution, though perhaps a
great part of the Kingdom did not hold in Capite, nor yet by Knights Service;
and therefore though the Feudatary Tenants of the Tenants in Capite, were upon
the performance of their Services acquitted of all other Charges; yet this was
still to be understood only of such ordinary Services as those Tenants were to
perform by virtue of their Tenures, such as was Scutage Service, or the
attending upon their Lords when they went out to War along with the King; but
did not extend to such Scutages as were granted in Parliament, or as a Tax upon
Land by the common consent of the Nation; for then the Tenants in Capite were
not only the Grantors, but the Collectors too, of such Scutage Tax, from their
Military Tenants; and the Writs to the Sheriffs were different from those for
Scutage Service; and for proof of this, I desire you would peru^e that Writ
which the Dr. Quotes of the 19th of Hen. III. which is still to be seen in the
close Roll of that Year. Cl. 19. H. 3. m. 8. dorso.
Rex Vice Comiti Sussex salutem. Scias quod Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, Abbates,
Pri^re^, Comites, Barons and omnes alii de Regno nostro Angliae, qui de nobis
tenent in Capite, spontanea volu^^^te su^, and sine Con^uetudine, concesserunt
nobis Efficax Auxilium ad magna Negotia nostra Expedienda, unde provisum (...)
de Consil^o illorum, quod habeamus de feodis Militum and Wardis, quae de nobis
Tenent in Gapite du^s Marcas ad predictum Auxilium faciendum, and unde
provi^erint reddere nobis unam medietatem ante Festum sancti Mic^aelis, Anno
Regni 19. and aliam Medictatem ad Pasche, Anno Regni ^osir^, 20. Ideo tibi
precipimus quod This Mandate was not given him as Chancellor, but as a Tenant
in Capite.
ad Mandatum venerabilis Patris R. Cicestren. Episcopi Cancellarii nostri, sine
dilatione Distringas omnes Milites and liberos Tenentes, qui de eo Tenent per
Servitium Militare in Balliva tua, ad redlendum ei de singulis feotis militum,
and Wardis duas Marcas, ad predictum Auxilium nobis per manum suam Reddendum in
Terminis predictis.

Sic scribitur pro aliis Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus and Magnatibus.

Now I desire you to tell me whether any thing can be more plain, than that
this Tax was granted by a Common Council of the Kingdom, according to that
Clause of King John's Charter, I have now cited: Wherein it is first especially
provided, that no Aid, or Scutage shall be imposed upon the Kingdom, unless by
the Common Council thereof; and yet you see by this Writ, that the Archbishops,
etc. with the Barons there mentioned, together with the other Tenants in Capite
alone, granted an Aid or Scutage Tax of two Marks for every Knights Fee which
they held of the King; and that by virtue thereof not only those Knights Fees
they held in their hands, but also all those Subseudatary Tenants called here
Freeholders, who held of them by Knights Service, were likewise charged for
every Knights Fee, so held, the like Sum of two Marks. Now I think nothing can
be more plain from this Record, than that this was a Common Council of the
whole Kingdom, and yet consisted of Tenants in Capite only; and therefore I
desire you to show me some better Proofs than you yet have done, that these
Tenants in Capite ever made a distinct Council different, from the Common
Council of the whole Kingdom.


F. I grant this seems at first sight to be a good Authority for you; but I
doubt not for all that, to prove, that it makes wholly against you; and will,
together with those Proofs I shall urge, make out this difference between the
two sorts of Councils, I have already asserted; and therefore I must tell you,
that there is no necessity of understanding the words de Consilio illorum
(mentioned in this Record) to refer to the Common Council of the whole Kingdom,
It not being here said to be granted per Commune Concilium Regni, and then
there can no more be proved from this Record, than that a Common Council of the
Tenants in Capite, took upon themselves an unusual Power, sine consuetudine as
the Writ here mentions in those times, to charge not only themselves, but their
Under-tenants also, and that even this was an encroachment appears by the
Statute, De ^^lagio non con^edendo, made 25th. of Ed. 1. whereby it is expressly
forbid that any Talliage or subsidy should be laid upon the Kingdom sine
volun^a^e and ^ssen^^ Archiepiscorum, Episcoporum, Comitum, Baronum, Militum,
Burgensium and aliorum liberorum hominum de Regno nostro. Now pray read my Lord
Cooks Reason in his 2d. Page 532.
Inst. why this Statute was made, The 2d. Cause (says he) was that the King the
Year before, had taken a Talliage of all Cities and Buroughs, without assent
of Parliament, whereupon arose a great Murmuring and discontent among the
Commons, for pacifying which discord between the King and his Nobles, and for
the quieting of the Commons, and for a perpetual and constant Law for ever
after, both in this and other-like Cases, this Act was made, etc. being no
other (then as the same Author tells us in the Conclusion of this comment on
this Statute;) then a restitution general to the Subjects of all their Laws,
Liberties, and free Customs as freely and wholly as at any time before, in
better and fuller manner than they used to have the same. But yet, that this
was no general Scutage or Tax upon the whole Kingdom, but only upon the Tenants
in Capite, and their Tenants by Knights service, appears by the Writ it self.
So that not only all the Persons I have already mentioned, who being Tenants to
Monasteries and Priories, did not hold by Knights service, and all Tenants in
Petys Sergeanty, and all Cities and Buroughs, who did not hold in Capite (who
if they had not then Representatives in the great Council, were wholly Free
from this Tax) and not only these, but all Tenants in Fee Socage, whether
holding of the King, or of other Mesne Lords were wholly exempt from this
Scutage* So that nothing seems plainer to me, than that this Assembly that gave
the King this Tax for themselves and their Tenants, was a Common Council only
of Tenants in Capite, charging themselves and their Tenants only, and not the
whole Kingdom; and that done in a Case of great necessity, sine consuetudine:
For if it had included all the rest of the Kingdom, there would certainly have
been some mention made, how all the rest of the Kingdom (which did not hold by
Knights service) should be Taxed.

And that this was a Council consisting of the Tenants in Capite only may
appear by a Record of the 42d. of this King, which I pray read. Rex Bar. etc.
Quia per Commune Concilium Com. Baronum and aliorum Magnatum nobiscum in Wallia
nuper existentium provisum est; Inter Communia de Term. Sancti. Mich. Anno. 42.
H. 3. Rot. 4. de Scut. Levand.
quod nos and ipsi qui servitium nobis fecerunt, ibidem habeamus Scutagium
nostrum, viz. De Scuto 40 Sol. pro Exercitu nostro Wall. Anno Regni 41. Vobis
mandamus quod de omnibus feodis Militum quae tenentur de Nobis in Capite vel de
Wardia in manu nostra existentibus (exceptis Feod. illorum qui brevia nostra
habuerunt de Scutag. suo babendo) l^vari fac. Scutag. nostrum. From which
Record, it appears, that this was only a Common Council of Tenants in Capite,
who had attended on the King, and done their Service in this Welsh Expedition,
and concerned none else but such Tenants by Knights Service and their Tenants
who had failed to do their Service; and is just such a Tax as is expressly
reserved by the last Clause of King John's Charter, which you have before
cited: whereby Scutage is to be assessed by all the Tenants in Capite.

And that not only the Spiritual and Temporal Barons, and Tenants in Capite did
thus meet, and hold distinct Councils, or Assemblies for the granting of
Scutage, but also that the Spiritual Barons and Tenants in Capite, did also
sometimes hold separate Assemblies, appears by the Patent Roll of the 15. of
this King, thus. Cum peteremus a Praelatis Angliae quod nobis Auxilium
facerent, Rot. Pat. 15. H. 3. N. 3.
pro Magna necessitate nostra de qua cis conflabat, viz. Epis. Abbatibus,
Abbatissis, Prioribus and Priorissi qui de nobis Tenent in Capite ipsi Nobis
liberaliter concesserunt Auxilium tale, viz. De singulis Feodis Militum suorum
40^. de tos Feodis, de quot ipsi tenentur nobis respondere quando nobis faciunt
Servitium Militare. Where you see not only the Bishops, and Abbots, but the
Abbesses, and Prioresses granted a Scutage of 40 ^. upon every Knight's Fee
(not which was held of them) but for which they were answerable to the King
before, and though I do not suppose that these Women left their Nunneries, and
appeared in Person at such Meetings, yet they might very well do it, by their
Economy or Stewards, as their Lawful Proxies for Assemblys of that Nature.

But when a general Tax or Subsidy was granted by the whole Kingdom, the Style
of these Councils runs much otherwise, as appears by the Close Roll, of the
4th. of this King, where it is recited in the Record; that, Omnes Mag^ates, and
Fideles totius Regni nostri, granted de qualibet carucata duos solidas. Rot.
Claus. 4. H. 3. M. 5.
Now it hence appears that this was a grant of Caruage, which not being a
Scutage service, nor yet a Tax by way of Scutage: and was therefore to be
granted by the Common Council of the whole Kingdom, assessed, not only upon
Tenants in Capite and their Feudatory Tenants, but upon each Plough-Land of the
whole Kingdom, must have bin granted (as I have already proved out of Bracton,
speaking of this Caruage,) de consensu and Communi consilio totiut Regni; for
otherwise these Tenants in Capite could never have charged all the Lands of
England; of which, not half was held by Knights service. And to make it yet
plainer by other Records, pray see another of the 16th. of this King, in these
words. Rex Vice-comiti Devon. salutem sciatis quod Archiepiscopi Episc.
Abbates, Rot. Claus. 16. Hen. 3. M. 2. Dorso.
Priores and Clerici t^ras habent^s, quae ad Ecclesias suas non pertinent,
Comites, Barons, Milites, Liberi homines, and Villani de Regno Nostro,
concesserunt nobis in auxilium quadragessmam pariem omnium m^bilium suorum: So
that it is plain here who made the Commune Concilium Regni, and gave this aid
of a 40th. part of their Goods, viz. The Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors,
Inferior Landed Clergymen, the Earls, Barons, Knights, Freemen, etc. it being
a Subsidy granted upon Goods, and not laid upon Land, and that it may fully
express all the Parties to the Grant, the Record tells us, there were also the
Villani, the Inhabitants of every Village or Borough Town. And to let you see
that our Ancient Manuscript Chronicles of this Age, give the same sense to the
expressions of this Record, and that in the same Terms. Pray Read this
Quotation which a Friend of mine took out of an Ancient Manuscript, called,
Chronica Monasterii de Hageny, Sub Essigie Vespasiani B. 11. fol. 20.
in the Cottonian^ Library, as Ancient as the times are we are now treating on:
the words are these, Anno 17. Henrici Regis 4 ti. where note that the year is
mistaken for 16. but the King is the same:) Henry the Third being often in that
Age called the Fourth, in respect to King Henry, Son to Henry the Second, Idem
Rex accepit ab Archiepis. Epis. Abbatibus, Prioribus, Clerici^ terras
habentibus, quae ad Eccles. sua non pertinent, and ab Comitibus, Baronibus,
Militibus, Liberis hominibus, and villanis de Regno Angliae in Auxilium
quadragesimam partem omnium mobilium suorum. And to let you see that this
Author makes a plain distinction between the Tenants in Capite and the rest of
the Kingdom, pray observe what immediately follows in the same place [ ut]
Anno. viz. 8vo. A quo communi Assensu, and voluntate Magnatum suorum, quam
aliorum laicorum totius Regni quintam decimam Catalorum suorum universaliter
accepit. Where note by accepit is still to be understood he received it, after
the Peoples grant of it, as before in the Record of the 16. and that by
Magnatum suorum is meant the great Lords and Tenants in Capite; and by aliorum
Laicorum (put here as distinct from them) all other Orders or Degrees of men.
Now pray, how could these Taxes upon the Goods of the whole Kingdom have ever
been given, but by the general Representatives thereof (since all could not be
there in Person) unless you can show me, that men in those days, held their
Goods and Chatels by Tenure in Capite.


M. I think you and I may so far agree, that this Council I instanced in,
consisted of Tenants in Capite only, and likewise that they imposed Scutage
upon no others than their Tenants, by Knight Service, yet does it not therefore
follow, that they were not the Common Council of the Kingdom, or might not have
Taxed all others, though they were not their immediate Tenants as well as they
did those that were: And therefore I am not convinced, but that these Persons
mentioned in the Records you have cited (which you grant constituted a Common
Council of the Kingdom) were no other, than the same Tenants in Capite already
mentioned, for as for the Fideles mentioned in the Record of 4 th. Hen. 3. I
think the Dr. has very well proved, both in his answer to Mr. P. as also in
his Glossary, that they were no other than the King's Tenants in Capite, and
for this, pray consider the Authorities he there gives us. For though I agree
with you, that the word Fideles does sometimes signify generally, all those
who are under the Power or Subjection of their Prince; B. G. page 45. Hottoman
in verbis Feud. Col. 924. D.
Yet Hottoman also tells us, That, Fideles interdum specialiter dicuntur iidem
qui Vassalli* Qui Feudo accepto in Patroni Fide, and Clientel^ sunt,
vicissimque suam ei certi obsequii nomine Fidem astrinxerunt, and in this
sense, I suppose, this word is to be taken in most of our Histories and
Records. I shall therefore give you one which will sufficiently clear the true
signification, Speaking of Prince William Son to Henry the 1ft. f. 90. A. N. 30.
not only of the word Fideles, but of Liberi Homines too. It is in William
Malm^bury in these words, Willi^mo Filio suo Cum vix 12. Annorum esset omnes
Liberi Homines, etc. Cujuscunque ordinis, and Dignitatis, cujuscunque Domini
Fideles, Manibus and Sacramento se dedere coacti sunt. By which you may see
that by the words Liberi Homines and Fideles are here meant only the Feudal, or
Military Tenants, either of the King or of any other Lord; And to prove it
farther by Records, pray see here those that the Dr. has given us in the same
place. Pat. 15. Johan P. 2. M. 2. N. 9.
The first is that of the Patent Rolls of the 15. of King John. Rex Baronibus,
Militibus and omnibus Fidelibus totius Angliae, Salutem. They were to hear what
the Bishop of Winchester was to say to them about the Releasing the Interdict;
B. G. 45. B. A. P. p. 67, 68.
and that these Milites and Fideles were only the King's Tenants in Capite, is
clear from the latter part of this Record: Vnicuique vestrum si fieri potest
Literas nostras super hoc transmissemus, sed Negotium majori Festi^atione, etc.
Test Meipso apud Rupel. etc.

The King had writ to them all particularly, but that the business required
greater haste. It seems before the granting of Magna Charta, this King sent
special Summons, and particular Letters to his Barons, and other Tenants in
Capite, to meet upon any occasion. So likewise in these Writs there mentioned
to the Tenants in Capite of several Counties, B. G. p. 45. Cl. 42. H. 3. m. 10.
dorso.
as they are found in the close Roll there cited. Rex omnibus Comitibus,
Baronibus, Militibus and aliis fidelibus sui^ de Com. Ebor. Northumbr. Cumbr.
etc. Vobis mandamus quod Prompti sitis, and Par^ti cum Equis and Armis, etc.
These were the Feudataries and Tenants in Military Service.

But to speak somewhat of the Clerici Terras habentes, etc. as also of the
Liberi Homines and Villani, mentioned in the Record of 16 Hen. 3. you have now
cited. 1. I cannot allow your Version of those words Clerici Terras habentes,
B. A. P. p. 220, 221.
qua ad Ecclesias suas non pertinent, by Inferior Landed Clergymen, since it is
more than you can make out; for I take them to be such Clerks, as had Manors
and Free, or Military Fees belonging to their Benefices, and that held of the
King in Capite, the Fee whereof was in the Crown, and not in the church, and
therefore did not belong to it.

But Mat. Paris, fol. 377. informs us better who they were that gave this Tax,
when he speaks concerning this very Council -- ad Coloquium coram Rege
convenerunt Episcopi, and aliarum Ecclesiarum Praelati, cum Proceribus Regni
concessa est Regi quadragesima pars honorum.

Now what the Liberi Homines were in this Record, you have cited, we may easily
guess from the other Records I have made use of in 19 Hen. 3. viz. such of
those, Omnes alii qui de nobis Tenent in Capite, which were not Milites in a
strict sense, or had not received the Order of Knighthood. And I shall make out
this sense of the words, as also of the true meaning of these Villani by
another Record, Rot. Pat. m. 7. dors.
dated but two years after this of yours. viz. 21 Hen. 3. Rex Vic. Kant. Salut.
Sci^s, cum octavis Sancti Hillarii, etc. ad mandatum nostrum convenirent apud
Westm' Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, Abbates, Priores, Comites and Barons totius
Regni nostri ut tractatum haberent nobiscum de statu nostro, and Regni nostri,
iidem Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, Abbates, Priores and Clerici Terras habentes,
quae ad Ecclesias non pertinent, Comites, Barons, Milites and Liberi Homines
pro se and suis Villanis nobis concesserunt in Auxilium Tricessimam partem
honorum.

From this Record we may observe, 1. That the King's Writ was only issued to
the Archbishops, B. A. I. 221.
Bishops, etc. Earls, Barons of the whole Kingdom. 2. That in the recital of
this Tax, the Sheriff is told, first, that the Archbishops, Bishops, etc. and
the Clergy which had Land not belonging to their Churches (a certain sign that
they granted by themselves, and out of nothing else, but that) and then that
the Earls, Barons, Knights and Free men for themselves, and their Villains
granted a thirtieth part of their movables.

And from this Record it is also manifest, these Liberi Homines had Villanos
(if not Bondmen) Villagars or Rusticks, Colonos, or Husbandmen at least; of
whose Estates by public Assent, and for the public benefit, they might in
part dispose of; which Liberi Homines according to the Tenor of all our Records
and Histories were Tenants in Capite; and that the Villani mentioned in the
other Record of 16. Hen. 3. to have given a fortieth part of their Movables,
did grant by their Lords; that is, their Lords Paramount, that were Tenants in
Capite, did grant for them, though they held it not immediately of them, but of
other Tenants in Military Service, which immediately held of the Tenants in
Capite, who did charge them by public Taxes, has been shown from diverse
Records: So that it was frequent in those times to say, such, and such,
concesserunt, granted such a Tax, that is, by those who had Power and
Authority to do it for them; and without their consent too, when those for whom
they granted were not capable of being Members of Parliament themselves. I
could give you more Examples of the like Nature, but I will not tire you.


F. I pray Sir give me leave to answer this long speech, and to begin with your
Interpretation of this word Fideles, First then, we are so far agreed, that the
word Fideles had two, or three, different Significations. First, it signified
all the Subjects in general; in the next place, all Vassals, or Feudatary
Tenants whatever, whether of the King, or any other Lord, as appears by the
Passage you have cited out of William of Malmsbury, as also diverse ancient
Charters, particularly those of King William I. and Maud the Emperess, and King
Stephen, which are diverse of them directed, Fidelibus suis, Francis and Angl^,
which cannot mean Tenants in Capite; since the Doctor and your self will scarce
allow any English Men to have then held Lands in Capite of the Crown. Lastly, I
grant this word Fideles may sometimes signify the Tenants in Capite of the
King; all which being so, I think you cannot deny, that it is not the bare
word, but the sense it bears in the Places where it is used, that must direct
us to its true Signification, and that the fideles there mentioned to have
granted Caruage in the 4 th of Hen. 3. could not be the King's Tenants in
Capite only, I have given you a sufficient reason which you do not think fit to
answer, viz. That Caruage was a general Tax imposed upon all the Lands of the
Kingdom, as well what was held by Knights Service, as what was not; and how
your Tenants in Capite could Tax those Lands which were never held by Knights
Service, I desire you would resolve me. And therefore by the Fideles here
mentioned in this, and many other Records, are not to be understood the Tenants
in Capite only, but all other Subjects who did Fealty; who, though they could
not all appear in Person in our great Councils or Parliaments, yet were there
by their Representatives the great Freeholders, Lords of Manors, or else by
the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses.

But I must now make some Remarks, upon your Interpretation of ^he Writs of the
16 th and 21 th of Hen. 3. wherein you have certainly very much mistaken the
sense of all the main Words. For in the first place, as for the Clerici terras
habentes non ad Ecclesias pertinentes, which you interpret to have been Clerks
having Manors, and Military Fees not belonging to their ^enefices, but held of
the King in Capite, seems to be altogether forced. For whoever heard of Clerks
(that is inferior Clergy Men) Parsons, or Vicars of Churches, who held
Benefices of the King in Capite, and not in Franc Almoigne? or if they had any
such, that therefore those Lands so held should be called, Lands not belonging
to their Churches; for at this rate the Lands of Bishops, all Abbots, Priors,
etc. which held of the King in Capite, would have been in your sense, Lands not
belonging to the Church; but who but you and your Doctor ever gave such an
unreasonable Comment on those words?

Nor will that Passage you cite out of Mat. Paris, at all favor your
Interpretation; for either these Bishops and Prelates there mentioned, gave
this sortieth part of their Movables in Parliament, with the rest of the
Kingdom, or else as Clergy men in Convocation: If the former, then these
Clerici could have no Votes there in Person; for I believe it would puzzle you
to prove, that at this time any Ecclesiastical Person below the degree of an
Abbot or Prior, had any place in Parliament, by reason of his Tenure by Knights
Service in Capite, for those Lands he held in Right of his Church; but if
you will have this Tax to be granted by the whole Clergy in Convocation, then
such Clerks as you mention could not be there in Person: First, because they
are said to be such as had Lands, qu^e ad Ecclesias suas non pertinent, and so
could not have any place there as Clergymen; nor could they be included under
the Praelati, since that word takes in none beneath the degree of a Dean. And
therefore if these Clerks gave any thing in Parliament, they must do it by
their lawful Representatives, the Knights of Shires; or if in Convocation, by
their Clerks of the lower House, then called Procuratores Cleri: So that take
it which way you will, those Clerks could not be present themselves at these
Parliaments, when those Taxes of the 30th and 40th part of their Movables were
given to the King; and therefore either as Laymen or Clergymen, must be Taxed
by their Representatives; but in deed the words Proceree Regni, which
immediately come after Episcopi and Pralati in Matthew. Paris, sufficiently shows
this grant was made in Parliament, that the word Proceres often includes, not
only the Knights of Shires, but Citizens and Burgesses too, I have already
proved, when I spoke of the various significations of that word. Nor is your
Interpretation of Liberi homines, for Tenants in Capite, who Taxed their
Villani, any other than a mere wresting of these words; for, if they were only
those who gave for themselves and their Villains, whom you suppose were either
their Bondmen, or else their Rusticks or Husbandmen, it is absolutely contrary
both to Law and Reason; for whoever heard that Villains or Bondmen, who had no
property either in Lands or Goods, ever paid Taxes? And if you suppose that
these Villani were only the Rustic Tenants in Socage by Villain Service of the
Tenants in Capite, then it is plain, that all the Military or Feudatory Tenants
of the Tenants in Capite, and all Tenants in Free Socage by certain Rent, were
exempt from both these Taxes, since they are not so much as once mentioned in
these Writs, neither can be comprehended under these Villani, as your self must
acknowledge: For if these Villani were mere Rusticks, pray tell me what reason
there was to put them check by Jole with their Lords, as they are in the Record
of the 16th of Hen. 3. as if they had given by themselves as well as the rest
of the Freemen of the Kingdom: Or what reason is there why the Lords (as the
words are in your Record) gave pro se and suis Villanis, if the Liberi homines
there mentioned, had not represented them; which could never have been said
with any sense, had they been only so many Freemen, or Masters over their
Slaves: where, as it here appears, every one of these orders or degrees of Men
here mentioned, had an equal independent Power to give for themselves, and not
one for another: or else this word may be meant in a larger sense, as in the
Record of the 16th of Hen. 3. where they are put in the Nominative Case (as
equal to the rest of the Orders of men there recited) and so could not be
Husbandmen, or mere Villagers, but the Inhabitants pof Cities and Buroughs,
and which sense Sir Henry Spellman allows in his glossary; Villanus est qui i^
Villa habitas ut Vrbanus ab Vrbe, etc. Villa autem propria ^^^at Viculum
Rusticanum* sed a ^e more Gallici idiomatis eraducitur ad insignia oppidu, and
ad ipsas vrbes: but take it in what sense you please, it is plain, it could
never here mean mere Villagers; nor could all your Liberi homines ^e only
Tenants in Capite; for then the Record would have concluded thus; and Liberi
homines, qui de nobis tenent in Capite; as it is in the Record you have cited
of the 10th of Hen. 3. to the Sheriff of suffex, and may be found in many other
Records, which respect only Tenants in Capite: And for further proof of this
sense of the word Villanus, we need go no farther than these very Records
themselves, of the 16th and 21th of Hen. 3. which you and I have now made use
of; in both which Writs there are certain Persons appointed to Ass^ss and
Collect the Aids in every County, and who, by Virtue of these Writs, did cause
to be Elected four of the best and most lawful Men, de singulis Villis of each
hundred in the Counties there mentioned; and then the Villani will signify in
these Writs, not Villains or mere Rusticks who were not then reckoned inter
L^galea homines. And though it is true you have brought some Presidents to
prove, that the Tenants in Capite gave Taxes for their Feudatary Tenants; yet
that was only where the Tax was raised upon Knights Fees alone, and not upon
all the ^ands of the Kingdom in general, much less upon Goods and Chattels; so
that either the Liberi Homi-nes mentioned in these Records, must mean all the
Freemen of England, who by their Representatives gave these Taxes of a 40th or
30th part for themselves, and all such of their Tenants, who held Estates of
Copyhold Leases, for Years, or at Will, or had Estates in Stock, Money, or
other Chattels; nor otherwise could these Taxes ever have been general, not
charged upon moveable goods of the whole Kingdom.

I have but one thing more to remark upon your Observations of this Writ, which
is, that whereas you take notice that the King's Summons was directed to none
of the Laity but the Earls and Barons of the Kingdom; and if so I desire you to
prove to me, that your less Tenants in Capite were at all present at those
Parliaments; for you have already granted that they were no Barons, and
consequently could not be included under that Title; so that if these Liberi
Homines who granted this Tax for themselves, and their Tenants, were not only
Tenants in Capite, but their under Tenants also by Military Service; (as the
Doctor himself grants in his Answer to Argumentum Antinormannicum.) p. 25. as
also in his Glossary, p. 51. therefore unless you can prove that your Liberi
homines were all Tenants in Capite, you will never make out that none but they,
and the less Tenants in Capite had a right under that Title, to appear at our
great Councils or Parliaments; and to grant Aids, and join in the making of
Laws for themselves, and the rest of he Nation, before the times you allow. To
conclude, unless you can also prove that there was a Tenure in Capite of Goods
and Chattels, as well as of Lands, it will appear by these Aids granted in
Parliament of Personal Estates, that all Freemen or Freeholders were alike
Free, and consequently had the same right to appear in Parliament, either by
themselves, or their Representatives.


M. But pray make out if you can, by some more evident Proofs, that any others
besides Tenants in Capite, were admitted into our great Councils; and that
these Liberi Homines were not Tenants in Capite.


F. I think I need go no further than the first words of the Agreement between
King John and the Barons which is still extant on the close Rolls of the 17th
of this King, ( m. 2. dorso.) beginning thus, Has est conven^io inter Dominum
Iohannem Regem Angliae ex una part, and Robertum Filii Walteri, Marescalli
exerci^us Dei, and sanctae Ecclesia Angliae, and Ric^. Comi^em d^ Clare, etc.
and here follow the Names of diverse of the rest of the Earls and Barons, and
allos Comites and Barons, and Liboros Homines totius Angli^e; so that it is
clear, this Charter was granted in a great Council of the whole Nation, in
which were assembled not only the Bishops, Earls and Barons, with all your less
Tenants in Capite, but also all the Clergy, as well the Inferior as Superior,
and all the Freemen or considerable Freeholders of the whole Kingdom; or, as
Mr. Seldom words it in his Titles of Honor, fol. 586, 587. it was made by the
King and his Barons, and the Freemen of the Kingdom; which Assembly Matt. Paris
expresses more succinctly by these words, tota Nobilitus Angliae in unum
collecta, quasi sub numero non cadebit; so that nothing can be plainer than
that many other, besides your Tenants in Capite, appeared at this great Council.


M. In the first place, before I answer the main of your Argument, give me
leave to tell you, That I cannot allow this Assembly at Run Mead to have been
truly a great Council of the Nation, but rather a Rebellious Armed Rout met
together without the King's Writs of Summons, and indeed, whether he would or
not; and I suppose you will not assert that any Representatives had Votes
therein; nor can you show me that any Knights, Citizens or Burgesses were
summoned to it.


F. I grant indeed that that Assembly was not properly a Parliament, I mean
such as we have at this day, as not being called by the King's Writs; yet since
almost all the Bishops, Earls, Barons, Tenants in Capite, and all the rest of
the Kingdom, were then in Arms, it may very well be reckoned a Common Council
or Solemn Convention of all the Freemen of the whole Nation, and that after the
most ancient manner; since all, or the greatest part of the Freeholders of the
Kingdom were there present in Parliament; and that this Council is looked upon
as a Parliament in the Eye of the Law, appears by a Writ to the Sheriff of
Northamptonshire, which is found in the close Rolls in the 28th of Hen. 3. Cl.
28. H. 3. M. 12. dorso.
to this Effect, That he should not permit any one in his Bailiwick to use any
Liberties belonging to the Crown, unless they had formerly been used ad Tempus
Parliamenti de Run Mead; quod fuit inter Dominum Johannem Regem Patrem
nostrum* and Barons suos Angliae.


M. I see that you are forced to confess, that this Assembly was no Parliament
in the sense we now take that word, nor indeed could be any more than a
Rebellious Rout there met, whether the King would or no; and therefore the word
Parliament is not to be understood in this Record, in the sense we now take it,
since that word came not in use here (instead of Magnum Concilium, B. A. P. p.
71.
and Commune Concilium and Colloquium a Conferrence) until about the middle of
Henry III. Reige, and does no more point out the constituent Members of it,
than that word did at that time: And so the meaning of the word Parliamentum is
to be taken in this Record.


F. I think I have very good reason, notwithstanding what you have now said to
affirm, that this was a great Council or Parliament accoding to the Mode of
those times; And tho I grant it was not called by the King's Writs, since it is
certain he avoided calling any, because he utterly refused to grant this
Charter at all, yet that is not material, since they, being a general and full
Assembly, or Convention of all the Estates of the whole Nation, had a just
right to meet and vindicate their Liberties then out-ragiously oppressed, and
trodden under foot by the King; and the King himself owned them as a lawful
Assembly, Vi. Matt. Pa^is
by sending to them, and appointing them to meet in Run Mead between Stains,
and Windsor on the 15 th. of June, which our Historians tell us, they joyfully
obeyed, so that he himself admitted them to be a lawful Assembly of Estates,
and consequently for his Parliament as appears by the agreement now cited.


M. I shall not much trouble my self, B.A.G. p. 159.
whither this was properly the great Council or not: But however, I cannot see
how Mr. Seldom could make out, that this Charter was made by, or to all the
Freemen of England; for it seems to me that there was not the least ground for
it. For if under the words Liberi Homines, all the Freemen, or Free-Tenants of
what condition soever, were comprehended; yet her is nothing in this Record
that any way proves that they had any hand in making this Charter, but the
Liberi Homines, here were only those whom the King calls Liberi Homines Nostri
in his Charter, and immediately grants them several Relaxations of their rigid
Feudal Tenures, by which it is apparent, these Liberi Homines were the Tenants
in Capite, and yet neither was the Charter made by them, as is before
intimated; Tho I confess these were the Freemen which made such a Cry for their
Liberties (most of which were but an Abatement of the Rigor, B. G. page 51.
and a Relaxation of the Feudal Tenures, as appears by the Charter it self) the
rest were only Followers, and helped to augment the Noise, they were no
Lawmakers as you imagine; for it is not probable, that those Men that had the
force of the Nation in their hands, would permit Men of so small Reputation to
share with them in Law-making: Those that had the Power of this, and other
Nations de Facto, always did give Laws and Tax the People.


F. Supposing this, (as I have already proved it,) to be a Lawful Common
Council, or Parliament of the whole Kingdom, I think I may still affirm that
this Charter was made, not only by the King, but by the Bishops, Earls, Barons,
and all the Freemen of the Kingdom, who certainly gave their Assent to it by
drawing it up into Form, and by accepting it from the King, when past under his
Seal, as truly as the Magna Charta's of King Hen. III. and Edw. I. are called
Statutes for the same reason, as I have already proved to you, or as much as
the Petition of Right granted by King Charles I. was a Statute, tho past under
no other Form.

Nor were the Liberi Homines totius Regni to whom King John granted this
Charter, no other than the Tenants in Capite as you suppose since in the time
of Henry II. this Kings Father, the word Liberi Homo was taken in a much larger
sense, as appears by the Assize of Arms, ordained by this King (as it is
recited in Hoveden's History) where after it is appointed, what Corcelets,
Helmets and other Arms, every Tenant in Capite should find, it immediately
follows thus; Quicuncque liber Laicus habuerit in Catallo vel in redditu ad
Valentiam 16. Marcarum habeat Loricam, and Cassidem and Clypeum and Lanceam;
Quicunque Liber Laicus habuerit in Catello ad Valentiam 10. Marcarum habeas
Habergellum, and Capelet Ferri, and Lanceam: and omnes Burgenses, and tota
Communia liberorum hominum habeant Wambais, and Capelet fervi and Lanceam*
Where you may observe, that every Freeman who was worth in Rent or Goods to the
value of 16 Marks, was to find as much Arms for the Defense of the Kingdom as
he that possessed a whole Knights Fee; and the meanest Townsman, and the whole
Commonalty of Freemen (for so I translate the Words, (...) Libe^orum hominum)
were to find a Caplet or Head piece of Iron, besides other Weapons. And the 2d.
Article of King John's Charter says expressly, Concessimus etiam and omnibut
Liberis Hominibus Nostris Regui Anglia, pro Nobis and Hae^elibus Nostris in
perpetuum omnes Liberates subscriptas, ^abe^das and ^enandas eis, and
haeredibus ^uit de Nobia and H^rodibus nostris: Which the Dr. himself renders
thus. We have also granted to all our Freemen of the Kingdom of England, etc.
And sure then this Charter could not be made to none but Tenants in Capite,
unless you will suppose that none but they were Freemen, and all the rest
Slaves.

Nor was this Charter only made to relax the severity of the Feudal Tenures as
you suppose, since there are diverse other Clauses in it which concern all the
rest of the Freemen, and Free holders in England as well as they, for besides
the first and second Chapters of this Charter, which grants and confirms to the
Church of England, and to all the Freemen of the Nation their Rights, and
Liberties; If you please better to consider it, you will find, that there are
several other Chapters in this Charter, which all other Freemen, as well as the
Tenants in Capite have thereby an Interest in, as you may see by the 10, 11, 12
13. 15, 16. 22, 23, 24, 25. and above 30 other Chapters, or Clauses therein
expressed which are granted, not to Tenants in Capite alone, but either to
Ecclesiastics, or other Lay Freemen of the whole Kingdom. But to prove this a
little further, I shall give you but one or two instances out of this Magna
Charta; and that too in the Drs. own Translation, Article 48. No Freman shall
be taken or imprisoned or disseised of his Free Tenement, or Liberties, or Free
Customs, or Outlawed, or Banished, or any ways d^stroyed, nor will we pass
upon him, or commit him to Prison, unless by the Legal Judgment of his Peers,
or by the Law of the Land ( i. e. by Legal Process.) The other is the 49.
Article of this Charter, that we will not sell to any Man, we will not deny any
man, or delay Right or Justice: Now Judge your self, whether these two Articles
were made to the Tenants in Capite alone, or to all the Freemen of the whole
Kingdom.

And hence it also plainly appears that the same Body of Freemen to whom this
Charter was made, were likewise present and gave their Assents to the making of
it: Nor were Vavasors, or Fendatary Ten^nts of the Bishops, Abbots, great Lords
and other Tenants in Capite, Persons so inconsiderable as you would make them,
that they only should come hither, but as followers, to augment the Noise,
since I have already proved from Bracton, that there were diverse of them, Men
of great Estates, and Power in their Countries, besides the Tenants of those
Abbots and Priors who (as I have already mentioned) did not hold in Capite of
the King at all, and yet made a great Part of the Kingdom, besides Tenants in
Pety^ Serjeanty, and those that held of great Honors, who could never be
represented by the Tenants in Capite at all. And therefore I must
(notwithstanding what you affirm to the contrary) look up^ on all these
Persons, for as good Lawmakers as the greatest Lords or T^nants in Capite of
them all; since the main force of the Nation did not lie in them, but in their
Feudatary Tenants, who would never have followed their Lords in this Assembly,
if they had not looked upon themselve as having as good an interest in the
Rights and Liberties they demanded (as appears by this Silvo of all their
Liberties) as their Lords themselves; and also as good a Right as they in
giving their Assent to them, when they were to be passed into a Law, as they
were by this Charter; since these Feudatary Tenants were not at all obliged by
their Tenure to obey their Lords Summons at any other Warlike expeditions, but
where the King, or his Lieutenants went out in Person.


M. I am very well satisfied, that this could be no Parliament for the reasons
already given, and tho I grant that these Charters were made to, and in the
Presence of the greatest part of the Clergy, Earls, Barons, and Freemen of the
Kingdom; yet this proves not that they had any Vote, or Suffrage in making of
them, B. A. l. p. 167.
nor indeed could they, for the great Charters were only the Petitions of the
People drawn into the Form of a Charter, and passed under the King's Seal, as
his mere voluntary Free Grants and Concessions, without any Votes or Authority
from the People: And therefore the great Charters of Henry III. recites them to
have bin made of his mere Grace and Free Will, as it is in the Preface to it.
But pray answer me a few plain Questions concerning King John's Charter; which
if you can resolve, I may be inclined to believe there might be some other
great Council besides that of Tenants in Capite. The first is, if this Common
Council of Tenants in Capite, were for Assessing of Aids and Escuage only (as
you suppose it is provided by the last Cl^use of this Charter) why was the
Cause of the Meeting to be declared in every Writ of Summons to the great
Barons and Tenants in Capite; B. A. P. p. 170.
if they were only Summoned about Aids and Escuage, or other ordinary business
of Course, sure then the Cause of Summons need not to have been declared as it
is here provided. In omnibus Lit^er is Submonitionis causam Submonitionis
illius exponemus?


F. I will give you an answer to this Question immediately, but before I do it,
let me tell you that you are much mistaken, in saying, that the great Charters
(because they were the Kings Free Concessions) were therefore passed without
any Votes, Suffrages, or Authority of the People of England: Since I have
already proved in our discourse concerning the legis ^^tive Power, that the
matter of those Charters was no more then an affirmative of the Common Law of
England long before your Conquest; and that the Peoples consent, and Suffrage
was sufficiently given in their drawing them up; and offering them to the King
to be Sealed, and accepting them from him when he had done it: And therefore
that the great Charters are always called Statutes in our Ancient Records and
A^^s of Parliament. But to answer your Question, I suppose that the King,
besides the ordinary business of their Assessing Escuage had often other
affairs of great moment to be transacted with, and Communicated to his Bishops,
great Lords, and Tenants in Capite, in which the rest of the Kingdom were not
at all concerned, such as giving the King their Advice, as a great Council,
concerning diverse weighty Affairs (as in the business of Sicily, mentioned in
the first Record I have cited)as also about undertaking Foreign Wars against
France, Scotland, Wales, etc. in which they were bound to follow, and assist
him together with their under-Tenants according to their respective Tenures,
and therefore it was but reason that they should have timely notice that they
might give their advice in it, as also that they might either come, or stay
away, according to the greatness or urgency of the occasion, and might also
give their Under-Tenants notice to provide themselves with Horses and Arms, and
all things necessary in case a War should be agreed on, which I think are
sufficient reasons for thus expressing the Causes of their Meeting in the Writs
of Summons.


M. Admit this were so, (which I shall yet take further time to consider of)
pray tell me in the next place, if all your inferior Barons, Vavasors, or
Lords of Manours, etc. supposing them either to have appeared in Person, or
else as chosen for Knights of Shires, or else as Citizens and Burgesses, who
were the Members of the great Council of the Nation; I pray tell me why there
should not have been the same care taken, that they might be also Summoned as
well as the Tenants in Capite; certainly they came not to them by instinct, nor
is it scarce probable that they would leave their Country busine^s to Travel
from one remote part of England to another, to these great Councils, which
seldom continued above three or four days, if they had had a Right so to do?


F. I shall answer you in few words, because it was not at all necessary to
express that Clause you mention for them all: Since it was sufficient therein
to follow the old Course of Summoning the Common Council of the Kingdom; for
doing which it had always been the Custom to give sufficient Notice by Writs of
Summons of their Meetings, whereas in this Council of Tenants in Capite, Since
there was by this Charter some alteration in the manner of their Summoning, B.
A. P. p. 68.
so there was also for expressing the cause of their Meeting: For whereas
before that (as the Dr. himself allows) all the Lesser Tenants in Capite, had
particular Letters or Writs of Summons expressing the Cause of their Meeting,
they were for the future to be Summoned by general Writs directed to the
Sheriffs, and therefore it was but reason, that there should be a particular
Clause reserved for their general Summoning, which there was no need of in
those Writs that were Issued for the summoning therest of the People, or
Commons to the great Council or Parliament, as I doubt not but it would appear,
in case we had those Writs to produce, in which likewise there was anciently
often expressed the particular cause of their Meeting, as there was, for
instance, in those famous Writs to the Lords and Commons of the 49. Hen. III.
B. A. P. 137.
which the Dr. has given us in his answer to Mr. P.


M. But I have still a greater objection behind than either of the former. You
cannot deny, but that by the first clause of King John's Charter (which I have
made use of) all Aids, and Escuages, were to be imposed by the Common Council
of the Kingdom; and Littleton himself tells us, in the second Book of his
Tenures, That Escuage is always to be Ass^ssed by Parliament upon those that
failed to do their Services after the Expedition was ended.

Now if this had not been a Right Inherent to the Great, or Common Council of
the Kingdom, but that the Tenants in Capite alone assessed it in King John's
time; how came they to lose that Privilege, and the great Council of the
Kingdom, or Parliament to get it, if the former had not been the only great
Council at the first?


F. I hope to give you as satisfactory an answer to this, as I have to the rest
of your Demands. This alteration might have fallen out two ways, either
according to Camdens old Manuscript Author, cited in his Introd^ction to his
Britania; Page 122.
the Sum of which is, that when King Henry III. after his great Wars with Sim.
Momford, and the Barons had Ruined many of them, he out of so great a Multitude
which was before Seditious and Turbulent, called the best and chiefest of them,
only by Writ to Parliament, who after that time became Barons by Writ, and not
by Tenure as they were before. And as for the l^sser sort of them, called
^^ones Minores, they might be wholly resolved into the Body of the Commons, or
ordinary sort of ^ree-holders, and the King being fearful of any farther
increase of Power in these Barons and Tenants in Capite might no more desire
their Company at the usual Feasts of the Year, whither before they used to come
ex more, and so their Power fell of course to the Council or Parliament, of
which, before, they only made a part.

Or else it might happen from the negligence of the Tenants in Capite
themselves, who growing weary of their Attendance might neglect to come to
those Councils, because of the great trouble and charge of those Journeys; and
the King being as willing to dispense with their Presence, this Court was lost
by Non-usage; and so the judicial part of it remained in the House of Peers,
and that of Assessing Escuage, and advising and giving Aids in matters of War,
fell wholly to the great Council of the Kingdom, of which these Tenants in
Capite, by their being capable of being Elected Knights of Shires, soon became
the Principal Members.

But, admit I should take this Council for Assessing Escuages for the Com^on
Council of the Kingdom; pray give me leave to ask you one or two Questions
likewise in my turn. Pray tell me therefore, if this Council had been such as
you would have it, to what purpose is there a full Stop in all the old Coppies,
at the end of this Clause, and ad babendum Commune Concilium leg^l de Scutagiis
assidendis ali^er quam in tribus Casibus praelictis, and why ^ould the next
Clause begin with, and de Scutagiis assidendis submoneri faci^^us, (...) if
they had been both one and the same Councils. Since it had been easier to put
it all under one Clause, If the matters ther^ Treated of had been the (...)?

In the next place, pray tell me if this were the great Council of the Kingdom
or Parliament as it is now called; why are there no other Rights or Privileges
reserved to this Council, but this of Assesing Escuage? Were not the Powers of
granting other Taxes (which could not be included under the word Escuages*) and
also of giving their Assent to Laws, things of as great (say greater) moment
than this of Assessing Escuage?


M. I shall give you as short and satisfactory an answer as I can to those
Queries. In the first place, I will not deny, but that both the Clauses you
mention might have been contracted into one, supposing them to be read without
any full stop between them, as Sir H. Spellman in his Glossary supposes them to
be. But what is this to the purpose? Must these therefore be two distinct
Councils, because the Charter it self words them a little more loosely than it
needed to have done? And as for your next Query, there was no need of inserting
any Clause to this Charter of reserving or conferring any Power to this Common
Council, of granting Taxes and giving their Assent to Laws, because they were
things which at that time they had no reason to complain of, since we do not
read that King John (as Arbitrary as he was) ever took upon him to make any new
Laws without their consents; and besides, it was implicitly reserved to them by
the last Clause of this Charter, viz. Saving to the Arch^bishops, Bishops, etc.
Earls, Barons, Knights, and all others, etc. the Liberties and Free Customs
which they had before. So that there was no need of any other Clause than this,
because it had been, not only the Custom, but the Law of the Kingdom, for the
King to lay Taxes, and Assess Escuage upon the Nation without the Consent, or
Assistance of this great Council, which grew now so great a grievance, that
they would not be contented, until the King by this Charter had renounced it.


F. I shall not now trouble my self or you, to confute this mistake of yours;
That the Kings of England could legally raise Taxes upon all their Subjects
without consent of their great Council, or that they ever exercised such a
Prerogative, unless it were in the violent Reigns of the Two Williams, and then
if it was ever done, it was only upon their English, and not their Norman
Subjects; the latter being exempt from it by the very Magna Charta of King
William I. by your own confession: Nor would they, I believe, have born it at
his hands; but I shall speak more particularly of this another time. Only pray
give me leave to ask you this one Question? If this Charter of King John had
been intended as a constant standing Rule or Form, not only for this, but all
succeeding Common Councils or Parliaments, what could be the reason that this
Clause you so much insist upon, of Summoning all the Tenants in Capite, should
be omitted in the great Charter of Hen. III. granted In the 2d. Year of his
Reign, and but Three Years after the 17. of King John, (when these Charters
were first granted) as also when it was again confirmed in the 9th. of Hen.
III. For can any one of sense imagine, that so material a Clause as this, and
so express for the Rights and Privileges of the whole Body of Tenants in
Capite, as the sole Representatives of the whole Nation could have been
omitted, had they alone in those times constituted the common great Council of
the whole Kingdom? How comes it to p^s^, that in all the Records of Hen. III.
Reign, wherein this Charter is mentioned; It is always recited Magna Charta
Nostra, viz. his own Charter, without taking notice of his Fathers? I should be
glad to receive a satisfactory answer to this Question from your self or any
other intelligent Person.


M. I hope I may give you a satisfactory answer to this Scruple, which I think
may be thus satisfied; I conceive that the first great Charter we have, which
is commoly attributed to Henry III. and styled his Charter in our Statute-Books
was properly the Charters of Edw. I. or perhaps, rather his Explication or
Enlargement of those Charters of King John and Henry III. For we find not the
great Charter, either of that or King John's, in any of the Rolls, until the
25th. of Edw. I. and he had a greater Sum of Money for confirming this Charter
than Henry III. had. Now in this Charter then confirmed, there is no Provision
made for any Summons to great Councils or Parliaments, and the reason may well
be, because the constitution of great Councils or Parliaments was lately
changed, from what it was in the beginning of King John's time, and till the
49. of Henry III. nor perhaps was it so fixed and peremptorily resolved on at
this time, what it should exactly be for the future, as to have it made an
Article of the Charter, and to this conjecture the frequent variations of
Summons to Parliaments in those times do give a probable confirmation.


F. I am not at all satisfied with this supposition of yours. For I doubt not
but to prove that it is altogether vain, and grounded upon no good Authorities,
either from History or Records, but I shall show you before I have done, that
the Magna Charta which we have still upon Record, by Inspeximus of Edw. I is
the very same, word for word, in all the material parts of it, with that of
Hen. III. both of the 2d. and 9th. Year of his Reign, and that there was no
alteration at all made as to the manner of it, a Summoning or choosing Members
of Parliaments from the beginning of this Kings Reign to the very end of it:
Nor yet in the time of Edw. I. as you suppose.


M. I should not be displeased to see that proved, though I think I am able to
show you the contrary. But before we proceed to that, I must needs tell you, I
am not yet satisfied, that there ever were anciently two Councils, one of the
Tenants in Capite, and the other, of the whole Kingdom; for methinks not only
your self, but Mr. Petyt and Mr. Atwood his second have fallen very short of
their proofs they have brought in this point; and there is nothing in the Drs.
whole answer to them, in which (in my opinion) he has obtained a clearer
Victory, therefore pray give me some better proofs of this distinction, if you
have any.


F. I did not imagine I should have needed to have spoken any further upon that
head; yet since you now require it, I shall obey your commands: Since therefore
you tell me that the times before your Conquest are obscure, and the
Authorities uncertain; I will give you a short History of these Councils,
beginning with King William I and so going down as low as Henry III. So f^r
then we are agreed; that the Council of Tenants in Capite met ex more at the
great Feasts of the Year; and that they also granted the King Aids, or
Subsidies to be Levied upon themselves alone; as I grant, appears by the Writ
of 19th. of Henry III. which you have but now cited, directed to the Sheriff of
Sussex.

But that this Council which was thus held ex more, was also often Summoned to
meet at other times when the Kings occasions required it, Rot. Claus. M. 7.
dorso.
it also as certain as appears by this Writ of the 26. of the same King, which
I shall read to you, Rex Vice-comiti Northampton, etc. Praecipimus tibi sicut
alias praecipimus, quod Summoniri facier Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, Comites,
Barons, Abbates, Priores, Milites, and liberos homines qui de nobis Tenent in
Capite eodem modo scribitur omnibus Vice-comitibus Angliae: Which Writ
extending only to those who held in Capite could never be a Summons to the
Common Council of the whole Kingdom; for then this restriction had bin
needless, qui de nobis Tenent in Capite, and it would have been known who had a
right to come to this Council, if these words had not bin inserted, so that
this seems to me to make a plain distinction between these Liberos homines qui
de nobis Tenent in Capite, and the rest of the Freemen of the whole Kingdom.

But when Eadmerus and other ancient Historians mention the great or Common
Council of the whole Kingdom (afterward called the Parliament,) then their
expressions are more general and comprehensive; for proof of which, Lately
Published at Oxford, 1692. in Saxon and Latin. p. 186. in the Printed Copy.
pray consult the Old English Saxon Annals, continued down to the time of Henry
I. wherein Anno. Dom. 1085. (being the last Year of William I.) there is a
remakable passage which I shall here give you in English;, At Christmas, the
King ( viz. William I.) was at Gloucester with his Nobles, and there held his
Curia or Court (in Saxon (his Hired) Five days; and immediately after it
follows thus:) After this he held a great Council [in Saxon, Mycel Getheat]
where he had many great Discourses with the Nobles, etc. Now it seems plain to
me, that this Court (here called his Hired) could not be the great Council of
the Kingdom; for to what purpose should it meet again so quickly, if it had the
great Council of the whole Kingdom? or, why are they here called by different
Titles, the one his Hired or Court, and the other the Mycel Gathea^, 2 Vol. f.
451.
the great Council; which is also called commune Concilium totius Regni, in Sir
Henry Spellmans Councils in this very Year.

And to show you more plainly the difference between this great Council of the
whole Kingdom, and the lesser Council of the Kings Barons and Tenants in
Capite: Pray see Eadmerus, who relating what was done in a great Council held
at Easter, Lib. 3. f. 58.
immediately before the Invasion of Robert Duke of Normandy, in the 2d. Year of
Henry I. says, there met tota Angliae Nobilitas, cum Populi numerositate, and
then Archbishop Anselm engaged for the King that he should Govern the Kingdom
according to the just Laws thereof, where you see, that besides the Noble men
and Gentlemen here called, Regni Nobilitas; there was also a great number of
the Commons here termed in the Barbarous Latin of that Age, Populi numerositas.

But when the King held his Curia of the great Lords and Tenants in Capite
alone, the expressions are more particular, as may appear by many Charters of
our first Norman Kings to several Abbeys of their own Foundation, which are
said to be made Consilio, and Assensu Baronum nostrorum tam presulum quam
Laicorum, as you will (for example) find it in the Charter of Hen. I. to the
Abbey of Abington; as it is exemplifyed in the ancient Manuscript Register of
that Abbey now in the Cottonian Library, in which Book you will find more of
the like Nature, which plainly make out this difference between this less
Council of the Kings Barons and Tenants in Capite, and the great Council of the
Kingdom.

And for further proof of this, pay see the Instrument of King John's
resignation of his Crown to the Pope, as you will find it at the end of Dr.
B's. complete History: which is recited to have been done Communi Concilio
Baronum No^tro^um, that is, by the Common Council of the Kings Barons and
Tenants in Capite, who were all there present in Arms against the Landing of
the French King then expected. And yet this was never looked upon to have been
done per Commune Concilium Ragni, since this Resignation was declared void by
the Bishops, Lords and Commons in full Parliament in the 40th. of Edward III.
because done sa^z lour Assent as it is in the Parliament Roll of that Year.

But when ever the whole great Council, or Parliament was summoned to assemble,
then this lesser Council of the Tenants in Capite, must needs meet also, as
being a principal part of it. And then the expressions were more comprehensive,
as I have already noted; and our ancient Historians do in my Opinion, by their
Expressions, plainly signify an Union of both these Councils, to make up the
Common Council of the Kingdom; as appears by the Letters which the Priory of
Canterbury wrote to the Pope upon the Election of Ralph, Bishop of Rochester,
in the 14th of Hen. 1. to the Sea of Cantebury, as you will find them in
Eadmerus, ( Lib. 5. fol. 111.) and which is there said to have been made
adunato conventu totius Angliae; that is, in the united Assembly of all
England, viz. the Episcopi, Abbates and Principes Regni, and itgens Populi
Multitudo. So likewise Hovelen in his History. ( fol. 273.) Anu 1121 (being the
18th of Hen. 1.) relates the Kings Marriage with the Lady Adeliza, Daughter to
the Duke of Lovain, to have been celebrated at Windsor, adunato Concilio totius
Regni, i. e. in the united Council of the whole Kingdom.


M. I am not yet satisfied with your proofs; and I doubt not but to show you
that this distinction of your Friends, Mr. P. and Mr. A. his second, between
the Common Council of the Kingdom, and the Council of the great Lords and
Tenants in Capite, will prove but a mere Chymra of those Gentlemen, from whom
you have borrowed it; for there was indeed but one Common Council of the
Kingdom in those times, viz. that of the Bishops, Earls, Barons, and other
Tenants in Capite.

And therefore in answer to your first Authority from the Saxon Chronicle, I
shall show you another of the same King's Reign, which will show the different
expressions of this great Council by Hired, and Mycel Getheat, to have been the
particular Fancy of that Monkish Writer, and it is from Gervas Do^^bornensis,
de Actis Pontisicum Cantuarens. Ecclesiae, where you may see in the December
Scriptores, Col. 1651.
this passage Anno. 4. Regis Wilhelmi I. Anno. Dom. 1070. Lanfrancus Cadomensis
Ahlu electus fuit Archi^piscopus Cantuariensis a Senioribus ejusdem Ecclesiae
cum Episcopit and Principibus, clero, and populo Angliae in Curia Regis in
Assumptione Sanctae Mariae, where you may see that this confirmation of the
Archbishop was made in the great Council of the Kingdom which is here called
collectively or altogether (and not one part of it only Curia Regis.) As for
the words which make up the constituent parts of this Council, we have
sufficiently debated them; and therefore I need say nothing more concerning
them.

But tho the Dr. has given us more Authorities to prove this, Fol. 125.
yet I shall make use of but one more from Badmerus it is in the Reign of Henry
I. thus, in subsequenti Nativitate Dom. Christi Regnum Angliae ad Curiam Regis
Lundoniae pro more convenit, and magna Solemnitate habita est, etc. This
instance is full in all points, here is the whole Kingdom, that is the whole
Baronage or University of England (for Bracton tells us the whole Kingdom
consisted of Earldoms and Baronies) who met according to Custom at the Kings
Court; and hence it is manifest that at those times the Common Council of the
Kingdom was held, and from this also as from the former instances, that the
Barons, Principes and Optimates, and Mayres Regni did at those great Feasts
pro more according to the Custom frequent the Kings Court, and were the only
Persons that constituted that great Assembly.


F. But pray give me leave to interrupt you a little; did not I tell you but
now, that the King did often convene the Common Council of the whole Kingdom to
meet the Bishops great Lords and Tenants in Capite at one of these Feasts;
P.R.C. p. 130.
and so it might be an Assembly ex more in respect of them, but extraordinary
to all the rest of the Kingdom, and this often happened at other times as well
as at these feasts according as the Kings occasions required, when all the
others were Summoned on purpose.


M. I have already answered that Objection; and granting it might be so, it
does not prove it was so: But I desire you to tell me what you can say to this
expression in the Authority I have now made use of from Eadmerus. Regnum^ombre
convenit* which is spoken of the most general Council when the Kingdom of
England then met at the Kings Court. So that your small Criticism upon the
Words adunato Conventu or Concilio, as if they signified this Union or
Conjunction of two Councils into one, is but a mere Pancy of your Authors,
those words signifying no more than a gathering or meeting together of all the
Persons that constituted that Assembly, as appears by these words in Eadmerus,
Adlinatis (without either Praecepto or Sanctione Regis) ad Curiam e^us in
pascha Terrae Principibus, Fol. 90.
i. e. the chief Men of the Nation being at his Court at ^aster.

But as for your main instance of King John's Resigning his Crown to the ^ope
in a Common Council of the great Lords and Tenants in Capite, but not of the
Common Council of the Kingdom, I confess it were very considerable if it were
true, for tho I grant that in all the Charters of this Kings resignation, the
words you mention, viz. Communi concitio Baronum nostrorum ^re inserted, yet it
could not be a great Council; since tho I grant that all the Tenants in Capite
were at that time Summoned to appear in Arms against the King of France; B. A.
I.
yet it being a Military Summons for the gathering together of an Army, and not
for the meeting o a great Council, and the five proscribed Bishops being in
France, and the Barons that sided with them, fled beyond Sea, and not dar^ng to
appear; so that this resignation having been Executed before so small ^ number
of Barons as appears by the Witnesses to it, viz. but two Bishops, the chief
Justidiary, seven Earls, and three Barons without subjoyning, and aliu
Episcopis, Comitibus, and Baronibus, or and Communitate, or ^ota Communitate,
it does not appear that there were any more present, so that this could not be
such a Council as was constituted by King John's Charter, that is, it was not a
Parliamentary Council, or general Representative of the whole Nation; and
therefore the Parliament in the 40th. of Edw. III might very well say, the
resignation was made without their Assent; and so I think this great Argument
of yours comes to nothing.


F. Pray do not Triumph before the Victory. For I doubt not but to prove,
notwithstanding what you have said, that this was a real Common Council of the
Barons and Tenants in Capite, in which King John resigned his Crown, Vi. Mat^.
page 234.
tho not of the Kingdom; Which I prove thus. First it appears by all our
Historians, that King John had just before Summoned all the Earls, Barons,
Knights and Freemen of the Kingdom, whoever they were, and of whomsoever they
held, to appear in Arms, which made so vast an Army, that after all the
ordinary Rabble were sent home; Matt. Parls tells us, that the Knights,
Esquires and Freemen that stayed behind, made an Army of 60 Thousand Men, who
were Encamped at Barham Down, not far from Dover, where this resignation was
Executed: So that this being almost as great a Meeting as that at Run Mead,
not long after, the King might very well have Summoned at least a great Council
of all his Tenants, in Capite, to countenance this resignation, and that he did
do so, the Charter it self says expressly; which had it been otherwise, would
have appeared a notorious Lie to the whole World. Nor do your Objections to the
contrary prove considerable. First, you say this was only a Military Summons,
and not to a Common Council, yet such a one as was constituted by this Kings
Charter, which sure could not be at this time, when that Charter was not yet
made till the Year after, before which, you grant, that the great Councils
might have met without the 40 days Summons, expressing the cause of their
Meeting; and if they could meet ex more, as you grant this Council did at the
great Feasts of the Year, without any Summons at all, sure they might as well
meet now on such an exigency: The King had, it is true, Summoned them at first
upon another occasion; but say you, there was so small a number of Barons at
this Meeting, that it could not be a Common Council of the Kingdom, neither do
I say it was, but the contrary; but how does it appear it was not? Why say you,
Five of the Bishops were then fled into France, and a great many of the Barons
of their Party. The latter is not true in Fact: few or none of the Barons
siding with these Bishops but as for the Bishops, what if Five were absent?
Were there not enough left to have made a Common Council of the rest of the
Tenants in Capite? Well, but there were but Two Bishops present, and Seven
Earls, and Three Barons, as apPears by their Names at the end of this Charter,
without any mention of more, or of the whole Communities being there; a special
reason, as if no more could be present at this Assembly than whose Names are to
it; by this Rule the great Charters of King John, and 9 th. of Hen. 3. were not
made in a great Council of the whole Kingdom; for there are no Witnesses Names
expressed at the end of them; it is true at the beginning of these Charters it
is said they were done by the Council of certain Bishops, Earls and Barons,
which yet were but a very few more of all sorts then there are mentioned at the
end of this Charter of King John's Resignation: So that this appearance of the
Bishops, Earls, Barons and Tenants in Capite is merely precarious; for if more
might very well have been there, it is most certain they were, notwithstanding
the paucity of the Witnesses to this Charter, since those were added only for
form sake, and were commonly those who were nearest the Throne when the Seal
was put to it.

I confess your first Objection is more material from Eadmerus, of the whole
Kingdoms meeting the King at Christmas ex more, without any Summons mentioned*
to which it may be replied, that there might be a Summons to the whole Kingdom
to meet, as well as to the Tenants in Capite; and this happening at Christmas,
one of the usual times of their meeting, this Author might apply the Title of
this Court to the Council of the whole Kingdom: And that this was so, will
appear from an Anonymous Author, who wrote in H. 1. his time, published by Mr.
Sylas Tailor, in his History of Gravel-kind, ( p. 194,) who relates this
Election of Archbishop Lanfranc to have been made Communi Consensu and
Consilio omnium Baronum suorum, omniumque Episcoporum, and Abbetum tostusque
Populi, which certainly must mean somewhat more than your Council of Tenants in
Capite alone.

And this also is confirmed by Matt. Pari^, who has been so careful, as to
mention a Summons to a great Council immediately after the holding of the Curie
of Tenants in Capite at Christmas; the words are thus: Anno Dom. 1237, i. e.
the 21th of Hen. 3. senuts Rex curiam suam ad natale apud Win(...), autem
continuo per omnes fines Angliae Scripta Regalia praecipiens omnibus ad Regnum
spectantibus, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus and
Baronibus, ut omnes in octabis Epiphaniae Londentis convenirent. Now pray tell
me if this Curia held ex more at Christmas, had been the great Council of the
whole Kingdom, consisting of the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Earl and
Barons, and other Tenants in Capite, to what purpose should the King coptinus (
i. e. immediately) issue out his Writs for summoning the very same Persons to
meet him at London on the octave of St. Hillary, when they were then all with
the King at Winchester, and that he might have communicated what he had pleased
to them.

Or what have you to say to the Curia, or Common Council held before, in the
Ninth of this King, but Eleven years after King John's Magna Charta, when the
great Charters were confirmed, and an Aid granted by the whole Kingdom, which
Matt. Paris, Anno Dom. 1225. relates thus; (which though I gave you at our last
meeting, it will not be amiss to repeat again:) Rex Henricut ad natale termis
^^^iam suam apud Westmon, praesentibus Clero, and Populo cum Magnatibus
Regionis, which words (as I have already urged) must comprehend some other
Persons then your Tenants in Capite alone; otherwise the word Populus had been
altogether in vain: so that you see the Common Council of the whole Kingdom was
often held at the same time with the ordinary Curia, and is by way of
Excellency, called by the same name as we at this day call the great Council of
the Kingdom, the High Court of Parliament; and Curia and Court differ no more
then a Latin Name from an English, which is likewise very well confirmed and
explained in the Chronicle of Walter of Civentry (to be found indivers private
hands) who lived in the Reigns of King John and Henry 3. and speaking of this
(...), Council or Parliament (which though it might begin at Christmas with the
Curia, yet it seems held on till Candlemass) when the Commons were joined to
it. He (...) thus; In Purtsicatione beatae Marlie convocaniur apu^ Lond^n,
Proceres Angliae ibiq; tractatu babito dissustere, cum Claro, and Populo ibi^^m
conv^cato, Rex (...) Libertates tam Eccles^^e, quam Regni, quam Forest^^, sicut
cartie suae sunt ^^ confect^^. Now I leave it to your self to judge, whether by
these words, Tracta^ diffusure babi^o cum Clero. and Populo, etc. (put after
the calling of the Proceres, i. e. great Lords and Tenants in Capite) any thing
can be meant but the inferior Clergy and Commons; all which being joined in one
Body, made up the Commune Concilium Regui: And that this was so, appears by the
date of this great Charter it self: 11 Februaril Anno Regui nono H. 3. But that
the whole Council or Parliament, when thus joined, was likewise called Caria
Regis. I can prove by several Examples; among which see the Stat. of M^^on in
20 Hen. 3. beginning thus; Provisum est in curia Domini Regis Henrico, etc.
coram Will. Cant. Archi piscopo and Episcopis suffragane^s suis, and coram
naure part Comitum and Baronum Auglie ibidem exillentium pro Coronatione qu
them Regis, pro qu^ omnes vocati fuerunt, ita provisum fuit, and c^ncessum (...)
^ predictis Archi^pise. Epise. Commitibus, Baronibus, quam ab ipso Rege, and
Aliis. Now who can these Alii mean, coming thus after Barons, but the Commons
as now understood?


M. I confess these Authorities you have now brought carry some color of in
Argument, but if they are looked into, will signify little: to begin with your
first quotation from Matt. Pari^, suppose I grant that there was a Curia (...)
more held at Westminster, at which there then appeared at Court only a small
number of the Bishops, Lords, and great Tenants in Capite; but the King not
finding them enough for the great Affairs he had then to communicate to them,
immediately issued out his Royal Writs to all the Orders of men there mentioned
to appear at London on the octave of St. Hillary; but how can you affirm there
were any Commons then summoned in the sense in which they are now taken, the
Barons being the lowest Order here expressly mentioned: but if you would but
have read the words that immediately follow in its place you have now cited,
you would easily see that your Knights of (...), and Burgesses could not then
be there; the words are these, venti i^i^^ Sancti Hi^^arii Londoni^s insini^um
N^bilium multitulo; how could these representatives of the Commons have been
elected and returned in so short a time as between Christmas, and eight days
after Twelfth-ti^^; so that there could have been scarce three Weeks time from
the date of the Writs presently after Chistmass-day* to the meeting of the
Parliament; but the truth is, by this infinita Nobilium multitudo, who are here
said to have come to London, is to be understood the great number of the
smaller Tenants in Capite, who all appeared at this Council according to King
John's Charter: Whereas your Knights of Shires, Citizens and Burgesses, if they
had all come at that time, could not be called infinita Nobilium multitudo, as
not consisting at this day of 600 Persons; and sure would have been fewer then.
But as for your other Authorities, if this be true I have now laid down, they
will be as easily answered, since by the word Populus put before, and distinct
from the Magnates in the passage you have now quoted from Mat. Paria; these
smaller Tenants in Capite are to be understood; and by Magnates the Bishops and
great Lords; and this also explains the like Phrase you now cite from Walter of
Coventry; where by Proceres and Populus are to be understood the same orders of
Men as by Magnates and Populus in Mat. Paris; so that it was with the smaller
Tenants in Capite, and the inferior Clergy, with whom the King had this larger
or more diffusive Treaty, as this Author words it.


F. I confess you have now put a very fair gloss upon these Places I have now
made use of; but it is an hundred pitties that such a fine Hypothesis should
have no better proofs than your bare Surmises to support it; for that is all
the Authority that I can see you bring for your sense of this word Populus for
the smaller Tenants in Capite, and not for the rest of the People; but I see no
good Authority as yet brought by you to prove it, except that clause in King
John's Charter, which if as I have lately showed you, it will beat a quite
different Interpretation, all that you have said upon that head will signify
nothing; therefore as for the main Argument you raise from the words infinita
multitudo nobi^ium in Mat. Paris, that they could not be the Knights of Shires,
together with the Citizens and Burgesses, because they could not be such an
infinite Multitude as this Author here mentions to have me; at London; as also
because of the shortness of the time of the Summons: If these are material
Objections against our Opinion, so it will be likewise against yours; for how
could this be a great Council according to King John's Charter, which expressly
provides for Forty days Summons for the Tenants in Capite to come to this
Assembly; and if so be, this usage was broken at this time upon some urgent
occasion in respect of them, it might be so also as to all the rest of the
Kingdom, for the Knights of Shires might be chosen at the next Country-court,
and their Names returned immediately before, or together with their meeting at
London; and as to the Citizens and Burgesses, it was yet more easy for them to
be chosen and returned in three Weeks time, since every body knows the Cities
might have called Common Councils; and the Towns and Buroughs by the notice of
their proper Officers to whom the Writs were delivered, might have assembled at
their common Halls or Town-houses, immediately upon the receipt of the Writs;
and these, together with the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses join with the
great Lords and Tenants in Capite, made up the infinita Nobilium multitudo,
mentioned by Mat. Paria.

But your main Objection I confess is behind, how these Representatives of the
Commons here called infinita Nobilium multitudo, could be the Knights, Citizens
and Burgesses, whose number could not be at that time above 500 Persons: As for
this, pray consider if the difficulty will not bear as hard upon you; for if
your Tenants in Capite made such a vaft multitude, all those difficulties will
arise that you press me with upon my Hypothesis of the meeting of all the chief
Freeholders or Lords of Manors in England in Parliament, before Knights of
Shires were introduced in the room of them, viz. How it was possible for so
great a multitude to debate, vote, or do any business; and what Room or Church
was able to hold so many, and the like; so that granting all your smaller
Tenants in Capite (who had but one Knights Fee apiece) to have met there, these
might have made a body of 5 or 5000 Men; which how they could have been managed
any better then 20000 or 30000, which would have more then taken in all their
Feudatary Tenants too, I desire you would resolve me if you can; so that at
last upon your own Hypothesis, this Populus consisting of the Tenants in Capite
were as much Commoners as the Knights o^ Shires at this day; for, as for the
word Nobilium, I have already proved (and you must needs here grant it) that it
takes in the inferior Nobility or Gentry, under the degree of Lords, as well as
the Superior; and if so, why not all the considerable measu Tenants of those
Tenants; so that you have hitherto brought no proof but your bare Assertion,
that under this infinita multitudo Nobilium and Populus, must be understood
only the great Lords and Tenants in Capite, since either this Author speaks
Hyperbolically, or else all the chief Gentry of England, of whatsoever Tenure;
might have appeared at this great and extraordinary Assembly.

So that you are under this Dilemma; either this Curia (which you confess met
ex more) was the great Council of the Kingdom, or it was not; if it was not,
then there was some other greater Council besides that; but if it was, then it
will plainly follow (though you do all you can to mince the matter) that this
great Council of the Kingdom or Parliament met of course by ancient custom
three times in the year without any Summons at all from the King; which if I
should have affirmed, you would have called it a Commonwealth Notion, since
nothing can be a greater proof, that this Assembly of the whole Nation in
Parliament did not upon your Hypothesis immediately depend on the Kings Writs
of Summons for their Assembling and Acting when met.


M. Well, since you can bring no direct proof that these were any other besides
the Tenants in Capite, who met at this great Council, I have still more reason
to suppose them to have been so, then you can do for the conorary Opinion;
therefore pray give me if you can, some clearer and later proofs for this
difference between the two Councils.


F. I shall comply with your desires, and in order to it, shall conclude with
two or three of those very Authorities the Doctor has given us in his Answer to
Mr. P. where he gives us this passage out of Mat. Paris, in the 2^^th of Hen.
3. (which plainly proves the Tenants in Capite not to have been the common
University, Fob. 639. A. D. 1244*
or sole Rep. esentative of the whole Kingdom; ^ pray read it: E^^^ in Anno
convenerunt regis summonitione convocati Londinum Magnates totius Regni
Arci^pis^ori, Episcopi, Abbates, Priores, Comites and Barons, in quo Concilio
portis Rex o^e proprio in presentia magnatum ( i. e. of all the parties above
mentioned) in Refectorio Westmonasteriensi Axilium sieri pecuniare, cui fuit
responsum qu^d super ^oc tractarent ^recedentesque Magnates de R^fectorio
convenerunt Archiepiscopi ^^ Episcopi, Abbates and Priores seorsim per se
superque hoc diligenter tractaturi, ^and^m requisiti fuerunt ex part eorum
Comites and Barons, si vellent illis unanimiter con^entire in responsione and
previsione super hi^ facienda, qui responderunt (sc^licet Comites and Barons)
quod sine communi universitate nihil facerent, ture de communi diss^nsu electi
fuerunt ex parie cleri, Electus Cant. etc.

Now I think here is as manifest a distinction as need to be between the Lords
and Commons, I. A. A. p. 207, 208.
as Members of the great Council and the common University of the whole
Kingdom; for it is obvious that when all the Lay Lords, Earls and Barons (to
whom you may also add your Tenants in Capite if you please) being met together,
were asked by the Bishops, Abbots and Priors then present, whether they would
agree with them or not? the Ea^ls and Barons answered for themselves, that they
would do nothing without the Common University, which could not possibly be
only the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Tenants in Capite, since it is plain
they were now all here, and referred themselves to another distinct order of
Men, different from themselves (who were not there present.) as also from the
Bishops, Abbots and Priors, who demanded there. Consents to what they had
agreed upon. Now if the Temporal Lords and Tenants in Capite had concurred,
here had been the consent of the Common University of Lords and Tenants in
Capite; but besides the consent of all these, there was, notwistanding, it
seems, required the Consent of another body of Men, called here the Communis
Vniversitas, by which must be meant the Commons, or no body, since otherwise
they might have all agreed together without any more ado.


M. I confess this Story out of Mat. Paris looks somewhat plausible at the
first on your side, but I doubt not if it be better considered, it will do you
little Service; for what if by this Common University is to be understood the
whole body of lesser Tenants in Capite, who not ^itting with the Lords at that
time, they would do nothing without their Consents, till it was proposes to
them; but that they did afterward all agree, pray read the rest of this
Narration, and it will make it clear enough, that this Common University of
Tenants in Capite did also agree with the Lords, Bishops and Abbots, the words
immediately following in Mat. Paris, are these; Tunc de communi assensu electi
fuerunt ex part cleri Blectus Cantuariensis, Wintoniensis, Lincolniensis, and
Wigoriensis Episcopi ex part Laicorum, Richardus Comes Frater Domini Reg^^,
Comes Bigod, Comes Legr. S. de Monteforti, and Comes Mares^ballus ex part vero
Baronum Richardus de Montfi^hes and Johannes de Baliol, and de Sancto Edmundo,
and Rameseit Abbates; ut quod isli duodecim provider^nt in communi recitaretur,
nec aliqua forma Domino Regi ostenderetur Authoritate duodecim nisi omnium
communis assensus interveniret; from which last passage it appears plain to me,
that in this Parliament the several Orders of men that were the constituent
parts of it, were only the Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls and Barons; and that
all these put together were termed the Common University, which is more
comprehensive then University simply taken; now if the Commons, as at this day
represented, had been there, we must have had some mention of them one way or
other, as well as of the Committees of the other Orders which made up the
general Committee of Twelve; so that it is plain beyond doubt, that the Commons
were not part of the Common University.


F. Then pray tell me who they were, for the Historian tells that when all
these Bishops, Abbots, Priors, had now met together with the Earls and Barons,
yet these last ^ell them that without the Common University they could do
nothing; which had been nonsense, if, as your Doctor supposes, the whole
University, or Community of the Kingdom had been all present.


M. I must confess, this is a material Objection, but what if to help him out,
I should tell you that by the Common University here mentioned, is to be
understood the body of the inferior Tenants in Capite under the degree of
Barons; and this Common University of Tenants in Capite might not have been
present and sat with the Earls and Barons at that time when the Bishops and
Abbots made this Proposal; therefore the Lords might very well answer, that
till they had consulted the Common Universty, or Body of Tenants in Capite,
they could do noth^ng; and though this Body of Tenants in Capite did not then
actually sit with the Earls and Barons, yet does it not follow, that they made
a distinct Estate by themselves, different from that of the Lords or greater
Tenants in Capite; for then the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, etc. (who are
here expressly said to have consulted by themselves,) must have done so
likewise; therefore though our Author is not so particular as he might have
been, yet certainly this Common University were thereupon consulted, and gave
their Assents to the choice of this Committee of Twelve, who were to draw up
their answer to the King, for the words are, tunc ex communi assensu electi
fuerunt; which seem to refer to the Common University or Body of Tenants in
Capite, or else the Lords Excuse, as well as the Election of these Persons by
the Bishops, Earls, etc. had been very insignificant.


F. This seems to me to be a precarious assertion, and without any due proof,
for tho the words are Tunc ex Communi Assensu, yet I very much doubt, whether
these words do refer to the Common University of the whole Kingdom, or not; for
your self confess, that Mat. Paris is short in this point; and that it was not
so, seems most likely to me by this material circumstance, that not one Person
of the Twelve, but was either a Bishop, Earl, or great Baron. (For that Richard
de Mon^sichet, and John de Baliot were so; Sir William Dugdale has proved in
his Baronage of England* Tom. 1.
) Whereas, if the University or Body of the Tenants in Capite had joined in
this Election, it is not likely, but they would have chosen some of their own
Body to represent them in this Committee, who were not Earls or Barons: Since
your self must confess that they then were a great Body of Men, who were not
Lords, nor did at this time Sit, or Act Jointly with the Lords, or greater
Barons in this Assembly; and likewise it farther seems highly probable, that
this Common University of Tenants in Capite (take it in your sense) did not
give any Resolution in this matter, since we do not find any Money given in
answer to the King's Request, but only Complaints of, and orders about,
Redressing of Grievances which was in those days often done in a great Council
of the Bishops, Lords and Tenants in Capite.

But I shall show you now by some other Records which the Dr. himself has made
use of, B. A. P. p. 197.
that there often was a distinct Assembly or Council of the Lords, and Tenants
in Capite different from that of the Commons or Commonalty of the whole
Kingdom: M. 10.
The first Record is to be found among the Patent Rolls of the 42. Hen. III.
beginning thus. Rex omnibus, etc. cum negotiis nostris arduis, nos and R^gnum
nostrum contingentibus, Proceres, and Fideles Regni nostri ad nos London. in
Quindena Paschae proximae praeterita faceremus convocari, and cum de Nego^iis
supra dictis, and maxim de prosecutione Negotii Sicili^e diligenter cum iisdem
tractaremus, ac ipsi nobis responderum quod si statum Regni nostri, per
Concilium Fidelium Nostrorum ratificandum duxerimus, and Dominus Papa
Conditiones cirea factum Siciliae appositas melioraverit, per quod Nige^ium
illud prosequi poss^mus cum effectu, ipsi diligentiam fideliter apponent erga
Communitatem Regni nostri, quod nobis Commune Auxilium ad hoc praestetur, etc.
The rest I shall not trouble you with, because it is not to our present purpose.

But you may here see, that taking the Words Proceres and Fideles in your own
sense, the former for the Bishops and Lords, etc. and the latter for the
Tenants in Capite, who were called to consult about the business of Sicily
(which Kingdom the King had before too rashly accepted of from the Pope.) Yet
tho they were all met, they could do nothing but give him advice, and could
give him no Commune Auxilium, i. e. common Aids, or Subsidies, without the
consent of the Commonalty of the Kingdom. Now what can this Community signify
but the Commons, for your Lords and Tenants in Capite were all met already, and
if they alone made up the Common University or Body of the Kingdom (as you
suppose,) why could they not have immediately granted the King the Assistance
he desired (if they had a sufficient Power so to do) without putting him off
with a Promise, that they would use their endeavor with the Community of the
Kingdom, as a distinct order or Body of Men: That this Aid or Subsidy should be
given him; and upon this condition it is, that at the end of this Record, the
King Promises them, that before Christmas, He would mend the State of the
Kingdom, per Consilium Proborum and Fidelium Hominum nostrorum, which can mean
nothing less than a Parliament; which the next Record in the same Roll recites,
was to meet at Oxford after the Feast of Pen^icost, which Record since it not
only recites the King's Oath, whereby he had bound himself to observe the
Direction of a Committee of 24^ Fideles. i. e. Faithful or Loyal Man, 12 of
which were to be chosen out of the Kings Council, and the other 12. by the
Procore^ or Magnates Regni which as I have already proved may take in the
Commons as well as the Lords; but whether by these word^ were meant the Lords
or Commons: The conclusion of this Record sufficiently confirms my Argument
from the precedent Record, that the Lords and Tenants in Capite, could not then
Tax the whole Kingdom at their Pleasure, without the consent of the Commons; or
else to what purpose are these words in the conclusion of this last Record:
Promiserun^ etiam nobis Comites, and Barons Memora^i, quod expleris Negotiis
superius tacti^, bon^ fide labora^unt ad hoc quod Auxilium nobis Commun^
praest^^ur a Communitate Regni nostri in cujus rei, etc. Dat 2. die Maeii: And
it appears by the Date, as also by the entry on the Roll, that both these
Records were perfected at once, and concerning the same business, and further
to prove that the Parties appointed in the Record to be chosen ex part^
Procerum, M. 6.
were not chosen by the great Lords or Peers only, may be seen from a Patent
Roll of the same 42. Hen. III. whereby Henry de Wengham Dean of St. Martin le
Grand, and then Keeper of the Great Seal, and John Manse^, Provost of Beverlay,
were two of the said Commissioners, tho they were neither Barons nor Tenants in
Capite (as I know of) hue only Eminent Lawyers, Fol. 391.
and Men of great Abilities (and so mere Commoners.) Yet Mat. Westminster calls
these Men, Proceres, as you may see by this Passage, speaking of this whole
Committee, Videntes ergo Proceres antedicti viginti quatuor, ad Regis and Regni
regimen (...) Electi, etc.

I shall only now conclude with a French Record, Ibid. 199.
which the Dr. himself has also given us at large and which refers to the said
Committee of 24. above mentioned; it begins thus. Henry par la Grace de Dieu
Roy d' Engleterre, etc. a touz ceus, etc. Sachiez ce pur le profit de nostre
Re^ume e a la Request de nos ^auz Homes e Prodes Homes, e du Commun de nostre
R^aume, Otreyames es vinc quatre Homes eus^ent p^^r, perq^ tous ce quil
ordencirent del Estat de nostre Reaume fust sermon, e Stable, the rest being very
long, you may read at your leisure, only I shall take notice of the date of
this Letter, to which the King also put to his Seal: The conclusion being thus:
Cost chose feu feite a Lundre landemaigne prochein apros la Gaul bau^^l'an de
nostre corronement quarente secundo, Ibid.
and tho the Dr. ca^ make nothing of the words Gaul baut, this happened I
suppose either from the bad Writing of the Record, or from the Ignorance or
Mistake of the Transcriber; for it should be Gaeule d' Aut, Vi. Spell. Glos.
Tit. Gula Augusti.
that is, the Gula of August; which is a great Holy Day in the Church of Rome
upon the First of August, (called also St. Petri ad Vincula) in the Memory of
St. Peter's Chains, curing of a Roman Virgin by her Kissing them.

I shall only observe from this Record that the Hauz or Prodes Homes mentioned
in this Record, being taken in the Dr^. own sense, for High and Wise Men; that
is, the Earls and Barons, yet the words e du Commune that immediately follow
them, must needs signify some Body of Men, different from the former, or else
it had been a notorious piece of Nonsense; since if the former words had taken
in all the Lords and Tenants in Capite, that is (in your sense) the whole
Community of the Kingdom, to what purpose are these words e du Commune, that
are immediately subjoyned since the hauz and Prodes Homes would have served to
express all the Lords and Tenants in Capite, whether taken as Great or as Wise
Men.


M. I confess what you have now said, would carry some, weight with it, were I
not very well satisfied, that you impose upon your self, by taking (as I told
you at our last Meeting) these words Communitas, le Commune, and Communalti in
a wrong sense; for the Commons as they are now, when indeed these words before
the 49th. of Hen. III. nay the 18th. of Edw. I. (as the Learned Dr. shows us in
his 2d. Edition against Mr. P.) are always to be understood, either of the
whole Representative Body of the Kingdom in general consisting of the Bishops,
Abbots, Earls and Barons, together with all the Tenants in Capite, called by
Mat. Paris and other Historians Communitas Baronagii, or else for the Community
of the Tenants in Capite alone, Styled Communitas Regni in our ancient Records.
And this I think I can prove to you, by undoubted Testimonies; but since you
are now upon the proving part, pray show me that these words I now mentioned,
did ever signify the Commons of England in the sense they are now taken before
the times we insist on, and I have the more reason to desire this from you;
because it is chiefly from the mistaken Application of these Words, that the
Gentlemen of your opinion have imposed their false notions upon the World.


F. I shall undertake what you desire; and I hope if I cannot satisfy you, the
fault will not lie in my Authorities, but you prejudices against them. In the
first place therefore let me mind you, how far you and I agreed at our last
Meeting, when I granted you that these words now in dispute were very
equivocal, and were often taken in different senses, as sometimes you say true,
for the whole Representative Body of the Kingdom, sometimes for the Community
of the Barons, and sometimes for the Community of the Bishops and Clergy; but
never as I know of for the Community of the Bishops, Lords and Tenants in
Capite, much less for the Body of Tenants in Capite alone, nor were you then
able to prove to me, that these words must necessarily be understood in your
sense for the Community of the Tenants in Capite: And tho you should prove them
sometime to be taken in that sense, yet would it rather make against, then for
your Opinion, since they must then signify a different Body of Men from your
great Lords, and consequently as mere Commoners as your Knights of Shires at
this day, which is against your first general assertion, that by these words
are always understood the Community of the Baronage only.

But to come to my proofs (which I shall divide in two parts;) first I will
prove that these words Communitas, le Commune, and Communalty, when coming
immediately after Comites and Barons, or Counts and Barons or Proceres in our
old Statutes and Records, do always signify the Commons in the same sense in
which they are now taken: And for proof of this, I will begin with the Reign of
Hen. III* when these words came first to be generally in use, and so descend to
his Successors as low as Rich. II. and if I can show you, that these words (so
put) always signify the Commons, as well before, as after that time: I think
you have reason to be satisfied, that these was never once upon a time such a
strange alteration in the constituent parts of our great Councils as you
supposed, yet none of our ancient Historians or Statutes should ever take any
notice of it, till these modern Antiquaries took upon them to disperse these
Clouds.

To begin first with the words le Commune, P. R. C. Rot. Pat. 48 H. 3. M. 16.
pray remember the Patent Roll of the 48th. of Henry III. which I mentioned at
our last Meeting* viz. the ^or^ of the Pea^e between this King, ^. A. P.
the Prince his Son, and the whole Body of the Kingdom Assembled in Parliament;
the Title of which is thus. Haec est Forma pacis a Dom. R^ge, and Dom. Edw.
Filio suo, Praelatis, Proceribus omnibus cum Communitate ^ota R^gni Angliae
communiter, and concorditer approbata. Now pray what can these words
Communitate ^ota here signify, but another Body of Men distinct from the Earls
and Barons, or else it would be a gross Tautology.

And pray compare this Form of the Peace now mentioned, with the Writs of
Summons of the 49th. of this King (when your Dr. grants the Commons were
Summoned to Parliament after the same manner as they are now) and see if there
be any change in the Terms; and for proof of this, we need go no further then
the very Writ of Expenses (for the Wages of the Knights of Shires, which the
Dr. himself has given us at large in his answer to Mr. ^.) it is the 49th. of
Hen. III. to the Sheriff of Yorkshire, Rot. Cl. 49. H. 3. M. 10. d^rs^.
wherein, after other recitals, it follows thus, Cumque communitates Comitatuum
dictorum vari^s hoc Ann^. ^^cerin^ prastationes ad defensi n^m Regni nostri,
etc. He therefore commands the said Sheriff, quod danbus militibus qui pro
Communitate dicti Comita^^s praefa^o Parliamento interfuerunt, etc. should be
paid their reasonable Expenses. De Communitate Comitatus praedicti: For going
to, and staying at, and returning from the said Parliament, etc. from whence it
appears, that the words Communitas and Communitates in this Writ, cannot
signify the Community of Tenants in Capite alone, but the Commons of the
Co^nty in general; unless you can prove to me that none but Tenants in Capite
had performed these varias praes^a^iones in the Writ, and that none but they
then contributed to these Expenses of the Knights of Shires; otherwise these
words must plainly signify the Commons in general, as they did in the like
Writ of the 28th of King Edward I. which I shall give you by and by; but I
shall first show you a few other Records of this Kings Reign, R. R. C. Rot.
Pat. 51 H. 3. M. 16.
concerning the word la C^mmun^ (which Mr. P. has given us) they are in the
Patent Roll of the 51st. of this King, wherein He by the Council and Assent of
the King of the Romans, and des Coun^s, and des Barons, and la Commune, de la
Terre, Pardons the Earl of Gloucester and all his Company: So likewise in the
same Roll, the King by the Council, and Assent of the said Counts, and Barons,
and de la Commune de la Terre, Pardons the City of London, all manner of
Rancour and ill Will.

Now pray tell me a reason, why should not the word la Commune in these Acts of
Pardon, signify the same thing as the word Communitas in the form of the
Peace* and in the Writ of Expenses of the 49th now cited: Since they come
immediately after the Counts and Barons, and so must needs signify a Body of
men, distinct from them; for there is the same reason, why the words la Commune
de la Terre, should here signify the Comm^ns of the Land; as that the word
Communitates Comitatus should signify the Community or Commons of the whole
County.


M. Will you give me leave to answer this Question presently, because I confess
it is very material, before you proceed farther? There may (in my opinion) very
good reasons be given. 1. Why the words Communitas and la Commune, may signify
the Community of the Tenants in Capite in the Form of the peace, and Acts of
Pardon; and yet signify the Commons of the County in general, in the Writ for
Expenses you have now mentioned: As first, because the subject matter is
different in the Form of the Peace, and Acts of Pardon, from that in the Writs
of Expenses; the one being the Communitas Regni, and the other Communitas
Comitatus only, called also in the Plural Number, Communitates Comitatuum, and
then I grant when thus used, it always signifies the Commons in general; and
there may be likewise a sufficient reason given, why this great change might
have been made in the constituent parts of our great Councils, and yet no
change of Phrases or Expressions might be made in our Records and Statutes, nor
any notice taken of it by our Historians; which is, because the first Knights
of Shires, being chosen out of, and by, the Tenants in Capite only; the change
was imperceivable at first, there being still Men of the same order, appearing
in Parliament, for the whole Body of those Tenants, the difference being only
in the Number, viz. Two, for a whole County; whereas before all the chief
Tenants in Capite came in Person, and I am the more inclined to be of this
opinion, because in this Writ of Expenses of the 49th. of Henry III. (which you
have now cited) there is no such Clause as is in the following Writs of like
Nature, prout in casu consimili fieri con^uevit, which shows it to have been a
new thing for the Knights of Shires to have their Expenses allowed them, that
being the first time of their Meeting in Parliament.


F. I confess what you say is very plausible, were there any Color of a proof
brought by you for it, but I shall show you further, that your distinction
between the Communitas Regni, and the Communitas Comitatus signifies nothing,
unless you can prove that this Communitas Regni was not the Representative of
the Communitates Comitatuum mentioned in this Writ, and did not consist of
Persons of the same degree or order; for the Writ of Summons of 49th. Hen. III.
says no more then that these Knights should be de legalioribus and peritioribus
militibus comitatus, without limiting them to Tenants in Capite. But as for
your Reason, why these great alterations might be made in our great Councils or
Parliaments, without any notice taken of it, it is altogether false and
precarious, for you have not yet, nor can, I believe, give me any sufficient
Authority (beside the Drs. bare assertion) that ever none, but Tenants in
Capite, were capable of being Elected Knights of Shires, or that none but such
Tenants by Military Service were the Electors.

And I think I have sufficiently confuted the Vanity of that Assertion at our
last Meeting, Vi. Dict. 6th. Page 425.
when I showed you the false interpretations you gave of those Statutes of 7th.
of Hen. IV. and 10th. of Hen. VI. whereby you would have proved, that there was
some alteration thereby made, as to the Electors of the Knights of Shires at
the County Court: Whereas, indeed before those Statutes, all Persons of
whatsoever Tenure, and of howsoever small an Estate of Freehold, who owed Suit
and Service to the County Court, were capable of being Electors; and
consequently of choosing whom they pleased as well Tenants in Capite as others,
to be Knights of the Shire; and that those who were not such Tenants were
frequently chosen; in the Reigns of Edward the Third, and Richard the Second; I
could bring sufficient proofs, were it worth while to insist upon a thing so
certain.

But I shall go on to prove that the same words, viz. Communitas le Commune, or
la Communalie, were used in many of our Statutes and Records, to signify the
Commons. I come therefore to the Reign of Edward the First, and I pray, in the
first place, remember, what I took notice of at our last meeting concerning the
Statute of Westminster the first, made in the third year of this King, See the
Old Fr. Statutes in Tottle.
beginning thus in French, per L'assentement des Archesques, Evesques, Abbes,
Priors, Counts, Barons and tout la Communalty de la Terre, Illonques Summones.

Now every one knows that Communalty is but French, for the Latin Communitas,
as appears by the first Writs we have left us (except that of the 49 th. of
Henry the Third, now mentioned) de expensis Militum, being of the 28 th. of
this King directed to the Sheriff of Somersetshire to levy the expenses of the
Knights for that County (who had served in the last Parliament) le Communitate
Comitatus praedicti; Rot. Cla^. 28 th. of Ed. 1. m. 12. dorso.
i. e. of the Commons of the said County in general, the same Clause is also in
the Writs which were then issued for the expenses of the Citizens and Burgesses
who served in this Parliament; which were also to be levied de Communitate
civitatis vel Burgi, Viz. 4 th. part of Mr. Pryn 's Parliament. Register, p. 9.
which sure must mean the Commonalty, or Commons of all those Cities and
Buroughs there mentioned, for the Record is, Eodem modo scribitur Majoribus,
and Ballivis pro Burgensibus Subscriptis: And which is also more remarkable,
these Writs contain this Clause, that the said Knights and Burgesses should
have their expenses allowed, pro veniendo, manendo, and redeundo a Parliamento
praedicto prout alias in casu consimili sieri consuevit; which words relating
to a former Custom, not then newly began (as this word consuevit in a legal
sense still imports) must needs relate to some time much more ancient than the
49 th. of Henry the Third; or the 18 th. of this King, the former of which was
but 26 years, and the latter but 10 years before this 28 th. of Edw. the First,
in which time there were not above thirty Parliaments called, if so many.

And further, that the Word Commonalty signified the Body of the Commons, and
not Tenants in Capite in the Reign of this King, appears by the Statute or
Ordinance (the year is uncertain) entitled, Consuetudines Can^iae, which you
may see in French in Tottles Collection; the Title of them is thus, Ceux son^
les usages les queax la Communalty de Kent Clayment avoir en Tenements de
Gavel-Kind. Now every body who knows any thing of Geval-Kind, know also it was
generally a Socage Tenure, there being but little of it held by Knights
Service, and consequently the owners of such Lands who were then the greatest
part of that County, are here called la Communalty de Kent.

So likewise in the Reign of Edward the Second the same words are used in the
same sense; as in the Statute of Pardon for the death of Pierce Gaveston made
in the Seventh of this King; See Tottle 's Collection.
which is granted per nous, ( i. e. the King himself) per Archievesques,
Ev^sques, Abbes, Priors, Counts, Barons, and la Commonal^^ de nostre Rolaume
illonques assembles.

So also in the Latin Records, as appears by an Act of Pardon granted in
Parliament, Rot. Parl. 12. El. 2. m. 17.
in the 12 th. year of this King: Consentientibus Praelatis, and Pr^ceribus,
and Communitate Regni. So likewise the Statute of York of the same year, writ
in French, Tottle 's Stat. p. 96.
is recited to have been made per Ass^nt des Pre^us, Counts, Barons, and la
Commune du Royalme illonques assemblez. Where you see that the Latin word
Communitas, and the French le Commune signify the same Order of men.

In the Reign of Edward the Third, I can give you these remarkable examples of
the same words, in the Parliament Roll in the first of this King, M. 8.
Andrew de Ha^iford, a Principal Citizen of London, was de Assensu Praelatorum,
Comitum and totius Communitatis Regni* pardoned all Homicides. M. 29.
The very like words are also used in the same Roll in the Act of Pardon
granted to the City of London.

I shall trouble you but with one m^re in this Kings Reign (but it is so
remarkable I cannot omit it) of the 34 th. of this King and is to be found in
the old Edition of Statutes Printed in French; the Title begins thus, Ceux sont
les chooses, queux nostre Seigneur le Roy, Prelates, Seigneurs and la Commune
ount ordaines and estable^s.

To conclude with the Reign of Richard the Second, the like expression is found
in the Parliament Roll of 5 th. of Richard the Second, where the Statutes
begins thus: M. 21.
Pur Commune prosit du R^yalm^ d' Angleterre cient fai^es per nostre Seigneur
le Roy Prelates, Seigneurs and la Commune de le Royalme esteantes en cest
Parliament; from the Titles to which two last Statutes, I pray observe that the
word le Commune, is not only used for the Commons in the same sense as it was
in the f^rmer Kings Reigns; but also that these Statutes were made by the joint
Assents of the King, Lords and Commons: So likewise in the same Roll are
recited, Concordiae, sive Ordinationes factae de Communi Ass^^su Regis
Procerum, and Magnatum, and Communitatis Regni Angliae; which I give you, to
show that the words Communitas and le Commune, always signify the same thing
in our Statu^es and Records, viz. the Commons as now understood different from
your great Lords and Tenants; and if they are to be taken in this sense after
the 18 th. of Edward the First, I would be glad if you could show me any
sufficient reason, why they should not be so understood a^ along before that
time, as well as in the 49 th. of Henry the Third only.


M. Tho I grant that these words you mention are to be understood for the
Commons, as now taken in many Records and Acts of Parliament after the 18 th of
Edward the First (and therefore you need not to have taken the pa^ns to have
gone beyond that time) yet notwithstanding I think I can prove to you by very
good Authorities, that the word Communitas (which I grant is the same thing
with le Commune in French) tho put after the words, Comites and Barons, does
not signify the Commons of England in general, but the Community of the
Tenant; in Capite alone, or at least the Community of all Tenants by Military
Service; and that as low as the Reign of Edward the Third; but for proof of
thi^, I pray peru^e this Writ, which the Doctor has given us in his Answer to
Mr. P. Rex Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, B. G. p. 32 33. Rot. Pat. 30. Ed. I. m. 1.
Abbatibus, Priotibus, Comitibus, Baronibus, Militibus, and omnibus ali^s de
Comitatu Cantiae Salutem. Sciatis qu^d cum p^^mo die Junii Anno Regni nostri
Decimo octavo, Praelati, Comites, Barons and caeteri Magn^tes de Regno nostro
concorditer p^o se, and pro tota Communitate ejusdem Regni in pleno Parliamento
nostro nobis concesse* unt Quadraginta solidos de singulis Feodis Militum in
dicto Regno in Auxilium, ad Primogenitam Filiam nostram Mari^andam, etc. Cujus
quidem auxilii levationi faciendae pro Dictae Communitatis aisimento hucusque
supersedimus gratio^e, etc. By this Record it is clear, that such as p^id
Scutage, that is Forty Shi^^ings for a Knights Fee, were then the tota Regni
Communitas, and no others, and of these the Tenants in Capite granted, and paid
it first for themselves and Tenants, and then their Tenants in Military
Service, by virtue of the Kings Precept paid it to them again for so many Fees
as they held of them, so that this Tax being raised wholly upon Knights Fees,
must be granted only by those that held by Knights Service.

But further, that the Communalte de Royaume, the Community of the Kingdom, as
represented by the Tenants in Capite, did still so continue as above mentioned,
till almost the middle of King Edward the Third's Reign is as clearly proved by
this Record of that King: Rex dilectis and fidelibus ^uis Vicecomiti Wygorniae
^homae B^tt^ler de Upton supe^ ^abrinam, Rot. ^in. 20. Ed. 3. M. 7. See it at
large B. C. p. 37.
Militi and Thomae Cassy de Wych salutem; ^^^atis quod cum in pleno Parliamento
nostro apud Westmonasterium ad Diem Lunae proximo post Vestum Nativitatis
Beatae Mariae Virginis proximo praeteritum tento, Praelati, Comites, Barons
and Magnates de Regno nostro Angliae etc. p^o se, and to a Communita e eja^dem
Regni nobis concesse^unt quadraginta solidos de singul^s ^eodi^ Militum in
Di^^^ Regno Angliae, etc. so that the whole Community of England in this Record
were Military Men, such as held Knights Fees, or parts of Knights Fees, and
such as paid Scutage, and they were neither the ordinary Freemen, or
Freeholders, nor the Multitude, nor Rab^le.


F. I pray Sir give me leave to answer your Arguments from these Records as you
^ut them, least I forget what you have said, in the first place as to this
Record of the 30th. of Edw. I. which relates to a Tax given in the 18th. Year
of his Reign, and recites an Aid of 40 s. upon every Knights Fee through the
whole Kingdom to have been given by the Bishops, Earls, Barons and other
Magnates, or great Men of the Kingdom in full Parliament, for themselves and
the whole Community thereof to Marry the King's Daughter; and which Subsidy he
had deferred to Levy till now, and therefore because this was a Tax granted
only upon Knights Fees, that those only who paid this Scutage, were then the
Communitas or whole Body of the Kingdom, which is no Argument at all, since
from this we may plainly collect the clean contrary; for if none had been to
pay to this Tax but those that held by Knights Service in Capite, then the King
would have had no need to have had it granted in Parliament; since by the 14th.
Article of King John's Charter, he might have Taxed his Tenants in Capite for
the Knighting of his Eldest Son, and the Marriage of his Eldest Daughter
without the Assent of the Common Council of the Kingdom, and according to your
Hypothesis, and the Authorities you have brought to prove it, these Tenants in
Capite might also, by the like reason have made their Tenants by Knights
Service, have Contributed to this Tax, which yet you see they could not do
without the consent of Parliament, and therefore this Aid or Subsidy being
granted in Parliament, must needs extend to all the Lands in the whole Kingdom,
as well those that held by Knights Service, as well as those that did not, for
it is not here said as in the Writ to the Sheriff of Sussex, qui de nobis
Tenent in Capite, and then the words pro se, and ^ota Communitate Regni cannot
mean (as you would have them,) viz. That the Lords and Tenants in Capite had
granted it for themselves and the Community of their Tenants by Military
Service only, who (say you) represented the whole Community of the Kingdom, for
then (as I have already observed) this needed not to have been granted in
Parliament at all; but at this rate no Tenants of those Abbeys and Monasteries
(which were a great many) who did not hold in Capite, would have paid any
thing to this Tax, nor yet the Kings Tenants, who did not hold in Capite, but
of some Castle or Honor: Nor lastly, any Tenants in Socage, who were very
numerous in Kent, as well as in other Counties (as Mr. Taylour proves in his
History of Gav^l-K^nd,) so that if your Tenants in Capite and other under
Tenants by Military Service had been then the Community of the whole Kingdom.
This Community had not consisted of above one half, or at most a third part of
the Kingdom.

But in my sense of this word Communitas, here will be no difficulty at all,
for these Magnates mentioned in this Record, being taken as (I have prove^)
they often are, for Knights of Shires, then these words are thus to be
understood* viz. that all the Parties mentioned in this Record, gave for
themselves and the whole Community of the Kingdom, consisting of all the Free
holders of England, who all contributed to the Marriage of the Kings Daughter
according to their respective Estates; and tho the sense of this word had been
otherwise in this place, yet it would not have contradicted my sense of the
word Communitas, which I do not aver always to signify the Commons, but when
it comes immediately after the words Comites and Barons, as it does not in
this Record you have now cited.


M. But pray tell me how this could be, since the Record says expressly, that
this Aid was to be Raised by 40 s. upon every Knights Fee, which could only
extend to Tenants by Knights Service, nor could this word Communitas here
signify the Commons as now understood; since the Citizens and Burgesses are
not at all mentioned, who you know do at this day make up the greatest part of
the Representatives of the Commons of England.


F. This proceeds from your not knowing, or else not consi^ering the ancient
manner of reckoning Estates; and consequently of Taxing by Knights Fees, not
only Lands held by Military, but Socage Tenure also, 24. H. 3. M. 8. dorso. 26.
H. 3. Par. 1. M. 6. dorso. Tit. de Militibus faciendis.
as appears by those Writs of the 24th. and 26th. of Hen. III. as they are
still upon the close Rolls, being (both almost the same, word for word,) which
I gave you at our last Meeting, yet since you may have forgot them, pray read
them again, Rex Vice-Comiti Northampton salu^em, praecipimus tibi quod per
totam ballivam etiam in singulis bonis villis, and similiter in pleno Comitatu
tuo clamari fa^ies, quod omnes illi de Comitatu tuo, qui tenent Feodum Militis
integrum, vel etiam minus, quam Feodum integrum dum tamen de Tenemento suo tam
Militari quam Socagio possint sistentari, and Milites non sunt, si^ut Tenementa
sus diligunt citra festum omnium Sanctorum, Anno. Regni Nostr. XXV. Arma
capiant and se Milites ^i^ri faciant.

Where you may Note, that all Men who held the value of a Knights Fee, either
by Military or Socage Tenure were liable to be made Knights, provided they
could maintain themselves of their Estates; which could never have been, had
not the Custom of Reckoning and Taxing Estates of all sorts, as well by Knights
Service as otherwise, according to the value of so many Knights Fees (that is,
at 20^ per An.) been then commonly used: But as for your next Objection, that
the Citizens and Burgesses are not mentioned in this Record, and so could not
be comprehended under the words Communitas Regni, this proves no more then that
which will easily be granted you, that this word Communitas used in your
Record, is there to be understood restrictively, and according to the subject
matter, viz. the Community of Freeholders, or Land-holders of the whose
Kingdom only; since this Tax being wholly upon Lands, the Commons of Cities and
Buroughs then called Communitates Civitatum, and Bu^gorum, whose Estates lay
in Money or Goods, could not be Taxed by Knights Fees; nor do I doubt but that
if we had the Records of that Parliament of the 18th. of Edw. I. now left us
(which are lost) it would appear, that they also contributed to this Tax
according to their Estates as they did in the 34th Year of this King to make
the King's Eldest Son a Knight: As for your Record of the 20th. of Edw. III. it
is but the same in effect with this of the 30th. of Edw. I. and the same answer
will serve for both, only I cannot but observe, that whereas you have often
asserted that this word Communitas, did only signify the Community of Tenants
in Capite, now you fall a Peg lower, and it must at last take in the whole
Community of Tenants by Knights Service, whether in Capite or not.


M. Well then you g^ant that this word Communitas does not always signify all
the Commons of England as you supposed; but farther, that it must mean the
Community of the Tenants in Military Service only: P^ay see this very Record of
the 34th. of Edw. I. which Mr. P. has given us at large in his Appendix, Page
172, 173.
which being long, I shall t^ouble you with no more then what makes to our
present purpose, viz. that the King in^ending to make his Son, Prince Edward a
K^ight, Summoned the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons and
other great Men of the whole Kingdom to appoint what Aid they would grant the
King toward it; and then it follows thus, that the Prelates, Earls, Barons and
others, as also the Knights of Shires being mer, treating together with
deliberation upon this Matter, consi^ering that an Aid was due to make his Son
a Knight, besides the burden that lay upon they King, by reason of the Scotch
War, at lengh they unanimously Domino Regni conc^ss^runt, p^o s^ and ^^ta
Communitate R^gni ^ricesimam partem omnium Bun^^um suorum ^^mporalium mobilium,
for making his Son a Knight, and toward his Expenses of his War in Scotland.
And then the Cives and ^u genses Civit ^^um, ac Burgorum, ^c caeteri de
Domini^s R^gis Congregati, treating about the Premises, and considering the
burdens lying upon the King (not mentioning any Aid for making his ^on Knight,
as not holding of the King by Knights-Fee, o^ Ser^ice, and therefore none of
the Community of the Kingdom, nor li^ble to it) D^mino R^g^ un in^mit^^ ob
cau^as supra dictas conc^sserunt Vic. sim^m pariem bono (...) mobilium. Here
the P^elates, Earls, Barons, and great Men, with the Knights of Shires,
consulted together, and gave for themselves, and the Community of the Kingdom,
a Thirtieth part of their Goods, and the Citizens, Burgesses and Tena^ts of the
King's Demeas^s (which we^e likewise none of the Community of the Kingdom) gave
a Twentieth part; for if they had been of the Community, they had said a
Thirtieth part as well as the rest; and therefore (...) most certain that even
at this time, viz. the 34th. of Edw. I. they we^e not taken to be part of the
Community of the Kingdom, and that the Tenant in C^pite, Serjeanty, or at least
the Military Men, and Tenants in Military Se^vice were only such.


F. As to this last Record you have cited, I need give you no other answer to
it, than a like Writ of the 35 th. of this King, which the ^^ctor himself has
also given us in his ^l^ssa^y; which I shall here read you at large, Page 37.
together with his Learned Comment upon it; it is for the Collecting of this
twentieth and thirtieth part granted in the thirty fourth you have now
mentioned* the Writ runs this, Militibus, libe^is hominibus, and ^oti
Communitati Comitatus Middlesex tum in^ra Liberta^^s, quam ^xtra s^lutem: cum
Archi^pi^co^i, Epis^^pi, Abbates, Priores, Comites, Bar^nes, Milites, Lab^ri
Homines, ac Communit^t^s, Co^itatuum, Regni nostri Tricesim^m ^m ^um Bo^orum
suorum t^mpor^lium m^bilium, Civ^sque and Burgen^^s, ac Communita^^s omnium
Civit^^^m and Burgorum ejusd^m Reg^i, (...) Tenentes de D^minion nos^^is
Vicesim^m Bonorum suorum mobilium, curi^liter concess^runt, and gratantur, etc.
And least we should happen to mistake the meaning of these words, the Doctor
himself has furnished us with this Learned Comment upon them as follows in the
same place. It is said in this Record that the Archbishops, B. G. p. 34.
Bishops, Earls, Barons, Abbots, Priors, Kn^ghts and Freemen, and Communities
of Counties, gave a Thirtieth part of their Goods, as if they had been all
Members, and sat in this Parliament: And so it is said of the Cities and
Burghs, that the Citizens, Burgesses and the Communities of the Cities and
Burghs gave a Twentieth part of their Movables, as if they had been all there.
But these words signify no more, than that the Knights and Freemen gave by
their Representatives, and that the Communities of Counties, and the Citizens
and Burgesses* and Communities of Cities and Burghs gave by their
Representatives, Claus. 34. E^. 1.
as is most clear from the Writ of Expenses for the Knights of Lincolnshire,
and so consequently for the rest. Now I desire you would tell me whether there
can be a plainer Record against the Doctors opinion than this; for in the first
place who were these Knights, Freemen and Commons who granted this 26 th. and
30 th. part of their Movables in the 34 th. year of this King; but the
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, the Lawful Representatives of the whole
Kingdom in General, as well those who held in Capite, or else by inferior
Military Service, as those that held by any other Tenure; or who were these
Representatives, but men chosen out of all so^ts, a^ well those that held by
Knights Service, as those that did not; unless you can prove (as you have not
done hitherto) that all the Cities and Buroughs in England held of the King in
Capite; and that none but Tenants in Capite, or Military Service at least, were
chosen either for Counties or Cities, and though I find your Doctor has an
utter aversion to the word Commons, and therefore will needs translate the word
Communitates, by Communities, and not Commons, yet if you were to render those
words, the Commons of the Coun^ies, Cities and Buroughs, into our Law-Latin: I
desire to know what other words you could make use of but these in this Record,
viz. Communita^es (...), Civi^atum and Burg^rum? So that to conclude, if in the
28* 34 and 35 th. of Edward the First* a^l the Commons gave by the same
Repres^ntat^ves as they do now, I can see no reason why they might not do so
too, thirty or forty years before that time; and pray take notice also that
here the Tenants in Ancient Deme^n gave likewise by themselves; and could not
be charged by the Knights of Shires. And therefore as Mr. L^mbard in his
Arche^on very well observes, this Prescription of not being chargeable with the
rest of the County must be very ancient, si^ce the^e was no Land at that time
reckoned as Ancient Demesne, which had not belonged to the ^rown before the
making of Doomsday Book.


M. I must confess what you have now said concerning the constant use of the
words Communit^s, and (...) C^mmune (coming after Comi^es and Barons) to
express the Commons in Parliament in our Statutes and Records, would we^gh much
with me had I not good reason to believe there were no such thing as Commons in
Parliament in the sense now taken before the 49 th. of Henry the Third; and
from which time I suppose it was discontinued ^till the 18 th. of Edward the
First; for which, I can give you very good proofs, when it comes to my turn;
but in the mean time pray show me by any Record, or Statute, that there were
any Knights, Citizens and Burgesses Summoned to Parliament till the times I
allow; for in the first place, you cannot show me any mention of Commons in the
Plural Number; in any old Statute before Edward the First's time, and as for
the words Communitas and le Commune, which I grant were often used to express
the Commons after that time, your self own they are equivocal; and therefore
when put after the Earls and Barons in the Instances you have given, may
signify the Community of the smaller Tenants in Capite, which were the only
Representatives of the Commons that appeared in Parliament in those days; and I
am the more incline^ to be of this opinion, because I have searched the old
Statutes very exactly; and cannot find any mention of the word Commons in the
Plural* much less of Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses, till the Statute of 34
th. of Edward the First, (...) Tallagio n^n conced^^do (made in the 34 th. of
Edward the First) wherein I grant they are expressly mentioned; and as for
Writs of Summons you can produce none till the 23 d. of this King, to Summon
them to Parliament; though I shall show one by and by that the Doctor has found
out of the 18 th. of Edward the First, whereby he proves they were then
Summoned after about twenty-six years discontinuance; therefore pray show me if
you can by any sufficient proof that they were there in Henry the Third's Reign
except once, or in Edward the 1 st's till the 18 th.


F. I confess your Doctor has not only ex^eeded all other men but himself too
in this rare discovery, for whereas in his first Edition of his Answer to Mr.
Pety^'s Book, he was content to follow Sir William Dugdale, and make the
Commons to have been first Summoned to Parliament in the 49 th. of Henry the
Third, and to have commenced by M^^ford's Rebellion, and so to have still
continued on; now the Doctor upon second thoughts, in ^is Edition in Folio,
will have them never to be Summoned any more than that once, because forsooth
he cannot find them mentioned in such express words as that he cannot evade
them, by saying the sense is equivocal; and if the Commons not being expressly
mentioned in our Statutes were a sufficient reason to prove them not to have
been there; were the Writs of Summons lost as well after as they are before the
23^ of Edward the First, you might as well have faced us down, that there were
none in all that time till the Statute de Tallagio non concedendo, you now
mentioned. And for proof of this pray see the Statute called Articuli super
Char^^s, made in the 28 th. of this King, which is said to be made and granted
by the King at the Request of the Prelates, Earls and Barons, who are only
mentioned in this Statute, and yet certainly the Commons were then at this
Parliament, as appears by the Writs of Summons and Expenses I but now
mentioned, and sure their assents were given to it, as well as the Bishops and
Lords, I could show you the like in many other Statutes of this King, nor are
the words Communit^s, or Commonalty, ever mentioned above twice in all the
Statutes of this King's Reign, viz. in that of Westminster the first, and that
against Bearing of Arms; neither is the word Commons to be found above once or
twice in all the Statutes of Edward the Second; in the Statutes made at
Lincoln, in the 9 th. of this King, it is said to be done by the King, the
Counts, Barons and other Grands of the Kingdom; now if these general words did
comprehend the Commons in those times, you grant they were constantly Summoned
to Parliament, I desire you would give me any good reason why the same words
may not as well comprehend them long before? and if the bare omission of the
distinct Orders or States of Men that gave their assents to the making of any
Statute, and the different penning of Acts of Parliament were a sufficient
reason to prove they had no hand in it; I doubt two parts in three of the old
Statutes of Henry the Third, and Edward the First, would have been made without
the Consents either of the Bishops or Lords; since in most of them there is no
mention made of either; and that what I say is true, pray at your leisure
peruse these Statutes following, viz. de Distriction^, Scacarti of the 51 of
Henry the Third, with other Statutes made in the latter end of that King's
Reign, as also that of Acto^ Burnel made in the 11 th. of Edward I. that of
Winchester made in the 13 th. of this King; that of Merchants in the same year;
as also those of Circumspecte agatis, and Quo Warranto, and see if you can find
any mention either of the Lords or Commons in them.

But to come to direct proofs, tho I grant the words Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses was not expressly mentioned in our old Statutes; yet I shall prove to
you by other words of a much more comprehensive signification, that they
appeared in Parliament in the very beginning of Henry the Third's Reign* for
this we need go no farther than the old Manuscripts, as well as Printed Copies
of Magna Charta; which was first Granted in the second year, and again
confirmed in the 9 th. of Henry the Third, both which conclude thus, Pro hac
autem Donatione and Concessione, Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, Abbates, Priores,
Comites, Barons, Milites, libere Tenentes and omnes de Regno nostro ded^iun^
quint^m decimam pa^tem omnium mobilium suorum. Now can any thing be more
express than this Clause, viz. That the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors,
Earls, Barons, for themselves and the inferior Orders, viz. the Knights and
Freeholders, and all others of the Kingdom by their Lawful Representatives,
gave this 15 th. of their Movables, at both those Parliaments, in which this
Charter was first made, and afterward confirmed.


M. I confess this Authority looks very plausible at first, but if it be
strictly looked into; I believe it will prove nothing at all: for as to your
interpretation of these words, I do not allow it for reasons I shall show you
by and by; but in the first place give me leave to dispute the Antiquity of
this Charter, which I do not take to be so ancient as you make it, for tho I
grant there was such a Charter made in the 2d. and again confirmed in the 9th.
of Hen. III. yet you have already had my thoughts of this Charter which you
suppose to be Henry the Thirds, viz. that this which we now have is not
properly his, but his Son Edw. I. since it concludes this: His testibus
Bonifacio-Cantuari^n^is Archi^pi^copo, E. Londinensi Episcopo, etc. Anno.
Regni-nostri ( Scil. Henrici 3.) nono; whereas this Bonifac here mentioned, was
not Archbishop of Canterbury before the 27. Hen. III. nor was there any one
whose name began with E. Bishop of London, during the time that Boniface held
the Sea of Cant^rbu^y.


F. I am very glad you have made these Objections against the Validity of this
Charter; for if I can prove to you, that what you have now urged from your
friend the Dr. is a mere Evasion against the Charter it self, I think you have
reason to be my Convert. In the first place, pray give me leave to confirm the
Vali^ity of the Charter it self; I therefore freely grant that the Original of
this Charter is not to be found among the Statute Rolls in the T^ner, where
there is nothing left of it on Record, except this confirmation of it by a
Charter of Impeximus of Edw. I. (the Conclusion of which is as you have now
given) and I think there cannot be a greater P^oof of the careless keeping or
voluntary im^ezlement of the ancient Statutes and Records of the Kingdom, than
the loss of this great Charter, which certainly must have been enrolled at the
time when it was made, as well as every common Grant made by the King to
ordinary Persons of Markets and Pairs, since we find Copies of it still Ex^ant
in the ancient Annals of diverse Monasteries, where they were formerly kept*
Annals Burt. page 271. and dein^.
as in particular in the Annals of the Abbey of Barton, Published in the first
Volum of ancient English Writers, lately Printed at Oxford, which fully answers
your Objection, for instead of Boniface it is there Witnessed by S. Archibis.
Cant. i. e. Stephen Langton who was then Archbishop of Canterbury, near 20
Years before Boniface; there is also an etc. after the name of this
Archbishop: And the same Charter is likewise recited, word for word with the
former, and has the same Conclusion concerning the granting of this 15th. by
all the Parties above mentioned in the Chronicle of Walter Hemingford Published
by the Learned Dr. G^^e in his 2d. Volum of English Historians, Printed at Oxon
1687.
only it has no, Witnesses Names at the end but the King himself Te^^e meipso,
and farther both agree in all things material, with four ancient Manuscript
Copies of this Charter of the 2d. of Hen. III. when he was in Minority, one of
which is in the Cuttonian Library; a 2d. was lately in possession of Sam
Baldwin Sergeant at Law; a third is in the Hands of John Cook Esquire chief
Prothonotary of the Court of Common Pleas, and a 4th. is at this present with
Mr. Peryt of the Inner Temple, which I my self have seen.

But to put this out of all doubt, there is still Extant a fair Original of
this Charter of confirmation of the 9th. of Hen. III. (when he was of full Age)
under the great Seal of this King (which is supposed to have belonged to
B^^^ail Abbey) and is now to be seen in the hands of Sir Nathaniel Powel Benches
of the Inner Temple, who is so civil as to Communicate it to all, who have the
Curiosity to see so great a Rarity, so that tho it is not to be denied, but
that the Charter Published by Sir Edward Coke in his 2d. Institutes, is
properly the Charter of confirmation of Edw. I. since Boniface was at that time
Archbishop of Canterbury, and ^ulk Bishop of London ( E. being by ^^stake put
for F. yet I think no man has any cause to doubt whether that Clause we dispute
about be not in all the Copies of this Charter, as well as in this of Edward I.


M. Well, admitting this Charter to be as ancient as you please, yet let me
tell you* if your sense be, that the words at the end of this Charter, viz.
omnes. de R^gon, those who gave, or granted this Subsi^y, were Members of that
Parliament; if you wi^^ understand it so, and according to the literal meaning
of the words then om^es de R^gn^, B. A. P. P. 125, 126.
as well those that had Estates in Land, as those that had not, all C^py
holders, all Tradesmen, all Bondmen and Villains (of which there were great
store in those days) and all Servants were Members of Parliament. And so then I
would willingly understand where ^ll these People should meet, how their
Council should be managed, and how it is possible in such Meetings (i any such
there can be) to prevent the greatest confusion imaginable. The meaning then of
the words, must be, that the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbot, ^ar^, Barons,
Knights, Free-Tenants, and all of the Kingdom, or all the King's Su^jects
Dederunt, that is paid a Fifteenth part of their Movables to the King, for his
granting these Charters, not that they themselves gave, or granted this
Subsi^y; and it is reasonable to conclude, that all the King's Subjects paid the
Fifteenth part* because one way or other, little or much they enjoyed the
benefit of them. I take this to be the Ge^uine sense of the words, but Mat.
Paris, whom you now quoted, makes it very apparent, who were the constituent
^orts of this Parliament, for if you please to observe, the Men to whom the
chief Justice Proposed this Fifteenth, and those who consulted about the King's
Demands, and those that returned an answer to them; and also granted the
Fifteenth part of the Movables, as well of the Ecclesiastics, as Lai^s o^ the
whole Kingdom, were only the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, Abbots,
Priors; and therefore they were the only constituent parts of this Parliament,
as they were also of the Parliament, or great Council held at Mer^on in the
20th. Year of this King's Reign: whither says M^t. Paris, Consummato cum gaudio
Nuptiali convivio Rex recedens a Londoni^s venis Merero^^m, ut ibi revocati
Magnaies una^um Rege de Regni Negotiis e^ntractarent.


F. I think I can as easily answer this small Objection against on meaning of
these words at the end of this Charter. Pray do, I affirm that these words are
to be taken literally or the contrary? Therefore you do ill to put a sense upon
me which I do not allow of, but pray tell who ever was so mad as to believe
that these words are to be understood literally; or that all those Persons who
you here give us a Bed-Roll of, could all appear in Parliament, in Person, or
had all Votes at the Elections of Parliament Men; and yet for all that, this
Clause is true in a legal, tho not in a litteral sense, that all the Freemen of
the Kingdom granted this 15th. viz. that the Prelates and Temporal Lords in
their proper Persons, and all the rest of the Kingdom by their respective
Representatives granted this Fifteenth; I hope it is a good Rule in your Civil,
as well as our Common Law, that he who gives, or grants any thing by his
sufficient Proxy or Representative is said to perform it by himself; and in
this sense, all the Men in the Kingdom gave, or granted, a Fifteenth for the
confirmation of this Charter; and so at this day, it may be said in a legal
sense, that all the Men of the Kingdom do join in granting the King a Tax by
themselves, or their Representatives in Parliament, tho none but such as are
Freeholders of 40 ^. a Year, can have Votes at the Election of Knights of the
Shire, nor any but the Aldermen of diverse Cities and Towns, and the Freemen of
Corporations, and the Scot and Lot-men of Buroughs, who have any Votes at the
Election of Citizens, or Burgesses.

And that your Dr. himself, tho he has misled you in the sense of this word
Dederunt, yet can grant this to be a reasonable Interpretation of this Clause,
when he is in a good humor: Pray remember his Comment upon the Record of the
34th. of Edw. I. which I gave you but now; wherein, after the Barons it
follows, that milites Liberi homines and Communitates Comitatuum granted a
30th. part of their Movables, and the Communitates Civitatum and Burgorum a
20th. whereupon he tells you these words are so expressed as if they had been
all there in Person; but these words signify no more, then that the Knights
and Freemen gave by their Representatives and that the Communities of Counties,
and these Citizens and Buroughs gave by their Representatives. and why these
Milites Liberi homines and Omnes de Regno might not do it as well in the same
sense? When this Charter was granted and confirmed, I should be glad if you
could give me a sufficient reason, so that I shall refer it to your own
Ingenuity, to consider when the Charter says expressly, that all the Persons
therein mentioned, gave a Fifteenth, whether it be not a manifest wresting of
the Grammatical signification of this word, Dederunt to render it they paid;
for at this rate a Man may make words signify just what he pleases. But our
ancient English Historians are the best Judges in this case, for the ancient
Annals of Waverly-Abby Published in the same Volume I last mentioned, under the
Year 1225. having given us a short account of the granting th^se Charters, 9
Hen. III. recite the conclusion of the great Charter in the same words as they
are in the Charter it self, only before Dederunt there is also added the word
Concesserunt, which shows that the Author of this part of those Annals, who
might very well write at the same time, or presently after the Charter was
granted, by his Paraphrase of Concesserunt, seemed to intend to prevent any
such mistake in the the signification of the word Dederunt. And that this was
the constant opinion of all Historians and Antiquaries to this day; I will show
you from Henry de Knighton, who lived within 100 Years after this Charter was
granted, Vid. Christi. ^crip ores Cot. 24.29.
in his History has this passage in this Yera, viz. 9. of Hen. III. Post haec
Rex Henricus concessit Magnatibus terrae duas Chartos unam de Foresta, and
aliam de Libertatibus ob quam causam Communes Regni concesserunt 15. partem
mobilium, and in mobilium: From whence it appears plainly that at the time when
this Author writ, it was generally believed that the Commons (called Milites
and Libri Tenentes in this Charter granted this 15th. of all their Goods.

I shall conclude with a modern Authority of a Person, who you will own to be a
Man of great Judgment and Learning, viz. Sir Henry Spelman, who in his
Discourse of Magna Charta, inserted in his Glossary, has this remarkable
passage, Demum Anno. 9. Regis Henrici concedente Clero, Page 376.
and Populo cum Magnatibus Q^intodeceimam partem omnium rerummobilium totius
Regni Angliae; renovantur Chartae Lib rtatum, prout sub Rege Iohanne prius
erunt conditae, where it is plain, that by Populus he meant the Commons as
distinct from the Lords and Clergy. As for what you say further, whereby you
would set up the Authority of Mat. Paris against the express ^ords of the
Charter it self: I suppose you or the Dr. from whom you borrowed this N^tion,
are the first who interpret ancient Statutes and Records, according to the
general Words of Historians: Whereas I always thought till now, that the sense
of Historians ought to have been understood by Records, and not vice versa,
since the former differ one from another in their manner of expression of the
constituent parts of our great Councils or Parliaments, and for brevity sake,
express themselves in as few words as they can.

But notwithstanding the Conciseness of those expressions which we find in Mat.
Paris, and other ancient Authors; yet I think even in this place now cited,
there are words enough to prove there were other Lay Persons at this Council,
besides Earls and Barons there mentioned, or else, what is the meaning of these
words Aliis U^iversis immediately after Baronibus, to whom Hubert de ^urgh
proposed the Kings Demands, and who also gave their answer to them? And if
these Gentlemen were not Barons, as certainly they were not (or else to what
purpose was this distinction made) then they were meet Commoners, and so we
find that there were Commons in Parliament from the Authority of Mat. Paris
before the 49. Hen. III. which is likewise proved by the Statute of Merto^
(which I have lately cited) in the conclusion of its Preface runs thus, Ita
provijum fui^, and conc^ssum t^m a predictis Archi-piscopis, Episcopis
Comi^ibus, Baronibus, quam ab ipso Rege, and Aliis. Now pray tell me who these
and Alii were if not the Commons, for you did not answer this Question when I
last mentioned this Statute.


M. I shall tell you my thoughts of these Alii by and by, when I come to these
words omnes de Regno; but in the mean time, give me leave to give you the Drs.
Interpretation of this word Milites put here after Barons, which Milites were
not Knights of Shires (as you suppose) but Tenants in Capi^e by Military
Service, as appears by the Assize or Statute of Richard the I. quoted by R.
Hovelen in his History, Fol. 445.
which is said to have been made, per Assensum and Consilium Archiepiscoporum,
and Episcoporum, Abbarum, C^miutum and Baronum, and Militum. Now these Milites
were often styled Barons, and the Barons, Milites. Nam Miles (says Sir Henry
Spellma^) quem Baronem vocibant non a Militari Cingulo (quo Equite crebantur)
sed a Militari ^edo quo alias possessor and libere Teneus, number upatus est,
nomen sumpsit, that is, such as had Lands given them for, or such as held Lands
by, Military Service and did Homage and Fealty to those of whom they held their
Lands, and in this sense, Mat. Paris calls all the Temporal Nobility Milites,
when in the Parliament 37. of Hen. III. he says a Militibus Concessum est
Scutagium illo Anno. ad Scutum tres Marc^t.


F. I think your Interpretation of the word Milites i^ forced, and quite
contrary to the true meaning of this Charter; now pray show me the consequence,
that because the Barons were anciently styled Milites; that therefore your
Tenants in Capi^e were then styled Barons too; which is not true, and quite
contrary to this Charter it self, where these Milites (whoever they were) are
put after the Barons, as a distinct Order of Men from them, whereas if the
terms had been then reciprocal the words Baron^s, or Milites (chu^e which you
please) would have comprehended both; but indeed this Title of Miles was then
of a much larger signification, and took in all Knights of whatsoever Tenancy,
whether by Military Service or Socage, as appears by those Writs of the 25 th.
and 26 th. of Henry the Third, which I have already cited, whereby those that
held Estates sufficient to maintain themselves de Tenemento, ^o tam militari,
quam Soc^gi, were a like Summoned in to take the Order of Knighthood, and when
Knighted were certainly as good Milites as the best of your Tenants in Capit^,
and so might very well be reckoned amongst the Milites in this Charter: But
pray tell me what say you to these following words, Liberi Tenent^s and omn^s
de Regno?


M. These likewise bear a like Interpretation, for by these libere Tenentes,
that immediately follow in this Cha^ter after Milites I suppose were mea^t no
other than the lesser Tenants in Capi^e, who having scanty Knights Fees, B. G.
p. 64.
or part of Knights Fees, desired not Knighthood, or had compounded, or fined
for it, that they might not be made Knights, and who not being actual Knights,
are here called Free Tenants or Freeholders, as I have already told you at our
last meeting.


F. Pray give me leave to answer this Interpretation of the word liberi
Tenentes, before we proceed farther. You may remember that I have answered all
your Authorities, whereby you would prove that the Tenants in Capi^e were at
this time the only proper Freeholders of the Kingdom; which is false, since I
then proved to you from Sir Henry Spelman's Glossary, that any Freeman having
an Estate of Inheritance, was as much Libere Tenens, a Freeholder as the best
Tenant in Capite in England. Indeed if the words had been Milites and libere
T^n^ntes, qui de Rege tenuerunt in Capite, you had said somewhat, but otherwise
it is all mere supposition, without any ground. But pray go on to the last
wo^ds in this Charter, and omnes de Regno nostro; what can they mean ^ut that
all the Freemen of the Kingdom gave this Fifteenth by their Lawful
Representative.


M. If you do not like our sense of these words, Milites and Libere Terentes: I
cannot help it, nor shall I dispute them longer with you; but as for this last
Clause in the Charter, Ibid. page 65.
and omnes de Regno, it only means, all these who were Tenants in Capite in
general in the same sense, as when our ancient Historians mention Regnum, and
S^cerdotium; by Regnum is to be understood both the Temporal and Spiritual
Barons, great and small; the Kings Justices, or any other that exercited any
share or Ministerial part of the Government; as perhaps all those di^ one way
or other by coming to our great Councils or Parliaments, etc. all which is
evident from the words of the Quadri parti^e History, concerning Thom^s Becket,
thus, Rex apud Clarendun. Regnum convo a^ universum. Quo com venis^ ut
Prasules, and Proceres, etc. i. e. the whole Baronage called together by the
Kings Writ, or a full meeting of the Spiritual and Temporal Barons, both great
and small. I pray also remember that passage you your self made use of but now,
out of Mat. Paris, whereby you would prove that the Common Council of the whole
Kingdom was distinct from that of the Tenants in Capite; because that after the
Curia held at Christmas, the King immediately issued out his Writs, commanding
omnibus ad Regnum spectantibus, to appear at London; and yet you see there are
no more mentioned to be Summoned than the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors,
Earls and Barons. B. G. p. 65.
So that we may hence learn the true meaning of these words, omnes de Regno, at
the end of this Charter; for these omnes de Regno, were the same with the omnes
ad Regnum spectantes, in Mat. Paris, the Regnum, or Government, the Communitas
Regni, the totalis Regni universitas, the insluita nobilium multitudo; and also
gives us the meaning of those words omnes alii de Regno, in the close Roll of
the 19 th. Henry the Third, M. 6. Dor.
to the Sheriff of Somersershie, Scias quod Comites and Barons, and omnes alii
de toto Regno nostro, etc. Concesserunt, etc. Which are further explained by a
Writ in the same Roll about the same business, directed to the Sheriff of
Sussex (which you have likewise cited) beginning thus, ibid. M. 8.
Sciatis quod Arohiepiscopi, Episcopi, Abbates, Priores, Comites, Barons and
omnes alii de Regno nostro Angliae, qui de nobis tenent in Capire nobis
concesserunt, etc. Here the omnes alii de Regno, were the omnes qui de nobis
t^nent in Capite; which were then all the Regnum, or Communitas Regni. So
likewise it may be farther proved from a Record of the 48 th. of Henry the
Third, Rot. Pat. N. 5.
Rex omnibus, etc. cum venerabiles Patres G. E. Eborum Archiepiscopus, etc. and
alii Praelati, Magnates, Milites, libere Tenentes and omnes alii de Regno nobis
nuper in Articulo necessitati^ servitium fecerunt, and sulisidium, etc. And I
may also put you in mind of the Writ I cited but now directed, Archiepiscopis,
Episcopis, etc. Comitibus, Baronibus, Militibus and omnibus aliis de Comi^aru
Kanciae, etc. for the Levving of forty Shillings upon every Knights he in that
Country. Now this Writ could not be directed to all the Men in Kent, but to all
such as paid Scutage, for not a fortieth part of them were Tenants in Capite,
or Military Service: So that these omnes alii de Regno, and Omnes alii
Comitatus, were the same one with the other, and otherwise it could not be: for
by Omnes de Regno, or Omnes alii de Regno, the Inhabitants in general could not
be understood, for they never were Summoned, no not the Hundredth part of them
to meet in Great Councils; for 'twas impossible they should, and perhaps not
above a fourth part of the Kingdom paid to this Fifteenth, if we consider how
many Servants, Villain^, Bondmen, and many such People there were than in the
Nation that paid nothing.


F. You have taken a great deal of pains to perplex and darken words in
themselves very clear and perspicuous; for methinks it is a strange piece of
confidence in your Doctor, when the Charter says expresily, That Omnes d^
Regno; all the Freemen of the Kingdom gave this 15th, to restrain this Act only
to the Tenants in Capite, who were but a few in comparison to the whole
Kingdom; this is indeed to make words signify any thing he fancies.

But to answer your Authorities, which are founded all upon false suppositions,
without any proof. As to your Authority from the Quadrilogus History of Thomas
B^ecket; it is true, that the Praesules and Pr^ceres are there called Regnum,
the Kingdom; but I have already proved at our last Meeting; that this word
Proceres was of so comprehensive signification, that it took in all the
Principal Men of the Kingdom, as well those that were Lords, as those that were
not; so that the chief Citizens and Magistrates of our Cities and great Towns,
are often styled Proceres and Magnates Civitatum, in our ancient Historians and
Records, and certainly the great Freeholders, or Knights of Shires did much
more justly deserve that Title.

As for the other passage out of Mat. Paris, where the Bishops, Abbots, Earls
and Barons, are called omnes ad Regnum spectantes; this is but a general way of
expression in this Author, and proves nothing: For either the word Barons,
takes in all the smaller Tenants in Capite, or it does not, if the latter, then
this Author does not exactly recite all the Orders of Men, whom your self must
acknowledge to have appeared there; since the great Barons alone could never
make this infinita Nobilium multitudo mentioned in this Author; if the former,
then it is plain, that he thereby comprehended more then those who were really
Barons. Since it is certain that the smaller Tenants in Capite were not so, nor
are so much as called so in King John's Charter; and then make the most of this
word Barons, it may in a large and common acceptance, take in all the chief
Freeholders, or Lords of Manors, which (as I have already proved) were often
called Barons in our ancient Historians, and Laws of the first Norman Kings;
and Mr. Cambden tells us that under the word Baronagium, omnes Regni ordines
continarentur: This I say, supposing that by this infinita Nobilium multitudo,
is to be understood, all the chief Gentry, or Freeholders of England, called
often Nobilitas Angliae, as I have already made out, and which may also take in
the Representatives of Cities and Towns; but if we should suppose, that by the
Barons here mentioned, are to be understood only the Tenants in Capite; yet,
since they, together with the great Lords, made the chiefest Figure in the
Government; it was easy for him to over-flip the particular mention of others,
it being enough to comprehend them with the Representatives of the rest of the
Kingdom, under the general Phrase of Infinita Nobilium multitudo, as I have
already said, but I always thought that the Conciseness of Historians, was to
be explained by our Statutes and Records, and not that their express words
should be interpreted by the concise Phrases and Expressions of Historians; and
if by omnes de Regno are to be understood all the Tenants in Capite in general;
how could this be without a notorious Tautology, since if it be as you say,
that the Bishops, Abbots, Earls and Barons comprehended all the greater
Nobility, and the Milites and libere Tenentes, all the lesser, or Tenants in
Capite, (who made then the whole Kingdom) if so, what can these words omnes de
Regno here signify, but so many idle words without any sense or meaning?

But it will be now more easy to answer your false Interpretation of these
words, omnes alii de Regno, which you will needs have to signify only the
Tenants in Capite; and it will be no hard matter to show you the Drs.
Prevarications on these words; for as to the first Writ directed to the Sheriff
of Somersetshire, tho I confess these words at the beginning of the Writ, are
omnes alii de toto Regno nostro; yet the Dr. has in his Glossary concealed the
words that follow, which plainly restrain them, to Tenants in Capite, and their
under Tenants by Military Service; but if you please but to turn to the Writ
which he has given us at large in his Appendix, Numb. 14. you will find first,
that this Writ recites, that the Earls, Barons and omnes alii de Regno, had
granted the King an Aid to two Marks on every Knights-Fee, quae de nobis Tenent
in Capite: Secondly, that at the Command of the Earls, Barons and all others
that held in Capite, the Sheriff should distrain omnes milites and libere
tenentes qui de eis tenent per s^rvitium militare, who were likewise to pay the
King the like Sum of two Marks for every Knights Fee, so that you may here
plainly see that this could be no general Tax granted by the whole Kingdom,
since none but Tenants in Capite and their under Tenants by Knights Service
were chargeable with it, which, if given with their consents, must have been
done in full parliament, and in which they had Representatives of their own
choosing, and if without their consents, was directly contrary to Law.

But you need go no farther then this Writ you have now cited, to prove that
the Milites and libere tenentes, were not at this time only Tenants in Capite,
as you suppose but their Feudatory Tenants also, as appears by the express
words of this Writ, which orders the Sheriff to distrain omnes Milites. and
libere tenetes qui de ci tenent p^rservitium Militare; but as for the other
Writ to the Sheriff of Suss^x, which (as you say truly) relates to the former,
to the Sheriff of Somersetshire; it sufficiently interprets those general
words, omnes alii de R^gno, and expressly restrains them to omnes alii qui de
nobis tenent in Capite, who in a Council of themselves alone, granted this Tax
for themselves only, as I have already proved, which, whether it was according
to Law or not, we shall inquire by and by.

But in the mean time, give me leave to answer to your next Record of the 4^th.
of Hen. III. which recites an extraordinary Service and Aid done by the
Prelati, Magnates, lib re Tenentes, and omnes alii de Regno: Now that this was
not a Service performed, or an Aid given by the Tenants in Capite only for the
whole Kingdom; the word Subsidium may teach you, which was never granted
otherwise, then by the whole Kingdom in Parliament. But let us first consider
the substance of this Record, which is indeed but the Kings Declaration or a
right to all his Subjects in general, or the Freemen of the whole Kingdom, that
what they had lately performed in Articulo nec^ssitatis praedictae non sibi
cedat in prajulicium, n^c ad posterum tra^atur in consuerudimen, vel
consequentiam nec ad bujus modi servi^ium compellentur; which being the effect
of this Record, now see the cause why it was granted, which you may find in
another Record of the same Year, M. 9. dorso.
and on the Roll, and to which this Rcord you cited relates, which is a general
Summons directed, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Comitibus, Baronibus,
Vice-comitibus, Militibus, liberis Hominibus, and Vniversae Communitati
Comitatus Lincolniae, commanding them all, even the Citizens and Townsmen
immediately to appear with such Arms as are there expressed (and were proper
for each Man's Estate and Condition) for the common Defense of the Kingdom,
against strangers then ready to invade it, and this Record also says, eodem
modo scribitur caeteris Vice-comitibus Angliae. Now since it appears by this
Writ of Summons by which this Service and Aid was performed, that not only the
Tenants in Capite, but all the Subjects of the whole Kingdom were engaged in
the performance of it; can any body, but one who will take things by halves,
suppose that by these omnes alii de Regno there mentioned (and who must
certainly be the same Parties intended in the Drs. own Record, viz. all the
Freemen of the Kingdom) could be meant no more then the Lesser Tenants in
Capite, taken altogether, when they had been (according to our sense) all
particularly named before?

But that by these omnes de Regno cannot be here meant only the Tenants in
Capite, Rot. Cl. 2. Mem. dorso.
but all the Freemen of the whole Kingdom, I shall prove by another Record of
the 16th. of Hen. III. and is the very Writ I gave you before, wherein it is
recited, that the Villani together with the rest of the Liberi Homines had
given a 30th. of their Movables, in consideration of which, this Writ
concludes thus, Concessimus etiam Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus,
Prioribus, Comitibus, Baronibus, and vobis omnibus aliis de Regno nostro, quod
tam Charta nostra, de Foresla, quam alia Charta nostra de Libertatibus, quas
eis, and vobis fieri fecimus de caetero in omnibus teneantur; so that it
plainly appears, that by these words in this Record omnibus Aliis de Regno,
must be understood all the Freemen of the Kingdom in general, unless you will
allow none to have had any share in these Charters, or to have received any
benefit by them, but the Drs. Tenants in Capite alone, which sure you will not
affirm.

But least I tire you as well as my self, in dwelling so long upon things so
plain and obvious, were not they by too much industry, rendered obscure, I come
at last to the conclusion of your discourse, which is no more then a repetition
of what you had said at first; that because all the Kingdom could not be
Summoned to appear in Parliament, and that Villains and Servants etc. never
paid to this Tax; that therefore the words omnes de Regno are not to be
understood literally; (a doughty discovery) and therefore you have found an
expedient to help this contradiction by your Tenants in Capite, and Thy
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses for the Laity, and by the Procuratores Cleri
for the Inferior Clergy; whose Interpretation is most agreeable to truth, I
durst leave to any indifferent Judge; for I must needs tell you once again, I
cannot see any manner of reason, either from Authorities, or from the Nature of
the thing, that your Tenants in Capite could be the omnes de Regno in a legal
sense, and as such did represent all the Freemen of Estates in the whole
Kingdom; therefore if you can prove this, it may go far to convince me,
otherwise not.


M. Since you will not rest satisfied with those Authorities I have already
produced to prove it; B. A. P. 117. E^d^in. Ibid. 121.
pray let me discourse with you a little more particularly of the nature of
Tenures by Knights Service. I therefore suppose that the Dr. has very well
prove by several Records, as also the two Writs of 19th. Hen. III. to the
Sheriffs of Somerset and Sussex, that the King anciently by his Prerogative,
and his original Power and Right, reserved upon Knights Fee, did Tax the
Military Tenants, of his Tenants in Capite, and their other ordinary Free
Tenants, and by his Writs caused them to pay both ^cutage Tax and Scutage
Service, and other reasonable Aids, as often as necessity required.


F. I grant indeed, the matter of fact to have been sometimes as you say, since
there is no averring against express Records; but I say likewise, that as for
those Writs the Dr. has given us concerning the Kings Ordering the Sheriffs to
distrain the Mesne Tenants of the Tenants in Capite for Scutage Service, as to
Marry their Daughters, or for the finding of Men in any Warlike Expedition, it
was no more then those Mesne Tenants were bound to do by the Tenures of their
Estates; if they had failed to serve their Lords in Person, or by sufficient
Deputies; and therefore the King might legally grant them Scutage upon such
Tenants, and perhaps might also change their Service in Person into a pecuniary
Aid, as appears by some of those Writs the Dr. has given us; and this not by
his Prerogative, but by Law; so likewise, tho your Tenants in Capite could Tax
themselves in their distinct Council, or else in the Common Council of the
whole Kingdom at what rate they pleased, for the Knights Fees they held of the
King; and tho the King might sometimes undertake by this pretense, to I evy a
Scutage of two Marks on their Under-Tenants also; yet does it not appear by
either of those Records you have now cited, that they gave for more then
themselves alone, the words in the Writs being only, that they had given the
King Esse^ax Auxilium of two Marks upon every Knights Fee (as well Wards as
others) who held of him in Capite, without any mention of their Mesne Tenants;
so that if the Sheriff was afterward ordered to distrain these Mesne Tenants
also, for two Marks for each Knights Fee they held of their Lords; this was
straining a point of Prerogative, and was expressly against Law; for at this
rate the King might by the l^ke Prerogative have Taxed all the Bishops, Abbots,
great Lords and all other Tenants in Capite without their consents, as well as
their Mesne Tenants, tho it was contrary to the express words of the Charters
of King William I. and King John, which you your self cited at our former
Meeting, so that granting the matter of fact to have been practiced sometimes
as your Records make out, this is no proof that this was a constant Law, or
settled Custom, much less that the King had a right so to do.


M. I do not doubt, B. ^. A. page 179, 180.
but that I can prove to you, that what this King then did in charging these
mesne Tenants was according to his ancient Prerogative, and what himself and
his Predecessors had frequently done both before and after the Clause in King
John's Charter of Nullum Scut^gium, vel Auxilium ponam in Regno meo, and^. was
granted, nay after it was granted Hen. 3. and Edw. 1. taxed their Demeasns
through England, Rot. 11. Hen. 3. m. 19.
tho not the whole Kingdom by the advice of their Privy Council until the
Statute de Tallagio non concedendo was made in 34 E^w. 1. and both Rich. 1. and
K. John had taxed the whole Kingdom without common assent before the Grant of
Magna Charta; as also in the Reign of Rich. 1. as you may find in Hoveden, Fol.
442.
who lived at that time, the passage is long, and therefore I shall only give
you the beginning of it, viz. that this King Anno 1198 ( Regno 9.) accepit de
unaquaque Carucata terrae totius Angliae V. solidos de Auxilio, etc. and then
goes on to show us the manner how it was raised and collected; and it is
observable, that he uses these words Auxilium and Tallagium for the same Tax,
so we find in Mat. Paris, that King John took a seventh part of all Movables
without common Assent, F. 209. A. D. 1203.1207.
and another time a Thirtieth, the great Men and Clergy grumbling at it. K.
Hen. 3. also taxed all his Demeasn in the 33 d year of his Reign, M. 1.
as appears by a Writ in the close Roll of this year, whereby he also commands
the Sheriff of Bu^ks that he make Philip Basse^ a Rati^nabil^ Tallagium de
hominibus suis de eo tenentilus in Mannerio de Wycumb, quod aliquando suit
Dominicum Praedec^ssorum R^gis, etc.

In the 39 th. year this King (as the Doctor shows us at large by a Reco^d in
the keeping of the Remembrancer of the Exchequer) he taxed all his Demeasn; and
among the rest the City of London at 3000 Marks; B. A. I. 178.
which tho with some contest mentioned in this Record, they were at last forced
to pay; because it was found upon Record that this King and his Father had
several times ^alliated or Taxed the sai^ City in like manner, at the sums
therein mentioned; so that at last the Mayor and Citizens were fain to
acknowledge themselves th^s Talliable by the King.

So in the 52. year of his Reign he Taxed all his Demeasn Lands beyond Tren^ by
his Escheators; Rot. Cl. 52. H. 3. m. 10. dorso. Ryleys placit. Parl.
and this Right was acknowledged by all the Bishops, Earls and Barons in the 33
d year of Edw. I. as app^a^s by their Petition to him in Parliament, in these
words, Al P^ti^ionem Arc^iepiscoporum, Episporum, Praelatorum, Comitum and
Baronum and aliorum proborum hominum de Terra p^tentium quod Rex concedere
veli. quod ipsi p^ssunt ta^^i^re antiqua dominica, unde sunt in Tenantia, ^icut
R^x Dominica sua taliavit; it^ respon^um est, fiat ut petitur.

From all which you may plain see that the Kings of England had anciently a
Prerogative of laying Taxes not only upon their own Tenants and their Mesne
Tenants who held under them, but upon the whole Kingdom too; and it their
Successors have acted otherwise it has proceeded from their meet grace and
favor who have tied up their own hands from exercising this Prerogative.


F. I confess you have mustered up a great many Authorities; but for what end I
know not unless it be to prove that some former Kings stretched their
Prerogative to act directly against Law, and their own Charters to the
contrary; and to justify them in it when they have do^e, as if all things were
done according to their Lawful Prerogative, because they did it; if this be Law
or Reason either much good may do you with it; for at this rate the King
notwithstanding all Laws made and sworn by him to the contrary may take what he
pleases out of our Estates without our consents, because his Predecessors broke
the Laws and their Coronation Oath into the Bargain; but you might have
remembered that a de f^cto ad jus non datur consequentia; but I doubt the
Precedents you have now brought, will not come up to the proof of the assertion
you have laid down; for it is plain as well from King John's Charter, as by
that passage in Bracton, I but now cited, whereby it appears that extraordinary
Taxes such as Hidage, Courage, and Carvage, and alia (under which I suppose was
included your Scutage-Tax also) could not be imposed without the consent of the
Common Council of the whole Kingdom; when the King met his People in
Parliament; if then this were Law whatever K. John o^ Henry the Third, or any
other King acted contrary to this Rule, was illegal, and produced among other
mischiefs the general revolt of all the Baronage, i. e. as well the Inferior as
Superior Nobility of the whole Kingdom, till such time as our Kings, finding
they could do no good by force, were fain at last to content themselves with
the Legal Prerogatives of the Crown, and by new Laws and fresh Declarations of
the ancient Law to declare it unlawful for them to impose any Taxes upon their
Subjects without their consents in Parliament.

But let me tell you that by thus setting up the Kings Illegal Prerogative of
taxing the Mesne Tenants of their Tenants in Capite, you quit the question; for
I asked you by what right the Tenants in Capite (whom you suppose) could grant
by this great Charter a Fifteenth of the Movables of the whole Kingdom as well
of those who did not hold of them by Military Service, as of those that did,
nay of those who never held of them at all; and you then fly presently to I
know not what unknown Royal Prerogative of Taxing the Mesne Tenants of the
Tenants in Capite at pleasure; which was either according to Law, or it was
not, if the former, I have already proved he could not do it by Law at all; but
if against Law, there was the like reason why he should have had the like
Prerogative over his Tenants in Capite too; even over the very Bishops, Abbots
and Temporal Lords; and then I desire to know whether the great Council of the
Kingdom had not been long since destroyed and given up.

But to examine your Authorities, it is true, Hoveden says of Richard the
First, that accepit de unaquaque Hida Terrae V. solidos, yet does it not
therefore follow, that he took this Tax without consent of his great Council,
it was the ordinary Phrase of Writers in those times to say, Rex accepit, i. e.
received such a Tax, when indeed he took nothing but what was given him by his
Parliament. And therefore tho we find this Tax not mentioned in any other
Writer, but only Hoveden, and so cannot give you an express proof that this Tax
was granted in a great Council, yet it is most likely (nay certain it was) for
the word accepit does not in its own nature import any violent or illegal
exaction* and therefore considering the nature of the thing, it is greater
reason to suppose that this aid was granted by consent; since this same Author
tells us in the relation of this affair, that this Money was received by the
hands of two lawful Knights of each Hundred, and that they did answer this
Money to the Exchequer, Coram Episcopis, Abbatibus and Baronibus ad hoc
assignatis, who would never have undertaken it, had not this Tax been granted
by the Common Council of the Kingdom; but that this King could not tax the
whole Kingdom at his pleasure may appear by a relation out of this very Author:
in the very same year, Page 441. b.
but a little before, viz. that when the King demanded by Hubert Archbishop of
Canterbury, that Homines Angliae the men of England should find him 300
Milites, i. e. Knights to stay one whole year in his Service, or else would
give him so much money as that he might therewith maintain those 300 Knights in
constant pay, viz. to every Knight three Shillings of English Money wages a
day, and that to grant this, all the rest were willing, as not daring to resist
the King's will, only Hugh Bishop of Lincoln as a true servant of God
abstaining from all evil answered, That he would by no means agree to the Kings
desire, because it would redound to the detriment of his Church, etc. and so it
seems the business fell and came to nothing. Now it is plain that this Request
must have been made in the great Council of the Kingdom; or at least in that of
the Tenants in Capite, and if he could not charge his Subjects with the keeping
but of 300 Horsemen for one year without their assents can any body believe
that he should presently after extort a much greater Sum, viz. five Shillings
out of every Plow-land in England. But as for all your Precedants for King
John's reign, he was such a Notorious Tyrant and breaker of his Coronacion
Oath, and common Faith both to God and man, that I hoped that neither your self
nor any good English man would have fetched Precedents for Prerogative, from so
pros^igate a Reign as his, and in which I grant there were more than once
illegal Exactions of this nature, which yet are branded by those very
Historians that relate them for great oppressions and unjust exactions; Vid.
Chron. Thom. Wikes. and Annals de Waverly in Anno 1207. Published at Oxford.
as particularly in this first instance of out of Mat. Paris of K. John's
taking away by force the Seventh of the Moveable Goods of the whole Kingdom;
which is by this Author called by no better than Rapinam, Rapine or Robbery.

The same I may say to the like Exactions of his Son H^n. the Third, which are
branded by all Writers as horrible and illegal oppression^, nay are owned to be
so by this Kings frequent Confirmations of Magna Charta, and Acknowledgments of
his breach of them, and promised to observe them better for the future; But I
am sorry to find your Doctor, whom you follow, both in his Answers to Mr. P.
and Mr. A. as also in his complete History still to cite the most violent and
illegal Actions, nay the very perjuries for ^lowers of the Crown, and Royal
Prerogatives.

But as for the Authorities you urge for this Kings Talliating his Demesnes
without consent of Parliament, you your self grant that this Talliage was not
general upon the whole Kingdom; and if so, could only concern his own Tenants
in ancient Demesne, and none else; who were always exempted from being taxed
with the rest of the Nation* because they were liable to yield the King a
reasonable Talliage ratione Tenurae whenever he needed it; yet this was
counted rather a privilege than otherwise, since they were not only free from
all other burdens and Parliamentary attendance, but were also Taxed much less
than the rest of the Nation in regard of their Tilling the Kings Lands; but
when this reasonable Prerogative grew to be abused, and the Exactions levied
upon them became intolerable, then they would no longer suffer it; but got it
taken away by the Statute de Tallagio non concedendo; after which we find the
Tenants in ancient Demesne frequently giving their shares of Aides and
Subsidies in Parliament by Delegates of their own, as in the Record of the 35
th. of Edward the First, which you have now cited; till at last they came to be
resolved into the common body of the Kingdom, but a^ for the City of London* it
was never taken for part of the Kings Demeans, and so is not to be found in
Dooms day Book, but as appears by Record held of the King in Capite, and
therefore could be no otherwise Taxed then as the rest of the Tenants in
Capite, that is, by the Common Council of the Kingdom. And this made the
Londoners deny to be otherwise Talliated, as appears by this Record of Henry
the Third, which you have now cited. But the truth is they had this Exaction
first laid upon them in the exorbitant Reign of King John; and this was
afterward trumped again upon them in all the ill part of his Sons Government,
because his Father had done it before; and I doubt not but if Ship-mony had
passed unquestioned, and been as often paid in the Reign of K. Charles the
First, but that it would have been urged as a Precedent in the Reign of Charles
the Second.

But as for your last Authority of the 33 d. of Edward the First, pray take
notice, that it is before the Statute de Tallagio non concedendo, and extends
only to such Estates in ancient Demesne as were held of the King by Noblemen or
Gentlemen, either by Gift, or Purchase; and which, for all that still kept the
ancient custom of being Talliated by the King, as their under Tenants were by
them, to enable the Lords to pay the Kings Talliage; and in this sense I
understand these words in this Record, unde sunt in Tenantia; i. e. of which
they are in Tenancy to the King. Nor does the Record call them Dominica sua, as
it does the Kings Demesns that follow; so that this could not be a Tax upon all
under Tenants by Knights Service as you suppose: sin^e their Estates were never
called Antiqua Dominica, and therefore I think after all, you cannot show me
any legal Precedent that our Kings claimed a Right under color of their
Prerogative of Taxing the whole Nation de Alto and ^^sso, at their pleasure.


M. I shall not now dispute it longer with you whether the Kings of England had
not anciently a power of Taxing the Lands held of them, without the consent of
their Great Council; but thus much I think I may safely aver that when this
Great Charter was made the Tenants in Capite as the Common Council of the
Kingdom gave Taxes and made Laws not only for themselves but their Mesne
Tenants, and the whole Nation also. Nor was this at all unreasonable, that
those who thus held Estates by Mesne Tenure under the Tenants in Capite, should
be bound by the Acts of those of whom they held them; B. I. A. page 171.
since we see in Scotland that at this day none sit there, either as
Commissioners of Shires, or Burgesses for the Royal Buroughs, but such as hold
in Capite of the King; for anciently before the Law for excusing the smaller
Barons and free Tenants in Capite, and sending Commissioners of Shires in their
stead, was introduced by a Statu^e made in the Seventh Parliament of K. Iam. 1.
A. Dom. 1420, it consisted all of Tenants in Capite, viz. of the Bishops,
Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons; and Libere Tenentibus qui de R^ge t^nent in
Capite; as appears by the very words in the Latin Titles to diverse of those
Statutes, as you may find them in Slenes Collection of Scotch Laws. Now if this
Law did anciently, and does still prevail in Scotland, that the Tenants in
Capite should be the sole Representatives of that whole Kingdom; I cannot see
any Reason why it might not have been so anciently in Engl^nd also, especially
since I can give you so good Reasons to back this opinion.


M. I will answer your Argument from Scotland by and by; but in the mean time
give me leave to tell you why I think it could never have been the custom in
England; and that for two Reasons, first because it was against Reason; and 2
ly, because it was against the known Law of the Kingdom* that it was against
Reason, is apparent; since what reason was there that if a Man in those times
purchased an Estate for a valuable consideration of a Lord, or any other Tenant
in Capite (as certainly thousands did) to be held either by Knights Service, or
in Socage that such a Tenant should lie at the Mercy of his Lord, to dispose of
his Estate in Taxes, and make Laws for him at his pleasure; however exorbitant
those Taxes were, or inconvenient those Laws might prove, the Lord being no
Representative of his own choice* or appointment.

In the next place, that this was contrary to the received Law and Custom of
the Kingdom in those times, I can prove by two very sufficient Authorities, the
one of the Earl of Chester, the other of the Bishop of Durham. Now it is
certain that both this Earl and Bishop hel^ their County Palatines in Capite
immediately of the King, nor had those Counties any Representatives in
Parliament, till long after that they had Knights of Shires and Burgesses,
granted them by particular Statutes made for that purpose; now according to
your Hypothesis, all the Freeholders and Inhabitants of those County-Palatines
should have been bound by all Acts of Parliament, and Taxed with the rest of
the Kingdom as often as there were Laws made, and Taxes given when their Bishop
or Earl was present, which was not so; for in the first place as for the County
of Chester if the Earl had been the Representative in Parliament of his Tenants
by Knights Service, or otherwise, as also of all the Abbeys, and the City of
Chester it self, and all other great Towns in that County, his Vote in
Parliament would have obliged all of them; and there would have been no need of
a Common Council or Parliament of the States of the whole County in which they
then made Laws, and Taxed themselves as a Separate Body from the rest of the
Kingdom, as may appear from these following Records which Mr. A. has given us;
the first of which is a Writ of K. Edw. I. I. A. p. 22. Ro^. Pat. 3. E. 1. M. 6.
directed, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Priori^us, Baronibus,
Militibus and omnibus ^liis Fidelibus suis in Comitat. C^striae; reciting that
whereas the Prelates, Counts, Barons, and alii de Regno, had given him a 15 th.
of their Movables. He desires that they also would of their Benevolence and
Courtesy (in Latin Curialitate) grant him the like Subsidy, which Note could
not be done out of a Common Council.

So likewise in another Writ of the 20 th. of this King, reciting that whereas
the Probi Homines, Rot. Bat. 20* E. 1. m. b.
and Communitas Cestriae sicut caeteri de Regno nostro 15 mam partem omnium
mobilium suorum nobis concesserunt gratiose: Now supposing (as the Doctor
always does) that these Probi Homines were the Earls Tenants in Capite, what
can this word Communitas here signify but another sort of men distinct from
them, viz. the Communalty or Commons of that County: And which is also
remarkable, this County was now fallen to the Crown for want of Heirs male of
the last Earl; and so according to the Doctors notion, the King being their
sole Representative needed not to have been beholding to them for these
Subsidies; since, tho not as King, yet as Earl of Chester, he might have Taxed
them himself, which yet he thought not fit to do, because he knew it was
contrary to the Rights and Privileges of that County, which had ever since the
grant of it to Hugh Lupus by Will. I. always been Taxed by themselves.

Which Privileges are also expressly set forth in a Supplication of all the
Estates of this County Palatine to K. Henry the Sixth, which Mr. P. has given
us from an Ancient Copy of it then in the hands of Sir Thomas Manwaring of that
County, P. R. C. p. 45, 46.
Baronet: Wherein the Abbots, Priors, and Clergy, Barons, Knights, Esquires,
and Commonalty set forth, that they with the consent of the Earl did make, and
admit Laws within the same, etc. and that no Inheritors, or Possessors within
the said County were chargeable or liable, or were bounden, charged or hurt of
their Bodies, Liberties, Franchises, Lands, Goods, or Possessions, unless the
said County had agreed unto it. Now what can here be meant by County but the
Common Council, or Parliament thereof, since otherwise they could make no Laws,
nor do any other public Act?

The like I may say for the County Palatine of Durham, which from the Grant
thereof by William Rufus to the then Bishop, had always been Taxed by
themselves, Rot. Aleman. 14 Ed. 3. m. 9.
and not by the Bishop in Parliament, and that as low as the Reign of Edw. 3.
as appears by this Record of the 14 th. of that King; containing a Letter or
Commission to R. Bishop of Durham; reciting, that whereas the Prelates, Earls,
Barons and the Commons of Counties, had given him a 9th. of their Goods there
mentioned, that therefore the Bishops should convene, the Magnates and
Communitatem Libertatis vestrae (to wit, of his County Palatine) ad certum
diem, and locum, with all convenient speed, and that done to persuade and
excite the said Magnates and Communitas to grant the King the like, or a larger
Subsidy, or Aid toward the maintenance of his Wars, which had been altogether
in vain, if the Bishop, or the King could in those days have Taxed this County
at their Pleasure.

Now if these great Tenants in Capite could not Tax their Mesne Tenants without
their consents, much less could the rest of the Tenants in Capite in England
impose Taxes on their Tenants in Military Service, or in Socage without their
consents, which last had a much less dependence upon them.


M. I must confess I never considered these Precedents of the County Palatine
of Chester and Durham; and therefore can say nothing to them at present, since
it is matter of fact, but as to Reason and Law; I think it is consonant to
both, B. A. P. page 171.
that not only Tenants in Military Service but Socage Tenure should be found by
the Acts of their Superior Lords, of whom all the Lands of England were
formerly held by Knights Service: And tho in Process of time many of these
Estates and Lands became free Tenements, or were holden in Socage, that is,
were Free holders; yet the Lords retained Homage (which in the times we now
write of, was no idle insignificant word) and by that a Dominion over the
Estate* whereby upon Disobedience, Treachery, or Injury done to the Lords, etc.
the Lands were Forfeited to them, and although the Lands, nor the Tenants of
them (which were termed Freeholders) were subject to any base Services, or
Servile works, yet the Lords had a great Power over these Tenants, by reason of
their doing Homage to them (which tho now antiquated) yet eo nomine their Lands
were many ways liable to Forfeiture, and Taxes too.

So that upon all these accounts, it was then as reasonable that the Tenants in
Capite should in those days make Laws, and grant Taxes for all the rest of the
Kingdom; as the Tenants in Capite in Scotland should do so to this very day,
for all the Inhabitants of that Kingdom of never so great Estates, and to this
Argument which is certain in matter of fact, you have yet answered nothing, nor
do I believe can.


F. I cannot see notwithstanding what you have now said, that the Superior
Lords, by reason of Homage should have an absolute Power over their Tenants
Estates: For tho in the Profession of Homage to the Lords, I grant the Tenant
thereby promised to become the Lords Man; yet he never thereby meant to become
his slave, and there were mutual Duties on both sides; so that if the Lord
failed to protect his Tenant in his Estate, or unjustly oppressed him, he might
have refused (nay renounced) his Homage, till the Lord had done him right; nor
can I see how a bare right of having the Forfeiture of the Estate in the Cases
you have put which yet let me tell you, were never so strict in respect of
Socage as Military Tenure as I could show you, were it worth while; for if this
right of Forfeiture alone* could give the Superior Lord a Power over his
Tenants Estate, to make Laws for him, and Tax him as he pleased, then by the
same Rule, the King as Supreme Lord over all his Tenants in Capite, should have
had the like Power over them, of making what Laws for them, and imposing what
Taxes he pleased upon them without their consents: and so there would have been
no need of Common Councils or Parliaments at all, since upon your Hypothesis,
the Tenants in Capite were the only Persons that had any right to appear there.
But if neither the Wardship, Marriage nor Relief of the Heir* could give the
King such a Power over his Tenants in Capite, much less could they attain the
like right over all their Mesne Tenants by Knights Service, for that would have
given them a greater Power over their Tenants then the King himself had over
them; therefore if those great Ties of Wardship, Marriage and Relief of the
Heir, could neither give the King, nor yet any Tenant in Capite power over the
Estate, or Liberty of his Tenants by Knights Service, much less over their
Tenants by Socage Tenure, who were not under this subjection; and farther, if a
right of Forfeiture alone, in some Cases, could have given the Lords a Power of
making Laws; and granting Taxes for his Tenants in Socage, then they should
have kept that right by this Rule, since all Lords had a right of Forfeiture
even upon their Tenants in Socage in some Cases, before the Statute of taking
away Knights Service; and the Court of Wards, and Liveries in the second year
of King Charles the Second, as I could prove, were it worth while.

As to Scotland, I shall not deny the matter of fact to be as you say, that it
has at this day no other Representatives in their Parliament, but the Tenants
in Capite, yet whether it was so or not anciently. I very much doubt, since I
find the very same words and Phrases made use of in the Titles of their old
Statutes, as also in their Records to express the Constituent parts of the
great Council of that Kingdom as were used in England, to express those of
England at the same time: For proof of which, Vid. Chart. Fund^^ Monast. de
Dunferling.
pray see the old Charters of King Malcolme III. and David I. as you may find
them at the end of the 2d. Vol. in Mr. Dugdales Mon^st. Angli^. and you will
see the former to have bin made by the Assent of the Comites and Barons Regni,
Clero adquie cent que Populo, etc. and as I shall also show you from Sir John
Skenes Collection of Scottish Laws, to begin with the most ancient there Extant,
B. A. P. p. 96. and dein Statut. Williel. Reg. fol. 2. cap. 7.
( viz.) an Assize, or Statute made in the time of King William, Sir named the
Lion, who began his Reign Anno. Dom. 1105. in the Fifth of our Hen. I. to the
observance whereof it is there expressed, that the Epi^copi, Abbates, Comites,
Barons, Thani and tota Communitas Regni tenere firmiter juraverunt, so
likewise King Alexander II. who began to Reign Anno. 1214. which was the
Sixteenth year of our King John, Stat. Alexan. R^g. fol. 22. cap. 2.
and he made his Laws de confilio and assensu venerabilium Patrum Episcoporum
Abb^tum, Baronum ac proborum hominum suorum Scotiae, and who these were may
also farther appear by the beginning of certain Statutes made by the said King
Alexander in the same Year, which begin thus: Statuit Rex per consilium, and
assensum totius communitatis suae, etc.

I shall next produce the Title of a Parliament holden the 13th. of Rob. I. who
began his Reign Anno. Dom. 1306. the 3d. of our Edward I. Stat. Rob. 1. fol. 29.
In Dei nomine, Amen. Rober^us Dei Gratia Rex Scotorum Anno Regni suo Decimo
tertio die Dominica proxima, etc. habito solenni tractati^, cum Episcopis,
Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus, Baronibus, and aliis Magnatibus de Communitate
totius Regni ibidem congregatis, and which Title concludes thus, de Communi
consilio and expr^sso con^ensu omnium Prelatorum, and libere Tenentium
predictorum ac totius Communitatis predicte ordinavit, condidit, etc. Statuta
infra Scripta, etc. So likewise in an ancient Manuscript, called,
Scoto-Chronicon, formerly in the Possession of the Right Learned and Honorable
Arthur Earl of Anglesey and now in the Herald Office; you will find the Entail
of the Crown of Scotland to have been made by this King Robert, Anno. Dom.
1315. in a general Council or Assembly of the whole Kingdom of Scotland, as
well Clergy as Laity, which as this Author tells us (who lived within Sixty
Years after) was held, Chap. 24.
Dominica proxima ante festum Apostolorum Congregati apud Aere in Ecclesia
Parochiali ejusdem Laici, Episcopi, Abbates, Priores, Archidiaconi, nec non
Diaceni, and caeteri Ecclesiarum Praelati, Comites, Barons, Milites, and
caeteri de Communitate, Regni, Scotiae, tam Cleri quam Laici, etc. from which
it is apparent: There was a great Council of the whole Kingdom (as in England)
more comprehensive then that of Tenants in Capite alone.

And that our English Records also agree with these Scotch Statutes you may see
by 2 Records which Mr. Pryn has given us in his History of Papal Usurpations,
out of the Rolls of the 17th. of Edw. I. it is a Letter to Eric, King of
Norway, Rot, Par. 17. E. M. 4.
concerning the Marriage of his Son Edward with his Granddaughter then Heiress
of Scotland and Norway, reciting that the Custodes (Scil. Regni Scotlae)
Magnates, Praelati ac tota Communitas predicti Regni Scotiae unanimi, and
expresso consensu had agreed to the said Marriage: So likewise in another
Letter of this King Edwards about the same Marriage, Rot. Par. 18. E. 1. M. ^.
he declares that he had by his Procurators therein named, treated and agreed
with the Custodibus, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Comitibus, Baronibus, and tota
Communitate ejusdem Regni, and it presently follows, ac praedicti nobiles and
tota Communitas Regni Scotiae praedicti. Now whom can this word Communitas
signify, put here distinct from the Earls, Barons and Nobles, but the Commons
of that Kingdom.

So likewise in the 14th. year of King Robert I. there was a Letter sent from
the Parliament of Scotland to the Pope, An. Do. 1320.
complaining against the violence of the King of England (which is to be seen
in Manuscript and is also Printed by Dr. Burnet, Part. 2. fol. 109. N. 10.
in his History of the Reformation; and by which it plainly appears, that the
Comites, Barons, Libere Tenentes, and tota Communitas Scotiae agreed to this
Letter.

And that the Cities and Borough Towns were at that time part of this
Communitas appears by the League made between this King Robert and the King of
France in the 28th. year of our Edw. I. which is to be seen in a Roll of this
year, P. R. C. page 83.
still Extant, in the Tower; which League was ratified and confirmed in their
Parliament, by King John de Bayliol, ac Praelatos, and nobiles Vniversitates,
and Communitates civitatum, and villarum praedicti Regni Scotiae, and I suppose
you will not deny that in Scotland, the Cities and Buroughs from times beyond
all Memory, sent their Proxyes and Representatives to the Parliament in
Scotland, and that each Citizen and Burgess so sent, had as good a Vote in
their Parliament, as the greatest Bishop or Earl of them all.


M. I desire no better proofs then what your self have now brought to make out,
that the Tenants in Capite are not only at this day, but have been from the
very beginning of Parliaments in that Nation.

For I shall appeal to those very Statutes and Records you have now cited,
which compared with diverse subsequent Statutes of that Kingdom, will make the
matter plain enough; that the Communitas and these probi homines mentioned in
these Laws you have cited, were the Community of the Tenants in Capite only.

In the first place, therefore let me observe from that very Law of King
Alexanders, the Title of which you have but now quoted, that these words per
essenssum Communitatis cannot here signify the Commons, since they alone could
neither advise, nor give their consent to make Laws, and therefore they must
needs refer to the whole Community or Assembly of Estates, consisting of
Tenants in Capite only, B. A. P. p. 98. Stat Rob. 3. fol. 63.
as I shall prove by a Parliament of King Rob. III. who began to Reign Anno.
Dom 1400. (in the 10th. year of our Richard II) the Title is thus. Parliamentum
Domini nostri Roberti III. Scoto^um Regis, etc. vocatis and summonitis more
solito Episcopis, Prioribus, Du^ibus, Commitibus, Baronibus, Liberis Te^entibus
and Burgensibus qui de Domino Rege tenent in Capite; and this is also confirmed
from the Title to a Parliament held at Perth Anno. Dom. 1427. being the 23d. of
King James I. Summ^nitis and vo^atis m^re solito Episcopis, Abbatibus,
Prioribus, Comitibus, Baronibus and Liberi T^nentibus, qui de nobis tenent in
Capite, and de quolibet Burgo certis Bu^genfibus, so that I think nothing can
be plainer from these ancient Statutes then that the Scottish Parliaments did
anciently consist of no other Members then the Bishops, Abbots and Priors,
Dukes and Earls, Barons, Freeholders and Burgesses, which held of the King in
Capite.

Having thus shown the ancient Costitution of the Scottish Parliaments for your
satisfaction, I shall farther show when, and how it was altered.

In the Seventh Parliament of King James the First, held at Perth, Statut.
Jacob. 1. ibid.
A. Dom. 1420, there was a Law made (which I shall contract) That the small
Barons and Freeholders need not to come to Parliaments, and that for the future
out of each Schirefdome there should be sent two or more wise men after the
largeness of the Schirefdome the which shall be called Commissaries of the
Shire, and that these should have full power finally to hear and determine all
causes to be proposed in the Great Council or Parliament, and that the said
Commissaries should have Costage of them of each Shire that ought to appear in
Parliament or Council. I have only given you an Abstract of this Statute
because it is pretty long, and penned in old Scottish English, but you may
consult it at your leisure.

And this is farther confirmed by a subsequent Act of Parliament of King James
the Sixth, B. A. P. f. 99.
holden at Edinburgh, July the 29 th. 1587, wherein after a repetition of the
former Act of King James the First, and a Confirmation of the same, it follows
thus:

And that all Freeholders of the King, under the degree of Prelates and Lords
of Parliament be warned by Proclamation to be present at the choosing of the
said Commissioners; and none to have voit in their Election but sik as hes
Forty Shillings Land in free tenandrie halden of the King, and hes their
actual dwelling and residence within the same Schire, etc. I need give you no
more of this Act, but I think it is most clear from this as well as the former
Act of Parliament, that the Commons in Scotland were only the Kings Tenants in
Capite, and are so at this day, since none but they can either choose or be
chosen Commissioners for the Shires, Vid. Present Stat. of Scotland, p. 17.
but as to the Buroughs who do each of them send but one Commissioner or
Burgess (except the City of Edinburgh which sends two) all which are chosen by
the Common Council of the Towns. Now there are in Scotland three sorts of these
Burghs, that is to say, Royal Burghs, Burghs of Regality, and Burghs of Barony;
Ibid. p. 100.
but only the Royal Buroughs, the Burgi Dominici Regis, or qui de Rege Tenent
in Capite, send Commissioners to Parliament, and are in number Sixty.

To conclude, that I may apply what has been said concerning the Constituent
parts of the Scottish Parliament to ours anciently, it seems to me that from the
great affinity there was between ours and theirs, it is certain, that our and
their Communitas Regni, was the same, that is, they were the small Barons and
Tenants in Capite.


F. I cannot deny but that the Parliament of Scotland has for above these two
hundred years consisted of the Bishops, Abbots and Temporal Lords, together
with the lesser Tenants in Capite, or their Representatives the Commissioners
for Shires, and Burgesses of Cities and Towns till the Reformation that the
Bishops and Abbots were quite taken away, tho the former were restored to their
places in Parliament by a Statute made in the latter end of King James the
First; yet I cannot allow that from the beginning of that Government, the
Scotch Parliaments have consisted of no other Members than those, since the
word Communitas coming as it does in these old Statutes and Records (I have now
cited) immediately after the Praelati, Comites, Barons, and Milites, etc. must
signify a distinct order of men from the Tenants in Capite, called in the
Statute of King James the First the small Barons, and since the Citizens and
Burgesses though none of those Barons, were also comprehended under this
Communitas (and whom you grant to make the third Estate,) why this word might
not comprehend all the other great Freeholders, I can see no reason to the
contrary.

And therefore I suppose that in the Reigns of K. David 2 d. or Robert the 2 d.
or else the beginning of Robert the 3 d. there was a great alteration in the
constituent parts or Members of the Scottish Parliament; and about that time
the chief Freeholders or Lords of Manors who held of Bishops, Abbots, and
other Temporal Lords, as well as of the Tenants in Capite, or else of the King
by petty Serjeantry, or Socage Tenure, as also many of the small Towns, or
Baronies might either forbear coming at all, or else desire to be excused
because of the great trouble and charge of attendance; (as you see the smaller
Tenants in Capite afterward did when Commissioners for Shires were appointed
in their steads) and so might by degrees leave off coming or be excluded by
some Law not now extant; and thus the Tenants in Capite, might become the sole
Representatives of the whole Nation in Parliament; and I am of this opinion
because in many of the old Statutes before the time of Robert the 2 d. we find
the Communitas totius Regni coming immediately after the Earls and Barons (as
in our own ancient Statutes and Records) but after those Reigns we find no more
mention of this Communitas, but only of the Dukes, Earls, Barons, Liberi
Tenentibus, and Burgensibus qui de Rege tenent in Capite, as in the Titles to
those Statutes of K. Robert the 3 d, and James the 5 th. you have now cited.

And yet that Liber Tenens was not anciently taken for a Tenant in Capite only;
pray see the 14 th. Chap. of the Laws of K. Alexander the 2 d. made Anno Dom.
1214. with your Doctors comment upon them; Statutum est quod nec Episcopi, nec
Abbates, nec Comites, nec aliqui liberi Tenentes, tenebunt curias suas nisi
Vicecomes Regis, B.A.P. p. 98.
vel servientes Vicecomitis ibidem fuerant, upon which words the Doctor in his
answer to Mr. P. has this remark, viz. this again shows us, that the
Freeholders were Lords of Manors at least. So that unless you will suppose
that none but Tenants in Capite were Lords of Manors, or held Courts, (as
certainly very many of the Mesne Tenants did) this word Liber Tenens must
extend to any other great Freeholder or Lord of a Manor, of whatsoever Lord he
held it; and as such might anciently have had a Vote in that Parliament, so
that if I have (as I think sufficiently) proved that the word Communitas coming
after the Earls and Barons in our ancient Statutes and Records did certainly
signify another order of men distinct from the Tenants in Capite, I I have the
same reason to believe it was so in Scotland too; not only because these
general words Communitas totius Regni, must needs be more comprehensive than to
express the Tenants in Capite only (who could never Represent all the great
Freeholders in Scotland any more than they did in England) but also because it
is acknowledged by the Scotch Lawyers that the Fundamental Laws and
Constitutions are the same in both Kingdom^, for Sir John Skene in his Epistle
to K. James before his Scottish Laws* says thus, Intelligo tuas tuorumque
Majorum leges, cum legibus Regni tui Angliae magna ex part consentiunt, which
is also acknowledged by the King himself in the Speech he made in Parliament
concerning the Union of both Kingdoms.

To conclude, I cannot but admire your Doctors strange partiality who does
allow the Commons of Scotland to have even been a third Estate, when he
expressly grants that the Commons of Scotland were, and are at this day the
Kings Tenants in Capite, and that the Kings Royal Buroughs were such as ever
did, and do at this day in Scotland only send Burgesses to Parliament: Now why
the Cities and Buroughs in England should not have always had the like
Privilege as well as in Scotland, I wish you could give me any sufficient
reason.


M. Since you own that the Tenants Capite, or else Commissioners in their stead
have been the sole Representatives for the whole Kingdom of Scotland for above
200 years, I doubt not but they were so long before that time; since you
confess you cannot show any Law by which this ancient Custom came to be
changed; though I grant that the Statutes before K. David and Robert the 2 d,
are said to be made by the Communitas totius Regni, yet you must not suppose
that Constitution of the Kingdom altered, when the Clerks altered their phrases
in penning their Statutes and Records, so that this Communitas was the
Community of the Tenants in Capite only, and not of the Freeholders, or of the
Citizens and Burgesses of the whole Kingdom; since as for the former you cannot
say that all the People in Scotland had ever a right to choose the Commissioners
for the Shires; for then it is most likely they would have kept to this day,
whereas we see that none but Tenants in Coplie have Votes at such Elections.

And as for Cities and Buroughs, I cannot find (nor do I believe you can show
me) any instance of a City or Burrough-Town in Scotland that ever sent Deputies
to Parliament, but what held in Capite of the King. For though there are, at I
said already, besides the Royal Burghs, two other sorts, viz. Buroughs of
Regality, and Buroughs of Barony, who hold of the King, but not in Capite; or
else of some Bishop or Temporal Lord; and though diverse of these are
considerable for Trade and Riches, yet none of them send any Burgesses to
Parliament; so that though I confess there are three Estates in the Scotch
Parliament, called in the Statutes of K. David and Robert the 2 d, the Tre^
Communitates Regni, yet did these always consist of the Tenants in Capite only,
who therefore sit together, and make but one Assembly.

Now that we may apply what has been said to England, I desire you to take
notice that the Doctor and we that are of his opinion, do not positively affirm
that that the Commons of England were not at all represented before 49 Hen. 4.
but that they were not represented in Parliament by Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses of their own choice, but by the greater and lesser Tenants in Capite,
the greatest part of which I grant were not Lords; and admit that I should
grant you that some Cities and Buroughs sent Members to Parliament, before the
49 th. of Henry the Third; yet were they only such as held in Capite, and no
other, as the Doctor has very well observed in his Answer to Mr. P's argument
from the Petition of the Town of St. Albans; so that upon the whole matter
there will be no more gained by you in this Controversy than that perhaps some
Citizens and Burgesses appeared in Parliament, and constituted a third sort of
men, which you may call the Commons, if you please, though I cannot find they
were so called, till after the time of Edward the First; but supposing this to
be so, it is very far from your Republican, levelling opinion, who do suppose
that all the Freeholders of England, had an ancient indisputable right of
appearing in Parliament by reason of their propriety in Lands, or other
Estates, whereas by our Hypothesis we suppose the great Council or Parliament
to have anciently been the Kings Court Baron consisting of his immediate
Tenants called thither by him their Supreme Lord to advertise him of the
Grievances of the Nation, and to propose what new Laws were necessary for the
public good of the Commonweal, and together with him to raise such public
Taxes both upon themselves and their Tenants as the necessities of the State
required; yet notwithstanding there is a vast difference between your notion
and mine concerning the Rights which such Tenants in Capite might claim of
coming to Parliament, since before King John's Charter, (whereby I grant all
the lesser Barons or Tenants in Capite were to be Summonld by the Sheriff to
come to the Common Council of the Kingdom) the King might have only called some
of the greatest and wisest of them, and such as he thought most fit to advise
him in making Laws, and imposing Taxes upon the Nation. And the like
Prerogative his Son Henry the Third resumed during the greater part of his
Reign, as I shall show you from diverse old Statutes by and by: B. A. P.
And that our Kings did often take upon them to call whom they pleased, and
omit whom they pleased of these Tenants in Capite, may appear by those who were
called Pares Baronum, or alios Magnates, who are put after the Barons; and of
these there are many instances of their being called to Parliament, and again
omitted in several Kings Reigns after the Commons were a third Estate, as
represented as at this day.


F. I must beg your pardon, if I cannot come over to your opinion,
notwithstanding what you now have said; since I do not find your reason to come
up to what you intend therein, for you only suppose, (but without any proof)
that the words Populus and Communitas must signify only Tenants in Capite, in
the ancient Scottish Charters and Statutes. All the Argument you bring to the
contrary is that I cannot show you any Law by which it was altered to what it
is now, and therefore that the Constitution has been always the same as at this
day. Now pray consider whether this will not press altogether as hard upon you
in relation to England; for you cannot show me any Law whereby the Tenants in
Capite were excluded here, and Knights of Shires introduced in their fleads;
and therefore by the same Rule let the Scottish Parliaments have been of what
they will, yet ours have been still the same they are now. But if you say that
this contrary usage has been introduced either by the Kings Prerogative, or by
the silent consent of the People, or by some Law that is now lost are not all
the same Arguments to be made use of in the case of the Scottish Parliaments;
which I may upon as good Grounds suppose to have deviated from their original
Constitution as you do that our English Parliaments have done it.

So that if those Arguments are of any weight they will serve for England, as
well as Scotland; but if they are not, it is in vain to make use of them at
all. The like I may say as to Buroughs in Scotland, since it is as easy to
suppose that diverse Buroughs in Scotland might voluntarily desist from sending
their Deputies to Parliament, that did not hold of the King in Capite; as it is
that diverse Buroughs in England did Petition to be exempted from sending
Burgesses to Parliament, by reason of their inability to pay the Expenses of
their Burgesses; as I could show you by diverse Precedents, (some of which are
in Print) had I now time.

As for the rest of your Discourse I cannot imagine to what it tends; for if the
Tenants in Capite had any place in, or right to come to Parliament, how came
they to have it, but by reason of the great Freehold Estates they held of the
King? and if so, I can see no reason why those that had as good or better
Freehold Estates than they should be all excluded; Or why a small Tenant in
Capite of but one Knights Fee held of the King in Capite, should give him a
right to a place in Parliament, and get that a Mesne Tenant, or Vavasour (as he
was then called) who held ten Knights Fees of some Bishop or Abbot, who perhaps
did not hold in Capite at all, should have no right of appearing there, nor of
choosing any Representative for him; since notwithstanding all you have now
said the Doctor either contradicts himself, B. A. P. p. 68.
or you, when he tells us expressly in his Answer to Mr. P. That the Tenants in
Capite, who were no Barons represented only themselves, and not the Commons;
but how this will agree with what he says in his Introduction, that the Body of
the Commons had no share in making Laws, etc. before 49 th. of Henry the Third,
unless they were represented by thd Tenants in Capite: and if so must then
certainly represent those that he here calls the Body of the Commons of England
Collectively taken.

But as for your notion of the Parliament's being the King's Court Baron; tho
you have borrowed it of a Learned Scotch Lawyer Sir George Me^^ensy, yet let me
tell you it was never true, for it is well known that the Great or Common
Councils both in England and Scotland are much more ancient than the Tennres of
Lands by Knights Service; or then the very Institution of Manors in this
Kingdom* which the Doctor tells us are of no higher an original than the Norman
Conquest.

But admit I should allow your notion of the Parliaments being anciently the
Kings Court Baron, then certainly all the Tenants in Capite had a right to
appear there, and to be not only Suito^s, but Judges of all differences arising
among the Tenants in the Lords Court, where neither the Lord himself nor his
Steward were Judges, and that of right and not by savor; whereas you suppose
such a Court Baron as was never heard of, where the Lord could admit or exclude
whom of his Tenants he pleased, to which if they had a right ratione Tenurae,
certainly he could never do. So that instead of a Court Baron and a Common
Council according to King John's Charter, whereby all the Tenants in Capite
were to be Summoned to this Council, or pretended Court Baron; you suppose the
King still retained a Prerogative of calling or omitting whom he pleased, which
instead of confirming the validity of the Charter, and that it was to be a Rule
how such Councils should be called for the future; you make to signify just
nothing, and that no Common Council was ever called according to that Model.
But pray show me a Court Baron, wherein the Tenants ever took upon themselves a
Power of giving Taxes out of their Estates, that did not hold of the manor,
though they were resident within it: But indeed you are out in the whole
matter, for the Doctor himself grants in his answer to Mr. P. when he gives us
King John's Letters of Summons to a Council directed to the Barons and Knights
(and as he translates Eidelibus) Feudatories, or Vassals of all England wherein
he lets them know, B. A. P. page 40.
that he had sent his Letters to every one of them, if it might have been done:
Now what reason had he to write thus, if these Gentlemen had no right to be
consulted, or that the King might have called or left out whom of them he
pleased. But the Barons and Tenants in Capite, were in another mind, when in
the 37th. of King Hen. III. as Mar. Paris tells us, they refused to Act or
Proceed upon any thing, without all the rest of their Peers, diverse of whom, it
seems the King had for some reasons then omitted to Summon.

But as for your instance of the Barons Peers, or alios Magnates, which were
sometimes Summoned, and sametimes omitted in the Reigns of our three Edwards:
You do well to put in, that it was after the times that the Commons were a
third Estate; for indeed, it was only after that the Tenants in Capite had left
off making a distinct Council by themselve; which I suppose was about the end
of Henry III. Reign, and then it is true, the King called several of these
Tenants in Capite, (as also others that were not so) by Writ, to the House of
Lords, as Pares Baronum, i. e. not as real Barons, but Barons-Peers, since a
ba^e Summons by Writ did not as yet, (nor long after) vest a Peerage in their
Heirs, so that upon the whole matter, I see no reason from any thing you have
urged from the example of Scotland to make me change my opinion, that the
Tenants in Capite were anciently the sole Representatives, either of this or
that whole Nation in Parliament; for pray take Notice that I do not find the
Tenants in Capite, so much as mentioned in the ancient Statutes of that
Kingdom, or Charters of their Kings, as the Common Council or Parliament of
Scotland before the Reign of King Robert III. which was but late in Comparison
of the antiquity of those Councils in that Kingdom.


M. I could say more as to the Antiquity of the Tenants in Capite their coming
to Parliament as the sole Reprensentatives of the Nation before the time you
mention; but it grows late, and therefore I shall wave it at present, and so
shall only proceed to remark that great part of the Error of the Gentlemen of
your Opinion, proceeds from this false ground, that you suppose that the
Parliaments, both of England and Scotland were a perfect Representative Body of
all the Free-houlders and Freemen of those Kingdoms, which is a mere Chymera;
for in the first place, if we will consider, it never was, nor indeed is so at
this day; since you your self must acknowledge, that all Copyholders and
Lease-holders under Forty Shilling a Year, all Freemen in Towns Corporate*
where the Elections lies wholly in the Major, and Aldermen, or Common Council;
and lastly all that will not pay Scot and Lot in diverse Borough Towns, are
utterly excluded from giving their Votes in the choice of Parliament Men; and
consequently from having any Representatives in Parliament, though sure as much
Freemen as the rest of the Kingdom; and this either by general Statutes, or
else by the particular Charters and Customs of those Cities, Towns and
Buroughs; all which are looked upon as good and lawful Representatives of those
Cities and Buroughs; so that I am clearly of the Doctor's Opinion, B. A. P.
page 68.
that the Tenants in Capite as well those who were Barons as those that were
not, only represented themselves, and not the Commons, as being (as you truly
observe) never chosen by the People; and as no Man can believe that a great
Lord or Bishop could Represent his Mesne Tenants, so neither could the smaller
Tenants in Capite who were no Barons, be properly said to represent theirs; and
yet, these might according to the Custom of Feudal Tenures, and the Power they
then had over their Tenants Estates, very well make Laws for them, and Tax them
at their pleasures, because the main interest and strength of the Kingdom, lay
almost wholly in them; and these (as the Doctor very well observes) having the
Power of this, or any other Nation de facto, always did make Laws for, and Tax
the rest of the People.

But to say somewhat to the Authorities you have brought from the County
Palatines of Chester and Durham; I know not what old Privileges they might
pretend to, of not being forced to give Voluntary Aids or Subsidies of their
Moveable Goods without their consents; yet this much I think may be made out,
that as for all Land Taxes, and the general Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom;
they were as much bound by the one, and as much liable to pay to the other, as
the rest of the Subjects of England or else how came they afterward to be
bound by our general Statutes at all, as certainly they were from all times
since the Conquest; though Chester had no Representatives in Parliament, till
the Reign of Henry VIII. and Durham had none till our times.


F. You Gentlemen who hold this general notion of Tenants in Capite are so
intoxicated with it, that you do not care what absurdities or contradictions
you fall into, provided you may maintain your dear opinion, as I shall show you
by and by: But first let me tell you your Reply to what I have now said, is
very fallacious, and in some points mistaken as to the matter of Fact: For in
the first place, I doubt not but our Common Councils or Parliament were in
their first institution, the main Body or Representative of all the Freemen of
the Nation; and though it may by long continuance of time to deviate from that
Institution; yet, that it is to be attributed either to some prevailing Custom,
or else positive Law to the contr^ry; for it is certain that in the Saxon
times, all the Free holders of England had a right of coming to Parliament in
Person; and hence it is, that Liber Tenens, Liber Homo and Ingenuus were
Synonimous, and of the same signification, as I have proved from Sir Henry
Spelman's Comment, in his Glossary upon those words; and hence it is, that the
Members of those Councils were so numerous as they were in those times, and
long after, till they became so vast and unmanageable, that they were fain by
degrees to pitch upon this method, of sending Knights of Shires to represent
them, which is certainly a very ancient Institution, since the Tenants in
Ancient Demean, claimed to be exempted from the Expenses of Knights of the
Shires by P^esc^iption, as I shall show you more particularly by and by; and
likewise since all Riches consisted in those days in Land, or else in Stock, or
Trade, therefore the Cities and Buroughs, and Towns, by reason of their
Riches, had always a share in the Legislative Power, as well as in giving of
Taxes; and since all such Citizens and Burgesses, not being able to come in
Person, as the Freeholders could, were represented either by their chief
Magistrates, called their Aldermen, or else by Burgesses of their own choosing
as at this day; so that all Freedom, or Ingenuity being in this, as in all
other Commonwealths, reckon per censum, by the Estates of the owners; our
Common Councils were, and that truly, the Representatives, not only of the
Estates, but Persons of all the Freemen of the Nation, for I am so far of the
Doctor's Opinion, that the Cheorl Folk (as they were then termed) were little
better than the Scotch Vassals or French Peasants at this day* and so were not
Reckoned among the Freemen; all Freedom consisting then in so much Freehold
Lands, held in a Man's own right, or being Freemen of some City or Borough
Town; and this gives us a reason why Copyholders and Tenants for years, have
no Vote in Parliament at this day; since it is certain, (and all our Law Books
allow it), that at the first all Copyhold Estates were held by Villenage, and
the owners of them at first the Villani, or Tillers of the Demefnes of the Lord
of that Town, there being at first no Freehold less then that of a whole
Township, since a Manor; and therefore all Copyholders and Tenants for
years, or at Will, though Freemen are not admitted to have Votes at this day,
because (as I said before) Freedom anciently consisted in the Inheritance or
Freehold Estate of Land, or in Riches, in Trade or Traffic; Leases for Life
and Years, being not known, or at least not commonly in Use in those days; and
hence it is, that when Estates of Freehold came to be divided into small
Parcels, all Freeholders till the Statutes of Henry IV. and VI. (which we have
before cited) were as much capable of giving their Votes at the Election of
Knights of Shires, as the best and greatest Tenant in Capite in England, till
it was reduced by those Statutes to 40 s. Freehold per Annum; these Freeholders
and Burgesses of Towns being anciently looked upon in the Eye of the Law as the
only Freemen; and it was these Freeholders alone who owed Suit and Service to
the County, Court, and were amerced if they did not appear.

This being premised, and sufficiently understood, will give us a very good
account, why Copyholder and Lease-holders for years do not give any Votes at
Elections of Knights of Shires; and yet the Parliament may still continue the
Representative of all the Freemen of the Nation, as the People of Rome and the
Territories about it were of all the Romans, though there were a great many
Liberti, and in Inqui lini, who sure were Freemen, and not Slaves, and yet had
no Votes in theirs Comitiis Centuriatis, or general Assemblies of all the Roman
Citizens.

But that the Liberi homines, and Libere Tenentes de Regno, must take in more
than your Tenants in Capite the Doctor himself is at last forced to confess in
his Glossary (notwithstanding his maintaining the contrary in the body of his
Book) viz. that the Liberi Homines, Tit. Liberi Homines and Libere Ten. p.
and Libere Tenentes mentioned in John's Magna Charta, were not only the
Tenants in Capite, but their Retinue and Tenants in Military Service also, and
whom he there supposes to have been then the only men of Honor, Faith and
Reputation in the Kingdom, and if so might certainly have been chosen Knights
of Shires as well as any of the Tenants in Capite; though this is but
Argumentum ad Hominem; for the truth is that the Mesne Tenants by Military
Service were not the only men of Faith, and Honor in those times, since it is
certain the Kings Tenants in Pe^yt Serjeantry, and of some Honor or Castle, or
else his Tenants in Socage, besides those who held of other Mesne Lords; and
the Tenants of those Abbots and Priors, who did not hold in Capite, and yet
were very numerous, were men of as much Faith and Honor as those that did;
since many of them possessed as good if not better Estates than the Tenants in
Capite themselves* so that you are certainly mistaken in matter of Fact when
you say the whole force and strength of the Nation lay in their hands; for if
you mean Legal force, I have already proved, that the Tenants in Capite had no
Legal right to give away the Estates of their Mesne Tenants, or to make Laws
for them without their consents, who were altogether as free as themselves,
Servitiis suis debitis solum-modo exceptis, as Bracton tells us, much less for
so great a Body of Men as I now mentioned, who never held of them at all, and
consequently could not upon your own Hypothesis, be ever represented by them;
but if you mean a Physical strength, or force, though this can give no Natural,
much less Legal right for one Man to Lord it over another: yet even this was
much farther from truth, since the Mesne Tenants of all sorts, as well by
Military Service as in Socage, together with those above mentioned: who never
held of the Tenants in Capite at all, made six times a greater Body of Men,
both for numbers as well as Estates, then all the Tenants in Capite taken
together.

But to conclude, neither is your remark upon my Authorities from Gheller and
Durham at all to the purpose; for I have sufficiently proved, that those County
Palatines, were not at first concluded within the general Laws and Taxes of the
Kingdom; since they had their particular Councils for both within themselves,
as the Supplication of the Estates of the County Palatine of Chester,
sufficiently declares; and certainly Durham had the like Privileges, since I
never heard that the Men in that County were more Slaves to their Bishop, then
the Cheshire Men to their Earl; and tho I grant that about the confused Times
of King Hen. VI. there was a great breach made on the ancient Liberties of
these two Counties Palatines, and if the King and Parliament made Laws for, and
Levied Taxes upon them, though they had no Representatives therein, this
proceeded partly from their being overpowered by the rest of the Nation, and
partly by the ease they found in being excused from the Expenses of Knights of
Shires, and Burgesses, which all the rest of the Kingdom, was at that time
liable to, and which came to a great deal of Money (Four shillings per diem,
being in those days, more then Forty Shillings now,) and yet you see at last
they were aware of their Error, and at their request, got the Privilege of
having Representatives in Parliament of their own choosing, as well as the rest
of the Kingdom; and if this had not been a certain right of English Subjects,
how came the Welsh Counties, which were anciently no part of the Kingdom of
England, to have been admitted to choose one Knight for each County, and
Burgesses for each Borough Town, as well in North Wales, as South Wales,
though both these were Conquered Countries at the first, and incorporated to
England by particular Statutes; and therefore we have no reason to deny the
Truth of Bracton's and Fortescue's assertion, that no Laws are made nor Taxes
imposed in England, Vid. Fortis. de L^us. Leg. Ang. Cap. 36. page 84.
sine consensu communi ^uius Regni; or as the latter truly adds in Parliamento;
and certainly this word common Assent must take in all their Assents, who had
Estates either in Land or other Riches at that time when this Law was
Established.

But leaving this dispute about Scotland, and the County Palatines, pray make
an end (for it grows late) and give me the rest of your Reasons, why the
Commons could not be represented in Parliament before the 49th. of Hen. III.
and 18th of Edw. I.


M. I will proceed to do it, and for this end shall reduce my Arguments to
these three Heads, the first is, some Writs found out and produced by the
Doctor, whereby he proves that the Commons were not Summoned during the Reign
of Hen. III. till the 49th. secondly the general silence of all Statutes in
H^n. III. Reign; wherein is not one word mentioned of the Commons, but rather
to the contrary, thirdly the critical Time ( viz. in the 49th. of Hen. III.)
when the Commons were first called, during Monsfords Rebellion, fourthly, their
discontinuance from that time, till the 18th, of Edw. I. there being no mention
made of them in all the rest of the Reign of Hen. III. nor yet of Ed. I. till
the 18th. in which the Doctor shows you a Writ (not taken notice of before) by
which the Commons were Summoned, a new to Parliament: Lastly, from the
uncertainty of the manner of the Writs of Summons, whether for one Knight or
two Knights, and sometimes no Citizens and Burgesses at all, which sufficiently
prove the Novelty of the Institution, as also of some Parliamentary Forms
relating to the Commons, which show that neither their number nor manner of
Election was settled long after the Reign of Edw. I.

To begin therefore with the first Head. I know the Gentlemen of your opinion
make a great Noise about the loss, or rather defect of the Writs of Summons,
and Parliament Rolls of all the Kings, till the 23d. or 25th. of Edw. I. So
that we cannot be so well assured what was done in Parliaments of those times,
as we may be afterward: Yet there are still some Writs of Summons Extant upon
the Close Rolls before and in those times, B. A. P. p. 87. and dein.
by which the Bishops, Earls and Barons, were Summoned to Parliaments or great
Councils. And we have all the Close Rolls of King John and Henry III. on the
Dorse^. of which anciently, most of the Writs of Summons to the Commons in
other King's Reigns, are entered (few on the Patent Rolls which we have
likewise.) It Is therefore very strange, if the Commons were then represented by
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, and Summoned to Parliament as at this day,
that there cannot be found any Summons to them upon these Rolls, as well as to
the Lords.

But the Learned Doctor has for our Satisfaction, found out three Writs of
Summons to the Lords, one in King John's Reign, and two other of Hen III. The
first is in the Close Roll* 6th. of King John directed to the Bishop of
Salisbury, M. 3. dors.
which is needless here to be repeated Verbatim, only pray take notice of the
material words of this Writ, where after the Cause of the Summons particularly
expres'd, it concludes thus, expedit habere vestrum Consilium and aliorum
Magnatum Terrae nostrae quos ad diem ilium and Locum fecimus convocari. M. 13.
dors.
The second is in the Close Roll of the 26th. Hen. III directed to W.
Archbishop of York, wherein he is likewise Summoned ad tractandum, Nobiscum
una cum caeteris Magnatibus nostris quos similiter fecimus convoca^i de arduis
Negotiis nostris statum nostrum and totius Regni nostri specialiter
tangentibus; with this note underneath eodem modo Scribitur omnibus Episcopis,
Abbatibus, Comitibus and Baronibus.

The third is of the 38th. of the same King directed to Boniface Archbishop of
Canterbury, Cl. 38. Hen. 3. M. 14. dors. de Magnatibus vocatis al Concilium.

B. A. P. page 92, 93.


whereby he is Summoned to be at Westminster within Fifteen days after Hillary
next coming before the Queen, and Richard Earl of Cornwail about the Affairs of
Gascony; and this very Council Mat. Paris Anno. Dom. 1254. calls a Parliament,
to which all the Magnates or great Men of England came together* the Day of
which Meeting he makes to have been the 6th. of the Calends of February, being
St. Iulian's day, and which fell one within Fifteen days after St. Hillary's
Day, which was that appointed for the Meeting of this Parliament by the
aforesaid Writ of Summons, and who were the Constituent parts of this
Parliament may be be farther made out by a Letter of the Queen, and Earl
Richard to the King then in Gascony, Additament. fol. 189. N. 50.
which is recited by Mat. Paris in his Additaments in these words; Domino Regi
Angliae, etc. Regina and Richardus Comes Cornubiae Salutem, Recipimus literas
Vestras ad Natale Domini proximae praeteritum quod in Crastino Sancti Hillarii
Convocaremus Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, Abbates, Priores, Comites and Regni
Angliae ad ostendendum, etc. Whereby it appears who were then the Constituent
parts of Members of our English Parliaments, viz. the Archbishops, Bishops,
etc. Earls and Barons of the Kingdom. So that there is no such Universal
silence concerning the Constituent Parts of our Parliaments, as you and those
of your Party, suppose from the loss of the Parliament Rolls of those times,
most of which, though I confess are lost, yet there are enough left to satisfy
any reasonable Person, that there were then no Commons in Parliament in the
sense they are now taken.


F. You cannot give me a better demonstration of the loss of the Parliament
Rolls and Writs of Summons than what you now offer, for if we have all the
Close Rolls of King John and Henry III. on the Dorses. of which you tell me,
the Writs of Summons use to be entered, then certainly those to the Lords were
there entered also, and if so; how comes it to pass that in above Eighty Years
time, in which there must be above Eighty Parliaments, you can show me but
three Writs of Summons, and those only to as many Bishops, and to no Temporal
Lords at all: If so be these were Parliaments and not great Councils of the
Bishops, Lords and Tenants in Capite only, as I rather believe they were, for
you rely too much upon you Doctors credit, when you allege that we have all
the Close Rolls of King John, and Henry III, which is a great mistake, for I
have had a Friend who has given me a note of what Close Rolls are still Extant
in those Reigns, and what are lost which you may here see.

To begin with King John, pray observe that all the Close Rolls of the first
Five years of his Reigns are gone, and so they are in the 9th. 10th. 11th.
12th. and 13th. for certainly, there were some in those, as well as in the
succeeding years: In the next place till the 18th. there is but one Roll left
of each year, but then there are three; and after that but one or two in a year
to the very end; now pray tell me, how we can be assured that there was not
more then one Roll in every precedent year, as well as in the 15th. the like I
may say for the Reign of Hen. III. which though I grant are more entire then
those of King John; there being some left us of every year but the 23d. yet
they are but a few; and for the greatest part but one in each year, never but
two in any year in all this long Reign, unless it be the 39th. in which there
are four, which is very strange, that in so busy a time, as most of this Kings
Reign was; there should be no more Rolls left, and therefore it seems very
probable, that at least half are lost, and in which might be many Summons, as
well to the Commons, as to the Lords, and if they are not lost, pray tell me
what is become of all the Writs of Summons to your lesser Tenants in Capite,
who certainly often met in this long Reign according to King John's Charter,
but if you will tell me they are lost, or omitted to be entered upon the Close
Rolls, I may with like reason and certainty affirm the same of the Writs of
Summons to the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, for if the one may be lost,
sure the other may be so too.

But what if after all, these Writs you have produced were not any Summons to a
Common Council or Parliament at all, but only to a great Council of the Tenants
in Capite, which I have great reason to believe, not only because the Title to
the last Writ is only Summonitio ad Concilium, and not Commune Concilium Regni,
but also because Mr. Seldom and Mr. Pryn, who certainly must have seen all
these Writs as well as the Doctor, and were as able to Judge of them, never
cite them for Summons to Parliament, and Mr. Pryn observes of several Writs, in
which the like words of Summoning the Lords to give their advice, are likewise
found, that they were only to such Councils, or Treatises which were frequently
used as Low as the Reign of Richard II. but if these Writs had been Summons to
Parliament, sure Mr. Seldom and Mr. Pryn had no reason to bewail (as they so
often do) the loss, of not only of Parliament Rolls, but of all Writs of
Summons, both to Lords and Commons (except those of 49th. Hen. III.) till the
23d. of Edw. I. But pray go on if you please to make good the rest of the
positions you have now laid down.


M. I doubt not but in the next place to show you (though it is true, most of
our Parliament Rolls are lost) both from our ancient Historians and Statutes,
that there were no Commons in any Parliament, during all the long Reign of King
Hen. III. except in the 49th. of that King.

I shall begin with the first Act of Parliament we have of the time of Henry
III. which was made in the 20th. of this King at Merton, where though it is
said, to be provided and granted, as well by the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls,
Barons, as others, yet the words and Aliis and others are to be understood of
the Tenants in Capite, distinct from the Earls and Barons, as I have already
proved.


F. I shall answer your Authorities as you go, you may say you have proved it,
but I know not when; and why may not I with as good a Face maintain, that these
words and Aliis do here signify the Commons, if the word Barons must take in
all the great Lords and lesser Tenants in Capite, as sometimes you suppose it
does, when no other Lay-Members are mentioned; but I have already observed,
that this Barons is a Cheveral word, and to be stretched, or contracted as
best suits with your Hypothesis. So I think I may with greater reason, suppose
the Earls and Barons to be all comprehended under the word Barons, and the
Commons under Aliis, as I have already proved; and which is also most suitable
to the last Clause of Magna Charta of King Henry III. But you forget that I
have I think sufficiently made out, that the Commons had their Representatives,
both at the making and confirming of Magna Charta in 2d. and 9th. of Henry III.
and therefore whatever proofs you bring to the contrary, will come to late;
though I shall patiently hear what you have to say, but if you have no more
Authorities to produce from Statutes and Records, which have not been already
considered: Pray proceed to the 49th. of this Kings Reign, and give me some
reasons why the Commons were called in that year, and never before nor after,
till the 18th. of Edw. I. for they both seem to me very improbable suppositions.


M. I shall observe your Commands, and shall give you as short an account as I
can of this transaction: First, therefore I desire you to take notice, that
after Simon Mon^fort and the rest of the Barons of his Faction had taken King
Hen. III. B. A. P. p. 134. and dein.
and Richard Earl of Cornwall the King's Brother, with many other of the
Nobility Prisoners at the Battle of Jews. He carried them about with Him, till
they had taken in all the strong Forts and Castles of the Land, and when this
was done, Mat. Paris tells us, that calling together at London, the Bishops,
Earls and Barons of that Faction, which so seditiously held their King
Prisoner, they began to set up a Committee for the Government of the Kingdom
consisting of Twelve Lords, who were chosen out of the whole Community or Body
of the Baronage, without whose advice and consent, or at least of Three of them
no affairs in the King's Household, or in the Kingdom should be transacted; and
to these Ordinances, the King and his Son were forced to agree; and though the
Record of this Agreement recites that this Ordinance* Rot. Pat. 48. Hen. III.
M. 6. Dorso.
was made at London, by the consent, good^liking and Command of the King, and
also of the Prelates, Barons, and of the Community there present, yet I am not
yet convinced, that by the word Communitas in the Latin Record, is to be
understood the Commons, but the Community of the whole Kingdom, since this
Agreement is Signed only by some great Earls and Barons, and no Commoner
witness to it, but the Mayor of London, whom your self will grant, was no
Parliament Man.

After which, Simon Montfort, the better to settle himself in his Usurpt Power,
and in those Lands and Castles which himself, and those of his Faction, had
unjustly wrested from Prince Edward, who was now also a Prisoner, having
delivered himself as a Hostage for the Performance of this forced Peace; they
in the first place sent out Writs in the King's Name, unto diverse Bishops,
Abbots and Priors, and to such of the Noblemen as were of their own Party* to
appear at Westminster on the Octaves of St. Hillary next ensuing and the Doctor
has given us a Copy of the Writ of Summons to the Bishop of Durham, B. A. P.
p^g. 137. Rot. Claus. 49. Hen. III. M. 11. Dorso. in Sch^dula.
as it is found in the Close Rolls of the 49th. of this King, and at the end of
it, it is thus recited, ^eodem mo^o Mandatum est Episcopo Carleol: As also to
diverse Bishops and Abbots, all of their own Party and Faction, there being
above an Hundred Abbots and Priors then Summoned (more than ever were I believe
before or since) and then follows a short Writ to the Sheriffs of Counties, to
Summon two Knights de Legalioribus and Discretoribus singulorum Comitatuum^
though it does not appear by the Writ, whether the Sheriffs of the Counties
were to Elect, and send these Knights, the Sheriffs being then of the Faction,
and made by them, for it is there said only quod venire faciar^. There are also
other Writs recited to have been directed to all the great Cities and Towns of
England, as also to the Cinque Ports, to send two of the most Legal and
Discreet of each of the said Cities, Buroughs, Towns and Cinque Ports to the
said Parliament at Westminster, at the time aforesaid. So that without the
History of this Ni^k of time, these Writs (which are said to be for the
Delivery of the Prince out of Prison, and for the settling of tranquillity and
Peace in the Nation,) cannot be understood.

But Prince Edward's Release could not be agreed upon in this Parliament,
whatever other Business might be dispatched: So that things still remained in
this uncertain condition (the King being all this time a mere Shadow) until
such time as Simon Montfort, and Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester falling
out, the latter, at last took up Arms, and joining with the Earls of Surry and
Pembroke, to whom also came Prince Edward, after he had made his Escape from
Hereford, they altogether raised considerable Forces against Monfort, who
meeting them, and joining Battle near Evesham, Monfort with one of his Sons,
and many other Lords and Knights were Slain, and all his Party routed.

Now pray tell me if this is not a very clear account from the History of the
matter of Fact, why the Commons were first called to Parliament by Monfort
during his Rebellion; and I think I can also give you very good reasons (and
Authorities to back them) why they were again discontinued all the rest of this
Kings Reign, until the 18th. of Edward. I.


F. I shall tell you my opinion of your Narrative by and by, but in the mean
time pray satisfy me in one or two Questions, pray Sir, what may be the
reason, that we can find but twenty three Earls and Barons Summoned, of that
great number there was then, and only to thirteen Bishops in this Parliament,
and yet at the same time there should be summoned above an hundred Abbots and
Priors, and but five Deans of Cathedral Churches; pray why might not these
numerous Barons be trusted as well as all the Abbots and Priors?


M. As for his not Summoning all the the Earls, Barons and Tenants in Capite,
but putting Knights of Shires and Burgesses in their rooms, B. A. P. p. 143.
there may be a very good reason given for it, viz. the danger that Simon
Monford and his Privado's apprehended from the too great Concourse of the
Nobility, and their great Retinue^* and the Example of his own and the Barons
Practices at Oxford in the Parliament of 42 d. of Henry the Third might be the
cause why they altered the ancient Usage; and of their sending Writs out,
commanding the Sheriffs of each County as also the Cities and Burghs to send
two Knights. Citizens and Burgesses respectively. But the Reason why there was
so many Abbots and Priors Summoned was, Ibid. 139.
because Simon Monfort thought himself sure of them; He was a great Zealot, and
a Godly Man in those times, and a great Minion of these Religious men (as then
called) as also of the Bishops and Clergy, and they were at least seemingly
Great Favorites of his.


F. I must confess there is some color of Reason, why Simon Monfort should
Summon so many Abbots and Priors to this Parliament if he were sure of all
their Votes before hand, but there is no certainty of this, for if he had been
so sure of them, there was as much reason why he should have called them all
likewise to the Parliament at London, which you say he Summoned the year
before, when with the Consents of the Bishops, Barons and others, he made the
new Ordinances you mention; but you cannot find in any Historian, or Record,
that he then Summoned so many of them, and it seems pretty strange, that all
these Abbots and Priors. and Deans, not a fourth part of which were Tenants in
Capite should all take the trouble to come to this Parliament without any
scruple, if neither they nor their Predecessors had ever been Summoned before.

But the other reason you give why so many Earls and Barons should be omitted,
is much more unlikely, for if the numerous Barons Factious Practices at Oxford
had before frustrated, Monfort's designs, there had been indeed some reason why
he should have done, all he could to have hindered their coming again; whereas
on the contrary the Earls and Barons at the Parliament at Oxford, though they
came thither with Arms and great Retinues, yet it was only to join with him,
and to force the King to agree to the Oxford Provisions. But if the Commons
were now Summoned (as you suppose) to curb the extravagant Power of the Lords,
yet it could not be his Interest, or indeed in his Power so to do, not the
latter, because the Earls, Barons and Tenants in Capite, were too powerful and
numerous a body to have suffered such an affront and breach on their Right, as
this was. Nor could he and his two and twenty Companions have ever dared, to
have displeased so great and powerful a body of men, as you must allow your
great Barons and Tenants in Capite* both great and small then were, and who
made such a powerful opposition for their Liberties in King John's time, or
that they would have thus tamely permitted men wholly of the Sheriffs choice to
have thus taken away their places in Parliament, and made Laws for them, much
less the Citizens and Burgesses, most of whom were certainly not Noble by
Birth, nor yet held Lands in Capite; nor could it be for Monfort's Interest so
to do; for the greatest part of the Earls, and Barons were of his side already,
and thus to ^^clude them, had been the only way to disoblige them, and make
them leave him, and go over to the King's side: So that I must needs tell you
upon the whole matter, granting Monfort to have been such a Knave and Hypocrite
as you make him, yet certainly he was no Fool, but a great Politician and I
leave it to your self, or any indifferent person to judge whether it was
possible for him to do so silly and unpolitick a thing as this. For granting
all the Abbots and Priors to have been of his side (as you suppose) they could
no way counterballance the great Power of those Earls and Barons, and numerous
Tenants in Capite, that were all hereby excluded. So that let the Commons have
been Summoned when you will, it was certainly before this 49 ^h. of Henry the
Third, or not at all.

But to give you my opinion why so few Earls and Barons are mentioned in this
Record of the 49 of Hen. 3 d to have been Summoned to this Parliament; I
conceive it was not out of any jealousy or suspicion in Simon Monfort of those
who were then his fast Friends but out of pure carelessness, or omission of the
Clerks; who I suppose through have, inadvertency, or multiplicity of business
omitted to enter the names of all the rest of the Earls, Bishops and Barons, to
whom Writs of Summons were likewise sent, and that I do not speak without Book,
I appeal to the Record it self; where there is a blank space left unfill'd of
about four Inches breadth which could be left for no other end than to add the
names of all the rest of the Earls and Barons who were certainly Summoned to
that Parliament as well as those whose names are there expressed.


M. I shall not longer dispute this point, but I think you must grant that the
Commons are never mentioned in any Record or Statute of this King; for after
his Victory at Evesham he called a Parliament at Winchester, whereto we do not
find any Commons Summoned, as before, but the King by the advice of his
Magnates alone, Seized the Liberties of the City of London, and also they gave
Him all the Lands of the late Rebels.

And then there was after this a Parliament Summoned at Kenelworth, in the 50
th. of this King, where it was agreed by the common assent of the Bishops,
Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, and all others, that six Persons who were all
(except one) either Bishops or Barons, should choose six others and the whole
twelve were to judge concerning those who were disinherited for their late
Rebellion, and their Determination or Award, is called Dictum de Kenelworth,
and was made to better the condition of the disinherited, and to turn the
Forfeitures and Loss of their Estates into a Composition for them after the
value of five years Purchase, to be paid at two or three short payments, yet we
do not find that to this Parliament the Commons were at all Summoned, but to
the contrary; for though it is true that the Statute gives us all their Names.
Yet the Doctor further proves to you from Sir William Dugdale's Baronage, that
there was not one of them, but what was either a Bishop or a great Baron of the
Kingdom; whereas had there been any Commons in this Parliament, they would
certainly have had Commissioners of their own order as well as the Bishops and
Lords.


F. I shall give you a short answer to your Authorities from the Parliaments of
Winchester and Kenelworth; as for the former you must own that all the Rolls of
it are lost; B.A.P. p. 144.
and that there is no more left of it on Record than that Writ or Commission
which the Doctor has given us, which recites that by the unanimous consent of
all the Magnatum, or great Men (as the Doctor renders it) the King had the
seisin and possession of all the Rebels Estates given to him; which is no
argument to prove that no Commons were there; since I have so often made out
that under this word^ Magnatum not only the Knights of Shires, but Citizens and
Burgesses were often comprehended: It Is true there are no Writs extant to prove
the Commons were now Summoned; neither is there any reason to believe the
contrary; since if it were a cunning invention of Montfort to Summon the
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses to abate the power of the Tenants in Capite, it
was sure as good policy for this King to continue so politic an Institution,
which would for the future serve for so good a balance; not only against his
Tenants in Capite, but his great Lords. also, as for the Parliament at
Kenelworth, I shall admit all the matter of Fact to be true as you have related
it from Mat. Westminster, who says, that the Twelve Commissioners appointed to
draw up the Statute of Kenelworth, were chosen de Potentioribus Procerum, and
Prudentioribus Praelatorum, and also that the French Record (cited by the
Doctor) together with Sir William Dugdale's Comment upon it make it out plain
enough that the Lay*Commissioners who were chosen by all the parties there
named, to make this Statute, were all great Earls and Barons, though in the
Record it self only styled Knights.

Well, what follows from all this? that the Commons could have no hand in this
choice, because the tous Autres, or omnes Alii mentioned in this, and other
Records must needs always signify the smaller sort of Tenants in Capite; and I
say it signifies the Commons as now taken; whether you have made good your
Interpretation by any cogent proofs I must leave to your own ingenuity; for to
tell you the truth, I think your Doctor has led you astray in this point; and
till you can make it out better than you have done, I must beg your pardon if I
keep my old opinion; and if your Argument be good, that no Commoners were
there, because none of them were chosen Commissioners, then by the same
Argument none of the small Tenants in Capite were there neither; because none
under the degree of an Earl or Baron were Elected. As for the want of Writs of
Summons to these Parliaments if that were to be the rule, that makes as much
against the rest of the Tenants in Capite, who were no Barons, nay the very
Bishops and Abbots, and Lords, since there is no Writs of Summons found for
their appearance at either of these Parliaments; and so the King might call
whom he pleased.


M. In the first place it does not follow that because Montfort had Summoned
some of the Tenants in Capite to appear for all the rest; and that he also
called some Citizens and Burgesses to this Parliament of the 49 th. yet the
King might have very good reasons (though we cannot now positively tell what
they were,) nor to follow this new Invention of Monforts, however it might then
serve the turn; for perhaps the King did not like it because introduced by a
Rebel. And he had also by his Victory at Evesham so quelled the power of the
great Lords and Tenants in Capite, that I believe he was afterward able to
call or omit whom of them he pleased, according to the Testimony of Mr.
Cambden's Nameless Manuscript Author, cited in his Brittania; that after the
horrid troubles and confusions of the Barons Wars, only those Earls and Barons,
Quibus Rex dignatus est brevia Summonitionis dirigere venirent ad Parliamentum
suum, and non Alii.

And that this was true in matter of Fact, I shall prove from the next Statute
of Hen. 3. which is extant, viz. that of Ma^l^bridge, B. A. P. 144, 145.
made in the 52 d. year of this King to which there were no more Summoned than
some of the more Discr^^t of the Greater and Less^r Barons, as appears by these
words in the Preface to that Statute, Convocatis Discretioribus ejusdem Regni
tam Majoribus quam Minoribus, Brovisum est; and Statutum ac concordatum, etc.
which seems to have been done by the King's particular direction since by the
general Writ of Summons provided by King John's Charter, the Sheriff of each
County was to Summon all the Minor Barons, and Tenants in Capite, which could
not be, if only the more Discreet were then Summoned, nor is there in this
Preamble, the least Hint or Intimation of any Writs directed to Counties,
Cities or Burghs for the Choice of Members.

I desire you in the next place to take notice that Britton (who lived about
that time) supposes this Statute to have been made, B.A.P. Page 95.
Per la Purveance de Robert Walerand and per Commune Assent des Graunts
Seigneurs du Realm. By the Procurement or Forecast of Robert Walerand, and by
common assent of the Great Lords of the Realm, without any mention of the
Commons. I have a great many more such Statutes to instance in which are said
by M. Paris to have been made in several Parliaments of this King, by the
Community, or Common University or Baronage of the whole Kingdom, but I pass
them by because we have sufficiently debated most of them already.


F. If only some of your Great Lords and Tenants in Capite could thus meet, and
make Laws to bind all the rest, and they so tamely put up this strange
Infringement of their Privileges as you suppose, it seems their Power was much
abated since the 37 th. year of this King, when (as I said) Mat. Paris tells
us, that the Barons would do nothing without the rest of their Peers, whom it
seems the King had then omitted to Summon; and therefore I must needs tell you,
that I am not of your Doctors opinion, nor yet of Cambden's nameless Author,
that this King after his victory over Montfort and his Adherents could by his
Prerogative call, or omit what Peers he pleased, since it is contrary to the
Declaration of all the Bishops, Ibid. Sir R. Cotton 's Collection of Records in
this Year.
Abbots, and Priors in Full Parliament, 2 Rich. 2. wherein they claimed, That
holding per Baronium* it did belong to them, de Iure and consuetudine R^gni
Angliae (that is, by Rights of Prescription) to be present in all Parliaments
as Peers of the Realm, and to treat, consult and ordain concerning the Affairs
of the Kingdom; and if the Spiritual Lords claimed this Privilege, sure the
Temporal Barons might with the like right have made the like claim, and I am
sure it is highly derogatory to the Rights of the Peerage of England to
maintain that the King either has, or ever had the power of calling and
leaving out what Lords he pleased, and so to make packed Parliaments to serve a
turn when ever he pleases.

But to come to the main strength of your Argument, that because the more
Discreet men of the Kingdom of the Greater as well of the less^r are only
mentioned in this Statute; that therefore there were only called to it such
Lords and Tenants in Capite, as the King pleased to Summon, and that all the
rest were left out; which is a very idle Supposition; for at this rate, may as
well say, that there were no Temporal Barons there at all, and that by the
Greater discreet m^n are to be understood some of the Bishops and Judges; who
tho no Peers* yet were then the most Learned in the Laws and Customs of the
Kingdom of any persons at that time, and consequently the most wise and
discreet to draw up Laws, and by the lesser sort of discreet men, shall be
understood such Great Clerks and Lawyers, tho not Tenants in Capite; as the
King pleased to choose, as being likewise most able to advise him. But if you
tell me that this Interpretation is forced; I may as well say the same of
yours, and that with greater reason. Yet I shall prove that this Parliament was
Summoned in no other manner, and consisted of no other persons than those that
used to appear in all other preceding Great Councils or Parliaments. In the
first place therefore I must put you in mind of what I have already said, that
there is no conclusion to be drawn from the bare penning of the different Forms
of ancient Statutes, who were Summoned to the making of them, nor by what power
they were Enacted; some of them it is true, being drawn in the form of the
Kings Charters, or Writs; without any mention of the Assent either of the Lords
or Commons, and others are said to be Enacted by the whole Realm without any
mention of the King at all; and I have given you a List of diverse old Statutes
from the Reign of King Henry III. to the time of King Edward III. in which
there is no mention at all made, either of the King, or any other of the three
Estates; and yet no Man I think but will grant that these Statutes were all
made, and agreed to by them according to the usual Forms, tho it be not
particulaly expressed, and therefore to give a better account of this Law, it
is fit we consider, that these words convocatis Discretioribus Regni, are no
more restrictive to some particular Persons, then if it had been in the
Superlative Degree, and instead of Discretioribus, it had bin Discretissimis,
or Sapientissimis Regni, which no Man would interpret to mean only a few of
those whom the King should judge the wisest and most discret Men of the whole
Kingdom; and therefore we must not mind the Grammatical, but Legal sense of
these words, and then it amounts to no more than this, that by the Greater
discreet Men, were meant the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, as under the lesser
Discreet Men were included the Commons.

But that these Minores Descreti cannot be understood of the Tenants in Capite
only, appears by the conclusion of the Preface to this Statute of Marle-bridge
in these words: Provisiones, Ordinationes, and Statuta subscripta ^b omnibus
Regni ipsius incalis, tam majoribus, quam Minoribus, firmiter and
inviolabiliter temporibus perpetuis Sta^neri^ observari; so that if by the
Majores I^colae, who were to observe these Statutes, the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal are meant, then by the Minores Incolae Regni must be understood by the
same reason the whole Commons of England; and so likewise for Parity of reason
by the Minores Discreti, mentioned before in the Preface, must be also meant
the Representatives of the Commons in Parliament.

And that this alone can be the genuine sense of these Words, may appear by
comparing this Statute with another made at Gloucester the 6th. of Edward I.
where in the Preface it is recited in these words, purvenant m^sm le Roy, pur
Amendment de son Royalme, and pur pluis plenier exhibicion de droit sicome le
profit d'office demand, appelles les pluis Discretes de son Royalme auxibien
des Greindres, come des meindres, establie est, and acordan'ment ordeine. So
that if the Commons were there called to this Parliament, and if by the
Greindres Discretes were understood the Lords, then by the like reason under
Meindres Discretes must be meant the Commons as at this day.

But that this Statute was made by the Common Council of the Kingdom, and not
by a Conventicle of a few of the Lords and Tenants in Capite, Summoned ad
Libitum Regis, appears by all the original Writs, founded upon several branches
of this Statute, which are to be seen in the Register; reciting that this
Statute was made de Communi Concilio Regni. Fol. 171, 174, 175.
Now the word Commune signifies no more than General; and how could this be
called a General Council, which only consisted of a few of the wiser sort of
Bishops, Lords and Tenants in Capite?

As for what you and the Doctor cite out of Cambden's Nameless Author of King
Henry's, sending Writs of Summons, and culling out a few of the Earls and
Barons out of a great multitude that were Seditious after the War with the
Barons was ended; if you will have it extend to those who never forfeited by
reason of Montfort's Rebellion. I need not say much to it, Fol. 590.
since Mr. Seldom in his Titles of Honor has sufficiently baffled that
Authors authority, for if it was never true as to Earls, it was not like to be
truer in respect of the greater Barons. But as for your lesser Barons or
Tenants in Capite; I know not but he might be much more in the right in respect
of them.

What you say as to Robert Walrand is not much material, for tho he was never
so great a Baron or Lawyer, yet he could draw up this Law, but as being one of
the Kings Council, who in those days drew up, and prepared all Bills that were
offered in Parliament. And thus Britton might well say, that this was made by
the Common Assent of the Grand Seigneurs (this Act being so highly for their
advantage) and yet the Commons might be also there as well as the Great Lords;
for otherwise if Britton must be literally understood, what becomes of your
Minores Discreti mentioned in this Statute to have given their consents as well
as the Majores, whereas this Author mentions none at whose request it was made,
but the Great Lords only: But that by these Minores Incolae Regni, mentioned at
the end of this Statute, were meant the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses; Pray
see a Writ of Summons the 24th. of Edward I. with the Doctors note upon it in
his answer to Mr. P. the Writ is directed to the Archbishop of Canterbury,
Rot. Cl. M. 4. Dorso.
and concludes thus, B. A. P. page 155.
that he should warn the Procuratores Cleri there mentioned to appear with him,
ad tractandum, ordinandum and faciendum no^iscum, and cum ceteris Praelatis,
and Pro^eribus, and aliit ^nc^lis Regni nostri in the Margin over against these
last words, the Doctor gives us this Note, the Incolae Regni were the Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses mentioned in the former Writ, but not here particularly
enumerated. Now, though it is true, that this Writ is after the time that the
Doctor will acknowledge the Commons to have been constantly Summoned to
Parliament, yet if these words could mean the Commons in this Writ. why they
should not signify the same in this Statute, I can see no reason, but the
Doctors strong prejudices to the contrary. But if you have no more Authorities
to alledg from the Reign of Henry the Third, pray go on, and show me the rest
of your Arguments; why you suppose the Commons were never called in above half
the Reign of Edward the First, till the 18 th. And I desire this the more,
because as I have already proved from the Statute of West. 1. 3 Ed. 1. the
words and tout le Communalty de la Terre, coming immediately after the Counts,
Barons; and those other words foregoing, must needs signify the whole
Commonalty of the Land; B.A.P. p. 146.
and so the Doctor himself has rendered it in his Answer to Mr. P.


M. But first pray observe what the Doctor there tells you, that by the word
Commonalty he means not the Commons in the sense they are now taken, but the
Community of the Tenants in Capite only; and for this, Claus. 3. Ed. 1. in 1.
die veniendo ad Parliamentum.
pray consult the Writ of Summons to the Archbishop of Canterbury to come to
this Parliament, (which I confess is the only Writ of this kind that is left
upon the Rolls from the 49 th. of Henry the Third to the 23 d. of this King) in
which you will find the Archbishop Summoned ad tractandum, ordinandum una cum
Prelatis, and magnatibus Regni; that is, as the Doctor explains it, with the
Prelates and Great Men of the Kingdom, which Great Men very frequently
comprehended as well the Barons Majores as Minores, Ibid. p. 147.
the Earls, Barons, and greater Tenants in Capite, and the less which then were
the Community of the Kingdom; so that your Interpretation of the words des
Greindres, and des Mendres in the Statute of Gloucester (by which you would
interpret the like words in the Statute of Marlbridge) for the Commons, as now
understood, will signify nothing, as being before the time we allow the
Commons to have been Summoned to Parliament in this Kings Reign.


F. It were a very easy thing for any man of a confident undertaking temper to
frame what Interpretations he pleases from the general or equivocal of
Histories or Records, if he could as easily find Authorities to support it; but
I see nothing like a proof for it, but the Doctors bare Assertion: Since I have
already sufficiently proved, that the words Communalty and Communitas coming in
our Statutes and Records immediately the Counts and Barons after do always
signify the Commons as now understood, and why they should not signify so
here, I can see no reason; for as to the words in the Writ to the Archbishop
of Canterbury, they prove nothing at all, who were the Constituent parts of
that Parliament; for if the word Magnates must need signify the greater and
lesser Tenants in Capite only, pray why do they not signify so in the Writ of
Summons to Parliament, of the 49th. of Henry III. Cl. 49. H. 3. M. 11. Dorso.
to the Bishop of Durham (which the Doctor has Printed) where there is no
mention made of his Treating or advising with any other Persons then the other
Prelates, and Magnatibus nostris, yet the Doctor within two Leaves after gives
us the Writs of Summons for the Knights, B. A. P. page 147.
Citizens and Burgesses to this Parliament. But it seems in his first Edition
of his Book against Mr. P. he had not made those rare discoveries he did
afterward; where he pretends not to carry this Opinion beyond the 49th of Hen.
III. Therefore pray go on to show this new Light, by which the Doctor
discovered, that the Commons were never Summoned to Parliament all the Reign of
Edward I. till the 18th.


M. In the first place, you cannot show us any mention of the words Communalty,
or Communitas in any of the Parliaments of this Kings Reign; not in the Statute
de Bigamis made in the 4th. of this King; the Preamble thereof runs to this
effect: B. A. P. page 147, 148.
That these underwritten Constitutions were recited before some of the Bishops
and others of the Kings Council, and afterward heard and published before the
King and his Council, here is no express mention, who were the Constituent
Members of Parliament at this time, or of this Parliament in particular, more
then that it is said in the Close of this Statute, that the aforesaid
Constitutions were Published at Westminster in the Parliament after the Feast
of St. Michael.

So likewise by the Statute of Westminster the 2d. made in the 13th. of Edw. I.
it appears that the Prelates, Earls, Barons and the Kings Council, were the
Constituent parts of the Parliament at Gloucester you but now mentioned; for it
recites that the King in the 6th. year of his Reign, Convecatis Prelatis,
Comitibus, Baronibus, and Concilio suo apud Glocestre, etc. and thus; the
Statute of Mortmain made by this King in the 7th. of his Reign, is recited to
have been made de Consilio Pralatorum, Comitum, Baronum and aliorum fidelium
Regni nostri de Concilio nost^o existentium, etc. the Statute of Acton Burnel,
was made in the 11th. of this King, by himself and his whole Council, Le Roy
per Luy, and per tout son Council ad ordein and establie; though this was done
in Parliament, as appears by the Statute of Merchants of the 13th. of the same
King, which recites, that the King had made by himself and his Council at his
Parliament at Acton Burnel these Establishments. I have been the more
particular in the recital of these Statutes, not only because here is no
mention made of any Commons in these Parliaments, but also because it farther
confutes your position in your 5th. Dialogue, that the King had not then the
sole Legislative Power.


F. You have said almost nothing now (I except that of the Kings being the sole
Legislative Power,) which I have not already freely acknowledged, viz. that the
words Communitas, and Communalty are not above twice mentioned in the enacting
part of any Statute in this Kings Reign; and the Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses not once mentioned, till the 34th. of this King, nor any mention
again of the Commonalty till the Statute of Lincoln, made in the 12th. of
Edward II. and yet it appears by the Writs of Summons and Expenses, beginning
at the 28th. of Edward I. that the Commons had been Summoned to Parliaments,
ever since that time; and that they were so, also before that time; I have
already proved both by Acts of Parliament and Records, but by yours, and your
Doctors method of arguing; if the Writs of Summons to the Commons of the 49th.
of Henry III. had happened to have been torn off, and lost, as they easily
might have been, since it is only affixt to the Roll by a loose Schedule, and
also that all the Writs of Summons to the Commons had been lost, from the 23d.
of Edward I. to the 34th. then there is no denying the Commons to have been
there, because particularly named; and if these Writs had also happened
afterward to have been lost till the 12th. of Edward. II. when they are
expressly named in the Statute of Lincoln which I now mentioned; then the
Commons should have been again excluded by the same Argument, as they are after
the 49th. of Henry III. because no Writs of Summons are found for them, nor any
mention made of them in any Statute, first for above 30 Years, and after that
for above 13 Years together, since you will not allow the words Communitas and
Communalty to signify the Commons, till you please to allow them in that sense.

This may serve as a general answer to all you have said* concerning the
omission of the Commons in all Statutes till the 18th. of this King, and may
serve not only for them, but against the Bishops and Tenants in Capite. being
all present at diverse Parliaments, where the Acts are recited to have been made
by the common Assent or Accord, without at all specifying whose Assent, and
sometimes without naming the King at all.

This being premised, it will be easy to return you a short and particular
answer to the Statutes you have cited. As for that de Bigamis, you confess that
the Statute only mentions its being recited before the Kings Council, and
Published in Parliament without relating what were the constituent parts of it;
Ergo, no Commons were there, and I may with as good a Fa^e say, no Bishops,
Abbots, nor your smaller Tenants in Capite were there, because not particularly
named: As for the rest of the Statutes you have cited of Gloucester, Mortmain
and Act^n Burnel; it is true, the Prelates, Earls and Barons are the only
particularly mentioned, because they then bore the greatest figure in the
Government, your lesser Tenants in Capite being quite lest out; for that they
could not then be comprehended under Baronum, I have sufficiently made out. But
to conclude, give me any sufficient reason, why the Commons might not be at
these Parliaments as well as they were after the 18th. tho most commonly no
otherwise mentioned then they were before that time, if you say the Writs of
Summons make it out they were there: You confess l^ke your prejudice, since the
two Writs of Summons before that time would, if they had not been lost have
made out the same thing.

As for what you say for the Kings being the sole Legislative Power in those
times. I have long since proved, that no King could ever legally make laws
without the consent of the Common Council or Parliament, and after that, all
that you can say for the Kings making Laws alone with the advice of his Council
signifies nothing; For if the words are literally to be understood, then this
Council of the King, whether you will have it to consist of the whole
Parliament, as the Statute of Mortmain seems to intimate, or else of his
particular Council in Parliament, as in the Statute of Acton Burnel, where
those constitutions are said to be ordained by the King and his Council, if by
ordained, you mean only drawn up, and prepared for the Parliaments Assent; it
is no more then what I shall easily grant to have been often used in those
times, but if you will have ordained to signify enacted, then pray tell me how
you will avoid the Kings Council, having a Joint Hand with the King in his
Legislative Power, since the words are the King by himself and his Council had
Ordered and Established: But you have carried both your self as well as me, too
far from the main Question; therefore pray give me some better reasons why you
are of this Opinion, that the Commons were not Summoned again to Parliament
till the 18th. of Edward I.


M. I am now coming to it: But first remember that about an hour or two ago, I
cited a Record of the 30th. of Edward I. which related to an Act of the 18th.
of this King; B. A. P. page 149.
by which Record it appears, that the Prelates, Earls, Barons and other great
Men of the Kingdom had then in full Parliament on the first of June, granted
him 40 s. on every Knights Fee to Marry his Daughter; and it thence also
appears, that tho this Tax is said to be given for themselves and the whole
Community of the Kingdom, yet it was by the Community of Tenants in Capite
alone, because it was to be raised wholly upon Knights Fees; so that hitherto
in this Kings Reign, there appears nothing that can plainly evince, either the
Summoning, or being of any Commons in Parliament, as now understood; we are at
least left at great uncertainties, nay in my Opinion, the proof is more strong
on the Negative, that there were none.


F. I wonder you should mention this Writ any more, since I have already
confuted the Doctors notion about it, and proved that it was a general Tax
granted by the Parliament upon the whole Kingdom, and not laid either by, or
upon, the Community of the Tenants in Capite alone, nor does the way of Taxing
by 40s. upon every Knights Fee at all prove it; for if it is to be understood
of Lands only held by Knights Service; then this Tax could not have extended to
any other Estates, as certainly it did, since the King could by King John's
Charter, have forced his Tenants in Capite to grant him an Aid toward this
Marriage of his Daughter, and (if what you say be true) could also have made
all the Mesne Tenants of the Tenants in Capite, to have contributed to it
according to the Knights Fees they held, and this without calling a Parliament
at a^; therefore pray give some better Authority then this, for I^e assure you
I am not at all satisfied with it.


M. I will now give you the Writ the Doctor has discovered, and by which, it
will plainly appear, that this Tax granted in the 18th of this Kings Reign, B.
A. P. p. 149. and dein.
was given before ever the Commons were Summoned to it; and for this, the
Learned Doctor has found out a loose bundle of Writs of this year, directed to
the Sheriffs of most Counties of England, and they are the ancientest Extant,
or perhaps that ever were (for in probability, the calling of Knights, Citizens
and Burgesses according to that Example was discontinued from the 49th. of Hen.
III. unto this time) by which two or three Knights were directed to be chosen
for each County; pray read the Writ it self, since I look upon it as the first
Pattern of this kind, that of the 49th. of Henry III. seeming to have been
Written in haste without those Forms, that were afterward required in Writs of
this kind, and particularly in this: Edwardus Dei Gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus
Hiberniae* and Dux Aqui^aniae Vice-comisi Westm^rlandiae Salutem. Cum per
Comites, Barons and quosdam alios de Proceribus Regni Nostri, nuper fuisse^us
super quibusdam Speci^liter requisiti super quibus, tam cum i^sis, quam cum
aliis de Comitatibus Regni illius Colloquium ha^ere volumus and Tyactat^m, tibi
praecipimus quod duos, v^l tres de Di^cretioribu^, and ad laborandum
potentioribus Militibus de Comitatu praedicto ^ine delatione Eligi, and eos ad
nes usque West monasterium venire facias ita quod sint ibidem a die Sancti
Iohannis Bapt. prox. futur. in tres Septimanes ad ultimum cum plena potestate
pro se, and Communi^ate Comitat. praedicti adconsulendum, and consentienoum pro
se and Communitate illa hiis quae Comites, Barons, and Pro. eres praedicti,
tunc dixerine concordanda, and habeas ibi h^c Breve. Test meipso apud
Westmonast. 14 die Jun. Anno. Regni Nostri 18.

Whereby you may see in the first place, that there was yet no certain number
of Knights of Shires settled, who were to be Summoned to appear at this
Parliament: And you may in the next place remember from a before mentioned
Record of the 30th. Ed. I. that on the first of this Month, the King had
Scutage then given him in full Parliament; and now Fourteen days after, at the
Instance of the Earls, Barons and other great Men of the Kingdom, upon certain
matters by them moved and propounded to him; He Issued His Writs of Summons to
the Sheriff^ of the several Counties, to cause to be chosen two or three
Knights of each Counties, to come to him at Westminster, three Weeks after St.
John Baptist at farthest. We may also further observe from this Writ, that it
is most probable (though it is not here absolutely said so) that the King was
moved by the Earls, Barons and great Men of the Kingdom, to call these Knights
to this Parliament, and that as this Writ is the first to be found after that
of the 49th of Henry III. so it really was the first Writ of Summons after that
time, for the Election of Knights to represent the several Counties.

In the next place, that there could ^e no Citizens nor Burgesses chosen, or
sent to this Parliament by Virtue of this Writ, as they were afterward by
directions contained in the Writs sent to the Sheriffs for Electing Knights of
the Shires.

Lastly, that by this Writ, the Knights were to come to the King at
Westminster, three Weeks after St. John Baptist at furthest. which was the
15th. of July; also, that in the same year, between the time of the date of the
Writ, and the time appointed for Meeting of the Knights, The Statute of
Westminster the third was made as may appear by this Clause at the beginning,
Dominus Rex in Parliamento suo apud West monasterium post Pascha-A^o Regni sui
Decimo octavo, videlicet in Quindena Sancti Iohannis Baptist. (that is the 8th.
of July) ad Instantiam Magnatum Regni sui Concessi^, Providit. and Statuit,
Quod de caetero liceat unicuique libero homini, etc. So that this was the same
full Parliament, which gave the King Scutage on the first of June, and then the
King and Barons, without the Commons, made this Statute, or the Knights had
another Summons after the Date of this Writ (for before that they were not in
Parliament) or the Knights came a Week before they had need to have done, but
neither of the latter are probable, seeing the Knights then were great Husbands
of their time and Expenses, and were not very forward to undertake this
Service, as being constantly bound with, or engaged by Sureties, or Manucaptors
for the performance of it, and their appearance in Parliament, and therefore it
seems reasonable to conclude, that this Law was made without them, and before
their coming to Parliament.

So much of this Writ, from which, as well as diverse following Writs and other
Records; it is evident that it was from this Kings Authority, and at this very
time that the House of Commons came to be fixed and established in the present
constant Form, it is now, and has been in, for many Kings Reigns, and than the
King in this Age was not altogether confined to any Number of Knights, Citizens
or Burgesses, nor were several strict Forms and Usages now Practiced ever then
thought of, nor some Legal niceties and Punctilio's now in use, then judged
absolutely necessary.


F. Pray give me leave to answer what you have now said from this Writ, before
you proceed to any other Record. First as to your Argument from the variety or
uncertainty of the number of Knights of Shires, which you at first suppose to
have been Summoned to Parliament, that I doubt will prove a gross mistake, for
if we closlely consider the Writ it self, it will prove no more then a Summons
of these Knights to a great Council, Colloquy or Treatise (as the Writ here
cal'^ it) and not to a Parliament, the words Colloquium and Tractatum mentioned
in the Writ, not then signifying a Parliament; but such a Collequy Treatise, or
great Council as is mentioned i^ the Statute of the 7th. of this King,
forbiding all Men coming with Arms to such Assemblies wherein there is also a
plain difference made between Parliaments and such Treatises as I have already
proved from the Statute of the Staple of the 27th. of Edward III. which was
first made in such a Treatise or Council as appears by the Title to the said
Statutes, and was afterward confirmed by the next Parliament, in the 28th.
year of the same King, Cap. 1. whereby Magna Charta, and all other Statutes
before made are also confirmed; for had this Summons been to a Parliament, sure
there would have bin also Writs of Summons found for the Electing* and
returning of Citizens and Burgesses, as well as Knights of Shires to this
Assembly, and these Writs of Summons would have been entered on the Dorse of
the Close Rolls according to the Rules, your self have laid down; whereas this
Writ is only found, in a loose Bundle of Writs of diverse other Matters; neither
is there any title in the Margin of the Record (as is usual in Writs of
Summons) to Parliament, whereby it may appear, what kind of Assembly this was,
to which these Knights were Summoned, nor is your Argument from the date of the
Writs of Summons any convincing proof, that the Commons were not in this
Parliament at the time of the Writ Issued; since during the Session of this
Parliament, the Earls and Barons might make this Request, for calling of those
Knights out of the Counties, to give their Opinions and Advice in the matters
to be proposed to them by the King, and that thereupon, the King at their
Request, thought fit to Summon two or three more of the Knights of Shires to
have their advice also.

And as for your last Argument, that the same Parliament which gave the Tax
above mentioned on the first of June, must be sitting, even to the very time of
the return of the Writ, because the Statute of Westminster, the third was mane
on the Quindene of St. John Baptist: ( viz. the 8th. of July) So that the King
and the Barons, without the Commons, made this Statute, and that these Knights
were Summoned after the act was passed. There is no necessity of making these
Consequences, for this Parliament might very well be dissolved that very day
this Act passed, and this Council or Colloquy might be Summoned to Meet within
three Weeks after Mid-Summer ( i. e. about the 16th. of July) according to the
Writ you have cited. And so I believe it would appear were the Rolls of that
Parliament now Extant, as they are lost, as well as those of diverse succeeding
Parliaments.


M. Well then you are forced to confess, that this Writ was Issued whilst the
Parliament was still sitting; and if so, I cannot see any need there was of
another less Council or Colloquy to meet, after the Parliament was ended, since
as long as it was sitting, that could have much better dispatched all such
business as the King had to do, and how the King could foresee that he should
have need of another Council before he had any business for it, seems very
improbable; and therefore I think I may very well suppose with the Doctor, that
this Writ was a Summons to Parliament, though it does not (I grant) expressly
call it so; but your Argument is of no weight, that because this Writ was not
entered upon the Close Roll, that therefore, it is not to be looked upon as a
Summons to Parliament, as also because the Title to it is only Summonitio ad
Consilium; since the Doctor in his answer to Mr. P. gives us several Parliament
Writs upon the Close Rolls with this Title ad Consilium, which proves that the
King had in those days a larger Power of calling what number of Knights of
Shires he pleased to Parliaments, as appears by two other Writs he there gives
us of the 22d. of Edward I. which are entered in the Close Rolls to the Sheriff
of Northumberland, to cause two Knights to be Elected for that County, bearing
Date the 8th. of October, and the next day after the King, as appears by
another Writ to the same Sheriff, ordered him to cause to be chosen two other
Knights besides the former, and to cause them to appear at Westminster the
morrow after St. Martin's Day, to hear and do such things as the King should
more fully enjoin: The like Writs (with bot^ the former) were sent to all the
Sheriffs in England. Now though it is true* that the Title to the first of
these Writs, is only de Melitibus Eligendis and Mittendis ad Concilium; yet
these words well considered must certainly here mean a Parliament, both these
Writs being entered upon the Close Rolls where all Writs of this kind are wont
to be found, as I have already observed; and besides the words in the first
Writ are the same with those which are found in several other Writs of Summons
to Parliament, viz. ad Consule^dum, and Consentiend. pro se and Comm^nitate
illa biis qua Comites, Barons and Proceres pr^dict^: concorditer ordinaverint
in praemissis.


F. I confess we are at a loss in this affair, for want of the Records of this
Parliament, which if we had I doubt not but there would appear very good
reasons why the Lords did then desire the King should consult more of the
Knights of the Shires then what had appeared at this Parliament, as that Lords
might refuse to give their Advice in the matters proposed by the King, without
he would also consult more of the best and ablest Knights of Counties, who were
to come up with fresh Power, and further Instructions, what answer to give the
King in the matters he should propose, which, that it was neither to give
Money, nor make Laws, is plain; since (you say) the Tax of 40s. on even Knights
Fee was given, and the Statute of Westminster 3d. made before they came up to
Parliament; but indeed the words in the Writ plainly prove that this was no
Parliamentary Meeting, since they are here only Summoned, ad Con ulendum, and
Cons^^iendum; whereas in all Writs of Summons to future Parliaments, the words
are ad faci^ndum quod ^unc de Communi Consilio ordinabitur; or the like, as
appears by the Writ of Summons of the 23d. of this King, ^. A. P. page 155.
which the Doctor has printed, whereas the words in this Writ are ad
consentiendum, etc. ^iis qua Comites* Barons and Proceres ^radicti rune
duxerint concordanda, etc. And if this had been done at the request of all the
Tenants in Capite (as you suppose,) how come the Bishops, Abbots and Priors,
who held also in Capite to be omitted, and not mentioned in this Writ, to have
joined in this request, as well as the Earls, Barons and great Men?

But as for the Doctors next precedent, viz. a Writ to the Sheriff of
Northumberland, to return two Knights of the Shire, and then the next day
after, other two for the same County, I am not at all satisfied, that those
Writs were a Summons to a Parliament and not to a great Council, for besides
the Title of the Writ is de Militibus Eligendis and Mi^tendis ad Consilium, and
the words in the Writ are not the same with those which were commonly used in
Writs of Summons to Parliament, as I have already shewn' you in this Writ of
Summons we are now upon: Whereas in the Summons to Parliaments of the 23d. of
this King, Claus. 23. E. 1. M. 4. Dorso.
the ordaining part does as much refer to the Commons, as to the Lords, the
Commune Consilium consisting of both; whereas in these Writs you have cited,
they were to consent to such things which the Earls, Barons and great Men,
should think fit to agree to; but that I may show you a little more plainly,
the absurdity of this fancy of your Doctors, that these Knights of Shires were
now Summoned, the Parliament sitting; pray let me ask you one or two Questions
concerning this business, pray who were these Gentlemen that the King you say
thus Summoned to Parliament?


M. According to the Doctors account, they must have been all Tenants i^
Capite, since he often tells us, that out of these alone, the Knights of Shires
were chosen at the first.


F. Well, but then who were these Magnates and Alii Proceres mentioned in the
Statute of Westminster, and in this Writ of the 18th. of Edward I.?


M. I must own my self at a loss, certainly to define who they were; for if I
say they were the smaller Tenants in Capite, who are here put as a distinct
order from the Comites and Barons immediately foregoing; I foresee you will
ask me how these Gentlemen could be ^ummoned, since all the Tenants in Capite
were at this Parliament already; therefore I must tell you, I think there were
only some of the greatest and wisest of the Tenants in Capite who were no
Barons now Summoned, and whom the Doctor tells us, were often called to great
Councils, as Barons, Peers, and who, though sometimes called to sit among the
Lords, were often again omitted in several Kings Reigns, so that this
Parliament was composed (as those of Marlbridg and Glouces^er) not of all, but
only of the more discreet of these lesser Barons or Tenants in Capite.


F. If this be all you have to say to extricate your self out of this
difficulty, I think it will not amount to much, for in the first place, all you
have here said is mere conjecture without any proof; since this Statute of
Westminster 3d. says only in general, that it was made at the Instance of the
Magnates under which Title your Doctor, B. A. P. page 147.
when he explains the Writ of Summons to the Arch. bishops of Canterbury tells
us, were frequently comprehended the Barons Majores, the Earls and Barons, as
under Minores, the lesser Tenants in Capite, which when the Statute of
Westmister the first was made he will have to be the whole Commonalty of the
Land therein mentioned; and why this Parliament of Westminster the 3 d. should
not consist of the same Members now, needs some better reasons than your bare
affirmation to the contrary. Besides this Prerogative of calling these Barons
Peers to Parliament, did not only extend to Tenants in Capite, but to other
Mesn Tenants also; if the King thought them considerable enough for Estates, or
wisdom to do them that Honor, and so was not confined to Summon none but
Tenants in Capite, who according to your Interpretation of K. John's Charter
had all a right to appear by General Wr^ts, at the Common Council of the
Kingdom: but you may put what sense you please on these words Magnates and
Proceres, yet I am sure your Doctor can take them in no other sense than for
the Community of all the Tenants in Capite both great and small; Tir.
Communi^as Regni.
and so he tells us in his Glossary when he Comments upon the Writ of the 30
Edw. 1. which you now mentioned, and which refers to this very Parliament of
the 18 th. when Forty Shillings was granted on every Knights Fee to Marry the
Kings Daughter; B. G. Page 32, 33
and there the Doctor immediately tells us, that such as paid that Scutage
were Tota Communitas Regni, and no others; and of these the Tenants in Capite
granted. and paid it first for themselves and Tenants, etc. and which must
certainly relate to this very Parliament of the 18 Edw. 1. or none at all.


M. I confess I do not see how the Doctor can solve this difficulty; but by
denying what he has already said; and affirming, as I do now, that all the
lesser Tenants in Capite were not Summoned to this Parliament, but only some of
them at last ordered by this Writ to be chosen and returned by the Counties.


F. Yes, he might do it, if bare affirming were to pass for proof; but I shall
not give up my reason upon no better Grounds either to him, or you; not to
mention the improbability of the thing, that the King should be now
overperswaded by the Earls, Barons, and other Great Men to call these Knights
of S^ires which had been now omitted ever since the 49 Hen. 3. for above twenty
year^, when he had no need at all of them* but rather the contrary advantage of
Governing without them, since it is the Policy of Princes rather to diminish
than increase the number of the Members of their great at well as private
Councils, who certainly are most easily managed when they are a few than a
great many.


M. But what if we should go from the Doctors Position, and say, that perhaps
these Knights were chosen out of the Mesn Tenants of the Tenants in Capite,
many of whom I grant might be considerable for Interest as well as prudence;
and with whom the King at their request might desire to treat of certain
matters which had been before moved and propounded by him.


F. This is all that can be said, and yet is much more unlikely then the other;
since to believe that the Earls, Barons and Tenants in Capite should be now
grown so weary of their Power of imposing Taxes* and making Law^ for the whole
Nation as to, entreat the King to admit their under-Tenants to partake of so
large a share in both, is so extravagant a Fancy, that if it had not suited
with the Doctor's present Hypothesis, he would never have asserted it in cold
blood; since himself affirm^ that upon the making of King John's Charter, that
the Earls, Barons and Tenants in Cap^^e, were the only Parties to it, and that
all the rest of their Tenants who were there present were only their Retinue
and Tenants in Military Service which were with them at Runnemede, and were
hardly to be reckoned among the Freemen of the Kingdom, B.G. Glo. p. 51.
all the rest being only Followers who helped to augment the noise; and were
not Lawmakers, for it is not probable (says the Doctor very well) that those
men that had the force of the Nation would permit men of small Reputation to
share with them in Law-making, those that had the power of this or any other
Nation de Fac^o, always did give Laws, and Tax the People. But it seems these
Great Lords and Tenants in Capite, are either very stiff to maintain; or else
easy to give up their privileges just as it best suits with the Doctors
present occasion; but the Doctor may contradict himself as much as he pleases;
since it is not his fault, but his Hypothesis that has lead him into it.


M. I confess it does seem somewhat hard at present to conceive it, but we know
not what reasons the Lords and Tenants in Capite might have had to desire the
Concurrence of these Knights of Shires at this Juncture of time; but that their
coming to Parliament looks like a new Institution, may farther appear from
hence, that the King for a good while after the introducing Knights of Shires
to serve in Parliament, B. A. P. p. 152.
was wont to use the liberty of Nominating the same Members of Parliament who
were formerly chosen, appears by a very remarkable Writ the Doctor there
likewise gives us of the 28 th. of the same King, Cla^^. 28. Ed. ^. M. 3. Dors.
directed to the Sheriff of Cumberland, whereby he is commanded to cause to
appear at the Parliament at Lincoln on the Octive of St. Hilary the very same
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses who had before appeared at the last Parliament,
unless any of them were sick or dead. From which we may collect, that our Kings
in those days often made use of their Prerogative of Summoning such Members to
Parliament, as were not then actually chosen to serve in that Parliament; and
for a farther confirmation of this, there is still extant upon Record in the
same Roll the Returns of several of the Sheriffs upon the same Writs. Whereby
it appears that the same Members were returned to appear in this Parliament who
had before served at the precedent, unless in the Case of some that were sick
or dead.

And that our Kings had not yet a long time after lost their Prerogative of
Nominating how many Knights, Citizens and Burgesses they would have chosen and
returned to appear in Parliament, may appear by a Writ of the 45. Edw. 3.
whereby one Knight for a County, Claus. 45. Ed. 3. M. 2. Dors.
and one Citizen and Burgess, and those too, named by the King to the Sheriff
were to be Summoned to appear at Winchester to do those things that are
appointed in the same Writ, which were likewise directed to all the Sheriffs in
England; and that this was a Parliament appears from hence, that the Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses had Writs for their Expenses at this Meeting at
Winchester. Cl. 45. Ed. 3. M. ^^* Dors. T. R. ^7. ^i^* Iunii.
And tho in these Writs it is only expressed by these words* Magnum Consilium
Nos^rum, yet from this Writ of ^ummons it is evident, it did the Business of a
Parliament, and so no great matter for the Name.


F. If th^se be all the Arguments you have to produce against the Ancient Right
of the Commons being part of the Parliament before the 18 Edw. 1. I doubt they
will not be sufficient to do the business. For as to this Record of the ^8 of
Edw. 1. whereby the King is supposed to have had a power to cause those Knights
of Shires to be returned who were Elected to serve in the Parliament before
going without any new Ele^tion, this is altogether Pre^ar^ou^; for if you will
but read the Writ it self, and the reason of the King's thus acting, it will
plainly prove the contrary. For the King re^ite^ in that Writ, That having
resolved that the Charter of Forests should be observed and that his Subjects
had made a perambulation thereupon; yet that he would conclude nothing in that
matter, without the Counsel of the Prelates, Earls* Barons, and other Great
Men; and therefore desiring to hasten that business, as far as he could without
any delay. He thereby orders him to cause to come before him to the Parliament
at Lincoln the same Knights, Citize^n, and Burgesses as were before Elected.
Now the King might have very good reason for it, why he would rather treat with
them than with any other, because they had been privy to all the precedent
transactions concerning this business of Forests, and therefore were most likely
to come to the speediest conclusion with the King in that affair, as being
better instructed in it, than it was possible for any new Members to be, who
had not before been privy to the whole Affair.

Yet that the King never intended hereby to impose Representatives upon his
People without their free Consent, appears by this Clause at the end of the
said Writ. (...) qu^d Milites, C^ves and Burgenses praedicti dictis die, and
loco n^^dis omnibus inter^ut eum plena potestate aud^endi, and faciendi ea quae
ibidem in praemiss^^ ordinaeri con^ingent pro cummuni commodo dicti Regni. Now
how these Knights, Citizens and Burgesses could appear in Parliament with full
power of acting therein, without the new Election or Confirmation at least of
those whom they represented, I should be very glad ^f the Doctor or your self
could inform me* But to come to your next Record of the 45 Edw. 3. whereby you
would prove that the King in those days had a Power of appointing not only how
many Citizens and Burgesses should appear in Parliament for each County, but
also could name the Persons that should appear therein. I wonder how the Doctor
could so impose upon your, or his own, understanding since nothing is more
apparent than that this Council at Winchester to which they were Summoned, was
no Parliament at all but a Great Council, as appears by the very words of the
Writ it self, which recites, That whereas a Parliament lately at Westminster
had given the King a Su^sidy of 24 sh. and 3 d. upon every Parish in England,
that the King being willing to be better informed after what manner the Levy of
this Tax might be soonest performed, and because it would be burthensom for all
the Great Men, Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, who came to the said Parliament
to meet together again for this matter, therefore he Ordained for the sparing
their Pains and Expenses, to have a Colloquy and Treatise with some of the same
Members, and therefore names the very Persons whom he commands should appear
before him at Winchester to in^orm him and his Council of the best manner and
form whereby the said Tax might be soonest and most conveniently levied,
according to the intent of the said Grant. So that nothing is more plain from
the Writ it self, than that this Assembly was no Parliament; the proper
Business of which is always to make Laws, give Money, or re^ress Grievances,
none of which ^ut it is apparent were the cause of this meeting. To which these
that were Summoned did not appear as Knights of the Shires (their power being
expired at the Dissolution of the Parliament) but only (...) so many particular
private men, who by reason of their Interest in the Country the King supposed
could best inform him in the business above mentioned. But that in the Reign of
this King there were several Councils of this kind, which tho no Parliaments as
having but one Knight, one Citizen, and one Burgess, and only making Temporary
Constitutions concerning Trade, and other things of less moment, which were to
be put in practice for a time till they could be confirmed by the next
Parl^ament, appears by the Ordinance or Statute of the Staple above mentioned.
And of these Mr. Pryn in the first part of his Parliamentary Register of Writs
gives us diverse Precedents; P^g. 215.
which he rightly (...) (...)

So that I hope I have now fairly run through, and examined all the Precedents
which you or your Doctor have been able to urge in this great Question* and I
think, if you are a^ candid and ingenuous as I take you to be, you will not
assert, that any of them do amount to a proof* either that the Commons were
never Summoned from the ^9th. of Henry III. to the 18th. of Edward I. or that
the Writs of Summons he there produces, was to a Parliament and not to a great
Council, or that the King ever took upon him to appoint what number of Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses, should come to Parliament, or could nominate who they
should be, or could discharge whom he pleased from serving as Members therein.
All which your Doctor, I think with greater confidence, than right
understanding of the true meaning of the ancient Writs and Records of
Parliament, has undertaken to assert* I beg your pardon for troubling you so
long on these Heads. since the length as well as diversity of Records you have
now cited, could not be answered in less compass.


M. I must confess, you have given pretty plausible answers to most of the
Authorities and Records I have now cited, yet I cannot assent so far as to come
over to your Opinion, without a longer consideration of the strength of the
answers you have now given me to the Doctors Authorities. But in the mean time
you would oblige me, if you could give me the rest of your Arguments, whereby
you would undertake to prove that the Commons have been always an essential
part of the Parliament ever since the Conquest, for it seems to me, by what I
have read out of our ancient Historians, that there is no express mention made
of them by Name. in any Historian or Record, till the Reign of Edward I. and as
for those Arguments Mr. P. has given us to the contrary, methinks the Doctor
has given satisfactory answers to them.


F. I think I have made it clear enough, that the Commons of England were a
constituent part of the Wittena G^^ote, or Common Council of the Nation before
your pretended Conquest; and if it does not appear that they were deprived of
that right by the Normans entrance (which you have not yet proved) I think we
may very well conclude, that things continued in the same State as to the
Fundamental Constitution of the Government* as well after your Conquest as they
did before. Nor have you as I see proved any thing to the contrary. since you
confess that as much a Conqueror as King William was, yet he altered nothing
in those Fundamental Constitutions, the most that you pretend he did, being
only in an alteration of the Persons, who were the Legislators from English to
French Men or Normans; so that upon the whole matter, I think there is no need
of any new Arguments to confirm this truth, since the Commons of England,
claiming a right by Prescription, of having their Representatives in
Parliament; if you nor your Doctor, nor none of those whom he follows, can
prove by sufficient Authorities when this began, then I am sure you ought if
you were of the Jury in th^s matter, to find for the Tenants in Possession;
since that, together with a constant usage, time out of mind is as well by your
Civil as our Common Law a sufficient Title to any Estate; yet I doubt not but
to show you the next time we meet, that the Doctor has no^ given such
satis^a^^ory answers as you imagine to most of Mr. P's best Arguments, proving
this right of Prescription to have been the constant Opinion of an succeeding
Ages; to which I shall also add diverse new Authorities, as well from ancient
Historians, as Parliamentary Records and Statutes, but since it is grown now
very late, I beg your pardon till another opportunity.


M. I thank you Sir for the pains you have taken to satisfy me in this great
Question; but pray come again within a Night or two, that we may make an end of
this weighty Controversy, and then we may proceed to wha^ we at first
intended, viz. whether the King can ever lawfully be resisted, or whether by
any Act he may Commit, he can ever (...) to be King.


F. I accept of your Proposal, and shall wait of you again as you appoint, but
in the mean time pray consider well of the Authorities I have now urged, and
the Answers I have given to your Argument, and then I hope there will be the
less need of new ones.


M. I shall not fall to do it, but in the mean time am your humble Servant.


F. And I am yours.


ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Publisher begs your Pardon for letting a Term pass without giving you this
Dialogue, which has so close a dependence on the Former; but it has been his
own unhappyness, and not his faul^.

In the next place he hopes you will not take it ill of him, that he has
^welled this to a bigger bulk than the other, since the Author, by reason of
the weightiness, as well as multiplicity of the Arguments could not make it
(...), without doing a considerable injury to this Important Subject. And to
let you se^ that I do not dissemble, the Author was forced to reser^^ two or
three Sheets more of the same Argument (because he would not ^ver tire you) for
the next Discourse.

And the Author also desires the Learned Doctor Brady's pardon, if through his
own have, or the Inadvertency of the Compositor, there have been some Omissions
of the Marginal References to his answer to Mr. Petyr, but since the Doctor
knows very well how to distinguish his own from the Authors Matter, and that
those who are conversant in his W^itings, may do so likewise; he hopes, both
the Doctor and the Reader will the more easily forgive it; Especially, since
you will find him so fair a Representer, as not to curtail the Doctors
Arguments, but rather to enlarge them wh^^ he thought he had a just occasion.

FINIS.
Bibliotheca Politica: OR A DISCOURSE By WAY of DIALOGUE, BEING A Continuation
of the former Discourse, concerning the Antiquity of the Commons in Parliament;
wherein the best Authorities for it are proposed and examined. With an Entrance
upon the Question of Non-Resistance, etc.

The Third Part.

Collected out of the most Approved Authors, both Ancient and Modern.

Dialogue the Eighth.

LONDON, Printed for R. Baldwin in Warwick Lane, near the Oxford-Arms; where
also may be had the First, Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth and Seventh
Dialogues. 1693.

The Authors chiefly made use of in this Discourse, and how denoted in the
Margin.

P. R. C, Mr. Petyts Rights of the Commons asserted. B. A. P. Dr. Bradyes
Answer To Mr. Petyts Treatise. B. A. A. Dr. Bradyes Answer To Mr. Cooks
Treatise entitled, Argumentum Antinormannicum.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
I Must beg your Pardon, if I have made my Publisher tell you an Untruth before
I was aware, in the Advertisement at the end of the last Dialogue; when he told
you there were, but two or three Sheets behind upon this Subject; whereas
indeed this Dialogue is almost wholly taken up in discussing these Reasons, and
Authorities, that have been formerly brought by Mr. Petyt or are now newly
added by me; to prove that the Commons had Representatives in Parliament long
before the 49th of Henry the 3d, in doing which, if I have been too long, I
hope you will pardon it, since so weighty a Question could not be dismissed
without saying the most, I could find had been alleged; as well for as against
it. And since I was to explain the meaning of those Words Clerus and Populus,
in the times immediately after the Conquest, it was fit to let you know that
anciently the Inferior Clergy, (who did not hold in Capite) had Places and
made a part of the 3d Estate, as well the Bishops and Abbots, in our general
Councils or Parliaments.

There was likewise a necessity of showing, that the Commons of England claim
to appear in Parliament by Prescription, Time beyond Memory, and consequently
of showing how that time is to be understood in all our Law Books; which are
the only proper Interpreters of that Law Term of Time, of which there is no
Memory to the contrary. And since there is no Writer that I know of, who has
opposed this Notion of the Right of Prescription in the Commons, but Mr. Prin.
I have Impartially considered, what he has writ against it, in his 2d and 3d.
part of his Parliamentary Register, and put down the Substance of it in this
Discourse, with what may be reasonably replied thereunto; so that considering
the many fresh Authorities from Historians and Records that are here inserted,
and that have never been Published altogether before. I think I may safely
affirm, that there has never been so much hitherto put together of this kind;
nor perhaps will be till Mr. Petyt shall please to publish at large his Learned
and Elaberate Collections from Ancient Monuments of Antiquity, Histories; (both
Manuscript and Print) as also from Parliamentary and other Records on this
important Subject, many of which you will here find Abbreviated; and to whose
Learning and Knowledge in matters of this kind, I must own my self beholding for
the Arguments from the Inferior Clergy's (who were not Tenants in Capite) being
anciently part of the great Council of the whole Kingdom, as also that of
applying the Right of Prescription to the House of Commons.

But if Dr, Brady or any Friend of his shall think fit to animadvert upon any
thing that has been here laid down, I shall be so far from being concerned at
it, that I shall rather be very well satisfied; since as a fair Representer of
other men's Opinions, who write not for Victory, but the Discovery of Truth, I
shall be glad if the Dr. or any other Learned Person shall think fit to give
the World greater Light on this Subject, by publishing somewhat that is now,
and more convincing; then what has been heretofore done. For had it appeared
so to me, I declare I should not have taken so much Pains to set down the
Arguments on both sides; which I shall still continue to do, if any thing shall
be performed material in this kind. I have to make up this Discourse just
entered upon the Question of Non-Resistance, but cannot go far in it now; but
shall leave what is to be f^rther said upon that important Subject to the next
Dialogue, which will be speedily Published.

THE Eighth Dialogue BETWEEN Mr. MEANWELL a Civilian, AND Mr. FREEMAN a
Gentleman.
M. I Am glad to see you again so soon; for indeed I am very impatient to make
an end of this great Question concerning the Antiquity of the Commons appearing
in Parliament; and therefore pray go on where you left off, and give me those
plain proofs you promised me, whereby you would make out that both the Knights
of Shires, as well as the Citizens and Burgesses had a right to be there ever
since the Conquest; for I desire to go no higher.


F. I thought I had said enough on that Subject at our last Meeting to satisfy
any reasonable person: I am sure more than you were able fairly to answer,
especially as to my Replies to the best Authorities you brought from the
Doctor; and therefore pray before we proceed farther, tell me your Opinion upon
second thoughts of those Authorities and Arguments I then gave you.


M. I must confess they do somewhat shock me; but I hope you will pardon me if
I cannot come over to you, without first hearing what may be said by the other
side, and to this end I have writ to the Learned Dr. for his Solution to
several difficulties, that I confes^ upon his Hypothesis I know not how to
solve; but doubt not but to receive farther satisfaction from him as to those
Points in a short time; but in the mean while, let us proceed in our intended
design, and examine the rest of the Arguments you have to produce on your side.


F. I shall obey your Commands; and therefore in the first place you cannot
expect more than is in our power to give you: For since all the
Parliament-Rolls and Writs of Summons, (except those of the 49th of Henry the
Third) are lost till after the times in question between us, you must be
contented with what other proofs we can produce, provided they are sufficient
to satisfy any unbyast, indifferent Person: And to this end I shall sort the
Authorities I intend to make use of into these three Heads. First, I shall give
you diverse Quotations out of the most Ancient Writers, who lived in, or nearest
the time you prefix; viz. the coming in of the Norman William; and shall
descend down in order of time as low as your Drs. 18th of Edward I.

2. I shall show you from the Authorities and Testimonies of the Judges of
almost all our Courts; of the House of Commons; nay of several whole
Parliaments, and the King himself, that the Commons had an undoubted Right of
S^tting there by Prescription.

3. From the Consent of all our Neighboring Kingdoms who being governed by a
King, and a great Council or Assembly of the Estates according to the Gothic
Model, the Commons had always from the Institution of the Government their
Representatives in those Assemblies.


M. I much doubt that; but pray begin with your Ancient Historians; for as for
my own part* I must freely tell you, though I have looked them over very
warily, yet I can find nothing in them concerning the particular constituent
parts, or Members, of our great, or Common Councils, but the Magnates,
Optimates, or Principes, Comites and Barons; all which though you have at our
last meeting showed me from some Authorities, that they may take in others,
though not Nob^^ by Birth; yet since these words have been most commonly taken in
another sense; it needs some better proof than to say in general, that mere
Commoners were there, because those general words may sometimes be taken in
that sense* and as for the words Clerus and Populus, which I confess are often
mentioned to be present at those Assemblies; the Learned Dr. in several places
of his Answer to Mr. P. as also in his Glossary has plainly proved, B. A. P.
p. 26, 27 Tit. Clerus and Populus.
that as the word Clerus sometimes signifies the Bishops, and sometimes the
Inferior Clergy; so Populus does also neither great nor little People, but
only the Layety; and therefore as it is used, and restrained signifies the Lay
Plebs; or the Lay Magnates. What I mean by Plebs, I shall show you by and by;
but that the word Populus does not signify the Inferior sort of people, or
such as were inferior to Barons, Tenants in Capite, or Noblemen, the Dr. has
very well proved from that passage made use of by Mr. P. to prove the Commons
to have been in that great Council which made Henry the first King, P. R. C.
Fol. 55.
because it is said by Mat. Paris, that Congregato Clero, and Populo universo,
etc. by which word Populus he would understand the Commons alone distinct from
the great Lords: B. A. P. p. 27, 28.
But the Dr. very plainly shew^ him the falseness of this Interpretation from
the same Author within three lines of the place himself had cited; where the
same Body of Men, which is but just before called Populus, is presently after
called Magnates, ad haec Clero respondente and Magnatibus cunctis; not one word
in this place of any Populus, but the great, or Noblemen, (that is the Tenants
in Capite) must be the People or Laymen here mentioned, and this same Clerus
and Populus is by Eadmerus, speaking of a great Council held at Westminster in
the second Year of this King called Primates Regni u^riusque Ordinis; or as
Florence of Worcester words it, Anno D. 1102
the Orders of Men assembled in this very Council, Omnes Principes Regni sui
Ecclesiastici, and Secularis Ordinis; the which the Dr. also proves from
several like passages in Eadmerus; in all which, as also in all other Authors
the Dr. has there cited: This Populus is explained to be the Earls, Barons,
and great Men of the Kingdom only, Ibid. p. 31, 32.
that is, all the greater, as well as smaller Tenants in Capite. And though I
confess at our last Meeting you brought very good proof, that the word Populus
was more comprehensive among the Romans; yet though the Roman Populus
comprehended all the People, as well Nobility as Plebeians; and that in
Scotland it took in the Burgesses of the Royal Buroughs, which hold
immediately of the King; yet does it not follow that this word must needs
signify so in this Kingdom too, since in all Countries not all the People, but
only the Governing part of it is used for the Populus in all Histories, Public
Acts, and Laws of those Kingdoms; thus in Denmark formerly, and still in
Poland, the Populus consisted solely of the great Councils, of the Nobility and
Senate, in which there were no Plebeians at all.


F. I hoped we had done wrangling about this word Populus; but since I see you
are not yet satisfied, I shall show you more plainly that by this word used in
our Ancient English Historians, is not only meant the great Lords and Tenants
in Capite, but another larger, and more comprehensive Body; and whereas you say
that the word Populus is still restrained by our Ancient Historians to the
Magnates, Primates, and Principes Regni; all which words do in their genuine
signification signify Great or Noblemen; and that though they are sometimes
taken in a different acceptance, yet that it lies upon me to prove that they
are to be taken in my sense, to this I must tell you, that the proving part
ought to lie wholly of your side; for since the Commons of England have been
for above these Four hundred years constituent Members of our Parliament, (as
is agreed on all hands) and that they also claim to be so by right of
Prescription, it lies still upon your door to prove the contrary, and to show
at what time, and upon what occasion they were first introduced, which if you
have not been able hitherto to perform, so as to give me any tolerable
satisfaction; you cannot blame me if I still keep my own Opinion, and believe
them as Ancient as Kingly Government it self in this our Island.

But since I grant these words Clerus and Populus are of a general, and
equivocal signification, their true sense and meaning is best to be understood
from the subject matter that is treated of, as I shall show you first from the
nature and signification of the words Clerus, and Populus, according to the
Ancient Constitution of our Government, that they must signify many more than
your Tenants in Capite alone; and then I shall confirm my Interpretation by the
Authority of such Ancient Historians as lived either in, or very near the Times
I mention: And therefore I shall first prove it from the great Analogy there
was between the Clerus, and the Populus, so that if the Clerus took in more
than your Tenants in Capite in our Common Councils, by the same reason the
Populus must do so too.

Now that this word Clerus, when used by it self, does not originally signify
either the Bishops and Abbots alone, or the Inferior Clergy alone, (as your
Dr. asserts) is evident, because Clerus is a general word, and comprehends all
the Clergy of whatsoever sort or degree: Now that all the Clergy as well the
Superior as Inferior, had either themselves in person, or else by their
Representatives a place in the Saxon Witten Gemots, or Mycel Synods, and made
together with the Laity one entire Council, or general Assembly, without the
joint consent of both which no Laws or Constitutions, whether Ecclesiastical or
Civil, could be enacted; for proof of this, we need go no farther than Sir H.
Spelman's first Volume of Saxon Councils, and particularly in the Councils or
Synods of Clovesho first and second, Vide Spelman's Counc. 1 Vol. from p. 332.
to 346.
that of Kingston, A. D. 838. that held under King Egbert, and Withlafe King of
the Mercians, and that of Winchester under the same King Egbert, in which
Tithes were first granted; in all which you will find that both the Clergy, as
well the Inferior, below the degree of Bishops and Abbots, as also the Laity
below your Earls, and great Aldermen and Wites had a share.

And that this continued so both in, and after the Norman Times, appears by the
first great Councils we have left us, that were held under the first Kings of
the Norman Race.


M. I should be very glad to see that proved; for I always hitherto believed
that none of the Clergy had then any Votes in the Great, or Common Council of
the Kingdom, but those Bishops, Abbots and Priors, who all held in Capite of
the King alone; and though it is true, there was also a Synod, or Convocation of
the Clergy often held at the same time when the Common Council of the Kingdom
was assembled, yet was it no part of that Council; and as the Clergy had
nothing to do in the making of Temporal Laws; so had the Laity no hand in the
making of Ecclesiastical Canons, or Constitutions for the Popes Legate or
Archbishop of Canterbury often held these Synods at other times when the
Common Council of the Kingdom was not assembled at all; and thus it continued
till the 25th and 26th of Henry the 8th, when the King was first by the Clergy
in Convocation, and afterward by the whole Parliament recognized and declared
Supreme Head of the Church of England under Christ; and from that time the King
reassumed the Power which the Pope had before usurped; and his consent alone
under the great Seal is the only Ratification of all Canons or Ecclesiastical
Constitutions passed in either of the Convocations of Canterbury, or York, at
this day.


F. I grant that for between three hundred, and four hundred years the matter
of fact has been as you say; but that it was not so from the beginning, is
also as certain; for first in the Saxon times before the Popes Usurpation came
in, it is evident from the Councils, or Synods I have now cited that the King
had no more power to make or confirm any general Ecclesiastical Laws or
Constitutions without the consent of the Wittena Gemot or Mycel Synod
consisting of the Clergy, as well as Laity, than he had to make Temporal Laws
without it. So far were they in those times from having any notion of any
personal Supremacy in the King in Spiritual, more than in Temporal matters; and
that this continued so till the Pope did not only usurp upon the King's Right,
but that of the whole Kingdom in general, may appear by those Memorial^ we have
left us, of such common Councils or Synods in the Reigns of our first Norman
Kings.

For the Proof of which, I shall begin with the Reign of William l. in whose 14
th Year, Anno Domini. 1077.
the Privileges of the Abbey of Westminster were Confirmed by that King in a
Common Council, as well of all the Clergy as Laity of the whole Kingdom, as may
be proved by a Charter, still to be sound at large in the Old Char^ulary of the
Abbey of Westminster, Sab Essigie Fausti^ae, A. 3.
now in the Corronian Library; Collected by Sulcardus an ancient Monk of that
Abbey, the Conclusion of which Charter of Privileges, makes it very plain of
what Members this Council then consisted, and who gave their Consents to the
Acts of it; which pray read, In solemnitate Pentecost^: haebito consilio in
celeberrino loco praescripti Westmonast, and a nostra regia Maj^s^ate Conventis
in unum, cunctis Regni nostri Primatibus, ad audiendes, and confirmandas
quosdam Synodalis decreti causas necessarias communi consensu maxim
Episcoporum Abbatum, and alio^um insignium Procerum, etc. Scripta est haec
Charta, and sigillata and ab ipso Reg^, and supradic^is personis testificata
confirmat. and auctorizata in Dei nomine, etc.

This being one of the first, and most remarkable Councils of this Kings Reign.
I cannot let it pass without observing, First, That all the chief men of the
Kingdom were there, as well of the Clergy as of the Laity; and that the Words
Primates, and Proceres here mentioned are very Comprehensive; and may take in
many others, besides your great Lords and Tenants in Capite, I have already
proved at our last Meeting but one: Secondly, Pray observe, that this Charter
of Privileges, though all of them concern mere Temporal Things, is authorized,
Confirmed by the common Consent, and Subscriptions of all the chief men, as
well of the Clergy as Laity; from all which nothing can appear more plain to
me, than that in the Reign of this King, the Clergy and Laity made one Common
Council, without whose joint Consents, nothing could be transacted in the
Legislative: Whether of Ecclesiastical, or Civil Concernment.

I could give you more Instances of this kind in this King's Reign, but I make
haste to that of his Son William II. in whose 7th Year Eadme^^s tells us, A. D.
1093. Ead. Hist. Nov. L. 1. f. 26. Spelmani Council. Vol. 2. f. 26.
there was a Common Council held at Rockingham, about the difference between
Archbishop Anselme and the King; at which were present, Episcopi, Abbates,
Principes, ac Clericorum, ac Laicorum numerosa multitudo; no^ that by Principes
or Chief Men, may be here meant many more than your Tenants in Capite, I have
already sufficiently proved: and that this Numerosa multitudo must mean
somewhat more than those, I shall prove f^rther by and by.

In the long Reign of Henry I. I could give you many Instances of this kind,
bu^ let these suffi^e: In the 7th Year of this King, Bromton tells us in his
History (speaking of the Council in which this King gave up his Right of
Investitu^es) Clero and Populo ad Concilium Londoniae congregato; An. D. 1100.
Col. 1000. Spel Conc. T^. 2. f. 28.
and who this Clerus and Populus then were, he immediately explains himself;
thus, Astantibus Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, caeteraq, multitudine maxima
Procerum, and Magnatum; under which words I have already proved, that diverse
others besides your Tenants in Capite might be comprehended, and their great
number shows them to have been more than those.

But though this Author does not here expressly say it, yet that the Inferior
Clergy were likewise at these Councils, appears from Sim. of Durham, and the
C^ntinuator of Florence of Worcester, A. D. 1126. being the 25. of this King,
where they both make mention of a Synod or Council held at London, at which
were Assembled the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, etc (the Pope's Legate
presiding over the Clergy,) and besides these, cum innumera Cloi, and Populi
Multitudine, and the Continuator of Florence shows us the manner of their
giving their Consents to those Constitutions, as well Civil as Ecclesiastical,
there made, and Published: they being proposed, with a Placet vobis, and the
Answer to them is, Plaecet, Placet, Placet, thrice repeated; which is very like
the Form still observed in the Bishops and Lords giving their Consent to all
Matters proposed in their House by saying Content.

So likewise the Continuator of Florence, in Anno Dom. 1127. being the 27th of
this King, mentions such another General Council, or great Synod; Vid. Spel.
Council. 2 Vol. f. 35.
wherein William Archbishop of Canterbury Presided over the Clergy, and after
the recital of all the Superior Clergy as before, he thus proceeds, Confluxere
quoque illue (i. e. to Westminster) magnae multitudines Clericorum and
Laicorum, tam Divitum, quam Mediocrium, and sactus est Conventus inaestimabilis
sedit etiam tribus diebus, acta sunt ibi de negotiis saecularibus nonnulla,
quaedam quidem determinata, quaedam dilata, quaedam vero propter nimium
aestuantis turbae tumultum ab Audientia judicantium pro^^igata: And though the
Author gives us the Ecclesiastical Constitutions only, yet it is plain from
him, that Civil Matters were also transacted in this very Council which
consisted as well of the Superior as Inferior Clergy; as also of the Nobility,
and Commons; which are all expressed under the general words of Divitum and
Mediocrium, and resemble the Phrases of the Majores, and Minores; and the des
Greindres; and des Meindres, mentioned in the Statutes of Marlbridge and
Gloucester; which words were debated at our last Meeting.

In the Reign of K. Stephen, there were also several Councils held of the same
sort: and particularly that of his Third Year, in which was granted a Charter
of Confirmation of this Kings, A. D. 1138, 1139.
of the Privileges of the Abbey of Westminster, which is also to be found in
Sulcardus's Chartalary abovementioned, wherein after the general words of
habito universali totius Angliae consilio, and a mention of the Pope's Legate
(who Presided over the Clergy): It follows thus, ^ffuerunt etiam Comites, Regni
mei and Barons quamplurimi, and innumera Cleri and Populi multitudo qui his
omnibus interfuerunt, and Religioso favore voluntatem and Assensum, Authoritati
nostrae paginae, and Privilegio praebu^rent, etc.

So likewise in an ancient Manuscript Chronicle of the Abbey of Ely, under A. D.
1139. being the 4th Year of K. Stephen, there is a remarkable Passage, Vi.
Anglia Sacra. f. 622.
when speaking of a great Council then held at London, he expresses it in these
Terms* Concilio adunato Cleri, and Populi, (and then explains of what Members
these did consist) viz Episcoporum atque Abbatum, Monachorum, and Clericorum)
Plebisque infinitae multitudinis: Now pray give me leave to make some
Observations from these Passages in all these ancient Charters, and Historians:
that besides these Bishops, Abbots, Earls and Barons of the Kingdom, there were
also an innumerable Multitude of Clergy and People, or (as the Ely Chronicle
words it) an infinite number of Clerks, and Commons. Now, pray tell me, what
can be meant here by all these put distinct from the rest of the higher Orders,
but the inferior Clergy, as the Deans* Archdeacons, and Procurators of the
Chapters of Cathedral Churches; as also those of the secular Clergy of the
whole Diocese? And who can be meant by this infinite Multitude of People, or
Plebis, (which naturally signifies the common People distinct from the higher
Nobility) but the most considerable Freeholders, or Lords of Manners, whether
Tenants in capite, or not, under the degree of the higher Nobility, together
with the Citizens and Burgesses of Cities and Towns, and who came not only as
idle Spectators, since the Charter I last cited, expressly mentions that they
were not only present, but also gave their Assents to this Charter of King
Stephens?


M. And may I not with as good reason ask you why these words Populus and Plebs
may not in the Historical barbarous Latin of that Age serve only to express
(not the Multitude, or Rabble, or mere common People) but the whole Body of
lesser Tenants in capite, beneath the Dignity of the greater Barons?


F. I will give you two very good Reasons for that; First, from the great
Analogy there was then between the Members of the inferior Clergy, and those of
the inferior Laiety or Commons; the former of which, even all the Abbots and
Priors; (except those few that held in capite) with all the rest of the
inferior Clergy already mentioned, holding only in Frank Alimoign, and not by
any Military Tenure at all. Now pray give me any sufficient Reason why the
Layety should not also consist of all other Orders of Men who did not hold in
capite neither, and by whom I do not mean the mere Vulgar, or Rabble; though
Freemen, of Freeholders of small Estates, but the most considerable
Freeholders or Lords of Manors in England; or else the Knights of Shires,
who, I suppose, represented not only themselves, but their inferior Tenants;
whether Copyholders, or for Term of Years; as also the Representatives of all
the Cities, and Borough Towns in England: Now these might together with your
Tenants in capite, make so great an Assembly as might very well deserve the
Title (with an easy Hyperbole) of Infinita or innumera multitudo as our
Ancient Historians express it.

Whereas your Drs. Tenants in Capite, could never in these first Times after
this Conquest, amount to so great a Multitude, not being by his own Confession,
B.I.A. p. 171.
above 700 Persons, besides the Bishops, Abbots and Priors; who did not make
above 100 more, which could never deserve the Title of an infinite and
innumerable Multitude.


M. I must confess, that neither your Notion nor your Authorities to prove it
do any way satisfy me, for in the first place your Argument from the Analogy
between the Clergy and Layety, who, you say, made up this Assembly does not
hold; for, though I grant there might be in that part of it which we call the
Convocation, and was then called the Synod, all the Bishops, Abbots, and great
dignified Clergymen; (nay, Procurators of the inferior Clergy too if you
please*) yet were not these (who I grant, were not Tenants in Capite) Members
of the great Council of the Kingdom; but a distinct Assembly from it, which
treated only of Spiritual Matters, and together with the Bishops and Abbots
made Ecclesiastical Canons, as the two Houses of Convocation do at this day;
yet meddled not at all in Matters of a mere Civil, or Temporal concern; any more
than the Lay Council could meddle with Spirituals: and to let you see that this
was true, it is evident beyond dispute that this Ecclesiastical Synod was often
assembled by the Authority of the Pope or Archbishops of Canterbury and York,
when the Common Council of all the Layety were not summoned at all: and so Vice
versa the Common Council of the Kingdom often met, when the Synod of the Clergy
was not convened; as appears by the most ancient Writs of Summons to the
Bishops we have left us; as particularly, The first Writ of this kind that is
upon the Rolls, viz. That for the Bishops (which Mr. Prin has Printed, in the
First Part of his Parliamentary Register) in the 6th of K. John, P. 2.
and which I have cited from the Drs. Answer against Mr. P. at our last
Meeting, in which Writ, though I grant there is a Clause for Summoning the
Abbots, and Conventual Priors, yet there is none for the inferior Clergy.

But in the next Writ, which the same Authors have likewise Published, viz.
That to the Archbishops of York there, there is no Clause at all for Summoning
any of the Clergy as such, Ibid. p. 3.
though it is true, there is underneath an Eodem modo scribitur omnibus Episcopis
Abbatibus, etc. Comitibus and Baronibus; which shows that this Writ was not to
Summon them in their Spiritual but Temporal Capacities. So likewise in the next
Writ of Summons to Parliament, P. 717. P. 5.
we have left us on the Roll, which is cited in Mr. Selden's Titles of Honor:
as also in the same Parliamentary Register, and in Dr. B. against Mr. P. viz.
That of the 49th of Henry the Third, to the Bishop of Duresme without any
Clause of Summons to the Clergy, whether Abbots or others. So likewise in the
next Writ of Summons that is left us, viz. That of the 23d of Edward the First,
(Published also by Mr. Prin) to the Archbishop of Canterbury, Ibid. p. 6.
in which there is no Clause of Summoning any of the Clergy; and though there
immediately follows another Writ of the 23d of this King, in which I grant
there is this Clause of Praemunientes Priorem, etc. viz. The Prior, Chapter,
and other of the Clergy of his Diocese to appear in Parliament; yet that they
were no necessary part of it, but only of the Convocation, appears by the rest
of the Writs of Summons to Bishops, which Mr. Prin has also given us in that
Chapter; all which if you please to peruse, you will find, that in near 200
Writs to Parliaments or great Councils, the Clause of Praemunientes Clerum, is
to be found in scarce half of them; which shows that the summoning or omitting
them depended wholly upon the King's Pleasure, and so were no constituent part
of the great Council or Parliament, as you suppose they were under the first
Norman Kings; for then sure they would not have been omitted, to have been
constantly Summoned in all Parliaments, as well as the Bishops and Abbots.

But to come to your next Argument from the numerousness of these Assemblies,
which you say could not be properly called Numerosa, or Infinita Multitudo,
whereas all the Tenants in Capite as well Ecclesiastics as Laymen, did not
amount in all to 800, there may be an allowance made for this to the Monkish
way of Writing of those times, who might call such a great, or more than
ordinary Assembly of the Clergy, and Tenants in Capite, an innumerable, or
infinite Multitude, when indeed they were but few more than our Lords and
Commons are at this day.


F. I pray Sir, give me leave to Answer what you already said, before you
proceed any farther, because what I have to reply to it, will be pretty long;
in the first place, you cannot with any reason (if you better consider of it)
deny, that the Clergy, as well the Superior as Inferior, did, before your
Conquest as well as long after, make but one Assembly or Body of a General
Council; though sitting in several Places (as the Lords and Commons do at this
day) for the words in the Old Book of Ely, are Adunato Concilio Cleri, and
Populi, which is to be rendered, the Council of the Clergy and Layety being
united and joined together, as I already showed this word Adunato does always
signify; as also by the Confirmation of that Charter of King William's to the
Abbey of Westminster, and to which, (though a Matter of mere Temporal Concernment)
all the Clergy, as well as Layety, gave their joint Consents, as appears by the
Conclusion of that Charter, as also to that of K. Stephen, but now cited which
they could never have done, had they not then made a part of the same General
Council, or Assembly.

Having proved to you that the inferior Clergy did anciently make a part of the
General or Common Council of the whole Nation, I shall now proceed to answer
your Objection: It Is true, that for a great part of some Kings Reigns, for want
of the Writs of Summons to the Superior, as well as to the Inferior Clergy, we
cannot certainly tell, though we may presume it from the general words of the
Historians, whether the Inferior Clergy were Summoned or not; yet this, I
think, I may boldly aver^, that wherever any ancient Author makes mention of
the Clerus, and Populus in general, being present at any such Common Council,
it must necessarily mean not the Bishops, and Abbots; or the Superior Clergy
alone, or the great Lords and Tenants in Capite only, but those and the
Representatives of the whole Nation both Clergy, and Layety taken together; as
I think I have sufficiently made out.

Nor is your Objection considerable, from that writ of the 6 th of King John,
that no Inferior Clergy were summoned, because only the Abbots and Priors are
mentioned at the end of it, to this I answer, that (granting it to be a writ of
Summons to a Common Council of the Kingdom, which is not yet proved) the
omission of the Inferior Clergies being summoned, is no cogent Argument to
prove they were not there; since for ought as you and I know there might be
other writs issued to the Inferior Clergy, distinct from those to the Bishops
and Abbots: Which last used to have distinct writs to each by themselves, and I
may as well suppose these writs to be lost as you do, that all the general
writs to the smaller Tenants in Capite, who were no Barons and yet were to be
all summoned, according to King John's Charter are all lost; and as for the
Abbots and Priors mentioned at the end of this writ of King John's, they were
such as held only in Capite, or else such as did not; if the former, this
might be only a Council of Tenants in Capite, and none other, of which I grant
there were many held in those times upon occasion of Wars, Scurages, and other
matters; but if by these Conventual Abbots and Prio^^ summoned by this writ,
you will mean all Abbots, and Priors of whatever Tenure; then it appears
plainly that this great Council consisted of many other Ecclesiastics, than
what held in Capite, and if so, why might not the Inferior Clergy as well make
a part of it?

But as for your next Authority, the writ of the 49 th of Henry the 3 d, which
is certainly a summons to Parliament, in which is no Clause of summoning the
Inferior Clergy; this is no more an Argument than the former, since it might
not then be the Custom to insert them in the same writ with the Bishop, to be
summoned by him; but they might have general writs of their own directed to the
Clergy of each Dioces^; but that all the Inferior Clergy as well as the
Superior appeared at diverse Common Councils or Parliaments during this Kings
Reign, (which they could never have done without the Kings Summons, tho the
writs are lost) may appear from that great Council or Parliament of the 9 th of
Henry 3 d: Whereto as, Mat. Paris tells us (in the place, I have so often
mentioned) were summoned Clerus and Populus cum Magnatibus Regionis, or Regni
as Mat. Westminister Words it; and in this Council was given by omnes de Regno
the 15 th of all the movables of all the whole Kingdom. So that certainly
these omnes de Regno must take in all Degrees of men, and consequently the
Inferior Clergy too; since it is certain the Bishops, and Abbots did never
represent them in the House of Peers, or in Convocation, so as to lay any Taxes
upon the Inferior Clergy without their express Consents; and this is the more
evident, because this Tax was a 15 th upon movables; and not a Tax upon Land,
and consequently could never be imposed upon those of the Clergy, (who held in
Frank Almoign as all the Inferior Clergy then did and do at this day) by the
Bishops and Abbots that held in Capite, and that these Charters were made by
the Common Consent of the whole Kingdom; (and then certainly by the Inferior,
as well as Superior Clergy,) may appear by the Confirmation of the great
Charters, Rot. Stat. 25. E. 1. m. 38.
as also in the Preamble to the Statute of Articuli super Chartas (made the one
in the 25 th, the other in the 28 th of Edward I.) in both which it is expressly
recited that the great Charters of Liberties, and the Charters of Forest were
made per Commun Assent de tout le Royalme, en Temps nostre Pere; and if by the
Common Assent of the Realm, then sure by that of the Inferior as well as
Superior Clergy, since the Bishops and Abbots, who sa^e there only by their
Baronies could never represent them.

That the Inferior Clergy were also summoned to Parliament, in the 39 th of of
Henry 3 d. appears from the Annals of Burton, in Anno Dom. 1253. Where that
Author (who lived at that time) relates that the Inferior Clergy then
appearing in Parliament, sent Messengers to the Pope concerning the intolerable
Grievances they then lay under; among which, the first Grievance set forth by
the Procurators of the Clergy, for the Diocese of Lincoln is this, Quod decima
bineficiorum suoram Domino Regi fuit concessa ipsis non vo^atis, maxim cum
agitur de aliquo obligando necessarius est ejus expressus consensus: By which
it appears, that the Inferior Clergy then claimed it as their undoubted Right
by the Law of the Land, not to be Taxed either by the King, or the Pope without
their express Consents, and they contended so hard for it, that they have
preserved this Right even to this day, when they now give their Votes to the
choice of Knights of the Shires; tho till the late King Charles's Reign, they
were never taxed without the Consent of their own Procurators in Convocation;
and this may serve to enlarge your understanding, and to show you in what sense
the whole Clergy, as well the Inferior as Superior did anciently make the third
Estate in Parliament, which was more Comprehensive than the Bishops and Mitred
Abbots alone, who sat in the upper House only per Baronian, by Reason of their
Baronies; tho in the Synod or Convocation of the Clergy, as Ecclesiastical
Persons only; Where they also joined in the making of Ecclesiastical Laws and
giving Taxes; which last you cannot deny, but to be a mere Temporal Thing.


M. I grant you are so far in the Right; yet tho the Inferior Clergy often
joined with the Common Council of the Kingdom, in giving the same Taxes, yet
this was by, and upon themselves alone, and they had no hand in making of
Temporal Laws; and giving Taxes for all the rest of the Kingdom; and I
challenge you to show me any precedent within these 500 years, that the
Inferior Clergy ever made the third Estate in Parliament, or that their
Consents was ever asked to the making of Temporal Laws; since the Bishops have
been always looked upon till of Late, as the only Representatives of the
Inferior Clergy in Parliament, how else could they be obliged by general
Statutes or Acts of Parliament; since according to your own Confession, they
gave no Votes at the Election of Knights of Shires, but since the return of
King Charles II. so that if they had ever joined in this Legislative Power (as
you suppose they anciently did) I cannot see why they should not have kept to
this day.


F. I grant indeed, it has been otherwise between 300, and 400 Years, but for
that it was not so from the Original Institution of the Government, is also as
certain; for that the English Common Councils consisted of all sorts and
degrees of Ecclesiastics you must allow; since before the coming in of the
Normans, the Bishops and Abbots did not sit in the Mycel Synods, as Temporal
Lords, is generally acknowledged, and yet even after they came to sit among the
Lay Peers in the great Council of the Nation by virtue of their Baronies; the
Inferior Clergy also gave their Assents to the making of Temporal Laws, and
giving Taxes; I have proved by such Authorities, as I do not see you are able
to answer; and for further Proof of this, to show you their coming was
continued down to the Reign of Henry third, see Sir H. Spelmans Councils,
second Volume, where you will find that they were in that great Council at
Clarendon, P. 64.
when those famous Constitutions were made, as appears by these Words in Mat.
Paris at the end of these Constitutions. Hanc Recognitionem, sive Recordationem
de consu^tudinibus and libertatibus iniquis Archiepiscopi, Ann. Dom. 1164.
Episcopi, Abbates Priores, Clerus cum comitibus and Baronibus, and Proceribus
cunctis juraverunt. So likewise at the Council of Gaintington in the 34 th of
this King. P. 641.
Roger Hoveden has in his History these Words. Dominus vero Rex statin postquam
in Angliam applicuit magnum congregavit concilium, Episcoporum, Abbatum,
Comitum and Baronum, and aliorum multor^m Clericorum, quam Laicorum, apud
Gaintington. And Mat. Paris in the Year 1185, (being the 31 st of this Kings
Reign) mentions a Common Council of the Kingdom then called at Clerkenwel,
where Convocatus est Clerus, and Populus, cum tota nobilitate, which Dr. Heylin
in his Stumbling Block of Disobedience thus translates; P. 193.
the Clergy, and Commons together with the Nobility being summoned. And in 1 of
Richard I. R. Hoveden also tells us of a great Council held at Pipewel Abbey in
Northamptonshire, where the Archbishop of Canterbury produced a Charter of King
William I. Coram Rege, and Vniversis Episcopis Clero, and Populo. And an
ancient Charter of primo of King John, (now in the Archbishop of Canterbury's
Library,) entitled, Charta Moderationis seod. magni sigilli, recites the said
King to have been Crowned, Mediante tam Cleri quam Populi unanimi consensu, and
savore, and tho the rest of his Reign was Turbulent, P. 587.
yet the Author of the Manuscript Eulogium, quoted by Mr. Seldom in his Titles
of Honor, mentions a great Council at London in the 16 th Year of King John,
where the Archbishop of Canterbury was present, Cum toto Clero, and tota secta
Laicali, i. e. (says Dr. Heylin in the same place) The Clergy of both Ranks and
Orders, with all the Laity (called here Secta Laicalis) and the Lords and
Commons had then their places in Parliament; and the Dr. proceeds thus, and in
possession of this Right the Clergy stood when Magna Charta was set forth by
King Henry the 3 d. Wherein the Freedom, Rights, and Privileges of the Church
of England (of which this evidently was one) was Confirmed to them; ( i. e. the
whole Clergy in general). I have here showed you, what Dr. Heylins sense was,
to let you see that a Person of great Learning, and a high Churchman thought it
no Heresy to be of our Opinion, and to maintain as he does all along in that
Chapter; that the Inferior Clergy and the Commons were a Constituent Part of
the Common Council or Parliament long before the 49 th of Henry 3 d, and that
the Inferior Clergy continued to be so, till the Reign of Henry the 4 th at
least.

But that their Consents was also anciently asked in the making of Laws, we
need go no farther than the Authority I have now given you from the
Continuation of Florence of Worcester. And farther, that they were once a part
of this great Council or Parliament, besides the Testimony of the Modus tenendi
Parliamentum, (who tho he be exploded, as an ancient Author, yet certainly is a
good Witness for his own time, viz. that of Edward the third) where the
Procuratores Cleri are reckoned among the Constituent Members or States of
Parliament, which is also confirmed by the two first Writs of Summons, we have
left us on the Rolls, viz. the 23 d of Edward I. where in this Clause of
Praemun^entes Clerum is particularly expressed; Rot. Claus. m. 4. dorso. B. A. P.
p. 155.
which pray read from your Drs. Answer to Mr. P. Praemunientes Priorem and
Capitulum Ecclesiae vestrae, Archidiaconos totumque Clerum vestrae Diocaesis
facientes quod iidem Prior and Archidiac. in propriis Personis suis, and dictum
Capitulum per duos Procuratores idoneos plenam and sufficientem potestatem ab
ipsis Capitulis, and Clero habentes, una vobiscum intersint, modis omnibus tunc
ibidem, ad tractandum, ordinandum, and faciendum nobiscum, and cum coeteris
Praelatis, and Proceribus, and aliis Incolis Regni nostri qualiter sit hujusae
modi periculis obviandum, (viz. The dangers in the Writ mentioned to be
threatened from France) and that this was not the first time this Clause of
Praemunientes was inserted in the Writs of Summons to Bishops, might be easily
proved, had we all the Writs of Summons before the 23 d of Edward I. as well as
since: But we may hence observe, that the Inferior Clergy are not only
summoned to treat with the Prelates, but are as well as they, here authorized
to Treat, Ordain, and Act with them, and the Lords, and Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses (for so your Dr. himself here in the Margin translates, Aliis Incolis
Regni) and how they could thus Consult and Act with them, if they had not bee^
then, as well as the Prelates, a part of the same Body of the great Council or
Parliament of the Kingdom. I confess surpasses my Capacity to understand; nor
is this Clause found in this Writ alone, but is also in most other Writs of the
Bishops Summons to Parliament as low as our own times; and that these Writs
were not to Convocation, but Parliament, P. 120.
appears in Pryns Parliament Register, plainly by the Letters of Procuration
made by the Prior, and Chapter of Bath to William Swynham and John de Merston,
appointing them to appear, and Act for them, as their Lawful Procurators in the
Parliament summoned, Ann. Dom. 1299. being the 27 th of Edward I. which is of a
different form from another Letter of Procuration of the same Prior and
Chapter, Ann. Dom. 1295. (231. Edward I.) to their Procurators therein named to
act for them in the Convocation then summoned at Westminster, the same
difference is also observed in all the Writs of Summons to Convocation
different from those whereby the same Persons are summoned to Parliament; the
former being directed only to the two Archbishops, or their Vicar Generals to
Summon all the Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and Clergy of their respective
Provinces; without any particular Writs issued to any other Bishops, Abbots,
Priors or Clergymen, as in Summons to great Councils or Parliaments; wherein
there are commonly particular Orders to the Bishop to warn all the Inferior
Clergy in the manner but now mentioned; as Mr. Pryn very well observes, P. 106.
P. 60.61. Rot. Claus. 31. Edw. 3. m. 21. Dorso.
in his first part of his said Parliamentary Register; where you may see, there
is a Writ of Summons to Parliament, of the 31 st Edward 3 d; to the Archbishop
of Canterbury, reciting that he intended a Parliament; for diverse arduous, and
urgent Businesses concerning Himself and Crown, and the necessary Defense of
the Kingdom and Church of England. And then proceeds thus, Et quia Negotia
praedicta perquam Ardua sine Maxima deliberatione tam Praelatorum and Cleri
quam Magnatum, and Communitatis ejusdem Regni; etc. and therefore it behoved
him to Summon the said Clergy, Great Men, and Commons; and then requires him to
summon all the Bishops, Abbots and Deans, and Priors, and Archdeacons to
appear personally, and the rest of the Clergy by two Procurators; with full
Power ad tractandum, and consulendum super praemissis una vobiscum, ad
consentiendum. Illis quae tunc ibidem super dictis negotiis divina savente
Clementia contigerit ordinari.


M. But what can you say to their being omitted to be summo^ed in diverse Writs
to Parliament, as appears in Pryns Register you now cited; and from whence
himself has there made this Observation, P. 107.
That there is no Clause of Praemunientes, etc. in any Writs of Summons to
Councils of State, but only to Parliaments, and that not always but at the
Kings Pleasure. Which shows plainly, that tho they were sometimes summoned as a
part, yet were certainly no Essential, Constituent part of this general
Council, since they were omitted in so many of them; and had they been always a
part of this Council; pray tell me, how they came to lose this Right; since the
Clergy in those days were not wont to lose any Right, or Privilege they
enjoyed?


F. I have already granted, that tho the Inferior Clergy have been, no
necessary Constituent part of Parliament, for diverse Ages last past, yet does
it not follow, that therefore they never were so; since they have lost this
Right by Degrees; and I shall now show you by what steps it happened: First,
therefore pray observe, that anciently all Abbots, and Priors whatever, as well
those that held in Capite, as those that held in Frank Almoign were all
summoned alike to the general Councils of the Kingdom; as appears by the first
Councils after your Conquest, that we have any Monuments of; nay it also
appears from that very Writ of the 6 th of King John, (if it were a Writ of
Summons to Parliament) which as I have already proved at our last Meeting it is
most likely it was not whereby the Bishop is to summon all the Abbots and
Priors of his Diocese none excepted; and tho I grant that in the next Writ of
Summons of the 26 th of Henry the 3 d, to the Archbishop of York, there is no
Clause expressed of summoning the Abbots and Priors, and other Clergy of his
Diocese, yet it is much to be doubted, whether this were a Summons to
Parliament or not^ being without any Title of ad Parliamentum or Concilium.

But that the Abbots and Priors, as well those that held in Capite, as those
that held in Frank Almoign were summoned to the great Parliament of the 49 th
of Henry the 3 d, appears by that List of their Names, which both Mr. Pryn,
Parliament Regist. Part 1. p. 106.108, 109, 110.
and the Dr. have Printed from the Roll, nor' do I believe that this was the
first time that all these Abbots and Priors being 101 in all were summoned to
Parliament, notwithstanding your Drs. fancy, that Simon Montsert summoned so
many of them, B. A. P. p. 138.139.
only because he was sure of them, since if we had the Rolls of the foregoing
years, as well as of this; we should (no doubt) find little or no difference;
for by another List of the Abbots and Priors, Ibid. 156.157.
which the Dr. himself has given us of the 23 d of Edward the I. to the same
Parliament above mentioned, when the Inferior Clergy were likewise summoned;
there appears to have been seventy Abbots and Priors summoned to this
Parliament, of which not a third part ever held in Capite; and tho diverse of
them then pleaded exemptions; yet they were many of them such as held in Capite
as well as those that did not, as the Abbots of St. Edmunds Bury, Waltham, St.
Albans, Evesham, etc. all which, as it is notoriously known, held in Capite,
and were commonly summoned to all Parliaments afterward; now pray see how all
this numerous Train of Abbots and Priors (which Mr. Pryn confesses to have
sometimes amounted to 122. Parliament Regist. 141.
) who were summoned to some Parliaments and great Councils; came to be omitted
is to be ascribed chiefly to their own Petition and Desire, when their constant
attendance in Parliament when held every year; and frequently oft^er was
counted a burden rather than an advantage, by Reason of the great charge, and
trouble of coming to those Assemblies; and their being bound to contribute to
the general Aids that were then given the King* and thence it is we find on the
Rolls so many discharges upon their Petitions in Parliament, that they did not
hold of the King by Barony nor in Capite; Ibid. p. 142. Vi. Seldens Titles of
Honor, p. 731. to 735.
nay the Abbot of Leycester after serving in no less than 50 Parliaments, yet
in the 25 th of Edward the 3 d procured a writ of Exemption from the King, Quod
non compellatur venire ad Parliamentum; the Lords in Parliament easily giving
way to it, since they knew that the fewer hands, the Legislative Power was
reduced to, the greater still was theirs that remained; to which may be added
the Kings Pleasure, who by degrees began to omit summoning of diverse of the
smaller Abbots, and Priors before summoned; since it has been the policy of our
Kings to reduce their great Councils or Parliaments, especially the Peers into
as few hands as they could, because they are then most easily managed; and the
Abbots and Priors never complained of it, for the Reasons already given; thus
most of these came to be struck off by degrees, Ibid. 141.
till at last of all this numerous company of Abbots and Priors there were in
the Reigns of Edward the 3 d. Richard 2 d. and Edward the 4 th. and even to the
dissolution of Monasteries under Henry the 8 th, no more than 25 Abbots and two
Priors, viz. the Prior of Coventry, and of St. John of Jerusalem summoned to
Parliament. I have dwelt the longer on the History of these Abbots and Priors,
because it sufficiently confutes your Drs. Notion of none but Tenants in
Capite, appearing in Parliament.

But to give you some account of the Inferior Clergy, how they likewise might
come to be often omitted out of the Writs of Summons to great Councils, and not
to make a constant part of the Parliament, but only of the Convocation; this
might happen two or three ways, and that without any positive Law for it: As in
the first place, pray consider the vast increase of Power, which fell to the
Bishops, after King Henry the first, had given up his Right of Investitures to
the Pope; by which means they depended not at all on the State, and so took
upon themselves a greater Power of imposing upon, and making Temporal Laws for
the Inferior Clergy in Parliament, as if they had been their Representatives;
yet they could never represent all the Abbots and Priors, who held in Frank
Almoign for the Reasons already given, as also because most of them were
exempted from their Jurisdiction; But that the Bishops could never impose Taxes
upon the Inferior Clergy at their Pleasure without their express consents in
Parliament, or Convocation; appears by this memorable Writ of 9 th of Edward 2
d, to the Archbishop of Canterbury, Ibid. p. 154.
which Mr. Pryn has likewise given us; by which it appears that diverse of the
Clergy had consented to grant the King a subsidy in the precedent Parliament,
but only by Reason of the absence of the said Archbishops, and others of the
Prelates, and Clergy it could not then be done, and therefore the Archbishop is
thereby ordered to call a Convocation for that purpose, which had been
needless, if the Bishops alone could have Taxed the Inferior Clergy in
Parliament or Convocation without their express Consents; so that it is plain,
that in that Age they still retained a great share of the Supreme Power, viz.
of not being taxed, unless by Representatives of their own either in
Convocation, or Parliament; as it continues to this day.

But to show you further, how the Presence of the Inferior Clergy, and
consequently their summoning to Parliament became less necessary, we must have
recourse to the Bull of Pop^ Boniface the 8 th in the 24 th of Edward I. by
which he forbad all the Clergy of the Western Church, as well Superior as
Inferior to give any more Taxes of Subsidies to Temporal Princes, without his
Holinesses License; whereupon the King summoned the Bishops and Clergy to
Parliament, at St. Edmunds-Bury in the 24 th of ^is Reign; where when they then
re^used to grant him any supplies, he then, (as all the Historians tell us,)
held his Parliaments at Westminister, Cum Baronibus suis, excluso Clero,
without either Bishops, Abbots, or Inferior Clergy, which was the first
Precedent of this kind, that we ever read of in this Parliament; Vi. Mat.
Westminster. Ann. 1296. P. 405. to 408. Chron. Will. Thorn. Co^. 1965. Walsingham.
Ann. Dom. 1296.1297.
the King with the consent of the Lay Lords and Commons seized all the
Temporalities of the Clergy, as well Bishops as others, and put them out of his
Protection, until they were forced to redeem themselves by paying a 5 th part
of their Movables; for doing of which, they were afterward forced to procure
the Popes Absolutions, some of which Mr. Pryn has given us in this said
Register; and yet for all this, the Pope maintained this Power over the Clergy
for the future; so that they could not be taxed without his express License
(which since it could not always be obtained) no wonder if our Kings did more
frequently omit summoning any more than the Bishops, and Abbots, who were bound
to appear in Parliament by their Tenures, and so left out all the Inferior
Clergy as useless; the main business, and cause of their summoning to
Parliament, viz. giving of Money, being now taken away by the Popes usurped
Power; tho whenever his License was obtained, yet that their own express
Consents in Parliaments or Convocation was necessary, appears by that Passage
in the Annals of Burton in Anno 1255. already cited; when the Inferior Clergy
being extravagantly oppressed between the Pope and King, they sent express
Messengers when they met in Parliament, who were to set forth their greivances
to his Holiness. I have given you as good an account as I am able, how the
Inferior Clergy, which as well as the Superior did once make a Constituent part
of our great Councils, before the Conquest, nay for above 200 Years after, did
at last cease to be so, partly by the prevailing Power of the Bishops, partly
by the Usurpation of the Pope; tho chiefly by their own silence and consent not
complaining of their want of Summons to Parliament, as long as they could
'scape scot free, and all the rest of the Kingdom pay Taxes, notwithstanding
which the clause of their Acting, and Consulting with all the rest of the
Estates in Parliament, still remaining in the Writs of Summons is a sufficient
Monument to Posterity to prove their ancient Right.

And the Clergy of the lower House of Convocation was so sensible of this, Vi.
Dr. Burnets History of the Reformation in the Collection of Records, ex Ms. Dr.
Stillingfleet, p. 117.
that among certain Petitions by them made to Dr. Cranmer then Archbishop of
Canterbury, and the rest of the Prelates in the higher House of Convocation in
the Reign of King Edward the 6th, the 2 d Article of which runs thus, Also that
according to the ancient Custom of the Realm, and the Tenor of the Kings Writ
for summoning of the Parliament, which now, and ever have been directed to the
Bishop of every Diocese, the Clergy of the lower House of Convocation may be
adjoined; and associate with the lower House of Parliament, or else, that all
such Statutes and Ordinances as shall be made concerning all matters of
Religion, and causes Ecclesiastical may not pass without the sight, and assent
of the Clergy, and there is in the same place a second Petition; Ibid. p. 118,
119.
as also a Paper of Reasons offered to Queen Elizabeth, and after to King James
to the same effect.

And lastly to show you, that the Government of the Church and State of
Scotland was anciently all one and the same in respect of their Clergy, as well
as Laity with that of England in their great Councils or Parliaments; appears
by the Agreement between King Edward the ^. and the States of Scotland
concerning the Marriage of his Son, Prince Edward with the Princess of Norway
then Heiress of Scotland, which is published at large in Mr. Pryns 1 st. Vol. of
the Popes Usurpation, P. 396.
where you will find this Agreement to have been made between the said King
Edward ex una part, and venerabiles Patres custodes, (scil. Scotiae)
Episcopos, Abbates, and totum Clerum; nobiles viros, Comites and Barons,
totamque communitatem Regni Scotiae ex altera de matrimonio contrabendo, etc.

From whence you may observe, that as the same style was observed there in the
Titles of their general Councils or Parliaments as with us; and as the Inferior
Clergy there put after the Bishops and Abbots did not hold in Capite, but frank
Abnoign in that Kingdom; So likewise by the same Analogy between the lowest
Temporal State, with the Spiritual, the Commonalty of Scotland here styled
Communitas Scotiae could not then consist only of Tenants in Capite as your
Dr. and those of this Opinion suppose it did.


M. I must confess you have shown me more, for the Inferior Clergies being once
a Constituent part of the Parliament than ever I knew before; I will take time
farther to consider them, but that the word Populus must needs then take in any
more than the Tenants in Capite, I much doubt, since the other word Plebs,
which you so much insist upon from the old Book of Ely, signifies no more, B.
G. p. 24.
than Populus which as the Dr. shows us in his Glossary, In it self signifies
neither Great nor little People, but only Laity, and therefore as it is used
and restrained, signifies either the Lay Plebs, or the Lay Magnates, as I can
show you by several Examples, as particularly out of Mat. Westminster, Fol.
424. n. 30.
Ann. Dom. 1295. 23 d Edward I. where speaking, how the Popes Legates were
received in England who came to make up the differences between England and
France; He thus relates their Reception, Quos in Regn^ Angliae applicatos
excepit Plebs debito honor, accita per Regem apud Westmonasterium Primatum,
and Optimatum suorum Caterva. Here the Plebs were the Kings Great or Chief Men,
that is, the Earls and Barons, which he had called to Westminster, who so
honorably received these two Cardinals.

So likewise the same Author, Ann. Dom. 1297. 25. Edward I. The King and Barons
being at some difference about the Observation of Magna Charta, Fol. 430.
and the Charter of Forest, speaking how the King declared that he intended to
observe those Charters, after this he relate^, that the King thereupon required
to be given him by the Incolae or Inhabitants, the eighth Penny, and says thus,
Articulos in praedictis Chartis Contentos, innovari insuper and observari Rex
Mandavit, exigendo pro hac Concessione ab Incolis Octavum denarium sibi dari,
qui mox Concessus est a Plebe, in sua Camera tunc Circumstante; petit etiam a
Clero susidium. Qui respondit se velle summo Pontifici Literas Supplicatorias
dirigere pro Conferendi Licentia obtinenda. So that the Plebs here mentioned by
the Historian were only the Lay-Nobility that stood about the King in his
Chamber. Now pray consider, that the Word Plebs is of a much more vulgar
Signification than Populus, so that if the former did not signify the Commons
as now understood, the latter cannot do so. And therefore I see no Reason to
suppose that there Words must signify the Commons. The like Error I must tell
you by the way, the Gentlemen of your Opinion have fallen into, concerning the
Word Vulgus in the old Coronation Oath in Latin, B. G. p. 34.
when they ignorantly translate these Words in the old French Oath, les leys
les quelles ly la commuante aura eleu leges and Consuetudines quas vulgus
elegerit to the great Confusion of this Nation in the beginning of the late
troubles; whereas the Community here understood in this Oath, was the Community
of the Bishops and Abbots, Earls and Barons, and great Men, and the whole Body
of Tenants in Capite; expressed before in this Oath by Clerus, and Populus; for
by them alone could these demands be made, for the Vulgus, i. e. the Multitude
or Rabble, could never come near to make these demands at so great and splendid
a solemnity.


F. This is but to urge the same thing over and over again, for that under the
Word Populus were also comprehended the Commons, I have already sufficiently
proved, and can yet prove it further, from diverse Historians and Records, both
of Henry the 3 d, and Edward the 1 st, and Edward the 2 ds Reign; in the first
place, therefore I must still put you in mind of that Passage so often cited,
P. 323.
from Mat. Paris in 9 th of Henry, where the Members of that Common Council in
which Magna Charta was granted, is said to be Clerus and Populus cum Magnatibus
Regionis, P. 284.
or as Mat. Wistminster in the same year, almost in the same Words Clerus and
Populus cum Regni Magnatibus; with both which also agrees the Manuscript
History of Walter of Coventry, who speaking of this very Council of 9 th Henry
the 3 d, relates it thus, at the Purification of the Virgin, there assembled at
London the Proc^res Angliae ibique tractatu diffusiore habita cum Clero and
Populo, the King then granted the Liberties of the great Charter, and that of
Forests; and that there was granted a Comitions and Baronibus, Clero, and
Populo ibidem Praesentibus quinta decima ^mni^m mobilium de Communi Assen^^^.
Whence pray observe, what I before minded you of, that this Tax as it was a
general upon all the movables of the Kingdom, and took in all sorts of
Persons, and so could not never be given by the particular Order of the Drs.
Tenants in Capite, since it did not concern Tenures at all; and was levied on
those Knights Service, as well as upon those that did.

But the Author of the Annals of the Abbey of Burton is more full in this Point,
for in Ann. Dom. 1255. being the 39 th of Henry the 3 d, he tells us a
Parliament was held at Westminster, Convocatis ibidem Episcopis Abbatibus
Prioribus Comitibus, and Baronibus, and totius Regni Majoribus in quo, petebat
[Rex] a Clero and Populo, de Laicis feodis suis sibi suffragium exhiberi, etc.
( viz. For the Business of Sicily) and then goes on thus, disponens de suo
iniquo Consilio Hoc prius a Clero, and postmodum a Pop^lo Majori and Minori
extorqueri; from which passage, I shall observe, first, That all the Clergy in
general, as well the Bishops and Abbots, as Inferior Clergy are here styled
Clerus. Secondly, That the Nobility and Commons or whole Body of the Laity are
altogether called Populus. Thirdly, That this Populus is there also
distinguished into the Major, and Minor, now as by the Major can be meant none
but the greater Nobility, so the Populus Minor can signify none, but the
Commons in general, unless you will suppose that the Kings design was only to
extort Money from the Tenants in Capite, and no others.

But to put it farther out of all dispute, that this Word Populus when put
after, and distinct from Magnates, Barons, and the like in our ancient
Historians and Records, does signify the Commons alone; I shall prove to you
by the Patent Roll of 19 th of Edward I. M. 20.
(the Year after your Dr. supposes the Commons were called to Parliament) where
there is a Writ directed, Baronibus Militibus, and Liber^s Hominibus de Wallia,
reciting that the Comites Barons and Populus de Regno, had lately freely
granted a 15 th of all their Movables, and therefore desires like aid from the
Welsh; now nothing can be plainer than that by Populus in this Record must be
meant the Commons; and yet it is also as evident from another Record now in the
keeping of the Remembrancer of the Exchequer, that this 15 th was granted the
year before in the 18 th of this King; for by this Writ, or Commission he
appoints Commissioners for the Collecting of that 15 th of all Movables; which
the King thus recites, the Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, Abbates Priores Comites
Barons, and omnes alii de Regno, nunc sicut alias de nobis and Progenitoribus
nostris liberaliter fecerunt, to have lately freely granted him; which can be
no other than that mentioned in the Record of the 19 th, unless you can suppose
that there was a 15 th granted two years together, which is very unlikely, and
more than the Nation could then well pay.

So likewise by the Parliament Roll of 1 Edward the 3 d, M. 20.
appears that Hugh le Dispencer Jun. had been in the Reign of his Father, Per
Considerationem Parium, and Populi Regni, and per Assensum Domini Edwardi tune
Regis Angl. exiled and Disinherited for ever, as a Traitor, to the King and
Kingdom; that is, he was banish by the Joint Consent of King, Lords and
Commons; now if Populus in these Records signifies the Commons after the time
you own they appeared in Parliament; I would be glad to see some better Reasons
than you have hitherto given me to prove that it could not have the same
signification before the 49 th of Henry the 3 d, or 18 th of Edward I. yet that
Populus does also sometime^ signify both Lords and Commons appears from, Mat.
Westminster where relating how King Edward I. in the 34 th year of his Reign,
made his Son a Knight, then he tells us, Pro hac Militia filii Regis Concessus
est Regi Trigesimus Denarius a Populo and Clero, Mercatores vero Vicesimum
concesserunt. Yet that the Commons had also a share in this Grant, the Dr.
himself acknowledges in his Glossary, under the same Heads in these words; It
is evident from this Record, (meaning that of the 34th of Edw. I.
abovementioned) who were the Populus, or People intended by the Historian in
this place, to wit, the Comites, Barons, and alii Magnates nec non Milites
Comitatuum. Now I desire to know whether the Knights of the Shires were not
then Commoners as well as now, though reckoned among the Magnates, and as a
Superior Order to the Citizens, and Burgesses here called by a general word
Mercatores, who then gave a 20th part of their Movables by themselves?

But that the word Plebs does not only signify the Lay Nobility, but the
Commons too, in both the Quotations you have made use of out of Mat.
Westminster, is also as plain, for in the first Instance concerning the
Reception of the Legates, is it to be imagined that none but Earls, and great
Lords accompanied them, and that there were no Knights or Gentlemen amongst
them; and as for the words Primates, and Optimates, I think I have sufficiently
proved that those do not only signify the Lords, or Greater Nobility, but the
lesser also: Nay, the Chief Citizens, and Magistrates of Cities and great Towns.

As for the next Authority concerning the Plebs that Granted the Eigth Penny it
is much more evident that the Commons as well as the Lords must be comprehended
under that Term; And that this is so, I need go no further than the Dr's own
Concession in the same place a little farther; which you may read, Ibid. p. 25.
in these words; And that the Agreement for the Confirmation of the Charters
here mentioned was made, and the Eighth Penny granted by the Earls and Barons,
and perhaps the Knights of Shires; and that they were the Plebs that stood
about the King in his Chamber, is clear from the Writ of Summons of Parliament
for two Knights in every County, dated September. the 15 th. immediately
following, to come and receive the Confirmation of the Charters and his
Letters, that the paying of this Eighth Penny should not prejudice the Commons
for the Future, and to do further what by his Son and his Council should be
Ordained. So that the Dr. himself is forced to confess, (though sparingly) that
the Knights of Shires were likewise there, and comprehended under the word
Plebs at the time of this Grant: The King held this Parliament at his Palace
of Westminster, in some of the Halls or great Rooms, and the Commons might very
well sit in the now Court of Requests, (then called the Alba Aula, or White
Hall) (where Parliaments have been frequently held) and from thence be sent for
by the King into the Painted Chamber, or now House of Lords, where the King
then sat; and which might in respect of the Hall from whence they came be very
well called, Camera Regis, for none can imagine his Presence Chamber or
Bedchamber could hold all that Company, and in that Room the King might make
that Speech to them which this Author mentions, and then upon his promising to
renew the Charters, followed the Granting of the Eighth Penny ab Incolis, by the
whole People immediately granted the said Subsidy: Now the Dr. grants in this
place, That the Incolae here meant by the Historian were the Incolae Regni,
such Inhabitants as used to Pay Subsidies and Aids, only the Plebs must here
signify the Lay Nobility. Now, if the Incolae Regni were such us used to Pay
Aids and Subsidies, who made this Concession, can any Man doubt, but that this
Grant was made by their Representatives of the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses;
for if the Tax was general upon the whole Kingdom (as it appears it was) can
you imagine that the Citizens, and Burgesses, were not there present when this
Tax was given, as well as the Knights of the Shires; since it was to be levied
upon all alike? Nor is the Dr's Objection of any weight, That because the King
not long after Summoned another Parliament when he was beyond Sea, to meet his
Son Prince Edw. at Westminster: That therefore it was not probable, that if the
Commons had been at the Agreement, and granting of the Eighth Penny in the
King's Chamber they would have been dismissed, and called again about the same
business in so short a time, seeing the Confirmation of the Charters was
dispatched in Six Days, when the Parliamement ^et October the Sixth. For the
Dr. is very much mistaken to imagine that this was the same Business they met
about before, when the very Writ of Summons shows the contrary. For the Tax was
given already, and therefore they could not meet about that, but the Truth was,
the King went away in haste into Flanders without Confirming the Charters: So
that before the People would give any more Money, his Son Prince Edward was
forced to confirm them, (as the Dr. himself confesses in the same place) After
the Confirmation of these Charters, and that the Earls and Barons were
satisfied. But as for the Dr's wondrous discovery of the false bad Translation
of the old French Coronation Oath, I do so far indeed agree with him, that the
words le Commune aura elu, are not to be translated; which the Commons, or
Vulgar People, but the whole Community shall choose; rendered here by the word
Vulgus, by the Old Monkish Translator: yet this can by no means signify only
the Bishops, Abbots, Lords, and Tenants in Capite; (for who ever knew the word
Vulgus to signify the Superior Clergy and Nobility?) and so to exclude the
whole Body of the People in general. But Mat. Westminster. tells us, Fol 431. n. 10.
Concessus es^ (viz. to E^. I) Novenarius Dena^ius a Vulgo, a Clero vero Denus
ad Scotorum P^rtinaciam reprimendam, who had then invaded Northumberland, and
harrassed the other Northern Countries. P. 25.
Now pray read the Dr's Comment upon these words in his Glossary. Here Vulgus
is the same with Populus and Plebs when opposed to Clerus, or joined with it as
a Distinct Body of Men, and Clerus and Populus, Clerus and Plebs, Clerus and
Vulgus, are the Clergy and Layety, in the meaning of this Historian; whether
the Earls and Barons alone, or the Temporal Earls and Barons with the Commons
were understood by them, that is, the Commons represented in Parliament, and
not the Multitude or Rabble. Which indeed is a worthy discovery of the Dr's.
Nor do I know any body so mad as so to render it in the Coronation Oath: but
that this word Vulgus, when put for the whole Layety of the Kingdom is very
ancient in that Oath: See the Old Coronation Oath in To^tle's Collection of old
Statutes, who transcribed it out of some ancient Latin Copy of that Oath, or
else from that Clause in the Coronation Oath of R. Richard II. which is still
to be seen upon record.

I beg your Pardon for speaking these so long upon the true signification of
these words Clerus and Populus, Plebs and Vulgus, since there was a necessity
for it, by reason of those false glosses that that Dr. has with so much
artifice put upon them, still using them like Charms to bewitch and impose upon
his unwary Readers: especially since a right Notion of these words is
absolutely necessary for the right understanding the true sense and meaning of
our Ancient English Historian (...) after all this pother the Dr. makes about
the signification of those words Populus, Plebs, and Vulgus, as synonimous as
he grants them to be, they must all signify the whole Body of the People, as
well the Commons as the Lords represented in Parliament, by his own confession;
or else, I leave it to your self to consider who of the two is guilty of
levelling Notions, your Dr. or Mr. P. since one does but allert with the
general consent of Ancient and Modern Writers, that the words Barons and
Baronagium Angliae did anciently take in more than the Lords, and Tenants in
Capite: And the Dr. straight calls him a man of Levelling Principles, and that
jambles the Commons together with the Lords, whereas your Dr. can when he
pleases make the words Plebs and Vulgus to to signify the great Lords and
Tenants in Capite contrary to the subject matter on which he discourses, and to
their Genuine signification either in Ancient or Modern Latin.


M. I must consess you have now told me more than I ever yet heard or read of,
or indeed thought could have been urged, for the Inferior Clergies having been
once a part of the Civil, as well as Ecclesiastical Council of the Kingdom; and
I will consider farther of it: But in the mean time let me tell you; you have
not been yet so clear in your Explanation of the other opposite word Populus;
for admitting I should grant you, that there were in some sort Commons in
Parliament as represented by the lesser Tenants in Capite, who were not Lords,
yet does it not therefore follow that there must have been another rank, or
order of Persons beneath, or different from them, since (as I said it is, but
how) it is only the Custom; and Law of each Country that can determine what is
the Community or Representative Body of the People, so that there is no such
certain Analogy between the Clerus, when taken for the Inferior Clergy, and the
Populus when taken for the lesser Nobility; or Tenants in Capite. Since in
Scotland, though their great Council or Parliament might consist of the Abbots,
and Inferior Clergy as with us, who did not hold in Capite; yet you cannot
deny, but that the Temporal Estate or Layety; (at least of late Ages) wholly
consisted of the Earls, Barons, Lairds, or smaller Barons, together with the
Burgesses of Royal Boroughts, all which held in Capite; and for ought as I can
see from any clear Proofs you have brought to the contrary did so from Times
beyond all memory; and so it might have been in England too, for ought as I
know, for though you have taken a great deal of pains to Answer the Dr's. and my
Arguments against the Tenants in Capite, being the Representatives of the whole
Kingdom in Parliament before the 49th of Henry the Third, and 18th of Edward
the First: and also to prove that the words made use of in our ancient
Historians, Records, and Acts of Parliament, are of a more comprehensive
signification than to be confined to them alone: But you have not as yet proved
that these Gentlemen who you suppose to have had Places in our great Councils,
besides the Tenants in Capite, were Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses; or
whether all the Lords of Mannours, or great Freeholders in England appeared
there in person for themselves, and their under Tenants; therefore I pray be a
little more clear in this point, and show me some Authorities that the Knights
of Shires, Citizens and Burgesses have been always constituent Members of
Parliament ever since the Conquest: for methinks you waver in this Matter, and
sometimes you seem to assert the former, and sometimes the latter.


F. I confess it is not my humor to be positive in any thing that is in the
least doubtful, or obscure, and therefore as I will not maintain that Knights
of Shires always a constituent part of Parliament, before your Conquest, or
presently were after, though it is positively asserted by the Author of the Modus
tenendi Parliamentum; since the Antiquity of that Piece is justly questioned by
Mr. Seldom and other Modern Antiquaries; so on the other side, I shall not
assert, that they were not there at all; but this much I think I am able to
prove, that they were Summoned to Parliament long before the 49th of Henry the
Third, or 18th of Edward the First. But as for the Cities and Boroughs that
they had their Representatives in Parliament at, or presently after your
Conquest I think I can prove from as undeniable Testimonies as can be expected:
Since all the most ancient Rolls, and Records of great Councils and Parliaments
are long since lost, and destroyed.

Yet to show you, that we have some very ancient Authors that seem to mention
not only the Citizens, and Burgesses, but Knights of Shires to have been
summoned before the times you insist upon; and if it prove so, whether they
were there from the very Time of the Conquest is not material; since if I
confute your, and your Dr's. Opinion of the 49th of Henry the Third, and 18th
of Edward the First, I carry the Cause, and you may then invent if you can some
other Epoch whereon to fix their first appearing at our great Councils.

I shall therefore give you another Quotation out of the same old Monk
Sulcardus, which immediately follows the conclusion of the Charter of K.
William the First, to the Abbey of Westminster, but now cited: and it has been
made use of not only by Mr. P. in his Ancient Rights of the Commons, etc. but
by Sir William Dugdale himself in his Origines Iuridiciales; as also by the
Author of Argumentum A^tinormaunicum, to prove the Commons to have been
summoned to a great Council, in the 9th Year of K. William the First, Anno Dom.
1075. the words, as cited in Sir William Dugdale are these, That after the King
had Subscribed his Name to this Charter, with the Sign of the Cross; adding
many of the Bishops, Abbots, and Temporal Nobility, instead of Cum multis
aliis, has these words, Multis praeterea illustrissimis virorum personis, and
Regni Principibus diversi Ordinis omissis qui huic Confirmationi piisimo
affectu testes and ^autores fuerunt: Hii autem illo tempore a Regia potestate
diversis Provinciis; and urbibus ad universalem Synodum pro causis cujuslibet
Christian Eccles^e audiendis, and tractandis ad praescriptum celeberriumum
Coenobium quod Westmonasterium dicitur Convoceti. Now I shall only observe from
this Author, P. 273. Tit. Provincia.
that Mr. Seldom in his Titles of Honor, and Sir Henry Spelman in his
Glossary, do render Provincia for a County or Shire.


M. I pray give me leave to examine this Quotation, because I confess it seems
very specious at first sight, but if it be thoroughly examined will make nothing
at all for you. B. A. A. 301.
And to this end, pray let us read the Dr's. Observations on this Passage at
the end of his Answer to Argumentum Antinormaunicum.


F. But you need not read from the beginning of that Paragraph, since I so far
agree with the Dr. as that by Principes diversi Ordinus, are not to be
understood (as this Author renders them whom the Dr. here writes against) the
Chief, Ibid. 301.
or Principal Men of several ranks or conditions; but the Chief, and Principal
Men of both Orders; viz. of the Clergy and Laity; yet will it not therefore
follow (as the Dr. here would have it) that these Principes diversi Ordinis
were only Bishops, ^ Abbots, and great dignified Clergymen only; and the
Procenes, and Magnates, the Earls, Barons, and Temporal Nobility alone; for
though I grant he produces several Quotations out of Florence of Worcester,
Malmsbury Eadmer, to prove that Principes Regni Ecclesiastici and Secularis
Ordinis; Primates Regni utriusque Ordinis, etc. were at these Councils, yet I
have already proved that the words Principes, and Primates do not in their
proper signification signify none but Bishops, or dignified Clergymen on the
Temporal Nobility only; since these words mean no more than Chief, Principal,
or most considerable men both of the Clergy, and Laity, who had by reason of
their Offices, Dignities or Estates any place in our General Councils at that
time; and which did certainly comprehend the Inferior Clergy also, though the
Dr. has made bold to pass them by without any notice taken of them; and if they
were then there, by the same Rule the lesser Nobility or Commons were also
summoned from diverse Provinces, Cities, and great Towns.


M. Well, But pray see here; does not the Dr. prove plain enough, that this
Gentleman he writes against is mistaken in his Translation, Ibid.
and applying the words Provinciis, and Vrbibus, for Chief Laymen from diverse
Countries, Cities, and Buroughs; whereas the Dr. here proves that the words
mentioned in this passage cannot here mean Laymen sent from County to Cities,
but only the Bishops, whose Seats are here called Vrbes, and which, as the Dr.
shows us, were by a great Council held at London in the year 1077. being the
11th of King William, translated from Villages to Cities, as were Sherburn in
Dorsetshire removed to Sarum, Selsey to Chichester, Litchfield to Chester,
which was before this Council at Westminster cited by Sulcardus, Ibid. p. 302.
which this Author places in the 14th of this King. And the Dr. here farther
proves from these words following, pro causis cujuslibet Christianae Ecclesi^e;
that this Universal Synod being called for hearing and handling the Causes of
every Christian Church, that these words every Christian Church must certainly
mean many Churches in England, which in reason and probability could not be
meant of the small Parish-Churches all the Nation over, and therefore must be
understood of Cathedrals or Churches, where Bishops Seats then were, or where
they had been, or were to be removed.


F. Pray give me leave to answer this Comment of your Doctors, before we
proceed farther. In the first place, suppose I grant him that by Vrbes may here
be meant such Cities as had Bishops Seats, yet does it not therefore follow
that it shall signify no other Cities or Towns but Bishops Seats only; for
though I grant in the Modern acceptance of this word Vrbs, here in England, a
City, and a Bishops Seat are one and the same; yet it is plain, that at first
it was not so, for then there had been no need of the Law you mention, whereby
it was ordained that Bishops Sees should be removed from Villages to Cities;
nor it seems were all of them so removed at this Council you mention; since the
Dr. shows us from this very place here cited, that some of them still remained
in Villis and Vicis, in Villages and small Towns; and therefore it is here
said, Dilatum est ad Regis Audientiam qui in partibus transmarinis tunc
Temporis bella gerebat: ^And though the Dr. here supposes (tho I know not on what
grounds) that the persons summoned by the King to this Synod from Provinces and
Cities, were such as were concerned, or able to advise the King in this matter,
of the convenience of the places whither the Removals were to be made, as
Deans, Archdeacons, and other dignified persons, and Church Officers as well
of the Clergy, as Laity, etc. And also the Principes Regni, the great Nobility
who were in those days present in those Assemblies.

Now I shall only observe from these words of the Doctors, that even in his own
supposition all Cities had not yet Bishops Seats annexed to them, and therefore
the word Vrbibus cannot mean Bishops Seats alone, but any other great, or
walled Towns. But the worst of it is, it falls out very unluckily for the Dr.
that this Charter we now mentioned bears date A. D. 1075. two years before this
Law for removing Bishops Sees to Cities was made; so that all his Learned
Comment on that matter signifies just nothing, and this is one of the Doctors
very rational conclusions, which have no other ground than his own Fancy to
support them.

In the next place pray observe, the Dr. owns that by these Principes universi
Ordinis, were meant the chief Clergymen and Nobility he there musters up, but
passes by, or else did not consider the whole Context of these words, hii autem
illo tempori diversis Provinciis, and Vrbibus ad universalem Synodum Convocati;
which must certainly refer to the Principes Regni diversi Ordinis, to the chief
and considerable Men both of the Clergy and Laity of the Kingdom, who were
alike summoned from diverse Countries and Cities, and great Towns to this Synod.
Now pray do you or your Dr. tell me (if he can) what Earls, Barons, or great
Noblemen, were then summoned from Cities, or great Towns, as well as the
Bishops and Deans of Cathedrals, which if you cannot do, I see no reason why we
may not understand these Principes Regni, who were also summoned from the
Countries and Cities for the Representatives of the Commons of those Cities and
Towns at that time.

In the next place* I think the Dr. is as much out in his interpretation of the
word pro causis cujuslibet Ecclesiae, for the causes of every Cathedral Church,
since it must certainly mean not only Cathedral Churches, but all other
Churches, whether Parochial, or Conventual; for that it takes in the latter,
appears by one great cause of the summoning this Council, which was chiefly for
the confirmation of the Privileges of the Abbey of Westminster, which sure was
no Cathedral Church, and yet must be some Church or Ecclesiastical Corporation,
or else this Synod could have had nothing to do with it* And I doubt not but
this General Synod might, if it had pleased; have either made more Parish
Churches, or united others where there were many, as we find was done in diverse
great Councils of this nature; and should it not then have been said to have
met pro causis cujuslibet Ecclesiae, for the business of each Parish, as well
as Cathedral Church? Lastly, The Dr. will have all these great Clergy (...)
Laymen, only to meet at this Council, to advise the King about what farther
removals were to be made of Bishops bees; as if thereupon he had had the sole
power of making what Laws about them, without their consent, or that of the
Lay-Nobility, who though he will have to be always present in such Synods and
Assemblies, yet does he not give them any Votes therein; whereas it appears by
this Charter in Sulcardus, but now cited, that the Bishops, Abbo^, Earls and
Barons, whose Names are to it consenserunt and signaverunt; and it was ab ipso
Rage and supra dictis Personis testificata, consixmata and auctoxi^ata; which
if I understand Latin, signifies not only that they witnessed, but also
assented to; authorized, and confirmed it; which also more plainly appears more
fully by the conclusion of the Charter of King Stephens but now cited, all
which the Dr. passes by as slily as a Commentator does those words in a Text of
Scripture that make against his sense; for this had quite ruined and destroyed
his fine notion of the Great Councils of the Kingdoms then wholly consisting of
a few Bishops, Abbots, dignified Clergymen, and great Noblemen who had nothing
else to do there but to look on whilst the King alone made the Law.

To conclude, to show you that this Assembly was not only an Ecclesiastical
Synod, but Civil Council also; or Parliament as we now call it; I will give you
two good Testimonies for it, that we are not alone in this Opinion, the first
is from Mr. Somners Glossary, Parliamentum Synodus magna vo^atur; and to
confirm this there is written in an old hand in the Margin of this Manuscript
of Sulcardus over against the passage now cited, this Note; Nota hic amn^s
com^rari at Rege sua auctoritate ad causas Religionis tractandas tam nobitas de
Clero, quam Principes Regni cum aliis inferioris gradus, quorum (...) videtur
essa Parliamentum.


M. Yet I suppose you cannot deny but that the Dr. has plainly proved from
several Quotations from Gervas of Canterbury, Rich. of Ha^ulstad, Ibid. p. 302.
and the Continuator of Florence, that the word Pr^^i^^ia in this place
signifies a Bishops Diocese; and therefore that the Principes Regni who were
summoned out of those Provinces or Diocesses were only the Bishops, Abbots, and
other great Clergymen.


F^punc; I will not deny but that this word Provincia does sometimes in our
Ancient Authors signify in an Ecclesiastical sense the Diocese of a Bishops,
us these Authors (the Dr. has here cited) show us; yet that it must be taken in
a more unlimited signification in this place, is also as certain; since besides
that this word Provin^sia does most commonly signifi^ a Shire or County (as I
have already shown) the very context sufficiently proves it, since Bulcardus
says expressly, that the chief persons of both Orders were summoned from the
Coun^ies, or Provinces, as I already said, which when it refers to Laymen us
well as to the Clergy, I hope you will not affirm that it can signify
Diocesses only; but that besides the Bishops, and Abbots, there were a great
(...) more persons prosess at this Council, both of the Clergy and Laity, the
Dr. himself confesses. Let us therefore, consult the Authors themselves which
Dr. Brady has cited for the sense of this word Provincia, and let us see how
fairly he has dealt with them. Now pray Sir observe, it is true, the same words
are almost repeated verbatim in every one of these Historians, Ibid.
R. Hagulstad, Gervas of Canterbury, and the Continuation of Florence, who all
speak of a General Synod held at Westminster. A. D. 1138 being the Third of
King Stephen, in those words, Decima terti^ die Decembrie celebraetae est
Synodus apud Westmona^^. cui praesu^ Albericus Hostle^sit Episcopus Domini
Papae Legatus, cum Epis^opis diversarum Provi^oiarum numero XVII. Abbatibus
sere XXX. here the Dr. concludes with an etc. Now see what lies hid under this
etc. in R. of Hagul^^ad, and the Continuator of Florence, it follows thus, Cum
Cleri and Populi multitudine numerosa, in Gervase of (...) almost in the same
words, Cum innumera Cleri and Populi multitudine. Now pray tell me ingenuously
what could be the Doctors meaning (who pretends to be so exact in all his
Quotations) to leave out this so material a passage in every one of these
Authors with this, etc. unless it were that he was afraid his Readers should
take notice how numerous this Council was both of the Clergy and People; which
if he had done, it would have quite overthrown and destroyed his notion of
Tenan^^ in Capite, and let the World have known that this Council consisted of
a far greater number both of the Clergy and Laity than 17 Bishops, and 30
Abbots. Now had such a thing been done by Mr. Petyt, it would have been branded
by the Dr. with the hard Terms of taking away, or leaving unrecited such words
and matters as he thought would either advance or destroy his Assertions, as he
(how justly I leave it to you to judge) accuses Mr. P. in his Title to his
first Edition of his Answer to him. But, Turpe est Doctori, cum culpa redarguit
ipsum.



M. I cannot believe the Dr. had any sinister meaning in leaving out this
passage, but did it either because (as I said but now) he supposed these
expressions as only Hyperbolical phrases, by which these Monkish Writers used
to express all the Ecclesiastical or Lay-members of those Councils, or else
because he did not think it worth while, since he might not look upon this
innumerable company of Clergy and People here mentioned to have had any share
or voice in this great Council, but only to have come thither as idle
Spectators, B. A. A. p. 30.
a^ the Dr. shows us the Populus did at the making of Lanfrane Archbishop of
Canterbury; nor yet that they, or the Bishops and Noblemen chose him, but only
all applauded the King's choice, but that the Dr. was not afraid to take notice
of the great multitude of People that in those Hospitable days was wont to
flock to such Assemblies, Pray see what he says in his Series of English great
Councils, or Parliaments, at the end of his Introduction to English History,
where speaking of the Election of Archbishop Anselme, P. 54.
he recites this passage out of an Epistle in Eadmerus, Hui^ Electioni
assueruns Episcop^, Abbates and Principes Regni, and ingens Populi multitude:
The ordinary People (says the Dr.) came to shout and make a noise at such
Meetings, and only for good Victuals and Drink.


F. Very well: I think I shall easily Answer your and the Dr's. Learned
Observations: First, as for the Monkish Hyperbolical Phrases of innumerae or
numerosa Cleri and Populi multitude; I confess, you might suppose there was
somewhat in them, if they had been peculiar only to one, or two of them; but
when all these Writers do with one consent agree, in almost the same words, to
express all the Members of such Councils; I cannot see how they could have writ
thus, unless they intended to be understood literally, that there were great
Numbers both of Clergymen and Laics, who appeared as Members of those
Assemblies, far more than the Dr's. Tenants in Capite, and that they had also
Votes therein, appears by that Passage in the Conclusion of King Stephen's
Charter, which I quoted but now out of Sulcardus; when speaking of this very
Council in the 3d of King Stephen, which we last mentioned; that not only the
Comites, and Barons Regni, but the innumera multitudo cleri and Populi, were
not only present, but Religioso favore voluntatem, and Assensum Authoritati
nostrae paginae, and Privilegio praebuerunt, i. e. yielded their good wills and
consents to this Charter of Privileges to the Abbey of Westminster. And to show
you farther that this infinite multitude of Clergymen and Laics were also part
of this Council; Pray remember the passage I but now cited out of Florence of
the Council held at London, cum innumera Cleri and Populi multitudine, who all
alike gave their consents to the Constitutions by placet, placet, placet, and
consider what the same Sulcardus has said in the next Council of the 4 th of
King Stephen, when after Concilio adunato Cleri and Populi, and a recital of
the Bishops, he concludes with Monachorum and Clericorum Plebisque infinitae
multitudinis, as all alike Members of it.

Now I shall leave it to your self, or any sober, unprejudiced person to
consider, whether it is likely that so grave and august a thing as the R.
Charter of a Prince should take notice of the frothy consent and applause of
the mere Rabble, or Mob (whether of the Clergy or Laity) or so judicious a
Writer as this Author, and the rest of the Historians, (now cited) should have
nothing else to do, but to record to Posterity for a very remarkable
Transaction, that a great multitude of the o^^uary, or vulgar sort of People
came to these Assemblies only to shout, and make a noise, for good Victuals and
Drink; and therefore the Dr. and you, I hope, will pardon me if I still keep my
former Opinion, that both the Archbishops Lanfranc, and Anselm, were not only
named or proposed by K. William the First and Second in the Common or General
Council of the Kingdom, but were also therein Elected, or Chosen by the Citrus
and Populus, according to the manner of that Age, and the literal meaning of
those Ancient Authors, B* A. A. p. 300.
whose words the Dr. either leaves out of strives to wrest to quite another
se^ses* nor to his Objections against the Election of Lanfranc at all
considerable: For as to the first Objection against the literal sense of the
Old Author ^^^nted at the end of Taylor's Gavel kind; that he could not be
Elected consensu totius Populi Angliae, because, who can believe that all the
People of England, or the hundredth part of them, ever knew or understood of
Lanfranc's being made Archbishop. Now pray let me ask you this Question;
supposing this Election had been made in a General (...), of the Clergy alone,
and the words had been instead of totius Populi, totius Cleri Anglicae, would
it not have been mere cavilling to ask how all the Clergy of England could
leave their Livings, and come up to give their Consents at this Election, or
that the hundredth part of them ever knew of it, since every body is sensible
those words are not to be understood in a literal, but legal sense, that is,
the whole Clergy are said to give their Consents to a thing when they do it by
their lawful Representatives, the Bishops and Procurators of the Inferior
Clergy? And why may not the whole People of England be as well said to give
their Consents to this Election by their lawful Representatives at that time?
But that we are not singular in this Opinion, pray see what Archbishop Parker
says in his Antiquitates Brittannicae of this Election of Lanfranc's;
celeberrima est autem hujus, prae caeteris Electio, etc. Electus est enim a
Majoribus Cantuarensis Ecclesiae, t^n access^t Procerum, atque Praesulum,
totiusque quasi Populi consensus in Aula Regis, quod sane est inslar Senatus
seu Parliamenti Anglicani. As for the next Objection against this Election of
Lanfranc's, it is yet weaker than the former, because the Dr. has answered this
Question himself how the English Saxon Bishops, Barons, and the whole People
should choose a Stranger, a Person they had never known, and postpone all their
deserving Contrymen? Now pray read a very good Solution to this difficulty
(if he may be believed) in his Answer to Mr. P. wherein he tells us, P. 14, 15.
that King William had taken away from the English their Estates, and gave them
to his Normans, and that this he did from his very first coming in, and then
reckons up the Earldoms he gave to his Norman followers. Now if the English had
then no Estates, they could sure have no Places or Votes in that great Council
when Lanfranc was chosen; but if to solve this you will say as the: Dr. does in
his Answer to Antin^s mannicum, P. 300.
that this Council was held about the fourth year of the Conqueror, some years
before he had made an absolute Conquest, and that the English Bishops, and
Barons, and Freemen had still some Estates left, and therefore might then make
the major part of this great Council, when Lanfranc was made Bishop, so would
never have Elected him had it been left to their choice: Pray tell me if the
fear of refusing be a sufficient Objection that he was not Elected, whether or
no it will not be as strong an Objection against his being Elected by the
Seniors of the Church of Canterb. a^ Gervase tells us expressly he was, Gervas.
Dorob. in Act. Povet. Cant. Col. 1653. Glossary, p. 36, 37.
because (says the Dr.) they did it by order and direction from King William,
and their proceeding no other than it is now by the Chapters of other Churches
upon a Conge de Estire, they could not refuse him? And now supposing his Power
to have been as great (as a Conqueror) in the Common Council of the Kingdom, as
in the Chapter of Canterbury, why may we not say almost in the same words they
could not; they durst not refuse him (who was already Elected by the Prior and
Chapter of Canterbury) for fear of ^^^ing their Estates: But if an Election
that cannot be refused, is none at all, the Dr. may do well to consider whether
there was then, or is now, any Canonical Elections of Bishops in England at
this day.


M. I shall not farther dispute this matter at this time, therefore pray go on
to the rest of your Authorities out of our English Historians, proving that any
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses appeared in Parliament before the times we
allow them to have been there.


F. Tho I think I have sufficiently at our last Meeting from the Charters of
King John, and Henry the 3 d, as also from the Words Communitas and le Commune,
that the Common Council of the Kingdom consisted of many more Members than your
Tenants in Capite; yet to let you see that the Historians and Armalists of
those times did comprehend all the several Orders under the general Titles of
Clerus, and Populus, or Magnates and Proceres you may see in the Chron. of
Thom. Wikes, A. D. 1237. Where it is only said in general that the Clerus and
Populus Regni did in that Year being the 9 th of Henry the 3 d grant the King a
30 th of all their Movables for the Confirmation of Magna Charta, and which is
more remarkable, the Parliament which was held in 1264. being 49 th of this
King; is only thus mentioned by this Author, in an historical way transacto
siquidem vice^mo die N^tivitatis Dominicae sacta est London pes Comitem (seil,
Leyeestriae) Convocatio non minima Procerum Anglicorum, etc. Where in the
Annals of Waverly in this Year it is only said, Factum est Parliamentum magnum
Londonia, etc. Now pray observe, that either the Commons are mentioned by Wikes
under the Name of Proceres or not at all; and that under the Word Parliamentum
the Commons were then comprehended, appears by the Agreement between the King
and the Barons there extant, Annal. Waverly, p. 217.
which is said to be made, De unanimi assensu, and voluntate nostra (s^ili
Regis) Edwardi Filii nostri Praeletorum Vomitum, and Baronum and Communitatis
dicti Regni nostri; now it must be granted, since it appears by the Writs of
Summons of 49 H. 3. that the Commons were there; and consequently must be
comprehended under this Phrase of Communitatis Regni, and if this had been the
first time they had been summoned; it is strange none of these Authors should
take any notice of so remarkable an Alteration, and change of the Constituent
parts of our English Parliaments. But that the Knights, Citizens and B^rgesses
were also summoned in the next year in a Parliament of the 50 th of this King,
you may see in the said Wikes Chronicle, P. 8^.
Ann. Dom. 1265. where He sets down all the Constituent Estates of Parliament,
which were summoned to meet at Westminster, at the Translation of St. Edwards
Relics in these Words, Convocatis universis Angliae Praelatis and Magnatibus
nec non cunctarum Regni sui Civitatum paritir, and Burgorum potentioribus ut
Translationis Solemnia Celebrius illustrarent, wherethe Knights of Shires are
comprehended under Magnates and the Citizens and Burgesses are here styled
Potentiores Civitatum and Burgorum. And that this was not only for a mere
Ceremony, but for Parliament Business also, see the next page, where he tells
us, Celebratae tundem tuntae translationis solemnitate ^^perunt Nobiles (i. e.
all the Estates above mentioned) ut assolent, Parliamentationis genere de Regis
and Regni negotiis pertracture, etc. And in which Parliament the King so far
prevailed as to obtain a 20 th part of all Moveable Goods of the Laity. And yet
the Continuator of Mat. Paris in the Affairs of this year takes no notice of
this Parliament, but only says in General that St. Edwards Body was this Year
translated into its new Shrine. And the Annals of Waverly Printed in the same
Volume under this Year make mention of this Parliament in general terms, thus
Facta Convocatione Episcoporum, Comitum, Baronum, Abbatum, Priorum and multerum
aliorum. So uncertain a thing it is wholly to depend upon the general
Expressions of Monkish Writers without comparing them and the Records together,
and considering the Subject matter about which they treat; nor can we suppose
that the Constituent parts of our Parliaments were shope and changed as often
as they did their Phrases; and ways of expressing the parts of them. For they
not foreseeing the differences that might arise about these matters, had no
Reason particularly to recite the Constituent Members or Estates of Parliament,
as often as they had occasion to mention them, it being very well known who
they were at that time. But to prove further, that it was not likely there was
any Alteration in the Constituent parts of the Parliament, from what it was in
the 49 th, may appear by his Writ still extant among the Parent Rolls of the 54
th of this King, Rot. Pat. 54. H. 3. m. 7.
where it is expressly recited, that it not seeming safe to the Praelatis,
Magnatibus, and Communicati Regni nostri that both Himself and his Son Prince
Edward should be both out of the Kingdom at once in the Holy Land, and that
therefore he gives the whole Subsidy of a 20 th granted him by the whole
Kingdom to his said Son: and that it continued so in the beginning of Edward
the firsts Reign, appears by a Protestation in the 4 th of this King; as it is
found in the Patent Rolls, wherein he recites a 15 th, to have been granted him
of all Movables, by the Comites, Barons, ac alii Magnates, and Communitas
Regni nostri. So that unless the Sense of these Words Communitas Regni must
alter every Year, there is no Reason for us to believe any change to have been
in the Constituent parts of Parliament since the 49 th of Henry the 3 d. this I
think may be sufficient to show you that before the time you mention nor only
the Knights of Shires, but the Citizens and Burgesses did appear in Parliament
both before your 49 th of Henry 3 d, and 18 th of Edward I.


M. I believe the Commons might be comprehended under the general Words
Magnates and Proceres by Wikes's Chronicle in the 49 th of Henry the 3 d, or
else not be mentioned at all, which I rather incline to believe, and I must
also confess that the other Passage out of the same Author concerning the
Citizens and Burgesses being summoned either to a great Council or Parliament
in the Reign of Henry the 3 d, is more than I before ever took notice of. Yet
since this Author does not tell us, whether it was to the one, or the other;
nor how many of them were there, whether one only, or more for each City and
Borough Town, or whether they were elected by the People or nominated by the
King to appear there, does not appear from this Author, but as for the Words
Communitas Regni mentioned in the Agreement of the 49 th of Henry 3 d, tho it
might signify the Body of the Commons in that Record; yet if they were not
again summoned to Parliament, till the 18 th of Edward the I. it signified
only the Body of the lesser Tenants in Capite, till after the 18 th of that
King.


F. I am sorry to see Prepossession and Prejudice has so much overrun you as to
hinder you from closing with the Truth, for pray tell me, if this Author could
in the 49 th of Henry the 3 d, (when the Commons were summoned without dispute)
comprehend all the Estates of that Parliament under the General Words of
Pro^eres, and Magnates, and the Knights of Shires are understood by the same
Word in the next Passage cited out of the same Author, why might not other
Writers do so too in other Parliaments? as for your next Exception it is a very
small Cavil; for it appears that this Summons of the Citizens and Burgesses at
the Translation of King Edwards Relics was to a Parliament by the Words that
follow, Nobiles ut assolent, Parliamentationis genere de Regis, and Regni
negotiis pertractare; and why these Citizens and Burgesses should not be as
well Elected by their respective Cities and Buroughs this Year as well as the
last, as it appears they were by the Writ to the Cinque Ports; which the Dr.
and Mr. Pryn has given us; B. A. P. p. 140. Prins Parliament Register.
I desire you would give me any satisfactory Argument to the contrary. As for
you Objection against the Words Communitas Regni being to be understood for the
Body of the Commons in 54 th Henry 3 d, it is altogether as unreasonable; since
this is to make the Constituent parts of the Parliament, alter not only when
Writers shift their Phrases, but when they do not; and that without any other
Reason, but because the Writs of Summons and Parliament Rolls of those times
are all perished, and to deny the Commons were there only for that Reason; is
altogether as unjust as for any Court of Justice to turn a man out of the
actual and long Possession of an Estate merely because his Writings and
Evidences by the carelessness or roguery of his Servants have happened (a great
many) of them to be lost or burnt.

But fully to convince you (if possible) that Dr. Bradyes Opinion of the
Commons not being again summoned from the 49 th of Henry the 3 d, till the 18
th of Edward the first is a mere Fancy of his own, and contrary to the express
Authorities both of Historians and Records. And to come to plainer proofs, pray
in the first place take notice, that it appears by a Writ of the 11 th of King
Edward the I. to the Archbishop of Canterbury acquainting him with the
Rebellion of Lewellyn Prince of Wales, Rot. Walliae. m. 4. n. 2. dorso.
that he had de Consilio Praelatorum, Procerum and Magnatum Regni, nec non
totius Communitatis ejusdem, resolved God willing to put an end to this Welsh
Rebellion; so that this war seems to have been resolved upon at the Parliament
held the Year before, and now mentioned in this Record; a War which that
Valiant, and Fortunate Prince effectually concluded by the total subduing of
Wales, and killing of Lewellyn, whose Head was cut off and sent to London, the
particulars of which War Knighton, as well as other Historians relate at large;
Col. 2463.
and also that presently after David the Brother of this Lewellyn, the cause of
all these Mischiefs was (as this Author shows us) in Magno Parliamento at
Shrewsbury Condemned, and afterward hanged, drawn and quartered.

Walsingham is more short in the Relation of this Parliament, only says,
Walsing. Hist. Aug. fol. 51.
that in the 11 th of Edward the I. Habitum est Parliamentum at Shrewsbury, in
which this David was Condemned and Executed as before. But Thomas Wikes, who
lived at this very time in his Chronicle, Chron Thom. Wikes, Fol. 111.
but now cited, will better instruct us than either Walsingham or Knighton, and
his account of this Parliament is as follows.

Anno 1282. Circa festum sti Michaelis Rex convocari fecit apud Salopesberiam
Majores Regni sui and Sapientiores tam de Civibus, quam de Magnatibus and fecit
illuc addaci David, qui apud Rothelan fuerat captivatus ut super exigentiam
Delicti' sui corpore subiret Iudicium, etc. and then relates at large the
manner of his Execution, from which Passage we may observe, that this Author
makes it plain who were the Communitas Regni mentioned in the Record of the 11
th of this King; and who constituted this great Parliament at Shrewsbury, viz.
Majores and Magnates Regni, which last, as I have now often proved, takes in
the Knights of Shires, and the wisest of the Citizens.


M. But yet this Author says no more but that the Majores Regni and
sapientiores tam de Civibus, quam de Magnatibus, were called to this Parliament
wherein Lewellyn was condemned: Now it does not appear that these Ci^es were
Elected, or that there were any Burgesses chosen for the Buroughs, or that
there were any Knights chosen by the Counties; there were indeed Magnates
called to this Parliament, but they might be all Tenants in Capite.


F. Well then, since you will not be satisfied without direct, and evident
proof, such as neither your self nor Dr. B. will I hope deny; pray take this
which Mr. Petyt has not long since communicated to me; and which he has lately
discovered in Rotulo Walliae, in a bye Roll not taken notice of by any Body as
I know of before; Rot. Walliae 11. E. 1. m. 2. dors. Id. ibid.
it is a formal Writ of 11 th Edward I. for summoning the Temporal Lords to be
with that King at a Collequy (or Parliament) opud Salop in Crastino Sti.
Michaelis; and there is in the same Roll a second Writ directed to several
Cities, and Buroughs for Electing two Citizens; and two Burgesses to this
Parliament with a void space to insert more Names. Id. Ibid.
And also a third Writ is there directed to the Sheriff of every County in
England to cause to be chosen two Knights, pro Communitate ejusdem Commitatus.
And lastly, there is a 4 th Writ directed to the Justices and others of the
Kings Learned Council. With the same Preambles to each of them, all being
commanded to appear at the same time and place; now what can Dr. Brady say to
this, that he who was so long Keeper of these Records, and sure ought to have
perused them, (as he did many others of the same Reign,) yet has either
wilfully or carelessly passed by this so memorable a Record. And so I hope,
this will convince you for the future of the danger of being over positive in
an Opinion, because it could not presently be confuted; and let you see that it
is not at all improbable, but that the like Writs of Summons would appear as
well before the 49 th of Henry the 3 d, as in the rest of the Years of his own,
and his Sons Reign, had not those Records been lost and destroyed, which
considered, we have Reason to thank God for those that the Iniquity of the
times have yet le^t us.


M. I must confess you have told me more than ever I yet thought could be
produced against the Drs. Opinion; and I should be thoroughly convinced could
you show me any Writs of Expenses for the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, who
appeared at this Parliament.


F. I hope you will not averr against an express Record, tho the Writs of
Expenses for that Year are lost (being never entered upon the Roll) by the
Omission of the Clerks, who as Mr. Pryn acknowledges, oftentimes neglected the
Entries of Writs of Summons themselves, Vi. 4 th Part of Parliament Register,
p. 12.
as well as of Expenses; but if this were any material Objection, then there
should have been no Commons summoned to any Parliament from the 49 th of Henry
the 3 d. to the 28 th of Edward the first; when the fist Writs of Expenses
(except those of the 49 th of Henry the 3 d) do first appear upon the Rolls,
and so you must then go from the Drs. new Notion of the Commons being again
summoned in the 18 th of this King; but to show you that these expenses for the
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses could be no new things; pray peruse the Clause
in this second Writ. de expensis Militum and Burgensium, R^t. Claus. 28. E. 1.
m. 12. dorso.
of the 28 th of Edward I. we have upon the Rolls, the Writ is to the Sheriff
of Sammershire to pay to the Knights of that County, Venientibus ibidem
nobisoum de diversis negotiis nos, and Populum Regni nostri specialiter
tangentibus Rationabiles expensas su^^ in veniendo ad nos ibidem, morando, and
inde ad propria redeando (and now observe what follows) prout, alias in Casu
Consimili furi consuerit: Now pray tell me, how this last Clause could ever be
true, if the Knight of Shires, Citizens and Burgesses had never been summoned
to Parliament, since the 49th of Henry the 3 d, which was but 32 Years, or the
18 th of this King, but 10 Years before this Writ, was published all over the
Kingdom.


M. I confess what you now say, seems to carry some weight with it; but yet in
my Opinion falls far short of a Prescription, since a thing might be said to be
done; as in like Cases was accostomed, tho it had never been practiced above
20, or 30 times.


F. I see neither you nor your Dr. by Reason of your different employments had
ever any true Knowledge of the Nature of Tenures and Prescription; according to
the Laws of England, which He is not to be blamed for, had he not taken upon
him to be so great a Master in both; but I hope he will for the Future
remember, that old Adage ne suitor ultra Crepidam, therefore to set you Right
for the future, you must know that the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses have
ever claimed, being summoned to all Parliaments by Prescription, as I shall
prove by and by; but as for that part of it called Custom, my Lord Cook^ tells
us in his Notes upon Littleton, P. 106.
That in every Custom there be two Essential parts; Time and Usage, Time out of
Mind, and Continual Peaceable Usuage without lawful Interruption. Now the
Common^ have in all times beyond the Memory of Man, challenged to have enjoyed,
both those Essential parts of Common Law or general Custom. So that these words
Praut C^su'Cons^mili consuevit must be by Implication of Law extend beyond the
times of Henry the 3 d, and Edward the 1 st.

And for proof of this, I shall show you what claims the Commons have made to
this Usage from time immemorial; therefore I shall begin with Mr. P's first
Argument in his Rights of the Commons, Page 7.
asserred, Where the Burgesses of St. Albans in their Petition to King Edward
II. in Parliament, Rot. Pat. 8. E. 2. n. 233. Pro Burgensibus de Sto. Albano.
A. D. 8. Say, that they Sic^t caeteri Burgenses Regni ad Parliamentum Regis
(when it should happen to be summoned) Per duos Comburgenses suos venire
debeant, prout totis retroactis temponibus venire consueverunt, tam tempore
Domini Edwardi, nuper Regis Angliae patris Regis, and Progenitorum suorum, as
in the time of Edward II. S^mper ante instans Parliamentum, etc. and farther
declare that the Names of such Burgesses coming to Parliament were always
enrolled in the Rolls of the Chancery; notwithstanding all which the Sheriff of
Hertford at the Procuration and favor of the Abbot of St. Albans and his
Council, refused, Burgenses praedictos praemunire sou nomina little (...) prout
ad ipsum pertinuit, etc. and therefore they pray Remedy, the King and Councils
Answer whereunto was thus, Scrutentur (...), etc. de Cancellari^ si temporib^s
^rogenitorum Regis Burgenses praedicti solebant Venire vel non? and tunc siat
it is supe^ hoc Iustitia vocatis evocandis si necesse su^vit. Where by the words
totis retroactis temporibus, etc. must be understood that they and their
Predecessors were always accustomed to send two Burgesses to Parliament in all
former Ages, not only in the time of Edw. I. but his Progenitors; therefore in
King John's time, his Grandfather at least, and so long before the 49th Hen.
III.


M. I confess the Gentlemen of your Party make a great deal of Noise with this
Quotation, but if it be strictly looked into, I believe it will prove of no such
great consequence as you would make it. For Mr. P. has concealed the main
Cause of these Burgesses pretending a Right of sending Members to Parliaments,
and therefore 'twill not be amiss to give you the rest of it at large.

Ad Petitionem Burgensium villae de Sancto Albano sugg^rentium Regi, quod licet
ipsa tenent villam praedictam de Rege in capite and ipsi B.A.P. p. 38.
sicut caeteri Burgenses Regni ad Parliamen^a Regis cum ea su^^noniri
contigerit per duos Comburgenses suos venire debeane prout totis retroactis
temporibus venire, consueverunt pro omnibus servitiis Regi faciendis, etc. By
which words, as the Dr. very well shows us it is evident, that the Burgesses of
St. Albars claimed not, nor prescribed to come to Parliaments as merely from a
Borough, but as from a Town that held in Chief of the King, and this Service
was incident to their Tenure, and was such as the King's Progenitors had
accepted in lien of all Services due by reason thereof.

And farther, the Answer to this Petition is remarkable, which amounts to no
more than this, that if it did appear by the Roth of Chancery, that the
Burgesses of St. Albans were wont to come to Parliaments in the time of the
King's Progenitors, then such as have been called ( i. e. to Parliament) should
be called when there was necessary for it. Hence it is clear the King and his
Council were equally judges when it was necessary to call them, and for them to
come; as they were of their Rights and Pretenses to come.


F. I very much wonder a Gentleman of your Understanding should be so much
imposed upon by such weak Inferences; for in the first place it is a Great
Mistake in matter of fact^* that these Burgesses of St. Albans claimed to come
to Parliament no otherwise but as (...) in Capit^* for though the said Petition
re^ues that they hold the said Town of the K. in Capite, yet they do not
likewise say, that they claim'th to appear there only by that Tenure, for then
they should have re^ired that they sicut caeteri Burgenses Tenentes in Capite,
and not sicut caeteri Burgenses Regni ad Parliamenti Regis venir^ debeant. And
though it is true they set forth that they appeared there for all Services, yet
do they not say, that their Tenure in Capit^ was the only Cause of their
appearance in Parliam. since diverse Towns and Burrought of the Kingdom, which
held not in Capite at all, had the like Privilege before, of which I can give
you diverse Instances, which I shall read to you ou^ of this Note, which a
Lear^ed Friend of mine slace decea^'d has taken out of the Rolls in the Tower,
though when he sent it me, he thorough have, (...), has forgot to set down the
number of the Roll to most of such Buroughs, who never held in Capite, and yet
have always sent Burgesses to Parliament by Prescription; as first the Borough
these of Arundel, which always held of the Earls, and never of the King, being
granted by Henry I. To Hugh Montgomery Earl of Arundel. Secondly, The City of
Bath appears to hold of the Bishop of Bath and Wells. Thirdly, The City of
Wells it self, which always held of the Bishop, and never of the King, and is
therefore called Villa Episcopi in all public Writings belonging to that
Church, and was made a Free Borough in the Third of King John. Fourthly,
Beverly was made a Free Borough by Thurston Archbishop of York, Par. 52. H.
3. 15 m. 18.
which was confirmed by King Henry III. Hi^^hly, Badmin, which always held of
the Earls of Cornwall. Sixthly, Bridgwater for King John granted it to William
Brewer, Chart. Antiq. 2. Ioh m. 13.
Quod Brugwater sit liber Burgus. Seventhly, Coventry, which was always held of
the Earls of Chester, and pleaded in the Reign of Edw. I. to have never been
taxed with the King's Demesnes, but with the Body of the County. Eighthly,
Bishop Linne for King John granted to John Bishop of Norwich; Quod Burgus de
Lenna sit Liber Burgus inperpetuum; all which by the Writs we have left us,
Cart. Anno 6. Ioh.
sent Burgesses to Parliament as early as any that held in Capite. These I give
you only for a Taste, but I doubt not, but, if I had time, I could give you
three times as many, especially in Cornwall, where the Buroughs did almost all
hold of the Earl of Cornwall, and not of the King. But besides, the Doctors
error in supposing that no ancient Cities or Buroughs had any Right of
sending Members to Parliament, but only as they held of the King in Capite, his
mistake is yet much more gross in his construing those remarkable words in the
King's Answer to the Burgesses of St. Albans, Et tunc fiat eis super hoc
Iustitia, vocatis evocandis si necesse fuerit. Thus, And then let them have
Justice in this matter, and such as have been called, may be called, if there
be necessity. Upon which words you have also from the Dr. put this pleasant
gloss; Hence it is clear the King and his Council were equally judges when it
was necessary to call them, and for them to come; as they were of their Rights
and Pretenses to come. But I must needs tell you ^ think nothing can be more
absurd, and contrary to the genuine sense of this Record, than the Doctor's
construction, who will needs have the words evocatis evocandis, only to mean a
Calling, or Summoning to Parliament, which is quite contrary to the true sense
of the King's Answer to this Petition; for if that had been his meaning* that
those only should be summoned to Parliament whom the King pleased to call, to
what purpose were these words, scrutentur Rotuli, etc. de Cancel. si
temporibus Progenitorum Regis Burgenses praedicti solebant venire vel non? For
if their coming to Parliament had been a matter of mere grace and favor, and
not of right, and so wholly left in the King's breast whether they should come,
or not it, was in vain for him to command the Rolls of Chancery to be searched
whether the said Burgesses used to come to Parliament or not in the times of
his Progenitors; or if it had not been a matter of right, why should it be here
said, that upon search of the Rolls, Tunc fiat Iustitia, let Justice be done,
i^ there never was such a right of Prescription by which they claimed? But I
much wonder that the Dr. (so great a Critic in Records) should ever construe
them evocatis evocandis, a summoning or calling to Parliament; and I desire you
would show me in what Parliament Roll, or Ancient Record you can find eveca^^
ad Parliamentum, to summon to Parliament: But I more admire that you who are a
professed Civilian, should no better understand the sense of your own Terms;
whereas if you would have but consulted any Civil Law Dictionary, you might
have found evoca^e Testes always signifies to summon Wi^nesses; and I can show
you by twenty Precedents both from our Common Law Records, as well as your
Canon Law Forms, that evocatis e^ocandis does always signify the summoning
such Witnesses as are to be summoned in a Cause, and in this sense it is to be
understood in this Record, that not only the Rolls should be searched, but also
Witnesses summoned to prove their Claim, if any dispute or doubt should arise
about the matter of fact.


M. I shall no longer contend with you about the genuine sense of these last
words, since perhaps you may be in the right; but yet for all that, it does not
appear, that the King and his Council did by this Answer allow this Petition of
the Town of St. Albans to be true, that they had sent Burgesses to Parliament
in the time of his Predecessors, much less that any other City of Borough in
England were then allowed such a right by Prescription.


F. I grant indeed that this Petition does not absolutely allow the matter of
fact, (as it concerns the matter in dispute between them and the Abbot) to be
true, as it is there set forth, neither yet does it condemn it for false; but
whether it were true, or false, it matters not, for both the Petition and the
Answer do sufficiently prove the Point for which we make use of it; ( viz) that
it was then received for a general Custom, or Law, time out of mind, that the
Cities and Buroughs had sent Members to Parliament according as in the
Petition is set forth, P.R.C. p. 10.
otherwise it can scarce be supposed (much less believed) that the Burgesses of
St. Albans, or the Penman of this Petition should dare to tell the King, and
his Learned Council, in the face of the Parliament, so great, and ridiculous a
Novelty to be recorded to Posterity, as that they and their Predecessors in the
time of King Edward I. and his Progenitors, had sent two Burgesses to every
Parliament, or that the King and his Council should have ever received this
Petition without indignation, and a severe rebuke for their Impudence; If all
the World the^ knew, (as certainly they must (were it true) that there was
never any Election of Burgesses to Parliament before the 49th of Henry III.
(which was but fifty years before the 8th of Ed. II.) who from thence had
appeared no more till the 18th of Ed. I. which was but 24 years before the
delivery of this Petition, a time which must have been then fresh in the
memories of most of the Kings Council there present: Whereas they allow this
general Claim of Prescription, and every person, (though but meanly skilled in
our Law) does understand a general Prescription; viz. a tempore cujus
contrarium memoria hominum non existit, what it was then, and so remains, by
the Law of England at this day, as appears by our Ancient Records, Law Books,
and Judicial Proceedings.

And surely the Burgesses of St. Albans did not ground their Petition of Right
upon an Affirmation in Nubibus, Ibid. p. 11.
but the Justice and certainty of their Claim, as they very well knew, which so
they prayed it might be examined by uncontrollable proofs: The Rolls of
Chancery, and the King, Chancellor and all the Council, did no less know there
were such Entries on the Rolls, and therefore order their search; whereas if
the very ground of their Petition had been notoriously false, and idle (as it
must have been if neither this, nor any other Borough had sent Burgesses to
Parliament before the 49th of Henry III.) then instead of recording this
Petition and Answer, to future Ages, they would with contempt and indignation
have rejected it, nor would the Abbot of St. Alban's Council, and the Sheriff
of Hertford against whom this Petition was exhibited, have been wanting in
their own defense to have showed that this Ancient Prescription not only of
this, but of all other Buroughs was a mere Chimera and Fable: But instead of
this we do not find they made any opposition against it, because they knew they
had been summoned and appeared at diverse Parliaments before that time, Parl. 3.
p. 202.
as you may see in Prins Parliamentary Register they were in the 28th of Edward
I. which is almost as early as we have any Writs of Summons left us, to the
Commons of this King's Reign: And though it is true, the Sheriff of Hertford in
this 28th returns that the Bailiffs had made no Return of the Precept sent
them; yet this plainly proves that they were then look upon as a Borough, and
that it was very well known, that it was wont to send Burgesses to Parliament,
or else it had been a vain thing for him to have sent them any such Precept at
all: And though it is also true, there are no more Returns from St. Albans left
us till the 35th of Edward the First, yet that is no good Argument against
their Appearance in the former years, since the Writs and Returns upon them
being in loose bits of Parchment, might very well be lost, as well as they are
for many other places: But that the Burgesses of St. Albans were summoned,
Parl. 4. p. 36. B. 7.
and appeared in Parliament in the 35th of Edw. I. appears (though the Returns be
lost) by the Writs of Expenses of this year (being the first we have left us in
Prin's Parliamentary Register) for the Cities and Buroughs; in which Lift the
Burgesses of St. Albans are first upon the Roll; and that they were in
Parliament before this time, may further appear by that Clause at the end of
the Writ which I have already taken notice of, viz. That they were to have
their Experces for coming, staying, and returning, prout in casu consimili
fieri consuevit; which words relate to Ancient Custom, and extend to St.
Albans, as well as no any other Borough there mentioned: And that they also
were summoned, and appeared in primo and jecundo of Edward the Second, (in
whose Reign this Petition was exhibited,) you may see in Prin's Parliamentary
Registers, both third and fourth parts; P. 200 p. 900.
in the last of which you may find the Names of the Burgesses returned in the
first and fifth of this King, as they might have been seen also in the second:
Had not the Return (as Mr. Prin then acknowledges) been torn off* though it is
plain that they appeared there; and so may be likewise lost for all the rest of
the years of this King till the Second of Edward the Third, when we find they
appeared again, and so continue to send Burgesses to this day. And if it be a
good Argument of their Non appearance from the defect of Records, I Will
undertake to prove that London and several other Cities did not send any
Citizens to Parliament in several Kings Reigns, as you may see in this List of
Town (whose Writs of Expenses we now mentioned) of the ^5th of King Edward the
First^ where London, and most other great Cities are omitted, and yet St.
Albans is in. To conclude, it is certain that this was no new Claim of this
Borough, as appears by a Writ of the 5th of Edward the Second to the Sheriff
of Hertford, Vide Breve 5 Ed. 2. in Bend^llo.
that the Bailiffs of the Abbot had refused to Levy the Expenses for Ralph and
Peter Picot, who had served as Burgesses for the said Town in the last
Parliament; whereupon the said Ralph and Peter set forth before the King, that
the said Town used not to be Taxed with other Buroughs of the said County for
the Expenses of Knights, totis temporibus retroactis; but that it is a Free
Borough, and used to be summoned to Parliaments, which have been summoned by
the King and his Progenitors temporibus retroactis; and that the Burgesses of
the said Town used to receive their Expenses as the Burgesses of other
Buroughs of the Kingdom; to which Plea and Petition of the said Burgesses;
when the King had appointed a day both to the said Burgesses and Bailiffs of
the Abbot, to appear before him in Chancery, they failing at the day appointed,
the King therefore Issued out this Writ to the Sheriff of Hertford to summon
the said Abbot and Bailiffs to appear again before him, to show cause why the
said Ralph and Peter should not receive their Expenses as aforesaid.


M. I will consider further of this Argument; for I must ingeniously confess I
never heard or understood so much of this matter before: But pray proceed to
the rest of your Authorities.


F. But that it was not only the Opinion of the Buroughs of St. Albans, and
admitted by the King and his Council, but that also that it was the belief of
succeeding Parliaments, that the Commons were part of the great Council of the
Kingdom long before the 49th of Henry III. for proof of which, I desire you to
call to mind that King John in the 14th of his Reign made himself and Crown
tributary to the Pope. P.R.C. p. 24. Vide Mat. Paris anno 1213. Rot. Parl 40.
Ed. 3. n. 7, 8.


But Anno 40 Edw. III. when the Pope demanded the Arrears of this Tribute from
the King, the Prelates, Dukes, Count Barons and Commons, upon their full
deliberation in Parliament, resolved with one accord, that neither the King,
nor any other could put the Realm, nor People thereof into such subjection,
sanz assent de eux, without their assent; viz. as well of the Commons, as of
the Lords; and that it appeared by many Evidences, that if he had so done, it
was done, sanz lour assent, and contrary to his Coronation Oath, etc. Now what
can be more plain than that above three hundred years ago there was not the
least dispute that the Commons of England, (of which the Citizens and Burgesses
were then undoubtedly a part) ought to have been present in the Commune
Concilium Regni, or Parliament of King John's Reign, and to have assented to
that King's Resignation, to make it legal, and valid, as well as the Prelates,
Earls, and Barons.


M. As for this Argument I need trouble my self no further than to give you the
Dr's. Answer in his own words; B.A.P. p. 70.
viz. All that the Resolution of this Parliament in this case proves, is that
King John could not subject himself, his Realm or People, without their Assent,
but proves not, who they were that in such Cases at that time gave, or denied
their Assent, or how they did it, or whether 153 years before this Resolution,
the Commons were represented by Knights, Citizens, and Burges^es as at this
day. The Prelates, and Barons gave their Answer first, that such a Subjection
could not be made without their Assent, and then the Commons were asked what
their Thoughts were, and they answered in the same manner, and in the same
Words, the Barons had done, and when they answer altogether, They do it in the
same form of Speech conceived first by the Barons, without any Consideration,
whether the Commons were the same Body of Men, at the time of Executing the
Charter of King John's Subjection, etc. as at that present, or no.


F. I must freely tell you, I am not at all satisfied with this Reply of the
Drs. for if there is no heed to be taken of the House of Commons Answer to the
Pope, given in so solemn a manner as this was, there is no Credit to be given
to any thing they could say, if they are once supposed to speak like Parrots by
Roat, and only as they were taught by the Lords without any Consideration of
the Truth or Falsehood of what they averred. And tho the first Proposal of this
matter was by the King to the Lords, yet the Pope then threatening to
Excommunicate the King, and put the whole Realm under an Interdict; it was
certainly the Interest as well of the Commons as the Lords to avoid the blow by
a wary and true Answer to the Popes demands; for had their Answer been so idle
and frivolous, as you would make it, it had been advantage enough for the Pope
to have returned in answer to this Letter, (had what the Dr. alleges been
true) that the upstart House of Commons had nothing to do to meddle or treat of
any such matter, since they were none of the parties to the agreement, nor one
of the Estates, at that time when King John resigned his Crown, and made
himself and Kingdom Tributary to his Holinesses Predecessors, nor was the
space of an hundred fifty three years from the time of King John, to the 40th
of Edward the 3d, so far beyond the memory of man, as that so memorable a
Transaction could not be well known to the Pope, as well as to the House of
Commons then in being, since the making them a 3d Estate, fell out but in the
time of all their Grandfathers at farthest, so that it is scarce possible that
the memory of so remarkable a Transaction of which the whole World then rang,
should be lost in two or three Generations.

But I shall now proceed to show you, that as it was the express Judgment both
of the Lords and Commons, that King John could not make the Kingdom Tributary
to the Pope without their Consent in Parliament; so was it the Judgment also of
the whole House of Commons in the 2d of Henry the 5th, P. R. C. p. 39.
and admitted by that Noble Prince and the House of Lords, that they had ever
been a member of Parliament, and that no Statute, or Law could be made without
their Assent, as appears by a Petition or Protestation presented by the said
Commons to the King in Parliament, a Copy of which I shall now read to you, as
far as it concerns the matter in Question; Our Sovereign Lord, your humble and
true Lieges, Rot. Part. 2. H. 5. Ps. 2. n. 22.
that been come for the Comune of your Land, bysechin unto your riht twissness,
that so as hit has ever be their Liberty and Freedom, that there should no
Statute, no Law be made, of less than they yaf thereto their Assent,
considering that the Comune of your Land, the which that is, and ever has be a
member of your Parliament* been as well Aslentirs as Petitio^ers, that fro this
time forward by Compleint of the Comune of any Misch^ef, asking remedy by Mouth
of their Speaker for the Commons, outher else by Petition written, that there
never be no Law made thereupon and ingressed as Statute and Law, neither by
Additions, neither by Di^^inutions by no manner of Term, ^e Terms, the which
that should change the Sentence and the intent asked by the Speakers Mouth, or
the Petitions by foresaid ^even up in (...) by the foresaid without Assent of
the foresaid Comune, etc. This Petition is so plain that it needs no Comment,
therefore pray tell me what you think of it.


M. In the first place give me leave to tell you, that I do not find at all by
the Kings Answer to this Petition, that the King allowed the matter of Fact
therein set forth to be true, but rather the contrary, as you may see by the
Answer it self in these words, the King of his Grace especial grants, that
fro hensforth nothing be enacted to the Pet^^ions of his Comune that be
contrary of their asking, whereby they should be bound without their Assent,
saving always to our Liege, i. e. Royal Lord his Real Prerogatys to grant, and
deny, what him lust of their Petitions, and askings aforesaid.

And I shall farther give you the Drs. Answer to this Argument, which is to
this Effect; B. A. P. p. 86.
The design of this Petition was not to set forth the Antiquity of their
Existence, but their Right, that nothing might be enacted without their Assent
contrary to their intent and liking; and to show that it was never done since
the Commons were a third Estate, or (as they say) a Member of Parliament,
therefore it is needless to prove that which no Body denies, that the Assent of
the Commons was then and is now required to the making of all Statutes, and
Laws, but pray give me leave to ask you (with the Dr) what'were the Commons of
England as now represented by Knights, and Citizens, and Burgesses, ever an
Essential Constituent part of the Parliament from Eternity, before man was
created? Or have they been so ever since Adam? Or ever since England was
Peopled? Or ever since the Britains, Romans and Saxons inhabited this Island?
Certainly there was a time when they began to be so represented, and that is
the Question between us, concerning which, whether you or my self be in the
Right, I durst leave to any impartial Judge.


F. But notwithstanding your Drs. Answer, I think under favor the King, and
Lords did here allow the Substance of this Petition or Claim, as the main
Ground and Foundation on which it was built, viz. That the Commons had ever
been Members of Parliament; and therefore that no Law, or Statute should be
made without their Assents (which encroachment upon their Liberties, (...)
seems had been before endeavored by the King and Lords) and therefore let me
tell you, that the Answer of the King in Parliament, is rather a full
Concession of the Truth of the Commons claim; otherwise it is not to be
imagined that the King and Lords would have left such a Claim as of ancient
Right without any denial or Protestation against it, but instead of this, the
Kings and Lords allow the whole to be true; only the King reserved to himself
his Negative Voice of granting, or denying what he pleased, which the Commons
themselves do also allow him in the Conclusion to the Petition it self, as you
may see if you please to read it at large. And father, that this Affirmation of
the Commons was no other, then a Renovation, or Memorial of the Ancient Law of
the Land in that Point is more fully explained, and Confirmed by a Petition to
King Edward 2d in Parliament, P. R. C. p. 41. Ryleys Placit Parl. p. 619. Pet.
Parl. 18. E. 2. n. 2.
of all the Bishops, Prelates, Counts, Barons, and others of the Commonalty, in
the 18th of his Reign about an 10^. years before this of 9th Henry the 5th,
setting forth that they held their Mannours of the King Capite, as well within
the Forests as without, to which Mannours they held Gasz. (i. e. Wast.)
Appendant, and of which the Seignories had been rented out by the Acre, half
Acre, and Rude in improving their said Mannours, and that thereupon the
Officers of the King had made Seizure thereof, because they had not the Kings
License so to do, and therefore pray that they may improve their said Mannours,
etc. to which Petition it was answered by the King and his learned Council in
Parliament; that this could not be done without a new Law, to do, which the
Commonalty of the Land will never Assent, and concludes, Infra coram Rege, from
whence I make these Observations that the King and his Council do here declare
it, (as the ancient Custom of England,) that no new Law could then be without
the Assent of the Commons or Commonalty of the Land; and also that this
Commonalty was a distinct Body from the Commonalty of the Tenants in Capite,
before mentioned.

And besides this, I can show you diverse precedents to the same purpose and
particularly, a Declaration, or Protestation to Edward 3d. by the Commons in
Parliament, Rot. Parl. 81. Ed. 3. m. 56.
that they would not be obliged to any Statutes, or Ordinances, without the
Assent of the said Commons; which is also farther confirmed by another Petition
of right or a Protestation of the Commons to King Richard the 2d. as it is to
be found in the Parliament Rolls of 6th Richard 2d. (Pt. 1. m. 52.) wherein
they pray against a pretended Statute made by the King and the Lords, against
those who in the Statute of Henry the 4th are called Lollards in which they set
forth that the said Statute was never assented to by the Commons; and therefore
pray, that it be annulled: and pray observe the Reason, for that it was not
their intent, to be justified, nor to oblige themselves, or their Successors to
the Prelates, more than their Ancestors have been in times passed.

From all which, we may observe that the Commons do by all these Petitions and
Protestations make as strong a claim by Prescription for themselves, and their
Ancestors not being bound by the Acts of the Bishops and Lords, as the King
could make for himself, and his Ancestors, touching his own Prerogative by
Prescription. But as for your Queries on this Petition, since they are not your
own, give me leave to tell you, I look upon them as impertinent, for who ever
supposed that the Commons claimed a right by Prescription ever since the
Creation, or ever since the first Peopleing of this Island, since any Body may
see, that this Word ever is to be understood according to the Nature of the
Subject in hand, viz. from the first Institution of the Saxon Government in
this Island, now pray give me leave to put you a Case; suppose you should
affirm, that the Crown of England has ever been Successive, and not Elective,
would it not be mere Cavilling to ask you, Whither it was so, pure Divino ever
since Adam? but as you will leave it to any impartial judge, who is in the
Right, you or I, so shall I likewise leave it to them to consider, which is
most likely, that your Self, your Dr. and some of our Modern Antiquaries,
should make the House of Commons no ancienter than about the latter end of
Henry the 3d, or middle of Edward the 1st Reign, or the constant Judgment of
both Houses of Parliament, with the Assent of the King, and his Learned
Council, who have insisted upon the Consent of the Commons, as their ancient
and undoubted Right beyond all time of Memory.


M. I must confess you have proved it plain enough, that it was the constant
opinion of more than one Parliament; that the Commons had been before the 49th
of Henry the 3d, Members of the great Council of the Nation: But how long
before that they do not set forth: but since Parliaments, are no more
infallible than general Councils, I hope you will pardon me, if I do not give
absolute Credit to their Testimony, since in an illiterate Age, as that was in
which the Commons make this Petition; it might happen that not only they but
the King Himself, and his Council at that time might not certainly know, how
long, or how little a time the Commons had been summoned to Parliament,
therefore since all the Writs of summons to them before the 49th of Henry the
3d are lost; I pray show me from this general Right of Prescription, you so
much talk of, that there must have been any Commons summoned to Parliament
before that time; for I have now somewhat very Material out of Mr. Prins
Parliamentary Register to Object against Mr. Lambard's Argument from the Plea
of the Tenants in ancient demesne being exempted by Prescription, from paying
to the wages of Knights of the Shires; (as you told me at our last Meeting but
one) but first let me hear the rest of your Arguments from this Prescription of
Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses appearing in Parliament, before the 49th of
Henry the 3d; for since you have now proved they were there by an undeniable
Record in the 11th of Edward I. I shall now confine my self to Sir Henry
Spelmans and Sir William Dugdales (as well as the Drs. first) Term of 49th of
Henry the 3d.


F. I shall observe your desires, and in performing of which, I shall pursue
this Method; I shall first give you a general Definition of Prescription, and
shall then prove that the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses have always claimed
to appear in Parliament by virtue of this general Right of Prescription. Now
the Terms of the Law tell us, That Prescription is, when a man claims any
thing, for that he and his Ancestors and Predecessors, whose Estate he holds,
had, or used any thing in all Times whereof no memory is to the contrary; now
pray let us see to what time this is limited, that shall be said to be within
Memory, and what was anciently counted beyond time of Memory in a Prescription,
which may be best learnt from a Petition of the Commons to King Edward the 3d,
Rot. Parl. 43. E. 3. n. 16.
in the 43d of his Reign, which is to be found in the Parliament Rolls of that
Year, wherein among other Petitions of the Commons, this is one, which I shall
render and abridge out of French. Item, because the whole time of King Richard
I. is held for temps de Memory, that it would please the King farther to limit
this time; so that it do not pass the Coronation of King Edwards Grandfather to
the King that now is; (but mark the Kings Answer to this Petition.) Let the Law
continue as has been hitherto used, until it be otherwise Ordained; so that
since there has been no Alteration in this Point from the Reign of Edward the
3d, then the Time beyond Memory, or whereof there is no Memory to the contrary,
continues still beyond the time of Richard the I. for Littleton tells us, Lib.
2. Sect. 170. p. 115.
that all the time of Richard I. is time of Memory; and therefore Sir Edward
Cook in his Comment upon him, says, That this was intended from the first year
of his Reign, for (from that time) being indefinitely does take in all the
whole time of his Reign, which is to be observed.

Having fixed the certain time of a general Prescription beyond Memory, I shall
now proceed to show you, that the Claim of the Commons appearing at the Common
Council or Parliament of the Kingdom is beyond that time; which since I cannot
do directly, (by reason of the loss of the Records of Parliament of those
times) any farther then has been already in the Case of the Burgesses of St.
Albans (which alone is, I think, sufficient to satisfy any reasonable man) we
must therefore make use of such Collateral Proofs, and Records, which tho they
not directly, Inter Communia in scaccario penes Rememorat.
yet by undeniable Consequence will prove the Point in Question, I shall
therefore in the first place make use of a Writ in the Exchequer of the 34th
Edward I. directed to the Barons thereof, reciting, that whereas the Men of
Coventry set forth in their Petition to the King, that the said To all is not a
City, Borough, nor Demesne of the Kings, so that the Townsmen were not wont to
be taxed as Citizens, and Burgesses, or Tenants in ancient demesne, in any
Taxes granted to the King, and his Progenitors, but only with the Community of
the said County of Warwick, and yet that the Taxers and Collector; of the said
County have endeavored to levy a 30th of their Goods (toward an aid granted
by the Communities of the Cities and Buroughs to the King) to their Damage and
Impoverishment; and therefore pray remedy: the King therefore Orders, that the
Rolls be searched concerning, such Taxations in the said Town; and if it
evidently appear by them, that it is as they set forth; and that the said men
were always taxed with others without the Towns, Buroughs, and Manors
aforesaid; in all payments of this sort, that then they should not permit the
said Taxers, and Collectors to distrain the said Inhabitants to pay the King by
reason of the said Concession of a 30th otherwise, quam in totis temporious
retroactis in hujuscemodi casu fieri consueverit, etc. from which Record we may
draw these Conclusions, First, That this Town of Coventry did not hold of the
King, and yet was a Borough, and as such sent Members to Parliament, in the
26th, 28th, and 30th of Edward I. as appears by the return of Writs of that
Year. Vi. Prins Parliament Regist. Part 2d. p. 40.55.
Secondly, That yet it prescribed, Totis temporibus retroactis, in all times
passed to be taxed with the Body of the County, and not with the Communities of
the Cities and Buroughs in all Taxes granted to the King and his Progenitors;
which plainly shows, that the Cities and Buroughs granted Taxes by themselves
in the times of his Progenitors, that is, in the time of King John at the
least. Lastly, That the King orders the Rolls to be searched, which had been
idle direction, had it then been known, or believed, that the Cities and
Buroughs never gave any Taxes for themselves in Parliament before the 49th of
Henry the Third, but little above forty years before the date of this Writ.

I shall show you a like Writ (which is to be sound in the same place) for the
Townsmen and Tenants of Beverly in the County of York, in 8 vo. of Edward the
Second, seting forth in their Petition, that although they had been Taxed to to
the 20th lately given to the King per Communitates Comitatuum, by the Taxers
and Collectors of a Subsidy of the 20th in the said County, although they and
their Ancestors had been accustomed to be Taxed to all Aids, as well to the
King, as to his Propenitors, granted per Communitates Comitatuum ejusdem Regni,
with the Community of the County, and not with the Communitates Civitatum and
Bargorum; yet that the Taxers and Collectors of the 15th, lately granted by the
Commons of the Cities and Buroughs do grievously distrain them to their great
damage, and therefore pray Remedy; whereupon the King commands that the Rolls
be searched of such like Taxations, and if it appear that the said Town has
always been hitherto Taxed, as they in their Petition set forth, that then they
shall be discharged from the said 15th.

From which Record we may conclude that this Town of Beverly, though an Ancient
Borough, (and as such was summoned to send Burgesses to Parliament in the 26th
of this King) yet did not hold o^ the King in Capite, Vide Prin's Parliam. Reg.
part 2. p. 46.
nor in Ancient Demesne. Secondly, That Aids had been given the King and his
Progenitors per Communitates Comitatuum, i. e. by the Commons of the Counties,
which could not be done but by their Lawful Representatives, and that in
Parliament; but how far these Progenitors must extend, I need no repeat to you;
the ground of which Petition being admitted by the King in Parliament.


M. These Authorities, though material, yet do not in my Opinion reach the point
you were to prove; viz. That the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses appeared in
Parliament, before the Reign of Richard I. for both these Authorities, (though
admitted for good) yet reach no higher than King John's time, which is within
memory, as your self have now set forth, since the word Progenitors need not be
extended any further than the time of that King, who was great Grandfather to
Edward the First and Second, to whom these Petitions were made by these
Townsmen, and so do not clearly amount to your full time of prescription; viz.
before the Reign of Richard I.


F. Well, pray remember, that if you grant this, you have lost your Cause,
since certainly the Reign of King John is long before the 49th of Henry III.
but since you will be so over-critical, I will show you some Claims by
prescription beyond all time of memory, made by the Tenants in Ancient Demesne,
from being Taxed to contribute to the wages of Knights of Shires; and if they
thus prescribed, it is plain there must have been Knights of Shires chosen,
against paying whose wages they prescribed to have had this privilege: Now
this prescription must be very Ancient, since, as Mr. Lambard shows us in the
place I have quoted, there has been no new Tenants made in Ancient Demesne,
since the time of William I. But pray see the Writ it self in the Old Register
of Writs, which is there put down only as a Form for drawing of all other Writs
of this kind there to be found for other Towns, Fol. 261.
(and particularly the Tenants of Odiham in Hampshire) whenever there was
occasion; and therefore it is not to be wondered that neither the Name of the
King, nor of the place be expressed in words at length. The Writ it self is not
very long, therefore I shall give it you in Latin as far as is material: Rex
Vicecomiti L. salutem monstraverunt nobis homines, and Tenente^ de Manerio de
F. quod est de Antiquo Dominico Co^one. Angliae ut dicitur quod licet ipsi and
little Antecessores Tenentes de eodem Manerio a tempore quo non extat memoria
semper hactenus quieti esse cousueverunt de expensis Militum ad Parliamenta
nostra and Progenitorum nostrorum Regum Angli^e pro Commanitate dicti Comitatus
venienium, etc. and then proceeds that whereas the said Sheriff distrains the
said Tenants to contribute to the Expenses of the Knights that came to the last
Parliament, to their great damage, otherwise than totis retroa^tis temporibus
fieri consuevit; therefore commands him that he desist from his said Distress,
and do not compel the said Tenants to contribute otherwise quam omnibus
temporibus retroactis. And now though this Writ be without any Kings name or
date, yet it appears at the bottom it was issued by G. L. E^^rope then
Chancellor, and William de Holston, Clerk of the Chancery; and this must have
been before the 15th of that King, because it appears by the close Rolls of
that year, Rot. Claus. 15. E. 2. m. 37. dorso in Scedula.

Rot. Claus. 2. Ed. 3. m. 33. dorso.


that in December the great Seal was delivered to William d' Ayremyn, under the
Seals of William de Clyffe, and the said William de Herlston, Clerks of
Chancery, who are often mentioned in our Records to have been Keepers of it pro
tempore, till the Second of Edward the Third, when the said William de Herlston
had the sole custody thereof committed to him.

But there is yet a perfecter Writ of this kind in the 50th of Edward the Third
extant on the Rolls directed to John de Cobham, Claus. 50. E. 3. p. 2. m. 19
dorso.
and four other Knights therein named, reciting that whereas Simon Archbishop
of Canterbury claims as well for himself as his predecessors, and their Tenants
hitherto, a tempore quo non extat memoria, for certain Lauds held in Gavel-kind
in the County of Kent, which ought to be free from the Expenses of Knights
coming to our Parliaments, as well as those of our Progenitors; and concludes
with a Supersedeas to the said Sheriff not to molest the said Tenants until
such time as the King be further informed and that He by the Advice of his
Council has ordained what is to be done in the premises; from both which Writs
we may draw these Conclusions; First, That there was at the time of the
granting these Writs a Claim by prescription time out of mind allowed for all
Tenants, holding of the Archbishop in Gavelkind to be exempted from
contributing to the wages of Knights of the Shire, or else these Petitions, and
the Writs upon them had been idle and ridiculous.

Lastly, That this Claim of being thus exempted time out of mind (which as I
have already proved, extend, beyond the time of Richard the First) is allowed
by the King himself for good in both these Writs, only in the last the King
will be informed whether they are Tenants in Gavel kind or not; so that the
Conclusion must be, that if these Tenants in Ancient Demesne, and Gavel-kind
were always exempted from paying to the wages of Knights of the Shires beyond
memory, i. e. by prescription, then certainly those Knights must have been
chosen time beyond memory. I could give you several other Writs of like nature,
but I will not over charge you. Now certainly if the Knights of Shires were
thus Elected time beyond memory, the Citizens and Burgesses must have been so
too, since in Scotland where there were for a long time no Commissioners for
the Shires, yet the Cities and Buroughs ever sent Delegates to Parliament, as
your Dr. himself allows.


M. I must beg your pardon if I cannot come over to your Opinion, concerning
this prescription of Knights of Shires, Citizens and Burgesses appearing in
Parliament before the 49th of Henry the Third; since Mr. Prin in his second and
third part of his Parliamentary Register has proved; Vide Observations on Writs
of Summons, part 2. p. 173. and part 3. 8. per totum.
1. That all the words you insist upon to prove this prescription, are to be
understood in another sense than what you would now put upon them; so that though
Mr. Lambard and others of great note lay the Original Title and Right of all
our Countries, Ancient Cities and Buroughs Electing and sending of Burgesses
to Parliament, and to be by prescription time out of mind long before the
Conquest; yet against this Opinion Mr. Prin argues thus (whose Arguments I
shall contract because it would be tedious to recite them all verbatim.) First,
That as for the wages of Knights of Shires (which is the principal thing you
insist on in this last Argument) the Ancientest Writs extant for their wages,
Part 2. p. 175.
are those of 28th and 29th of Edward the First, and no Records or Law Books I
have seen derive their Title higher than the Reign of Edward the First: Cap. 12.
The first Statute concerning them is that of the 12th of Richard II. which
only enacts that the Levying Expenses of Knights shall be as has been used of
old time. Cap. 1.
The next Statute is of 11 of H. 4th, and enacts that Knights of Shires unduly
returned, shall lose their wages of the Parliament of old time accustomed, not
at, or before the Conquest accustomed: Yea no man can prove there were any
Knights for Counties Elected, and sent to Parliaments by the King's Writs
before the 49th of Henry the Third, not to the Reign of the Conqueror, or
before the Conquest, as Mr. Lambard would strain it. Now as for the words
Antacessores and Progenitores in the Writs you have cited, the former may very
well signify the Ancestors of those Inhabitants of Buroughs or Towns, and the
latter the Predecessors of the King that then was, which in the time of Edward
the Second, and Edward the Third, when those Writs were granted, need extend no
higher than the 49th of Henry the Third; and as for the other words in these
Writs, as totu timporibus retroaclis; and a tempore quo non ixtai memoria, they
must have the like interpretation, or what is equivalent to it; viz. in all
times passed, or time out of mind, i. e. before there were any Knights Elected
for the Countries, they were always free from contributing to their wages, so
that this prescriptions need not extend higher than the 49th of Henry III.
above mentioned; since which time it is true (as they there set forth) that
they and their Ancestors in all times, or time beyond memory, have always used
to be quit from such Expenses of Knights: Now there were many Prescriptions and
Customs in use in Edward the Third's time, and since, which may be well said to
be (...) out of mind, yet certainly had their Original not before, but long
since the Conquest, as you may read in Brooks, Fitzherbert, and other
Law Books, Title, Custom, and Prescription, and Cook's first Instit. My Lord
Hobard in his Reports; Fol. 58.113.
That which has been used, or (...) but two, or three Ages only, or out of the
memory or mind of men then being, is reputed a Legal Custom, P. 117, 118, 198,
199.
or Prescription 34 Henry VI. Brook 's Tit. Prescription, therefore this
Prescription of Tenant's in ancient Demesne to be exempted from contributing to
Knights wages, will no ways warrant Mr. Lambard's Conclusion from it; Ergo,
There were Elections of Knights of Shires before the Conquest. I am certain
that at this day Tenants in Ancient Demesne can plead that both they, and their
Ancestors, time out of mind, never were accustomed to pay Excise for any thing
for which Excise is now paid; will it therefore follow, ergo, all other places,
now subject to pay Excise, were liable to it before the Conquest, when it is a
duty imposed but since the late Wars. So that Mr. Prin here proves, that your,
and Mr. Lambard's Argument from the Tenants in Ancient Demesne, and Gavel-kind,
not paying in all times passed, or time beyond memory to the wages of Knights
of the Shires, is altogether fallacious, and inconclusive.


F. Pray Sir give me leave to reply to your Answer before you proceed to speak
of Borroughs. First, let me tell you, Mr. Prin very much forgot himself when he
here says, that the first Writs for wages of Knights of Shires are but of the
28th, R.A.P. 141.
or 29th of Edward the First, since you know better; for your Dr. has printed
the Writ of Expenses for the Knights of Shires that served in this Parliament
of the 49th of Henry III. and you your self have urged it to me, that this was
the first time, that these Knights had their Expenses allowed them, because
there was no Clause of, prout in Casu simili, expressed therein; which I told
you might be only through inadvertency of the Clerks, since the Dr. there gives
us another Writ of the 42d of that King, whereby it appears that the four
Knights of Counties who had appeared before the King and his Council at the
foregoing Parliament, were ordered their Expenses, for going, returning, and
staying at the said Parliament, which shows that these Writs were no new
things, and if so be these Knights had their Expenses allowed them only for
their Attendance at a Parliament, it is much more reasonable and likely they
had their Expenses allowed, when they made a part of it.

But to put this out of all doubt, Mr. Prin himself has cleared this point not
only by printing this very Writ in the 4th part of his Parliamentary Register,
but by declaring in the very first Section of that Volume, that though after this
Writ no more are to be found of this sort extant upon the Rolls of Henry III.
till the 28th of Edward I. yet they were constantly Issued but at the end of
every Parliament held after the 49th of Henry the Third, till the 28th of
Edward the First (being 35 years space) as this Clause in the Writs of 28, 29,
and 33th of Edward I. prout alias in Casu consimili fieri consuevit assures us;
but all the bundles of Writs from the 49th of H^nry the Third till the 29th of
Edward the First, being lost, and no Writs of Summons from 49 H. 3 entered in
the Clause Rolls till 22 E. 1. though returnable into Chancery, no wonder that
these Writs de Expensis (not returnable at all) were not enrolled till 28 E. 1.
after which they were usually endorsed on the Clause Rolls till the Second of
Henry the Fifth. So that by Mr. Prin's own confession, the loss of the Writs
from the 49th of Henry 3. till 28 Ed. 1. is no Argument at all to prove that
there were no such Writs before the 49th of Hen. 3. unless you could prove to
me that the Writs and Records of all those Parliaments had been so well
preserved, that there are none lost or imbezell'd, which Mr. Prin acknowledges
to the contrary; for if they were lost after the 49th of H. 3. pray give me a
reason why the like Writs of Summons and Expenses, might not be lost as well
before that time.

Having, I think, sufficiently answered Mr. Prin's Argument from the not
finding any Writs of Expenses before the 28th of Edward 1. from what he himself
sold afterward upon better consideration; I shall now proceed to reply to that
other part of his Argument from the equivocal use of the words, old times
accustomed, and in a tempore quo non extat memoria; which he will have to
signify a space of time only beyond the memory of any man living, whereas the
words custom and accustomed, when used of any general custom or usage all over
the Realm is still to be taken in much larger acceptance, as all our Law Books
will teach you: But I shall not dwell upon this, but show you that those
Authors whose works you have read, had no true notion of this expression in our
Ancient Records and Pleadings; viz. a tempore cujus contraii memoria non
existit; which has been always understood (as Littleton here tells you) for a
time beyond the Reign of King Richard I. So that wherever you find these
words, totis temporibus retroactis, or de Temps don't momorie des Homes ne curg^
al contrary, in any Records, they are always to be understood of a time older
than that now mentioned; you may prove a contrary usage if you can; but before
that time no Deed can be given in Evidence, nor Custom alleged beyond it: And
that this is not the sense of Littleton alone (who indeed makes a query about
this time beyond memory) I appeal to all our Year-books, and if you please to
see all the considerable Law-Learning at once about this Point, pray consult
Roll's Abridgment (or Com-mon-place-book) Title, P. 269.
Prescription, where he gives you these Conclusion, from the Year-books which I
shall here read to you in English.

1. It is clear enough, that there was a certain time called Time of Memory in
a Prescription, and for this he cites the Year-books of 19 H. 6.75. per Newton
1 E. 4.6. B. 9 H. 7.11.14 H. 7.1.

2. The said Time of Memory in a Prescription was from the time of King Richard
I. 20 H. 6.3. D. Mar. 119.5.3.4.9. B. the time of K. John is within memory,
Lit. Sect. 170.34. H. 6.36. B. 47. So that the said Time of Memory was from the
beginning of the Reign of K. Richard I. (who was Brother to King John, who was
Father to Henry the Third) for the whole time of his Reign was within Time of
Memory, 20 H. 6. per Newton again, 13 H. 4.9. B. where the Seisin of King
Richard is allowed for a good Title, and so a Warranty in his time.

So it seems by these words a tempore cujus contrarii memoria non existit, is
properly and generally intended for all the time before that; and before the
Statute of Limitation, was meant of that against, which no proof could be made
to the contrary either by Testimony, or Evidence in any time before, without
any limitation of time, the 34 H. 6.36. B. 37, seems to prove this: So that the
time of all Prescription was in those days the same with the time of Limitation
of Seisin in a Writ of Writ, as Littleton tells us. And since you have not as
yet brought any considerable proofs (but only bare negative ones which have
been answered,) against this Prescription of the Election of Knights of Shires
time beyond memory; what you have said to the contrary is little to the
purpose; for all the Modern as well as Ancient Law Books are against this
notion of Mr. Prin's; for in Judge Telverton's Reports, P. 31, 32.
Gibson and Holcrose's Case you will see, that whereas unity of Possession is
by the Statute of the Dissolution of Monasteries a good discharge of Tithes;
yet if the Monastery were founded deins Temps de Memoire (as this Abbey of Vale
Royal was in the time of Ed* I.) a constant Unity, since the Foundation was
held by the whole Court for no good discharge of Tithes by Prescription as the
Plaintiff had laid it; for the Defendant showing that the said Abbey was founded
since time of memory (though above three hundred years old) was a sufficient
confessing and avoiding.

So that Mr. Prin's Arguments whereby he would have the words, all times
passed, and Time of which no memory is to the contrary to signify a much less
space of time in these Writs I have now cited; and to be restrained within the
49th of Henry the Third, will not signify much: since they are expressly
against all our Law Books, neither does he cite any Cases for his Opinion out
of Brook or Fitzherbert, though he quotes their Titles; but as for this Quotation
from Cook's first Institutes, P. 113.
there is nothing there to countenance his notion, more than he tells us that
from Bracton, and Fleta, P 113.
(upon the words de Temps dout memory, etc.) docere opertet longum tempus and
longum usum; viz. qui excedit memoriam hominum, tale, enim, tempus sufficit pro
Iure; but without telling us what was then understood by this memoria hominum,
and a little after upon these words, Ascun proof al contrary; for it there be
any sufficient proof of Record, or Writing to the contrary, albeit it exceed
the memory, or proper knowledge of any man living, yet it is within the memory
of men: For memory is twofold; First, By knowledge by proof, as by Record or
sufficient matter of writing. Secondly, By his own proper knowledge, and for
this he cites diverse. Year-books in the Margin: But as for all that, long
Quotation Mr. Prin has here given us, I know not whence he had it; for there is
not any thing in Hobart's Reports to that purpose in the places he has cited:
And as for the Year-book of 34 Henry the Sixth, and Brook, they are both
directly against his notion, as you may see by what Rolls has been already
quoted from the same places: And though it is true in Prescriptions of ways, and
Commons, and other such petty thing, laid time beyond memory, the Judges, or
Jury are not so exact as to make the Plaintiffs prove their Prescription beyond
the time of any man then living; yet if they prescribe for never so long, it is
still in the power of the Defendant to prove that there was no such
Prescription, and this as high as before Richard the First, but no higher; and
thus high we assert the coming of Knights of Shires to Parliament: for I do not
pretend to lay it as high, as the Conquest or before, as Mr. Lambard does; if
it prove beyond the time now specified, it is sufficient to disprove Mr. Prins
Notion.

But to let you see, I am a fair Adversary, I will admit for once that this
time beyond Memory, shall be taken in a sticker, litteral Sense, for only as
far as is beyond the Memory of any man living. Now pray see what you will get
by it, if you remember that the Writ I but now cited from the Register for the
Tenants in ancient demesne their being discharged from Contributing to the
wages of Knights of the Shires, was laid, a tempore cujus contraii memoria non
existit, and these Writs are proved also to have been issued within the 15th of
Edward the 2d. and if so, pray reckon onwards, and see if the 49th of Henry the
3d. (when you suppose Knights of Shires to have been first chosen) does not
fall within the memory of most men then living, for Henry the 3d reigned
somewhat more than seven years, after this 49th, to which seven years, if you
add the almost 35 years Reign of Edward I. It makes 42 years, then add these 15
years of Edward the II. and (if you please) see if whole makes above 57 years;
which certainly was within the Memory of many Men then living, and it had been
a senseless thing for the Chancellor and Clerks of Chancery that then were, to
have granted these Writs of Exemption for a time beyond Memory, when they
themselves might have remembered when wages for Knights of Shires first began.


M. As for what you have said for this Prescription of Knights of Shires, I
will not dispute it farther with you, since it is a Point of your Common Law,
(in which I confess my self but meanly skilled) but I shall take farther time
to advise with those that know better; in the mean time, as for the Cities and
Buroughs let them have appeared when you will, their coming to Parliament,
could not be so ancient as before the time of Richard I. much less the
Conquest, as you suppose; since Mr. Pryn has in the same second part of this
Parliamentary Register traced the summoning of the Buroughs to their very
Original; and proved it could not be ancienter then the 49th of Henry the 3d. I
shall here contract his Arguments, and give you them, as I did the former.
First, Part 2. p. 214.
He here proves that there were never but 170 Cities and Buroughs, who sent
any Members to Parliament; of which 170 (in his Catalogue) nine of them never
had but one or two Precepts, and others but four Precepts of this Nature sent
them, upon none of which Precepts the Sheriffs made, any returns of Burgesses,
as these Ballivi Libirlatis nullum mihi dederunt responsum, or nihil inde
secerunt, attest; whereupon they never had any more Precepts of this kind sent
them to this Day, Christ-Church in Hampshire only excepted, which of late
years has sent Burgesses to Parliament, so that in Truth there were only 161
Cities and Buroughs in England, that ever sent Members to Parliament, during
all the precedent King^ Reign, viz. From the 26th of Edward I. to the 12th of
Edw. the 4th. Secondly, That 22 more here named of these 161, never elected and
returned Burgesses but once, and no more during all the said time. Thirdly,
That many more of these ancient Buroughs here named never sent Members, Ibid.
p. 225.226.
some of them more then twice, others thrice, others four, others five, others
six, others seven, others eight times and Lancaster has but 13 Elections and
Returns of Burgesses, and no more during all the above mentioned Reigns.
Fourthly, That although some of these Buroughs here named, who seldom sent any
Burgesses, tho they were summoned by the Sheriffs Precepts to Elect Burgesses
without any great intervals of time to six or seven Succeeding Parliaments, yet
most of them had along discontinuance of time, some of above 200, others above
300 years distance between those few respective Returns, of which he here gives
you several Instances, and referrs you to his precedent Catalogue of Returns
for the proof of it. So that there were but 112 Cities and Buroughs (taking in
the Cinque Ports, and all) who sen^ Members to Parliament in the Reign of
Edward I. seven of which made only one return, and no more, for ought I can
discover before or after Edward 1st Reign, till of very late Years.

Yet that in Edward the 2ds Reign, there were Precepts issued by the Sheriffs
and returns of Burgesses for 19 new Buroughs here named, Ibid. p. 227.228.
which (for ought I can discover) never elected any Burgesses before. Fifthly,
That under this long Reign of Edward the 3d. there were Sheriffs Precepts
issued to 19 new Borroughs returns made upon them to serve in Parliaments or
great Councils who never sent any Members before; and Precepts to more, that
made no returns at all thereupon; as for the Cinque Ports of Dover, Romney,
Sandwich, Winchelsey, Hastings, H^the and Rye; though there be no Original
Writs for, or returns of their electing and sending Barons to Parliament now
extant, before the Reign of Edward the 3d, yet it is apparent by the Clause
Rolls, that they sent Barons to Parliament in 49th of Henry, and during the
Reign of Edward 1st and 2d. of which more anon. Sixthly, That King Richard the
2d, Henry the 4th, and Henry the 5th, created no new Buroughs at all, neither
were there any Writs or Precepts issued to, or Election of Citizens, or
Burgesses by any new Cities or Borroughs, but such as elected them before their
Reigns. Seventhly, That about the midst of King Henry the 6th long Reign there
were Precepts issued to, and returns made by five new Buroughs and no more,
which never sent Burgesses to Parliaments before, viz. Gatton, in Surrey,
H^ytesbury, Hyndford, Westbury, and Wootton Basset all in Wiitshire, yet very
poor inconsiderable Buroughs, tho they elect Burgesses at this day. That
during Edward the 4th Reign, there was one new Borough, (here named) which
began to send Burgesses to Parliament under him, though it never sent any
before.


F. Well but how came this about, that so many new Buroughs were made in some
Kings Reigns, and few or none in others ^ and so many omitted, that had served
before in other Parliaments.


M. Pray read on and you will see, this Author gives us a very good account of
that; and impures it to two Causes. First, The Partiality, and Favor of the
Sheriffs, and the Ambition of the Neighboring Gentry, who desired to be
elected in such new Buroughs. Secondly, The mere Grace, and Favor of the
King, who by diverse Charters to new Corporations have given them the Privilege
of sending Burgesses to Parliaments. For Proof of which, pray see what this
Author here farther says. It is evident by the precedent Sections, and
Catalogue of ancient Cities, Ibid. p. 228.229, 234.
Buroughs, Ports, and their returns of Writs and Election, before specified
with these general Clauses after them, Non sunt aliae, or ullae Civitates nec
Burgi in Balliva mea, or in Comitatu praedicto, praeter, etc. as you may see by
the return of the Sheriff of Bucks, Anno 26 of Edward I where he denies there
were any Cities or Buroughs, in his whole County, and yet the very next
Parliament but one, within two years after, the Sheriff of Bucks returns no
less then three Buroughs, viz. Agmundesham, Wycombe and Wendover, with the
Burgesses Names that were returned, so that the 78 new Buroughs here named
were lately set up in the Counties, since Edward the 4ths Reign by the Practice
of Sheriffs, and the Ambition of Private Gentlemen seeking to be made Burgesses
for them, and Consent of the poor Burgesses of them, being courted and fe^sted
by them for their Votes without any Charters from the King; and are all me in
poor inconsiderable Buroughs set up by the late Returns and Practices of
Sheriffs.

And tho others may conceive, that the Power of our ancient Buroughs or Cities
Electing, Ibid. p. 230.
and sending Burgesses, and Citizens to our Parliaments proceeded originally
from some old Charters of our Kings heretofore granted to them, and to which
Opinion I once inclined; yet the Consideration of the new discovery of the old
Original of Writs for Electing Knights, Citizens and Burgesses I found in
Caesar's Chapel, has rectified my former mistake herein and abundantly
satisfied me that neither bare ancient Custom, or Prescription before or since
the Conquest, not our Kings Charters but the Sheriffs of each Counties Precepts
and Returns of Elections of Burgesses and Citizens for such Buroughs and
Cities, as they thought meet by Authority and Power, granted to them in, and by
this general Clause in the Writs of Summons issued to Sheriffs, for every
County before every Parliament enjoining them in these Words, Tibi praecipimus
firmiter injungentes, quod de Comitatu praedicto duos milites, and de qualibet
Cititate duos cives, and de quolibet Burgo duos Burgesses at discretioribus,
Ibid. p. 231.232.
etc. sin^ dilatione Eligi* and eos ad nos ad dictos diem, and locum venite
facias, etc. By virtue of which general indefinite Clauses used in all Writs of
Summons ever since 23d of Edward I. without designing what particular Cities,
or Buroughs by Name within each County, the Sheriff should cause to Elect* or
send two Citizens or two Burgesses, but leaving it wholly to each Sheriffs
Liberty and Discretion to send the Writ directed to him to what Cities and
Buroughs he pleased; thereupon every Sheriff used a kind of Arbitrary Power in
the Execution of this general Clause, according as his Judgment directed or his
Assertions, Favor, Partiality, Malice, or the Solicitations of any private
Buroughs to him, or of Competitors for Citizens or Burgesses places within his
County swayed him; this is most apparent by some Sheriffs in several Counties
returning more Buroughs, and Burgesses then their Predecessors, others fewer,
some omitting those Buroughs returned by their Predecessors, others causing
Elections, and Returns to be made for such new Buroughs, which never elected
or sent any before, nor after their Sherivalties, as is evident from the
Returns, Annis 28.33. E. 1. and 34. of E. 3. for Div^n. Anno 26. E. 1. for
Yorkshire. Anno 33, E. 1. for Oxfordshire. Anno 28. of E. 1. for Hampshire.
Annis 33. and 34. of E. 3. for Sommerset. Annis 25.27. and 28. H. 6 for Wilts,
etc.

So that the first Writs or Memorials of any extant on Record for electing
Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses to come to Parliament are those of 49th of
Henry 3d, but these Writs only commanded that the Sheriffs cause to come two
Knights, etc. of each County; and the like Writs were directed to the Cities of
London Lincoln, and other Buroughs of England to elect two Citizens and two
Burgesses for each of them, and the rest of the Cities and Buroughs in
England; the like Writs were also issued to Sandwich and the rest of the Cinque
Ports; without expressing their Names, or Number in each County; and this form
I conceive (says Mr. Pryn) continued till 23d of Edward I. when the aforecited
general Clause authorizing, and intrusting every Sheriff to cause two Citizens,
and two Burgesses to be elected, etc. out of every City and Borough in his
County; was first put into the Writs, by Authority and Color whereof every
Sheriff sent Precepts to what Cities and Buroughs of his County he pleased.


F. I have with Patience heard this long History of Mr. Prins concerning the
Election of Citizens and Burgesses, from which I must notwithstanding make bold
to differ, for tho I own him to have been a man of great Learning and Industry
in matter of Records, yet I doubt he was often too quick in taking up of
Opinions upon slender grounds; therefore for the answering of him, I shall
first show you the improbability of his Suppositions, and in the next place
shall make use of no other Confutations then what his own Book will afford us,
as to the Writs of Summons, Returns and other things he lays so much stress
upon; in the first place, for the Notion of Sheriffs sending Precepts to what
Cities and Buroughs they pleased; and consequently making as few or as many
send Members to Parliament as they would, that this was not so at first; is
evident from those very Writs of 49th of Henry the 3d, by which it appears that
they were not then directed to the Sheriffs, for any more then to the Counties;
but as for the Citizens and Burgesses, and Barons of the Cinque Ports, they
were then directed to themselves; and he also confesses, that this continued so
from that time till the 23d of Edward I. so that all this while (being about 28
Years) it seems the Nomination of what Cities and Towns should send Members to
Parliament did not depend upon the Will of the Sheriffs, but upon somewhat
else; and I have asked you once (tho without receiving any answer) what Rule
Simon Montfort went by to tell what Cities and Buroughs, were to send Members
and what not; since the Words are only in general, de quolibet Burgo, etc. and
therefore pray answer me now if you can.


M. I conceive in the first place, as for the Cities, Simon Montfort sent to
those that were anciently esteemed so, viz. such as had Bishops Sees annexed to
them, such as London, Lincoln, and particularly named in these Writs and others
of the same rank, and as for the Buroughs, tho we have not the returns of them
left us; yet I suppose they were such Walled, or other Towns; as were of some
considerable Note in England; such as he thought were most proper for his turn.


F. That this could be no Rule, appears by this clear Proof, First* That
neither Coventry and Litchfield, tho the Sees of the Bishops, were not counted
Cities in the time of Edward the first nor long after; nor yet Ely, for it
appears by the Lists, that Mr. Prin has given us, that it never sent
Burgesses, but only once and that to a great Council till of late years. So
that the Sees of the Bishops was it seems no general rule to make Places
capable of sending, or not sending of Citizens to Parliament.

And in the next place as to Buroughs, that is pure Imagination, that none but
considerable or walled Towns sent any Burgesses at first; whereas in the first
List of returns, which Mr. Pryn has here given us of the 26th and 28th, of
Edward I. which are the first extant (for ought I know, except those of 23d,
which I have never yet seen) besides the Shire Towns of the Counties, there are
returns of a great many small Buroughs, which never had any Walls, nor yet
(for ought as we can find) had any thing remarkable to make them be pircht upon
to send Burgesses more than others; but of these I shall speak more by and by,
only shall remark this much, that there must have have been some other Rule
besides Montforts own Will, for all this; and what this rule could be, unless
an ancient Prescription in those Towns to send Members, I desire you or your
Dr. would show any good Reason, or Authority to the contrary.

And after the 23d of Edward the I. when Mr. Prin supposes that the Sheriffs by
this general Clause in the Writs began to take upon them, this new Authority of
sending Precepts to, and making Buroughs of what Towns they pleased; this
could not in the first place extend to such as were before that Counties of
themselves, such as London, York, Bristol, etc. nor yet such as were Ancient
and opulent Cities, such as Canterbury, Lincoln, Exeter, etc. who were not made
Cities by having Bishops Sees annoxt to them, but were such long before
Christianity was preached to the English Saxons, as I have already proved* nor
could this Power of the Sheriff extend to the Cinque Ports, whose Rights of
sending two Barons for each Port was sure very well known and settled in the
49th of Henry the 3d, as appears by these general Words at the foot of the
Writ, similiter mandatum est singulis Portubus pro se, without naming them in
particular; so that if it had not been sufficiently known what Ports were thus
to send, all the Sea Port Towns in England might have had Precepts sent them,
as well as the Cinque Ports; who had at first their Summons directed to the
Barons and Baylifts in general; nor is there any Writ found directed to the
Warden of the Cinque Ports to Summon each of them to send Burgesses, Ibid. p.
246.
till the 17th of Edward ad, as Mr. Prin here shows you, so that in all these
Elections and Returns (being above 20) the Sheriff could have no Power; and
therefore did not depend upon his good Will and Pleasure alone, as this Author
would have it.

But to come to that, which Mr. Prin chiefly insists on, viz. the putting in
and leaving out diverse of the smaller Buroughs in so many Kings Reigns, and
which he attributes wholly to the favor or partiality of the Sheriffs. I shall
first argue against the improbability of the Notion, and then shall Confute it
by plain proofs from Mr. Prin himself. First, It is not at all likely, that the
King should ever trust the Sheriff with this great Prerogative of making what,
or as many Buroughs as he pleased in a County: Since that could not be then
done without some particular Writ or Charter, for otherwise this had made the
Power of the Sheriffs more Arbitrary than that of the King himself, it he had
in those Reigns, you treat or, no other Rule to go by than his own humor,
passion, or interest^ nor would the King have ever endured such an Innovation,
since it would have been in the power of the Sheriff^ to have made as many
Buroughs as they pleased, and to have increased the House of Commons to an
unreasonable bulk, wineh was against all Rules of Policy for him to suffer.
Lastly, Neither would the House of Commons themselves have suffered this
Encroachment; for since most of the Cities and Buroughs of England sent
Members in Parliament before this Innovation of the Sheriffs began, they would
never have quiet^^ permitted new Men to be sent in among them from obscure
places they never heard of, without either turning them out themselves, or
complaining to the King in Parliament of so great an Abuse.


M. But what can you say against direct matter of fact? has not Mr. Prin here
plainly proved to you, that the Sheriffs did in those times exercise an
Arbitrary Power in this matter, Vide Parliam. Reg. Sect. 8.
returning some Towns out of ill will only, to charge them with Electing
Burgesses, to make them liable to the payment of wages to them, omitting others
also out of spite, as appears by this Petition of the Townsmen of St. Albans
you have now cited; a great many of which were so long omitted, that they came
at last to lose all right of sending any more, Ibid. 238.
till it came to be again revived of late years (as in the Case of diverse
Buroughs whose names Mr. Prin has here given us) who by Orders of the Long
Parliament in 1640. again sent Members to Parliament after some Ages
intermission. Pray now tell me what other satisfactory account can be given for
the making of so many new Buroughs, and omitting so many old ones, but the
Arbitrary power of the Sheriffs, who then took upon them to do what they
pleased in this matter, as appears by so many Instances he has here given us?


F. Well, since the improbability, (I may say impossibility of the thing) will
not satisfy you, I doubt not but to show you that though the Sheriffs might
sometimes abuse the trust committed to them in sending Precepts to the
Buroughs that were not liable to them, yet that for all this they never
exercised that Arbitrary Power you fancy of making and unmaking. what Buroughs
(and consequently as many Parliament Men) as they pleased. Now to prove this
from Mr. Prin's own Instances and Authorities, I shall reduce all the Causes of
this Abuse to these Heads: 1. The Favor, or Malice of the Sheriffs. 2. The
Ambition of the Neighboring Gentlemen who desired to get to be Elected at such
Buroughs. Or lastly, from the desire of those Towns themselves to get this
privilege among them of Electing and Returning Members to Parliament. To begin
with the first of these, it could never proceed from the Favor of Sheriffs to
such Towns, because the charge of wages to the Burgesses was then so great
(when two shillings a day was more than ten shillings is now) that they could
never look upon it as a favor to have this charge imposed upon them, unless it
were some few who were very large, and in a rich and flourishing condition, and
those always sent Burgesses to Parliament before the Sheriffs had this power
committed to them, as you supposed by that general Clause in the Writ of
sending Summons to the Cities, and Buroughs; nor could the Sheriffs (if they
would) have long continued to lay this burden upon any Town out of Malice; for
if such Towns could not afford this extraordinary Charge of sending Burgesses
to Parliament, they might have escaped it whenever they would, either by making
no Returns at all to their Precepts sent them, as Mr. Prin here shows in the
Lists he has given us of Returns, very many of them did; or else they might
have taken that Remedy against it, Ibid. p. 233.
which (as this here Author expressly acknowledges) diverse Towns did, who being
maliciously charged by the Sheriffs to send Burgesses, when both unwilling, and
unable; and who upon their refusal to Elect, returned Burgesses for them
against their wills, whereupon they complained to the King or Parliament of the
Abuse, and so were eased of this Charge and Trouble, or else eased themselves;
other Buroughs growing very poor, and unable to send Burgesses to Parliament,
and defray their Expenses, were thereupon discharged by the Sheriffs who made
special Returns in their Favor (and of these he gives you several Instances in
his Collection of Returns for the County of Bucks, Ibid. p. 233, 236.
or else for Poverty, as in the Case of Lancaster) others procured perpetual,
or else temporary Exemptions from the King, or the King and his Council from
sending Burgesses to future Parliaments; and upon some one, or more of these
Precedent grounds they quitted, waved, or lost their Ancient Privilege of
sending Burgesses, which they rather reputed a charge, burden, and oppression,
than an honor; and of this he gives as a remarkable Instance in Toriton in
Devonshire, Ibid. p. 239.
which after having Elected and Returned Burgesses to no less than thirty two
Parliaments, Rot. Pat. 42. E: 3. part 1. m. 8.

Ibid. p. 241.


yet in the 42d of Edward 3. upon their Petition to the King in Parliament
obtained a Patent to be exempted for ever, which he here gives us, as also a
temporary Exemption from King Richard the Second to the Town of Colchester for
five years in regard of their great Charge in building their Townwalls; which
shows that the Burgesses wages was then a great burden upon Towns though rich
and flourishing in Trade, as appears by Colchester, which was then able to Wall
their Town at their own Expense: And I could show you more such Exemptions as
these, were it not too tedious; and I doubt not but there were many more such
than what are entered upon the Rolls.

Now that we may apply what Mr. Prin has here said to our present purpose, it
is plain, that though the Sheriffs might sometimes oppress some Towns by sending
Precepts to them to Elect, which ought not have sent Members to Parliament at
all; yet that he could not make new Buroughs without the Inhabitants consent
is plain by his own showing, since they could be eased of that Charge whenever
they pleased: And I desire you, or any one self, to show me any City, or
considerable Town in England, that thus began first to send Citizens, or
Burgesses to Parliament by the Sheriffs Arbitrary Power; not but that some
Towns might complain of this Abuse of the Sheriffs without any just cause, as
in this Petition of Toriton now mentioned, Vide the Patent of Exemption, Parl.
Regist. part 2.
where they set forth, quod villa praedicta ad mittend. aliquos homines pro
dicta villa ad Parliamenta nostra onerari non debtat, nec aliquos homines
praedicta villa, ad Parliamenta nostra vel Progenitorum nostrorum miserit, nec
mittere consueverit ante annum Regni nostri vicesimum primum, etc. Now, though
this Petition was false in matter of fact, since it appears by the Returns that
they had sent Burgesses to Parliament long before, in the Reigns of Edward the
First and Second; yet the ground of their Petition was right, that they ought
not to send any Men to Parliament, unless they had been accustomed so to do in
the time of this King's Progenitors, which had been a vain Plea, if it had been
in the Sheriff's power (as of right) to have summoned what Towns they pleased
to Parliament, since then there could have been no Custom pleaded against it.

This being once granted by Mr. Prin, or proved from the nature of the thing,
we shall now come more particularly to give an account how several Towns might
come to be put in or lest out of the Sheriffs Lists of the Buroughs without
granting them this Arbitrary Power of making what Buroughs they pleased. Now
these 170 Cities and Towns Mr. Prin has given us, and which have had Precepts
sent them at any time, may be divided by him into these three ranks; the first
is of those (being nine in number) which he says never made any Returns to the
Precepts seen them, V. Parl. Regist. part 2. p. 224.
and so continue to send no Members to this day (except Christ-Church.) Now
these nine Towns either had a right to send Burgesses to Parliament in the
King's Reigns, in which they received those Precepts, or they had not; if they
had such a right, the Sheriff's did but their duty to send them Precepts as
well as to the rest of the Buroughs of the County, for sure they had some Rule
for doing it, more than their own private fancies, since the very Writs of
Summons (from whence you would deduce this power to the Sheriffs) only recite
a^ qualibet Civitate, etc. and de qualibet Burgo, etc. which had been mighty
uncertain if it had not been then very well known what Towns were then Cities,
and what Buroughs; and sure these nine Towns must have then been Buroughs (in
Reputation at least) or else they could never have had one, two, or more
Precepts sent them (as Mr. Prin here owns they had) and they might have had
many more such for ought we know, had all the Sheriffs Precepts, and the
Returns upon them been preserved, as most of them are lost, or mislaid, as I
shall show more at large by and by: Or if these Towns had no right at all to
send Burgesses to Parliament, it was not in the Sheriffs power to impose it
upon them, since they might have refused it if they pleased; and so take it
either way, nothing can be argued from the loss or omission of the Returns for
these Buroughs, that they either had, or had not any former right to Elect,
since this might happen from the negligence of the Bailiffs, or Constables of
the Town, or else from their own desire to be excused from the Charge. Thus in
the 28th of Edward I. the Sheriff returns that the Bailiffs of St. Albans had
made no Return of his Precept; Ibid. p. 201.
neither is there any Returns of such Precepts to this Borough all the Reign
of this King; does is therefore follow, that this Town had no more. Precepts
sent them in all his Reign, when I have showed you the contrary by the Writs of
Expenses in the 35th of Ed. I. or that they had no other right to appear in
Parliament as a Borough, but what the Sheriffs Precept first gave them, when
you see they claimed by their Petition to Ed. the 2d. to send Burgesses to
Parliament in the Reign of this King and his Progenitors.

The second Rank of Towns are such for which are found for some one, for some
three, and for others more Precepts, with Returns of Elections made thereupon,
and yet those that have made most Returns do not amount to during the Reigns of
Ed. 1, 2, and 3. Rich. 2. Henry's the 4th, 5th, and 6th, to above thirteen
Returns. Well, granting all this, will it therefore follow, that they had no
other right than the Sheriffs good will and pleasure; since if they had a
right, and were willing to preserve it, they might have petitioned the King in
Parlialiament against this Abuse of the Sheriffs? and if they were willing to
give up their right by reason of the great charge and trouble of sending their
Members, volenti non sit injuria, does it therefore follow that no others liad
any other right to Elect, but what the Sheriffs Precept gave them? only
forsooth, because no more Returns appear either in the loose Bundles of
Returns, or upon the Clause-Rolls; or that therefore there were never any more
Elections and Returns made than what Mr. Prin has here given us; which is a
very fallacious Argument, considering how imperfect those Bundles of Returns
are, out of which he has extracted them, a great many of the Precepts and
Returns being no doubt lost and broke off the Files in the removing of the
Records from one place to another; besides the whole Bundles of Returns of
several years in diverse Kings Reigns, that are quite lost, or so mislaid, that
no body can find them. And for the truth of this Appeal to Mr. Petyt, who
assures me he found the Returns of the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses to
Parliament of the 23d of Ed. I. in an old Chest in the Exchequer among other
things of a quite different nature, which Mr. Prin never saw, or else certainly
he would have given in the Returns to this Parliament, Parl. R^gist. part 1. p.
33.
as well as he does the Writs of Summons to it; and yet that even these were
not always entered upon the Clause-Rolls, but lay scattered up and down the
Chapel of the White-Tower; Mr. Prin himself confesses (in his Introduction to
his third part of his Parliamentary Register) that he found no less than ninety
five loose Original Writs for Elections and Returns of Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses to Parliaments and great Councils in the Reign of Ed. 3. which were
never entered on the Clause-Rolls, and lay there until he found them buried in
dust and rubbish, as well as oblivion in a confused Chaos scattered from each
other, and intermixed with many hundred thousands of other Writs and Records of
various kinds. Now what if these Writs and Returns had never been found? so
that by his own showing it is no ways certain that there were never any such
Writs issued, or Returns made for the Counties, Cities and Buroughs, than
those he had before sound and published; and he himself also here confesses,
that by reason of the negligence of Record-keepers, there are more Writs and
Returns of Elections extant from some Counties than for others, though all had
the like Writs sent them: And if this was so as to the Counties, it was
likewise so as to the Cities and Buroughs; the returns of which are commonly
endorsed on the back of the Precepts; and where they were not so endorsed, were
much more likely to be lost; and farther that the Clause Rolls are no exact
Rule, for the Summons of Knights or Barons of the Cinque Ports and Burgesses,
Parl. Regist. 3 d. Part. p. 243.
appears by Mr. Prins own showing, viz. That there are no Writs of Summons to
the Cinque Ports entered on the Clause Rolls; for most part of the Years of
Edward 1, 2, and 3d. in the List he has here given us of those Years; now if so
many considerable Buroughs, as the Cinque Buroughs, could be thus omitted,
what can we expect for most of the smaller, and most inconsiderable Buroughs
in England.

To conclude this Head, if by Mr. Prins own Consession, the Entries of
Elections, and Returns upon the Clause Rolls are so very imperfect; and that
the loose Bundles of Summons, Precepts and Returns are far more imperfect (so
many of them being lost) pray tell me, how can Mr. Prin or any one else can
frame any Argument from these that remain, that there were never no more
Precepts and Returns from any Buroughs than those he has published us.

But to come to his third Rank of Buroughs, viz. such as for whom their appear
no Precepts nor Returns till the Reigns of Edward the 2d. Edward the 3d. and
other succeeding Kings; Ibid. p. 227.
all which Buroughs he therefore supposes to have been all newly made in those
Kings Reigns, because there are no Precepts or Returns from them sooner; it
must there follow that the Sheriffs made all these Buroughs at their Pleasure;
but Mr. Prin has done well here to add, that they never elected or returned
any before, for ought he can find to the contrary, since it might appear to the
contrary (for ought he could tell) if the returns of the Sheriffs in the Reigns
of the former Kings had not been so many of them lost, since he here confesses,
there are no Original Writs and Returns for the Cinque Ports to be found before
the Reign of Edward the 3d, who yet sent Members to all Parliaments in former
King Reigns; or how can he tell, but diverse of these Towns might have been
created Buroughs by the Kings special Writs or Charters tho now lost; or
perhaps unknown to this Author, who could not be supposed to understand the
Original of all the Buroughs in England their sending Members to Parliament;
but that he is certainly mistaken in making several Buroughs to have been but
new, because no Returns are to be found from them before the Reign of Edward
the 2d, may appear by these, for Example, First, Litchfield which was long
before that time a Bishops See; and sure then if not a City, yet an ancient and
considerable Borough. Secondly, Old Sarum, which was in the Reign of Henry the
3d, a Bishops See (till it was removed) and so consequently by your Rule New
Sarum, ought to pass for a City, and if not, was certainly a very ancient
Borough; and as such sends Burgesses by Prescription to this day, tho the Town
be quite destroyed; the like I may say of Gatton in Surrey, which tho Mr. Prin
will have but to be a new Borough, because no Returns appears to have been
made for it, by the Sheriffs till the Reigns of Henry the 6th, yet this is no
certain Rule; since it was a very old Borough and had anciently been so
Considerable as that we find several great Councils held at it in the Saxon
Times; tho it be certainly now reduced to a small Hamlet of half a score
Houses; now I will leave it to your self to judge, whether the Sheriff, would
have pitched upon so small and inconsiderable a place as this, to make a
Borough of, had it never sent any Burgesses to Parliament before that Time.
And I doubt not, but those Gentlemen that know the rest of the Towns, he has
there mentioned with Gatton; could say as much for the Antiquity as Buroughs,
if you please to inquire about them.

But I have held you too long upon this Head, and therefore shall proceed to
those two that remains, viz. The Ambition of Neighboring Gentlemen to make as
many Buroughs as they could, that they might be chosen at them; and the desire
of such Towns to be made Buroughs to receive the advantages of the Money spent
among them at such Elections; the first of these in the Times we are now
speaking of, could be no cause of their sending Members to Parliament; since it
is certain that before the Reign of Henry the 8th, none were Elected for any
City or Town, but Persons free of, or actually Resident in such Cities and
Buroughs, as appears by the Statute of 1 Henry the 5th, which does but recite
and confirm this ancient Custom, so that this Trick of choosing Members for Bee^
and Ale, has been introduced but of late Ages, viz. Since the time of Henry the
8th, when Gentlemen began first to be chosen for Cities and Buroughs; and if
that is so, the last cause falls off it self, viz. the desire of such small
Towns to Elect, since if they could get nothing, but rather loose by their
sending Burgesses to Parliament, and paying them their Wages (as they must do
as long as they chose from among themselves) it is unreasonable to believe,
that they ever should desire this as a Privilege; and therefore it is only,
since the neglect of this good old Law for Wages, that so many Buroughs (which
Mr. Prin here mentions to have had Precepts again sent them of late Years to
Elect Members after some Ages Intermission) desired to have this Privilege
renewed to them; as was done in the Case of those Buroughs he here mentions;
which yet certainly had been very gross, Ibid. p. 238.
and contrary to all common Right, if the House of Commons had not then
believed those Buroughs to have a had higher Right by Prescription than the
Sheriffs Precepts gave them; as for the last Rank, viz. those Buroughs created
by the Writs or Charters of our Kings, I need say but little, since this Author
here grants such Creations to have been good before the Statute of 5th of
Richard the 2d, but not since tho I cannot see any Reason for it; why he should
give the Sheriffs such Power of making new Buroughs after this Statute, in the
time of Henry 6th, as he does in the Case of Gatton, and those other Buroughs
he there mentions with it; and yet deny this King the like Prerogative. But yet
for all this, as I will not say there were none; so are there but very few
Examples of Charters, that conferr upon any City, or Borough a Power to send
Members to Parliament, who had it not before by Prescription, tho I grant that
Privilege may be mentioned in the Charter, and so put it in the Power of the
Major, and Aldermen to Elect for the future, when it was the whole Populace, or
all the Inhabitants of that Town that were to Elect before.

But to show you from the very Statutes themselves, that Mr. Prin has here
cited, that the Right of the Cities and Buroughs to appear in Parliament, was
not anciently looked upon to have had no other Original then the Favor of the
Sheriffs. Pray read these Clauses of the Statutes he has here quoted; P. 240,
241.
the first is that memorable Statute of the 5th of Richard 2d. 2d. Parl. c. 5.
(now mentioned, and which I have already cited) which expressly Enacts, That
all, and singular Persons and Commonalties which from henceforth shall for time
to come have Summons of Parliament shall come from henceforth as before to
Parliaments, in the manner as they be bound to do; and has been accustomed
within the Realm of England of old time, and whatever Person of the said Realm;
which from henceforth shall have the said Summons (be he Archbishop, Bishop,
Abbot, Prior, Duke, Earl, Baron, Banneret, Knight of Shire, Citizen of City,
Burgess of Burgh, or other singular Person or Commonalty) do absent himself and
come not at the said Summons, (except he may reasonably, and lawfully excuse
himself to our Sovereign Lord the King) he shall be amerced, and otherwise
punished according as of old times has been used to be done within the said
Realm in the said Case; and if any Sheriff of the Realm be henceforth negligent
in making his returns of the Writs of the Parliaments, or that he shall leave
out of the said Returns any Cities, or Buroughs which be bound, and of old
Times were wont to come to Parliament, he shall be punished in the manner as
was accustomed to be done in the said Case of Old Time, in the French ( d'
Anciente) From which Statute we may draw these Conclusions. First, That the
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses; are as supposed by this Statute to have a like
Right to have Summons to Parliaments as has been accustomed of Old Time, as
well as the Lords, Spiritual and Temporal here mentioned. Secondly, That by
these Words have been accust^med of Old Time (or d' Anciente) we are to
understand a general Custom of the Realm; Time out of Mind, that is by
Prescription; so that if the Bishops, Abbott, and Temporal Lords, are here
acknowledged to have had a Right to sit in Parliament by Prescription; so have
the Commons likewise by the same Words equally applied to all the Orders here
mentioned; Lastly, That if the Sheriffs shall neglect in making Return to any
such Cities and Buroughs, which were thus bound to come to the Parliament of
Old Time, he shall be punished, as has been accustomed to be done in all time
past (or d' Anciente) now pray tell with what color of Justice, the Sheriffs
could be thus punished, if there had been no certain rule to know what C^ties
and Borough were bound to come to Parliament of Old Time, but it had been
wholly left at the Sheriffs Discretion, which they should Summons, and which
they would omit; let us next compare this with the Statute of 23d of Henry 6th,
c. 15. (which Mr. Prin has here also given us) reciting, That diverse Sheriffs
of Counties have sometimes returned none of the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses
lawfully chosen to come to the Parliaments; but such Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses have been returned; which were never duly chosen, and other Citizens
and Burgesses than those which by the Mayors and Bailiffs were to the said
Sheriffs returned, and moreover by no Precepts to the Mayors, and Bailifts, or
to the Bailiff or Baili^^i, where no Mayor is, for the Electing of Citizens and
Burgesses to come to the Parliament; and then appoints the Penalties, for the
said abuses and neglects.

Now pray let me ask you, whether this bare Abuse of the Sheriffs, and neglect
of the duty of their Office here condemned by this Statute (and for which the
former Statute of Richard II. declares them punishable at Common law, (as this
Act makes them liable to it by Statute Law) could give them such an Arbitrary
Power, as this Author fancies. much less can serve to corroborate his Opinion
(as he here supposes it does) concerning the true original, continuance,
discontinuance, reviving and antiquating Parliamentary Cities and Buroughs,
not by Charters, and Patents from the King, or Prescription time out of mind,
but by the Sheriffs Arbitrary Power and Returns, by the forecited general
Clauses in the Writs?

But since I confess I have dwelt too long on my Answer to Mr. Prin's
Arguments, I shall conclude with only giving you one Record, which I hope will
sufficiently satisfy you, that not only St. Albans, but several other Ancient
Buroughs claimed to send Burgesses to Parliament by Prescription, which
appears by a Writ or Commission, reciting a Pe^ition of the Town of Barnstaple
to King Edward the Third, and his Council in Parliament, which is to be found
in the Patent-Rolls of the 17th of this King, Part. 1. m. 20. dorso.
seting forth that the said Town had been a Free Borough a tempore c^jus
contrarii memoria non exis^it; and as such enjoyed diverse Liberties, and Free
Customs by a Charter of King Athelstan, and this among others, ac quod ad
singula Parliamenta n^stra, and dictorum Antecessorum nostrorum, (among which
the said King Athelstan must certainly be reckoned for one) duos Burgenses pro
Communitate ejusdem Burgi mittere solebant; and therefore that Charter being
lost, they desire a Confirmation of it from the King, whereupon He by this
Commission directs a Writ of Enquiry to several Gentlemen and others therein
mentioned, to enquire if the said Burgesses had enjoyed all those Liberties so
granted by the said Charter of King Athelstan, or not; which would have been
ridiculous if the King and Council had been satisfied that no Cities and
Burrough^ sent any Members to Parliament under the Saxon Kings, and not before
the 49th of Henry the Third; and this Authority is the more remarkable, because
Bar^staple is one of Mr. Prin's Modern Buroughs, for which he can find no
Precepts or Returns earlier than the 26th of Edward the Third, though, no doubt,
(as appears by this their Petition) in the 17th of this King, it had sent
Burgesses to Parliament many Ages before, though the Precepts and Returns upon
them be all lost. And that not only the Cities and Buroughs do thus claim by
prescription, but that the Knights of Shires have always claimed the same
Privilege, may appear by another Petition of the Commons House extant on the
Parliament-Rolls of the 51th of Edward the Third, M. 5. n. 45.
which I shall contract and put into English out of French, reciting thus,
because of Common Right (in the Roll de Commune d^oit) of the Realm there are,
and shall be Elected two from every County of England to come to Parliament for
the Commune of the said Counties: And also the Prelates Dukes, Barons, Counts
Barons, and such as hold by Barony, which are, and shall be summoned by Writs
to come to Parliament, except the Cities and Buroughs who ought to Elect from
among themselves such as ought to answer for them.

Whence we may conclude, that the Commons then claimed to come to Parliament of
Common Right, (that is, by Common Law, or general Custom of the Realm, time out
of mind) as much as the Bishops, Abbots and great Lords. 2. That neither the
Bishops, Lords, nor Tenants in Capite had any Authority to impose Taxes, or
make Laws for the Commons of the Counties, or these for the Cities and
Buroughs, without their consents, because they had each of them
Representatives of their own Order to answer for them in Parliament.


M. I must confess this would have been absolutely convincing, could we have
seen this Charter of K. Athelstans; but since the Townsmen of Barnstaple do
only in their Petition (among others) set forth this privilege of sending
Burgesses to Parliament; now who can tell whether there was any such thing in
their Charter or not, since they confess they had lost it? Or granting it was
as they set forth, yet is will sufficiently evince that the right of Cities and
Buroughs to send their Representatives to Parliaments, was not, as you
suppose, as ancient as the Government, but had its Original from the Grants and
Charters of former Kings.


F. As to these Objections, we can have but all the proof that this Subject is
capable of at such a distance of time; but if I were a Jury-man in this matter
I should rather believe that the Town of Barnstaple had such Charter not long
before they made this Petition to King Edward the Third; and that there was
such Clause therein as they here set forth, than that these Townsmen should be
so impudent as to desire a new Charter of Confirmation from him of all their
privileges (of which this of Electing Burgesses was one) if there had never
been any such Clause in it at all. But as for the other Objection, that if it
were so, then it appears that all the right of Cities and Buroughs sending
Members to Parliament, is derived from the Grants and Charters of former Kings,
it is very fallacious; as you will find if you consider and compare the Ancient
right of the Bishops, and Abbots; as also of all the Temporal Nobility to come
to the great Council of the Kingdom, which as to the first of them I proved to
be as Ancient as Christianity it self, among the English Saxons: And as for the
Priesthood and Nobility in general, to have been as old as the Institution of
the Government it self. Now, though you grant that long before the Conquest our
Kings had the nomination of Bishops, and Abbots, and also the making of
Aldermen, Earls and Thanes, who made the Temporal Nobility in those great
Councils; will it therefore follow that because our Kings were thus entrusted
by the people with this prerogative of naming and investing Bishops and Abbots
per Annulum and Baculum, and also of creating those great Men now mentioned,
that therefore all the right either Order had to appear at those Councils, not
only proceeded from, but depended wholly on the King's good will and pleasure;
and that he could have chosen whether he would have named any Bishops, or
Abbots to vacant Sees, and Abbeys, or made any Aldermen, Earls, and Thanes, or
not, but have changed the whole frame of the Government into an Absolute
Despotick Monarchy, by destroying the great Council of the Kingdom; whether you
believe the Clergy, Nobility and People would have suffered any of those Kings
to have made such an Innovation? Apply this to the right of the most of Ancient
Cities and Buroughs in England; and see if it do not exactly agree with this
parallel Case of the Bishops, Abbots, and Temporal Nobility; since as there
were Priests and Nobles, who from the very first Institution of our great
Councils did not owe their Original to the King, but brought it with them out
of Germany, and to whose Suffrages the first Saxon Kings owed their Elections;
so no doub^ were there diverse Cities and Towns in England so considerable from
the time of the Expulsion of the Britains, that it was thought ^it to pitch
upon them as most able to send Representatives to the great Councils of the
Nation, that so they might imitate their old Government in their own Country,
in which the great Cities and Towns had always a considerable share, as they
have in the German Diets to this day; though the King might then (as he is now)
be entrusted with the Prerogative of making new Cities and Buroughs with like
privilege, with the old ones; though this was but rarely practiced till the
Reign of King James I. The two Universities, being some of the first
Corporations on which he conferred this privilege by Charter, of Electing and
sending two Burgesses to Parliament; which power has, I confess, been exercised
even to a grievance in the Reigns of his Son, and Grand-sons; so that it were
to be wished, that there was a Law passed, that no New City or Borough should
be made for the future without an express Act of Parliament.

Now I would very gladly hear what you can further say to so many weighty
Authorities, which I have now given you; for evident it is, that if they are
compared and considered in series of time, that neither Edw. 2d or 3d, nor
their Judges or Learned Council, no nor the Parliaments of their, and
succeeding times, had ever heard any thing of Dr. Brady's Annus Mirabilis, or
49th of Henry 3d. which was but 43 years before the Reign of Edward 2. his
Grandchild, and little above 60 years before that of Edward his great
Grandson.


M. Well, notwithstanding all this, whosoever will reflect upon what the Doctor
has writ, may suspect that the Judges (nay Parliaments) were very ignorant in
the History of this Nation, B.A.P. p. 13.
or that they spoke out of design. And it is a great Argument that the Lawyers
studied and knew only Popular and Lucrative Law, and not the Constitutions of
the Nation before their own time. And though I must confess what you have now
said may seem to me to carry some weight with it; yet since I do not easily
change my Opinion, upon the first hearing of a new Argument, or Authority; give
leave better to consider what you have said; but in the mean time, since you
have now mentioned the German Dyets, pray Sir, before we leave off, show me
what you undertook to prove at the first entrance on this Subject; viz. that in
all the great Councils, or Assemblies of Estates in Europe, which are derived
from the Germans and Goths, there are found Representatives for the Plebeians
or Commons distinct from the Clergy, and greater, and lesser Nobility.


F. I readily agree to your desires; but since my own Notes concerning this
matter are very long, and that I have them not about me, pray give me leave to
make use of the Authority of Dr. Heylin an Author, you have no reason to look
upon a^ partial, since he was not only remarkable for his great skill in
History, but also (as being a great Friend and Disciple to Sir Robert ^ilmer in
Politics) was a vehement assertor of Absolute Monarchy, and an utter Enemy to
the Power of Parliaments; yet this very person in his Treatise called, The
Stumbling of Disobedience and Rebellion, etc. printed 1658. in his 5th Chapter
(I have already quoted for the Inferior Clergy's being anciently a part of the
great Council or Parliament of the Kingdom) proves the Uniformity of the three
Estates to have been the same in all the Christian Kingdoms on this side of
Europe, he runs thorough them all, beginning with Germany; which I shall
contract, because he there says a great many other things not so material to
our present purpose.

And first beginning (as of right) with the German Empire, Thuanus gives this
Note in general, August. Thuan. hist. lib. 2.
Imperium in tria omnino membra dividitur, that the Empire is divided into
three Estates, over all which the* Emperor is the Head or Supreme Prince. Of
these the first Estate is ex sacro Ordine, of the holy Hierarchy, composed of
the three Spiritual Electors, together with the residue of the Arch bishops and
Bishops, and many Abbots, Priors, and other Prelates. The second is of the
Nobility consisting of the three Temporal Electors, the Dukes, Marquesses,
Lan^graves, B^tgraves, Earls and Barons, of which there is no determinate
number; the Emperor having power to add daily to them, as he sees occasion. The
third Estate is of the free or Imperial Cities, in number sixty, or
thereabouts, who repres^^t themselves at the General Di^ts, by such
Commissioners or Deputies as are authorized to that purpose.

Next pass we over into France, and there we find the Subjects marshalled into
three Estates, whereof the Clergy is the first. Rex coactis tribus Ordinibas,
Sacerdotio, Nobilitate, Plebe, subsidia rei pecuniariae petiit. So Paulus
Aemilius does inform us: Out of these three are chosen certain Delegates or
Commissioners, some for each Estate, as often as the King's occasions do
require their meeting, the time and place whereof is absolutely left unto his
disposing; and these thus me: do make up the Conventus Ordinum, or L' Assembly
des Estats, as the French men call it, in form much like the English
Parliament; [and of the meeting of these three Estates, not only this Author,
but all the other French Historians; and in particular Phil. de Commines make
frequent mention.]

Pass we next over the Pyren^^s, to the Realms of Spain, and we shall find in
each the same three Estates, whose meeting they call there by the name of
Curia. Bodin. de Repub. lib. 3.
the Court, (...), by way of eminency; consisting of the Clergy the Nobility,
and the Commisioners of the Provinces and most Ancient Cities. For proof of
which we need but look into the General History of Spain translated out of
French by Grimston, and we shall find a Court of Parliament for the Realm of
Aragon, consisting of the Bishops, Nobles, and Deputies of Towns and
Commonalties, having place in the said Estates convened by K. James at
Saragassa Anno 1325. for settling the Succession, Genesis Hist. of Spain. l. 14.
and declaring the right Heir. Also for Castile, we find a Parliament of Lords,
Prelates, and Deputies of Towns summoned at Toledo by Alfonso the Noble, Anno
1210. upon occasion of an Invasion made by the Moors; Id. lib. 10.
another before that at Burgos, under the same King, Anno 1179. for levying of
Money on the People to maintain the Wars: Also that great Convention of the
States held at Toledo by Ferdinand the Catholic 1479. for swearing to the
Succession of his Son Don John, Id. lib.
in which the Prelates, the Nobility, and almost all the Towns and Cities which
sent Comissioners to the Assembl^, are expressly named. Thus finally do we find
a Meeting of the Deputies of the three Estates of Navarre at the Town of
Tosalla, Anno 1481. for preserving the Kingdom in obedience to King Francis
Pl^eo^s, being then a Minor, under age: Id. lib. 22.
and for Portugal that the Deputies of the Clergy, Nobility, Provinces and good
Towns of Portugal, assembled at Toma^a, Anno 15^1. to acknowledge Philip the
second for their King, Id. lib. 30.
and to settle the Government of that Kingdom for the times to come.

Now let us take a view of the Northern Kingdoms, and still we find the People
ranked in the self same manner, and their great Councels to consist of the
Clergy, the Nobility, and certain Deputies, sent from the Provinces and Cities,
as in those before. In Hungary, before that Realm received the Gospel,
Bonfinius in hist. Hungar. Dec. l. 1.
we read of none but Nobiles and Plebeii, the Nobility and common People who
did concur to the Election of their Kings; but no sooner was the Faith of
Christ admitted, and a Clergy instituted, but instantly we find a third Estate,
Episcopos and Sacerdotum Collegia, Id. ibid. Dec. 2. l. 2. Id. Decad. 2. l. 3.
Bishops and others of the Clergy super added to them, for the Election of the
Kings, and the dispatch of other businesses which concerned the public, as it
continues to this day. In Danemark we shall find the same, if we mark it well.
For though Pontanus seem to count upon five Estates, making the Regal Family to
be the first, Pontan in Doriae discript. Id. in histor. Rerum Danic. l. 7.
and subdividing the Commons into two, whereof the Yeomanry makes one, and the
Trades man or Ci^izen the other: yet in the body of the History we find only
three, which are the Bishops, the Nobility, and Civitatum delegati, the
Deputies or Commissioners of Towns and Cities: For Sweden, it comes near the
Government and forms of Danemark, and has the same Estates and degrees of
People as amongst the Danes, that is to say, Proceres and Nobiles, the greater
and the less Nobility, Episcopi and Ecclesiastici, the Bishops and inferior
Clergy, Civitates and Vniversitates, the Cities and Towns Corporate (for so I
think he means by Vniversitates) as T^uanus mustereth them. Id. lib. 131.
[To which we may also add (tho here omitted by this Author) the Delegates of
the Rusticks or Husbandmen, who make a fourth Estate in the Assembly of Estates
of this Kingdom.] And in this Realm the Bishops and Clergy enjoy the place and
privileges of the third Estate (notwithstanding the Alteration of Religion) to
this very day; the Bishops in their own Persons, and a certain number of the
Clergy out of every Sochen (a Division like our Rural Deanries) in the name of
the rest, having a necessary Vote in all their Parliaments. [And this Swedish
great Council is the more remarkable* because it comes very near our
Constitution in England, in which I proved the Inferior Clergy; and the Commons
(not excepting the meanest Freeholders) anciently had their Representatives.

So that it had been the strangest thing that could have been observed in all
the Political Constitutio^s on this side of Europe, if that of England, tho
descended from the same Gothic Original; and founded according to the same
model should have had no Representatives for the Commons or Plebians in their
great Councils, or Parliaments. The Dr. here concludes with Scotland and
England, the former of which since you agree to have had from all times,
Citizens and Burgesses in their great Councils or Parliaments, I need not
repeat what is there, since it is no more than what you your self have granted;
and as for England he owns, (as appears by the Passages I have already cited
out of this Chapter, Page 193.
) that the Clergy, Nobility and People were called to a Parliament held under
Henry the ad. at Clerk^nwell.


M I will not deny, but there were Representatives of the Cities, and great
Towns in the great Councils or Assembly of Estates of all those Kingdoms you
have now mentioned out of Dr. Heylins Treatise; yet whether they were there
from the very first Institution of those Governments is much to be doubted. But
since I have not now leisure to inquire into the Original of all these
Kingdoms; nor at what time each State began to come to these great Councils;
give me leave in the mean time to remark, that all these Kingdoms (except
Sweden) came nearer to that Constitution; which we suppose to have been
anciently in England, and Scotland, and also other Kingdoms where feudatory
Tenures were observed, and consequently none but the Chief Lords or Barons by
Knights Service, B. A. P. p. 96.
and that held of the King; so that all those Foreign Councils, or Dye^s, etc.
at first were all the same, as consisting of Emperors or Kings with their
Earls, and Barons, Bishops, and great Officers, as is evident from all the old
German, and French Authors, and since Cities sent Deputies in Germany, and
Italy, Vi. Recoldus Discursus Polit. p. 126.
they were only from Imperial Cities; the like I believe would be found in
France, and those other Kingdoms you have now mentioned; but you cannot show
me, (unless in Sweden) any Representatives elected by the Common People, or
Rusticks distinct from the Nobility and Gentry; like our Knights of Shires in
England. So that I still doubt, whether all the Representatives of the great
Lords, and other Nobility that appeared in the Councils of these Kingdoms were
not all Tenants in Capite and no other.


F. That this is a mere surmise of yours, I think I can easily prove; for in
the first place, as for the Bishops, Abbots, and Clergy, who still made the
first Estates in all these Kingdoms; nothing is more certain, than that they
never any of them held of the King by Knights Service, and therefore could not
(...) in their great Councils by that Tenure* that Institution being for ought
as I know peculiar to England, and introduced by your Conqueror, as you your
self acknowledge; and as for the Temporal Nobility, you will find, that in
France not only those Noblemen, that held of the King by Military Service, but
those who held in libero Alodio without any such Service, at all, had places,
either by themselves or their Deputies in the Assembly of the Estates, so
likewise for the Cities and Towns that sent Deputies to it: I believe you will
not find that any of them held of the King in Capite: and to come to Germany;
you are likewise as much mistaken in fancying, that all the Imperial Cities
were Subject immediately to the Emperor before they became so; for Hamburgh and
Lubec were Subject to their own Princes, the former to the Duke of Holstein and
Sleswic, and the latter to Earls of its own; till at last they either purchased
their Liberties they enjoy from their Princes; or else cast them off and were
after received into the Body of the Diet by the Bulls or Charters of several
Emperors; Vi. I. Angel. We^denhagen de Rebus Hans^aticis, cap. 2. p. 30.
and so likewise Brunswick was always a f^^e City, till it was united to the
Empire by its own Consent: I could show you the like of several other Cities,
now called Imperial, who held anciently not of the Emperor, but either of
their own Earls, or Bishops, tho I grant it was the Charters of the Emperor
with the Consent of the Diet, that gave them a place in those Assemblies: and
tho it is true, that in all the rest of these Kingdoms, the mere Rusticks or
Paisants have no Representatives in their great Councils; yet this makes no
Alteration in the Case, if you please to consider it, for the Nobility and
Gentry are the only true and proper owners of the Lands, of those Kingdoms, all
the Rusticks or Paisants being mere Vassals, and in France almost Slaves to
their Nobility, and Gentry who (as I have already said) had all alike Votes in
their Assembly of Estates, as well those who held of the King in Chief by
Knights Service, as those that did not; whereas it was always far otherwise in
England, where the meanest Freeholder was always as free as to his Person, and
Estate as the greatest Lord of whom he held, and hence it is, that we have had
from all Times those of the degree of Yeomen, so peculiar to England, as
Fortiscut in his Treatise de Laudibus Legum Angliae, takes notice, who if they
lived on their own Lands, had no more dependence on the Noblemen, and Gentlemen
than they have now; and therefore it was but Reason, that these should have
their Representatives in Parliament; as well as the Inhabitants of the Cities
and Buroughs, who had most of them a far less share in the Riches; and real
Estates of the Kingdom. Secondly, Pray take notice, that in the rest of the
Kingdoms of Europe, except England and Scotland, there was no difference in
Point of Privileges as to being taxed, or having Voices in the great Council
of the Kingdom between the higher Nobility; such as had the Titles of Dukes,
Marquesses, and Counts; and simple Gentlemen, whereas in England it has been
always otherwise (at least since the Conquest) and the Earls, and Barons, had
by (...) Tenures Places, as Lords or Peers in the great Council of the Kingdom,
and so made a distinct Body from the rest of the People; whereas in other
Countries, the higher Nobility and Gentry are reckoned as all one Estate, and
therefore it was but Reason, that the rest of the Inferior Nobility or Gentry
should have their Representatives in this great Council or Parliament, or
otherwise they would have been as very Vassals as to their Estates, to the
great Barons, and Tenants in Capite, as the Boors in Germany, or the Paisants
in France were to their Lords, by whom they were taxed a^ their Pleasures;
which they never were in England, as we can find either from History or
Records. So that tho I grant that it is the municipal Laws of each Kingdom, or
Nation, that must determine what are the governing part of the People in those
Countries; yet tho that was not absolutely the same in all of them as it is in
England, yet we find it so in the main; and the Representatives of the Cities
and Towns do sufficiently assert the Right of the Plebians or Common People,
who make the 3d Estate in those great Councils. But I must here except Sweden
in which it is certain that the mere Rusticks or Boors had always their own
Deputies in their Dyets, as well as the Cities and Towns; and if Sweden had
this privilege, I cannot see why the English Gentry, and Yeomanry (who make
but one body of Commons) might not have had the like, till you can show me more
sufficient proofs to the contrary.


M Well Si^, I shall consider of what you say, but since it grows late, that we
may wind up this Conversation as fast as we can, give me leave to tell you,
that though I should admit all that you have hitherto averred for truth, and that
we should grant the Commons of England to have been as ancient a part of the
great Council, or Parliaments, as any of the other two; what is that to the
main Point in question between us. viz that of Non-resis^ance of the King upon
any account whatsoever? or how can you justsfie those of the Clergy, Nobility,
and Gentry of the Church of England, for taking up Arms against the King, and
contributing so much as they have done to the driving him away and in bringing
things to this confusion they are now in? since, let your Constitution of great
Councils and Parliaments be never so ancient, let us also for once suppose them
(as you do) to have a share in the Legislative Power of the Nation, yet how can
this authorize them (much less any private persons out of Parliament) to take
up Arms against the King, or those commissioned by him, since the whole
current, both of Common as well as Statute Law runs directly against you, and
all with one consent assert that the disposal of the Militia, or Military Force
of the Kingdom has been even so absolutely in the King's power, and at his
disposal, that no man can without being guilty of Treason, take up Arms
(whether offensive or defensive) without his Commission to authorize him to do
it; so that no Government in the World is more averse to all forcible
Resistance than our own, the King having been even from your time beyond memory
so fully possessed of the whole Militia, or power of raising offensive or
defensive Arms in this Kingdom, that it is expressly forbid by the Statute of
the 7th Ed. I. against coming to Parliaments and Treatises with force of Arms,
in which the King sets forth, That in the last Parliament the Prelates Earls,
Barons, and the Commonalry ( in Latin Communitas or Body of the Realm) have
said that to us, (i e. to the King) it belongs, and our part it is through
our Royal Seign^ury to defend (that is, in old French, to forbid) force of
Armor, and all other force against our Peace, at all times when it shall
please us, and to punish them according to our Laws and Vsages of our Realm,
and hereunto they are bound to Aid us as their Sovereign Lord as often as need
shall be. From whence you may observe, that it is the King's Prerogative to
forbid all manner of Arms or Armed force within the Realm; so that no man can
lawfully Arm himself without his Authority: And this is further confirmed by
the Statute of 25 Ed. the Third, concerning Treasons, wherein it is declared
(without any excepted Cases to the contrary) That to Levy War against our Lord
the King in this Realm, or to be adherent to the King's Enemies in his Realm,
giving them Aid or Comfort in the Realm, or elsewhere, is Treason. And Sir
Edward Coke upon this Statute says thus, That this was High Treason before by
the Common Law, for no Subject can Levy War within the Realm without Authority
from the King; and if any man Levy War to expulse Strangers, to deliver men out
of Prisons, to remove wicked Counselors, or against any Statute, or to any
other End, pretending Reformation on their own heads without Warrant, this is
Levying of War against the King, because they take upon them Royal Authority.
From which Statute, as also from your own Oracles (Sir Ed. Coke's)
Interpretation of it, you may observe that it is not only Treas^n to make War
against the King's Person, but to take Arms to make any Reformation or
Alteration in Church, or State, without the King's Authority; nor can any
Subject of England justify the taking Arms upon any account whatsoever, unless
it be by the King's Commission; and therefore all the Judges of England in the
Case of Dr. Story, Vide Dyer's Reports.
who was Executed for Treason in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, did with one
consent agree, that the very Consultation concerning making War against the
Queen, shall be interpreted a making War against her Person, and supposes a
design against her Life: So that nothing seems plainer to me, than that by the
Ancient as well as Modern Laws of England, all defensive as well as offensive
Arms are expressly forbidden and condemned.


F. I think I shall be able to make out, notwithstanding what you have now
said, that all Resistance of the King, or those commissioned by ^im, is so far
from being Treason, as you suppose, that it is every man's duty to oppose him in
case he goes about to set up, instead of a Legal Monarchy, a Tyrannical
Arbitrary Power in this Nation, since this is but to preserve the Original
Constitution of Parliaments, which in some cases cannot be maintained without
such a Resistance be allowed. But to proceed to the Authorities you bring from
our Statutes; as for the first, you urge from that 7th Edward the First; I
think that can by no means do the business for which you design it; for in the
first place, this is only Declaration of the Bishops, Lords and Commons of the
Land, that it belongs to the King to defend ( i. e. forbid) all force of Arms;
but mark Sir, what force? sure it is only meant of such Force as belongs to the
King's Prerogative to forbid; viz. force of Arms against the Public Peace, and
such as he might punish according to the Laws and Usages of the Realm; and
therefore the Statute expressly declares* that (as Subjects) they are hereunto
bound Aid him their Sovereign Lord the King at all times when need shall be;
but does this Act any where say, that he has an Irresistible Power to disturb
this Peace by his own private Illegal Commissions, or that any men are bound to
assist him in it; or because (for example) he has Authority to punish all men
according to Law that shall come to Parliaments with force of Arms, that
therefore he has an unlimited power of raising what Forces he would, and in
prisoning or destroying the whole Parliament if he pleased, and that no bod^
might resist him, if he had gone about so to do. The like may be said, if the
(...) should notoriously, and insupportably by force invade all the Civil
Liber^^^^ and Properties of his Subjects by Levying Taxes, and taking away
the^r Estates by downright Force, contrary to Law, now can any body in his
senses believe that the Act of 25th of Ed. 3. was made to prevent all
Resistance of such Tyrannical Violence and that the Resistance of those Forces
(whether foreign or domestic) that might be sent by the King's private
Commissioners to murder or enslave us, is making War against his Person, or
that it comes within any of the Cases expressed in that Statute, and therefore
cannot fall within the compass of Sir Edw. Coke's Comment upon this Sta^ute,
all the offenses therein specified being Treas^ns at Common Law before that
Statute was made; nor is the Reformation there mentioned, to be understood of a
just and necessary Defense of our Lives, Liberties, Religion, and Properties,
as settled and established by the Laws of the Land, to be looked upon as making
War against a weak or seduced King, but is rather in defense of him, and the
Government, by opposing Tyranny, which will certainly bring both him and us to
Ruin at last; so the Reformation he there mentions is only to be be understood
of such Insurrections and Rebellions as have been made under the mere pretense
of Religion, or obtaining greater Liberties for the common sort of People than
they had by the Law of the Land, such as were the Rebellions of Wat Tyler in
King Richard the Second, and Mortimers in H^^ry the 6th Reigns, not to mention
the other Rebellions raised by the Papists in the times of King Henry the
Eighth, Edward the Sixth, and Queen Elizabeth's Reigns; all which being begun
by Seditious or Superstitious men, were certainly rank Rebellions, and so are
and ought to be esteemed by all good Subjects.


M. I grant these pretenses seem very fair and specious, yet notwithstanding
this your pretended right, or a necessity of Resistance of the King, or those
commissioned by him in case of Tyranny, has been still looked upon as Rebellion
in all Ages, and the Actors dealt with accordingly where ever they were taken.


F. I do not deny but as long as Arbitrary and Tyrannical Princes could get the
better of it, and keep the Power in their own hands, they still Executed for
Traitors whosoever opposed or resisted their wicked and unjust Actions, though
they were never so near Relations to them; thus both Edward and Richard the
Second put their Uncles the Dukes of Lancaster and Gloucester to death merely
because they joined with the rest of the Nobility and People to prevent their
designs. So that it is not the Execution of the Man, but the Cause that makes
the Traitor, since Princes are seldom without a sufficient number of Judges and
Jurymen to condemn whomsoever they please to fall upon.

But that the Clergy, Nobility and People of England have always asserted this
right of Self-defence in case their Liberties and Properties were uniustly
invaded by the Tyrannical or Arbitrary Practices of the King, or those about
him; I think I can prove by giving you the History of it in so many Kings since
your Conquest, as will render it indisputable, if you please to give me now the
hearing, or else to defer it till the next time we meet.


M. I confess I was so weary of sitting up so long at our last Conversation,
that I made a Resolution not to do so any more; and therefore since it grows
late, let us leave off now, and I promise to meet you here again within a night
or two, and then I will hear how well you can vindicate your right of
Resistance from Law or History; but if you have no better proofs for it than
the Rebellion of the Barons in King John and Henry the Third's Reigns, you will
scarce make me your Convet, since Impunity does never sanctify a wicked
action, or render it the more lawful; and you have already given it me for an
Axiom, that a facto ad Ius non valet consequentia.


F. I accept of your Appointment with thanks; but pray do not for^judge my
Arguments till you hear them; and as for the Axiom, I allow it for good,
provided I may urge it in my turn; but in the mean time I shall wish you good
night.


M. And I the same to you.


FINIS.
Bibliotheca Politica: OR A DISCOURSE By WAY of DIALOGUE, Upon these Questions;
Whether by the ancient Laws, and Constitutions of this Kingdom, as well as by
the Statutes of the 13th and 14th of King Charles the II. all Resistance of the
King, or of those commissioned by him are expressly forbid, upon any pretense
whatsoever.

And also, Whether all those who assisted his present Majesty King William,
either before, or after his coming over, are guilty of the breach of this Law.

Collected out of the most Approved Authors, both Ancient and Modern.

Dialogue the Ninth.

LONDON, Printed for R. Baldwin in Warwick Lane, near the Oxford Arms; where
also may be had the First, Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Seventh and
Eighth Dialogues. 1693.

Authors chiefly made use of in this Dialogue, and how denoted in the Margin.

Dr. Sherlocks case of Resistance. S. C. R. Mr. Iohnsons Reflections upon it.
I. R. S. Dr. Hick's answer to Julian: Entitled Iovian. H. I.
I desire the Reader to remember, that whenever I make use of the word People
in this, or the following Discourse: I mean thereby the whole diffusive body of
the Nation, consisting of the Clergy, Nobility, and Commons.

The PREFACE TO THE READER.
I Must beg your pardon, if I have exceeded my intended design, (in the Preface
to the first of these Dialogues) of reducing what I had to say on the Subjects
there laid down into eight Discourses; Since being obliged to vindicate the
Ancient Constitution of Parliaments, from the Cavils of some late writers;
there was a necessity of considering what Dr. Brady had with so great industry
heaped together against the House of Commons, being anciently a constituent
part of our Parliaments, before the 49th of Henry the III. in the doing of
which, if I have proved too prolix, I can only say I could not avoid it,
without baulking those Arguments the Doctor has made use of to support his
opinion.

But having already treated in the third and fourth Dialogues, upon the
Questions of Passive Obedience, and Non-Resistance, as a Moralist, and a
Divine; I come now to handle the same Question as a Lawyer; and to examine
whether by the ancient Laws, and Constitutions of our English Government, and
by the late Statutes of the thirteenth and fourteenth of King Charles the II.
all taking up of Arms against the King, or those Commissioned by him, be
absolutely forbidden, and declared Treasonable; in the doing of which I can
assure you, I have not failed impartially to set down, whatever I have either
heard or read materially urged for one or the other opinion, and I have also
consulted some of the wisest and most Judicious Members of the long Parliament
of King Charles the II. to learn what was then the sense of both Houses of
Parliament, concerning the words of that Oath; but whether I have any ways
mistaken the sense of those August Assemblies; I humbly submit it to the
judgment of this present Parliament. For cujus est condere, ejus est
interpretari: and I hope for the like ingenuity from those, who give a
different and stricter interpretation to the words of those Statutes, and the
Oath therein contained; which though it be now no longer enjoined, yet since it
may still be thought to bind such as have taken it, it was very necessary to
inquire what was the true intent of those that imposed it; that is indeed, what
is the legal sense of the words of that Oath.

But as to the inconveniences, and mischiefs that may arise from the Peoples
judging what Commissions of the Kings are Legal, or Illegal; and either
resisting them: or yielding obedience to them, as they shall see cause: I have
only this to say, that I desire those of the contrary opinion, seriously to
consider all the inconveniences and mischiefs that may happen on the other
side; if the King is invested with an absolute irresistible power not only to
issue what commissions, but to whom and to what ends he pleases, though never so
illegal, and arbitrary: and that the whole Nation must yield an active
obedience, or at least a passive submission to them without the least
resistance, no, not so much as to assist any Foreign Prince, who should come in
to their assistance* as his Present Majesty (when Prince of Orange) generously
did: And when any man has without prejudice and passion considered
consequences; I shall freely leave it to him to embrace which side he pleases,
since I hope it is neither Heresy, nor Treason, to be of either; and therefore
I only desire the Reader to peruse this discourse without passion, or
prejudice, and then it is indifferent to me what party he takes; since I think
men may be honest and, conscientious who believe either way; and I do not
expect, nor desire any man to be of this, or that opinion, farther than his
reason shall guide him in which if he be mistaken he has no body to blame but
himself; since he is not sit to judge who is to be trusted with arguments only
for that, which he already believes to be the right side.

I have no more to mind you of at present, but to suppose these Papers to be
written before their present Majesty's were declared King and Queen;) and in a
time when every body not only thought, but spoke freely.

THE Ninth Dialogue BETWEEN Mr. FREEMAN a Gentleman, AND Mr. MEANWELL a
Civilian.
F. SIR, I am glad to see you again so soon, for I was just now looking over
some of our Old Historians, that lie here upon the Table, to rub up my Memory
for sufficient Instances and Authorities, that it has been always the received
and constant Custom and Practice of the Clergy, Nobility, and People of this
Nation, to defend the Ancient Government of this Kingdom by general Councils or
Parliaments, as also their just Liberties and Properties, not only by
Remonstrances, and Petitions to, but by Force too, against the King^ and those
commissioned by him, in case they found them evidently, and violently invaded,
beyond what any fair, or gentle means, and intercession were able to redress:
And for proof of this, I shall go as high as the Times of the Kings of the West
Saxons, from whom all the Kings of England before the Conquest were descended,
after the Kingdom of the West Saxons had prevailed over all the rest. I shall
therefore begin with the Reign of Sigehert King of the West Saxons, who, as I
told you in your Sixth Conversation, breaking the Laws and Constitutions of the
Kingdom, and Tyrannizing over all form of People, was in a general Council of
the whole Kingdom deposed, and expelled into the Forest of Audredswald, where
he was afterward slain by a Hogheard. As the Saxons Annals under the Year 755.
as also Huntingdon, and Mal^sbury relate. I shall not mention the Deposition of
King Edwin, by the Mercians and Northumbrians, and their choosing his Brother
Edgar in his stead, because not done by the Common Council of the whole
Kingdom; and that also for slight, and insufficient grounds.

Therefore since the Times before the Conquest do afford us no more examples of
this kind among the Kings of the West Saxon Race; (to which I only confine my
self) since those Kings being for the most part at Wars with the Danes to the
Time of Edward the Confessor, had somewhat else to think on than the making
themselves Absolute, or Tyrannizing over their Subjects; but indeed, there is
scarce to be found in History a Succession of more mild, just and valiant
Princes, than Egbert the First King of all England, and his Descendants.


M. Pray Sir tell me to what purpose you cite these Instances of the Nobility
and People of England deposing and casting off their Kings in the Times before
the Conquest; is it that you would justify that Commonwealth Principle, that
the Parliament has the like Power to depose the King at this day in case of
any Infringement of the Fundamental Laws, of the Kingdom, or breach of the
Original Contract (as those of your Party now term it?) if you do, pray speak
plain, and then I shall know what Answer to give you.


F. Tho'l assert it (as undeniable in matter of fact) that the English Saxons
did often exercise that Power they had reserved to themselves, of Electing and
Deposing their Kings, when they became insupportable for Tyranny or
Misgovernment, as appears not only in the Kingdom of the West Saxons, I have
now instanced in, but in almost all the other Kingdoms of the Heptarchy; in
which there are to be found many more Instances of the Deposition of their
Kings, tha^ what were in the West Saxon Kingdom* and this wa^ then very just
and necessary, since these Kingdoms were all Elective; and none of them
Hereditary; and that the general Meeting of the great Council of the Nation was
always at set, and constant Times; and did not depend upon the Will, and
Pleasure of the King, either to call or dissolve them, as I have already
proved; and that this Power was no unusual thing; I appeal to all the Ancient
Kingdoms of Europe founded after the same Model as ours; and which I mentioned
at our last Meeting; so that nothing is more frequent in their Histories and
Annals, than the Deposing of their Kings for the abovementioned Crimes of
Tyranny, or Misgovernments* But that some of these Gothic Kingdoms, as
Denmark, and Sweden* whilst they continued Elective, have exercised this Power
even till of late, is so notorious in matter of fact, that it needs no proof,
since the Kings of those Kingdoms held their Crowns at this day by that Title,
and on those Conditions, which the Nobility and People gave them, after the
Deposition of their Predecessors.

But tho this were so anciently also in England, it does not therefore follow
that it must be so now, for since the Crown of this Kingdom became Hereditary,
and that the Calling and Dissolving of great Councils or Parliaments came to
depend wholly upon the King's Will; I must allow, that the Case is quite
altered and that the Two Houses of Parliament have now no power to depose the
King for any Tyranny or Misgovernment whatsoever. The first Parliament of King
Charles the Second in the Act for attainting the Regicides have actually
disclaimed all Coercive Power over the King; and yet for all that, the
Nobility* and People of England may still have a good and sufficient Right left
them of defending their Lives, Religion, and Liberties against the King, or
those commissioned by him in case of a general, and universal Breach and
Invasion of the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, or Original Contract, (if you
will call it so) and not to lay down those Defensive Arms till their said just
Rights and Liberties are again restored, and sufficiently secured to them: So
that though I will not bring the Custom of the English Saxons as a precedent for
the Parliament's Deposing of the King; yet I think I may make use of it thus
far, that this Nation has ever exercised this necessary Right of defending
their Liberties, and Properties, when invaded by the King, or his Ministers,
either by color of Law, or open Force: And that this has been the constant
practice from almost the Time of the Conquest down to later Ages, I think I can
make out from sufficient Authorities, both from Histories and Records.


M. Though your Doctrine is not so bad as I expected, yet it is still bad enough;
and I never knew this Right of Resistance carried home, but that it always
ended in Deposing, and Murdering of the King at the last; as we have seen in
our own Times: But let the constant practice have been as it will, I am sure
such Resistance has been always condemned by our Ancient Common*Law, as well
as Modern Statutes, as I shall prove farther to you by and by; and therefore
pray give me leave to tell you, that the never so constant practice of an
unlawful thing, can no more justify the doing of it, than that constant usage,
time out of mind, for Thieves to Rob between London, and St. Albans; not that I
fore-judge you, or refuse to hear any Instances and Authorities from Histories
or Records to make good your Assertion.


F. I thank you for your patience; what therefore if I prove that such
Resistance has been not only actually exercised by the Clergy, Nobility and
People in former Ages, but that it has been also allowed by our Kings, and
approved of by great Councils or Parliaments in those Times for lawful, and the
Actors in it wholly indemnified and saved harmless, nay, a power given them,
and that by the King himself, to resist him, and defend themselves in case he
broke his Charters, and Agreements made to, and with his Nobility and People,
or else with some Foreign Prince; may appear from this remarkable Instance of
King Henry II at the end of whose Reign Hoveden in his Annals, Pa^^^ Poster.
gives us the Conditions of the Peace made in the last Year of this King
between him, and Philip King of France, with the Consent of their Bishops,
Earls, and Barons, where among other Articles you will find this for one,
particularly relating to the Barons of England, who were also to swear to the
Peace, in these Terms, Et omnes Barons Angliae jurabunt, quod si Rex Angliae
noluerit has Conditiones tenere, quod ipsi tenebunt cum Rege Franciae, and
Comite Richardo, and cos adj^vabunt pro posse contra Rege^ Angliae, etc. Whence
we may without doubt conclude, that the Resistance of Subjects in some cases
against their Kings, was then allowed of, even by the King himself, and thought
not inconsistent with the Allegiance they bore him, though it might suspend it
for a time.


M. I confess this Instance would be of some weight, were it not for the
Critical Time when this Peace was made; viz. when Richard Earl of (...), the
King's Eldest Son, had Rebelled against his Father, and taken part with the
King of France; and had drawn over a great many of the Norman, and Pictavian,
and English Barons to his Party; which when King Henry perceived, this very
Author you have quoted here, tells you, Quod Rex Angliae in arcto positus Pacem
fecit cum Rege Philippo; that is, was constrained to make Peace with him; so
that King Henry being in this straight, the King of France, and Earl Richard,
with the Barons of his Party, forced King Henry to sign what Conditions they
pleased; for there it no such Clause so much as mentioned for the French Barons.

But make the most of it, it is but a Temporary Relaxation of Allegiance from
King Henry to his Barons, and the King might surely thus release them if he
pleased: But it is plain, they could not have acted thus without this Condition
had been expressly inferred.


F. Well, supposing King Henry to have been never so much constrained to the
making of these Conditions, and that it was his own Act that rendered it lawful,
it still proves, as much as I urge it for, viz. that neither the Kings of
France, or England, then thought this Resistance absolutely unlawful; for then
the King's own Act could never have dispensed with it.

But to show you farther, that the People of this Nation have ever maintained
this Right of Resistance, even with the allowance of our Kings themselves; and
for the doing of this, I shall proceed with the earliest Instances of this kind
after the Conquest; viz. in the Time of King Richard the First, during whose
absence in the holy Land, he had committed the Government of his Kingdom to
William Bishop of Ely, Vi, R. Hovedens Annal, part posterior. 399.
who abused his Power by an Arbitrary and Insolent Carriage, affronting and
oppressing John Earl of Morton, the King's own Brother, and Geoffry Archbishop
of York, the King's base Brother, whereupon they rose up against him; and
having the Bishops, the Earls and Barons of their side, appointed the said
Bishop a day to answer to his Crimes in the King's Court, or great Council of
the Bishops, Lords and Tenants in Capite, then called Curia Regis, where when
he refused to appear, they all with one consent came to London, and fought with
the Followers and Adherents of the said Chancellor by the way; when they came
to Town, Earl John, with the Archbishops of York and Rouen, with all the Earls
and Barons, together with the Citizens of London, met in St. Paul's
Churchyard, and there it was proposed, that the said Chancellor should for
his Evil Government he deposed and banished the Kingdom, and so he immediately
was by the general Consent of the Common Council of the Kingdom; so that you
see the Nobility, Clergy and People, had then no notion of an Irresistible
Power in the King; and those put in Commission by him, when they found their
Power to grow Tyrannical, and Insupportable.


M. But if I forget not, you omit one material Circumstance in this Aff^ir,
which seems to make against you, which is, that Archbishop of Rouen, and
William the Earl Marshall did at that time produce the King's Letters, signed
with his (...), wherein he had appointed that they two should be associated in
the Government with the Bishop of Ely, and that he should do nothing without
their privity and consents; and of those associated with him in the business of
the Kingdom; and that if he offered to do otherwise, he should be deposed: So
that it seems what they now acted, was not so muchin opposition to the King's
Commission as to the Bishops, who had refused to obey his Commands.


F. I confess it was as you set forth; yet this makes nothing against my
Opinion; since it is apparent that Arms were taken, and this Resistance made by
the major part of the Bishops, Earls and Barons, together with the Londoners,
before ever it was known that such Letters were written by the King: And so it
seems they would have done much the same thing if there had been no such
Letters sent by the King at all. You may also remem^er that all these
proceedings also were approved of, and confirmed by the King himself.

But that I may proceed in my History of Non-Resistance, I come to the Reign of
King John his Brother, who when he had refused the Archbishop of Canterbury,
and all the Bishops, Earls and Barons of the Kingdom, to confirm the great
Charter of King Henry the First, Mat. Paris, A.D. 1215. p. 252. and dein.
they, together with the rest of the great Men and People of the Kingdom, of
all degrees and conditions, took up Arms, and made a vast Army, resolving never
to lay them down, till he had new granted, and confirmed the Charters of
Liberties, and Forests; till at last the King finding himself almost quite
forsaken, so that he had scarce five Knights left about him; he was at last
forced to meet the said Bishops, Earls, Barons and People at Runne-Mead, and
there to grant them that great Charter, which has been the Subject of so much
discourse between us; so that you see here that the Church of England in those
Times (if the Bishops and Clergy are the Representatives of this Church) had
then no notion of this Doctrine of Passi^e Obedien^e to the King's Absolute
Will and Commands.


M. I cannot deny the matter of fact to be as you say, but yet you may remember
that the same Author tells us, that the Pope thought the King, Ibid. p. 166.
hardly dealt withal in this matter, so that he gave Audience to the King's
Ambassadors concerning the Rebellions, and Injuries, which the Barons of
England had committed against their King; and that upon a solemn hearing of the
whole business, and after a consultation with his Cardinals, he did as Supreme
Lord of Eng^and, (after King John's Resignation of his Crown to him) by his
Bull then published make void the said great Charters of Liberties, and
Forests; and condemn all the Barons proceedings, as against their Duty, and
Allegiance to the King their Sovereign Lord; so that it seems this was not
approved of any where but by the Actors, the Pope thereupon Excommunicating the
Barons, and Suspending the Archbishop of Canterbury for joining with them.


F. I believe you will make nothing of this Objection; Ibid. p. 230.
for it appears from the same Author, that the Pope had before this
Excommunicated the King; and as far as lay in his power, deprived him of his
Kingdom, and absolved all his Subjects of their Allegiance; so that it is
plai^, it was not out of any true Principle, or hatred of Rebellion, and
Resistance in Subjects, that the Pope had thus acted; but purely to gratify
the King at this juncture of time, and to defend him in his Tyranny* and breach
of his own Charters, because he was then become his Vassal, and so he cared not
how much he oppressed his Subjects, because he was thereby the more able to pay
him the Tribute, before promised; and he could also expect the more securely to
extort Money from the whole Kingdom: But that this Bull of the Popes was
contrary to the King's own Express Act and Agreement, appears plainly by that
Clause, which is still to be found in a Charter under the Seal of this King;
and which seems to have been the Heads of the great Charter, (according to
which it was drawn into the Form we now find it in Mat. Paris) in which it is
expressly provided, and granted by the said King, that in case he should go
about to break or infringe any Clause in the said Charter, and shall not amend
it within the space of forty days that then I^li Barons cum Communia totius
Terrae distringent and gravabunt nos modis omnibus quibus pouerint, aut (scil.)
per captionem Castrorum, Terrarum, possessionum, and aliis modis quibus
potuerint, donec fuerit emendatum secundum arbitrium eorum, salva Persona
nostra and Regin^e nostra, and Liberorum nostrorum, and cum ^uerit emendatum
intendent nobis sient prius fecerunt. So that you see here in the Judgment even
of the King himself, they might freely resist, and take up Arms against him,
till he made good every Article of these Charters, if violated; and were not to
return to their Obedience till it was amended; and the like Clause almost word
for word is also to be found in the conclusion of the great Charters published
in Mat. Paris. P. 261.



M. I grant the Clause is there as you quote it; yet I much doubt whether it
was of any validity, being no doubt drawn up by the Barons then in Arms, and
which the King durst not at that time refuse, and so he was indeed under a kind
of dures^ when he did it. And besides, pray mark the conclusion of this Clause*
this Resistance was to be Salva Persona nostra and Reginae nostrae, and
Liberorum nostrorum, cum fuerit emendatum, intendent nos sicut prius fecerunt.
Now how this Security here reserved for the King's Person could consist with
that open War the Barons made afterward against his very Person, and casting
off all their Allegiance to their Natural Prince, and calling in Prince Lewis,
Son to the King of France, I cannot understand.


F. I think all this may very easily be solved,: For in the first place, K.
John was no more compelled to agree to this Clause, than he was to the Charters
themselves; and if those were lawful, and reasonable, so was this Resistance
too, since there was no other way or means lest to preserve them, in case the
King should go from his own Acts, and break through all he had done; so that if
the ends were lawful, the means to preserve it must be so too; or else those
Charters would have signified nothing any longer than the King pleased: As for
the other part of the Objection, that this Resistance was still to be, saving
the Person of the King and Queen, etc. and that this did not consist with the
Barons, after making War against his Person, and casting off all Allegiance to
him: It was not their faults, but the King's, if they could not perform this
Agreement, since the King by making War upon the Clergy, Nobility and People,
by his open, and notorious breach, and recalling of these Charters, calling in
Strangers to his assistance, and declaring he would no longer govern according
to Law, had made it absolutely unpracticable to preserve their Allegiance to
him any longer; so that they never cast off their duty as Subjects, till he had
cast off his duty as a King, and then what was there else left to be done but
to provide for their own safety, by calling in a Foreign Prince to their
Assistance, as soon as they could? since there was no other way left them to
defend themselves against those Troops of Strangers the King had invited over;
and though many of them with their Captain Hugh de Boves, had been cast away,
and drowned in a Tempest at Sea, yet more were daily expected: So that if
Tyrants should suffer nothing for the breach of their own Charters, and Oaths,
they would be in a better condition, by their violation, than the observing of
them; ^or by the making them, they for the present quiet the Minds of their
discontented Subjects, and when they please may break them all again, when they
have got power, if no body must presume to resist them; or not think them as
much Kings when they destroy, and oppress their People, as when they protect,
and preserve them by governing according to the Laws of the Kingdom. But pray
what have you to say against that general Resistance that was made by almost
all the Bishops, Barons, and great Men of England against his Son Henry the
Third, about the frequent and notorious violations of the great Charters which
his Father and himself had so often sworn to, and confirmed, and for which he
had received such great Benevolences and Subsidies from the Nation?


M. Before I answer this Question, pray take notice that I am not at all
satisfied with your Arguments; that when ever Subjects shall think themselves
injured, and oppressed by their Sovereigns, that then they may cast off their
Allegiance to them; if they cannot have the Remedy they desire; since this were
to make them both Judges and Parties too in their own Cause; which is
altogether unjust, and unreasonable, between private Men, much more between
Kings and Subjects. But passing by this at present, I shall tell you my Opinion
of this Resistance of Simon Montfort, and the Earls and Barons his Adherents,
that it was downright Rebellion, and tended only to dethrone the King, and
make him a mere Cipher, and to devolve the whole Government upon themselves; as
appears by the Oxford Provisions recited by so many Authors of that Age; and
which were afterward condemned, (and consequently those violent means by which
they were obtained) by Lewis the Ninth King of France, who in an Assembly of
his Estates, upon a solemn hearing of the whole difference between King Henry
the Third, and his Barons, declared these Oxford Provisions null, and void. So
far was this good and pious King from countenancing any Rebellion (or
Resistance, as you term it) of Subjects against their lawful Sovereign.


F. For all this, I cannot find that the King of France did then at all condemn
this defense the Earls and Barons had before made of the Liberties granted them
by the great Charters; for though he restored the King to his former Power, by
avoiding the Oxford Provisions, yet at the same time when this was done, P. 992.
(as the Continuator of Mat. Paris tells us) he expressly excepted the Ancient
Charters of King John, Vnivers^li [seil. Angliae] concessae, and from which per
illam sententiam in nullo intendibat pen^tus derogare; and if he did not in the
least intend to derogate from them, he could not with any Justice condemn the
only means the Barons had to maintain them; after so many Trials, and fresh
Promises and Oaths of this fickle inconstant King all broken, and laid aside;
so that you may as well or better allege the Pope's shameful Absolution of
this King from this Oath he had made to observe the great Charters, as an
Argument why they should not be any longer bound by them, nor the Barons
obliged to defend them; as this Sentence of the King of France to render the
Resistance the Barons had made in defense of the great Charters to be unlawful:
And that King Henry himself did afterward allow this Resistance for good and
lawful; Pray see the Agreement which was not long after made in full
Parliament, Rot. Pat. 49 H* 3. M. 5.
in the 49th between the King, the Prince, and all the Prelates, Earls and
Barons of England; whereby he obliged himself to observe all the Articles and
Ordinances which had been before agreed upon at London in the 48th Year of his
Reign: And then follows this Clause in the Record (which the Doctor himself has
printed in his Appendix at the end of the first Volume of his Introduction to
English History) which I shall here translate out of French, because it is very
old and obscure, it is thus: And if our Lord the King, or Monsieur Edward; (
viz. the Prince) shall go against the Peace and Ordinance aforesaid, or shall
grieve the Earls of Leicester or Gloucester, or any of their Party by reason of
any of the things aforesaid; that then the great Men, and Commons of the Land,
(in French hauz Homes, and Comun de la Terre) shall rise against them to grieve
them to the utmost of their power, and shall be obedient to them in nothing,
and in doing all things as if they were bound to them in nothing, until these
things shall be amended and maintained according to the Ordinance of the Peace
aforesaid; and to this our Lord the King, and Monsieur Edward, and the great
Men of the Kingdom, have sworn upon the holy Gospels, to keep and maintain the
things aforesaid. And with this Record agrees this King's Latin Charter, much
to the same purpose recited in the Annals of Waverly, P. 217.
An. 1264. only the words there are more general, that if the King or Prince
should break the said Peace by hurting or falling upon any of the said Earls of
Leicester, or Gloucester, or any of the Persons abovementioned, Liceat omnibus
de Regno nostra contra nos insurgere, and ad gravamen nostrum, opem and operam
dare juxta posse, ad quod ex praesenti praecepto nostro omnes and singulos
volumus obliga^i, fideliter and homagis nobis, facto non obstante. So that you
see here, that by the Judgment of the King himself, and the whole Parliament,
this Resistance might be exercised notwithstanding the Homage they had done
him. And this is that Form of the Peace which I have before cited to you to
have been made (as appears by a Writ to the Sheriff of Yorkshire, to be seen
upon the same Roll, Rot. Claus. 49 H. 3. m. 5.
and in the same Membrane) unanimi consensu and voluntate nostra, and Edwardi
filii nostri Primogeniti, Praelatorum, Comitum, Baronum, and Communitatis Regni
nostri, etc. which Doctor Brady thought fit to conceal, and not publish with
the former Record, because the word Communitas did not at all suit with his
Notions in this place.


M. I must confess this so solemn an Agreement upon the Record would have been
very considerable, had it been made, whilst the King and Prince had been free,
R.A. P. 135. and dein.
and in their own power: whereas the Dr. has made it plainly appear, that the
King and Prince were at this time in the power of Simon Montfort, and his
Adherents, who called that famous Parliament of the 49th, to which we suppose
the Commons were first summoned; Ibid. 143.
and therefore the Prince was not delivered at this time (any more than the
King his Father) out of their power, and was only taken out of Dover Castle,
and made a Prisoner at large under a Guard (as his Father was) until he made
his escape from his Keepers at Hereford Castle: So that I do not at all value
this Agreement, because made by duress; though I confess the words of the Records
are express, that it was de unanimi co^sensu and voluntate nostra, etc. Edwardi
Filii nostri. But it appears plainly, that by this Agreement the King had
discharged himself of all Royal Power, and confirmed this Agreement, whereby
the whole Government of the Kingdoms, and Nomination of all the great Officers
of the Crown was put into the hands of Nine Earls and Barons.


F. At this rate no Act that a King can do when he has the worst of it, though
confirmed by a Solemn Oath (as this was upon the holy Gospels) can ever be
binding; for it is but alleging that it was done by duress, and it is
sufficient to render it null and void: But be it as it will, this was certainly
the general Consent, Act and Declaration of the whole Nation assembled in
Parliament, and that owned by the King himself, and his Son the Prince, and all
his Party. And farther, that this Resistance of the Earl of Gloucester (who was
one of these Barons) was not after counted for Treason, or Rebellion, appears
by that Pardon of the said Earl which we have before cited to have been made by
this King, Rot. Pat. 51 H. 3. m. 161
with Assent of the King of Almaine (his Brother) and the Counts and Barons,
and Commons of the Land, in which he pardoned the said Earl, and all his
Company, (and also all the Londoners) all rancour and ill will; and in the same
manner as the King quits and discharges the Earl, and his Company; so does the
said Earl hereby for himself, and all his Company, remit to all those that were
of the Party of the King, any thing done since that moment (that is, that Civil
War in which the Earl of Gloucester, had so great a share) so that you see this
Resistance of the Earl of Gloucester was within two years after the Battle of
Evesham so far from being looked upon as Rebellion, that the Pardon is made
mutual, not only for the Earl, and those that followed him, but also for those
that had taken the King's part.

But I shall come now to his Son, and Successor, King Edward the First, where
we shall find this Doctrine of Resistance asserted more than once, not only by
private men, but by the whole Parliament, as appears by those Letters that were
written by the King's command or (permission at least in the 29th of his Reign)
in the name of all the Earls, Vide Mat. Westminist. Anno 1301. p. 436.
Barons, and tota Communitas Angliae, to Pope Boniface the Eighth, in
vindication of the King's Superiority over Scotland; to which you will find
this remarkable passage, Nec etiam permittimus, nec permittemus, sicut non
possumus nec debemus praemissa tam insolita, indebita, and praejudicialia, and
alias inaudita, praelibatum Dominum nostrum Regem, etiam si vellet facere, modo
quolibit attemptare: Which restraint of the King's Will must certainly mean
some what more than a bare Remonstrance or Declaration against it; since we
have seen in our own Times, Kings make nothing of mere verbal Declarations of
the Two Houses of Parliament, if they had a mind to do a thing they thought
belonged to their Prerogative, though the Parliament declared against it. And to
let you farther see that this Doctrine was at this time generally believed, and
practiced all over Europe, you will find almost the same Clause in the Letters
which were written in the Reign of Philip the fair King of France, Anno 1203.
(which falls about the 30th of our King Edward the First) and were sent to the
same Pope Boniface, upon the occasion of his manifold Usurpations upon the
Church of France, in the name of the whole Clergy of that Kingdom; Prin's
second Vol. of Pap. Usurpations, p. 954.
whereby it not only appears that this was done in a general Assembly of
Estates, viz. of the Clergy, Barons, etc. and Communitates Villarum; but they
also there declared, expressius, viva voce, Quod si praesatus Dominus Rex (quod
absit) tolera^^, v^l dissimula^e veilet, Ipsi (scil. Episcopi, and Barons,
etc.) nullot^nus sustinerent. So that here you see not only the Temporal
Estates, but the very Clergy declare, that they would by no means suffer the
King to act thus no not) if he would.

But the Barons and People of England, did actually put this Doctrine in
Execution, some few years before this Letter, I now mentioned, was writ to the
Pope; which transaction I shall give you almost verbatim out of Mat. of
Westminster, and Henry de Keyghton, in Anno 1297. (being the 26th of Edward the
First) when the King having extorted a great sum of Money from the Clergy, and
People, contrary to Law, and being then going into Flanders, he called a
Parliament at Westminster, where most of the Earls and Barons refused to
appear, until such time as their Petitions for the ease of their Country were
heard; and that the King would again confirm Magna Charta: Yet nevertheless the
King upon his confession of his Male Administration, which he made before all
the People, with Tears in his Eyes, and promise of amendment, then obtained of
the Commons an Aid of the Eighth Penny of their Goods: But as soon as the King
was gone over, the Constable, and Earl Marshall, with other Earls and Barons,
went to the Exchequer, and there forbad the Judges to levy the said Tax upon
the People by the Sheriffs, because it was done without their knowledge,
without whose consent no Tax ought to be exacted, or imposed; so that the said
Earls and Barons being thus gathered together, and the greater part of the
People joining with them; at last Prince Edw. then Lieutenant of the Kingdom,
was forced to call a Parliament; to which the Earls and Barons came attended
with great multitudes, both of Horse, and Foot, but would not enter the City of
London, till the Prince had in his Fathers name confirmed the great Charters,
and had passed the Statute de Tallagio non concedendo; both which were
afterward again confirmed by the King his Father some time after his Return.

And this will serve to explain the last Article in this Statute, which
comprehends the King's Pardon or Remission to Humphrey Earl of Her^ford and
Ess^x then Constable, and Roger Bigot Earl of Norfolk Marshall of England (the
two principal Leaders in the late Resistance) with all other Earls, Barons,
Knights, and Esquires of their Party, all Leagues and Confederacies; as also
all Rancour, and Ill Will, with all other Transgressions against them, and And
pray see Sir Edward Coke's Comment on these words, 2d Instit. 1. p. 536.
you compare our English Histories with this Act of Parliament, the Old saying
shall be verified, That Records of Parliament^ the truest Histories. The King
had conceived a deep displeasure against the Constable, Marshall, and others
of the Nobility, Gentry, and Commons of the Realm, for denying that which he so
much desired; yet for that they stood in defense of their Laws, Liberties, and
Free Customs, etc. (I suppose he refers to the Resistance but now mentioned)
whereupon he did not only restore the same to them as aforesaid, but granted
special Pardon to those against whom he had conceived so heavy a displeasure,
etc. and such a one as you will scarce read the like; and after a short gloss
upon the words Rancour and Ill Will, he thus comments on these words, etiam
transgressiones si q^as fec^in^; here the words, si qua^ sic^i^t, were added,
lest by acceptance of a pardon, they should confess they had transgressed. So
careful were the Lords and Commons to preserve their Ancient Laws, Liberties,
and Customs of their Country; so that it is plain that Sir Edward Coke then
thought the Lords and Commons had not transgressed in thus standing up, though
with force of Arms, for their just Rights and Liberties; and which sufficiently
proves that this Author did not conceive such a Resistance to be making War
against the King, and so Treason at that time at Common Law, and consequently
not to be afterward Treason by the Statute of 25th of Edward the Third (as you
would have it) since that Statute d^es not make any other Overt-acts to be
Treason, but what had been so by Common Law before this Statute was made.

But in the Reign of this King's Son Edward the Second, there were much more
pregnant, and fatal proofs of the exercise of this Right of Resistance by the
Earls, Barons, and People of England against Pierce Gaveston, whom having been
before for his Mis-government of the King, banished the Realm by Act of
Parliament, and coming over with the King's License, but without any reverse of
the said Act; Thomas Earl of Lancaster, the King's Uncle, with the rest of the
Earls, Barons, and Commons of the Land, took up Arms against him: And though he
raised some Forces by the King's Commission, yet they fought with him, and took
him Prisoner, and beheaded him, near Warwick. Some years after which the said
Thomas Earl of Lancaster, with Humphrey de Bohun Earl of Hereford, together
with diverse other Earls and Barons, took Arms, and spoiling the Lands of the
two Spencers, Father and Son, came up to London, where the King had called a
Parliament; in which the King was forced to banish the said Spencers out of the
Kingdom, though they quickly returned again; against whom when the said Earls
above mentioned, and diverse other Barons and Knights again took Arms; but being
failed by some of their Consederates, were overpowered by the King's Party,
and the Earl being taken Prisoner, was attainted, and beheaded at Portfract;
yet was the this Judgment against the Earl; and those of his Party afterward
reversed in Parliament, in 1 mo. Edward the Third, and their Heirs restored in
blood; as also to the Lands of their Fathers; as besides the Act it still to be
seen upon the Rolls, appears more plainly by a Writ of this King's reciting;
Rot. Claus. 1. E. 3. p. 2.
that whereas at a Parliament at Westminster, among other things it was agreed
by the King, the Prelates, Earls, Barons and Commons of the Kingdom, that all
those who were in the Quarrel with Thomas E. of Lancaster against the Spencers,
should have their Lands and Goods restored, because the said Quarrel was found,
and adjudged by the King, and the whole Parliament, to be good and just; and
that the Judgments given against them were null and void, and therefore
commands restitution of the Lands and Tenements now in the Crown to the
Executors of the said Earl; and the like Writs are found for the other Lords
and Gentlemen that had been of his Party.

And further, that not only this Resistance made by this Earl, and the rest of
his followers, but also that which this King himself made together with Queen
Isabel his Mother against the Mis-government of the King his Father, through
the evil Counsel of the two Spencers, appears by the Act of Indemnity passed in
the first Year of this King, in the preamble of which there is recited a short
History of the wicked Government and Banishment of the Spencers, Father and
Son; and also how Thomas late Earl of Lancaster, was by their procurement
pursued, taken, executed, disinherited; and how the said Spencers, and Robert
Baldock, and Edmund Earl of Arundel, by the Royal Power they had usurped, had
caused the King that now is, and the Queen his Mother, to be utterly forsaken
of the King his Father, and to be Exiled from the Realm of England; and that
therefore the King that now is, and the Queen his Mother, being in so great
Jeopardy in a strange Country, and seeing the destructions, and disinherisons
which were notoriously done in England, upon holy Church, the Prelates, Earls,
Barons, and the Commonalty of the same, by the said Spencers, Robert Baldock,
and Edmund Earl of Arundel, by the Encroachment of Royal Power to themselves;
and seeing they might not remedy the same, unless they came into England with
an Army of Men of War, and have by the Grace of God with such puissance, and
the help of the great Men and Commons of the Realm vanquished and destroyed the
said Spencers, etc. therefore our Sovereign Lord the King, by the Common
Council of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other great Men, and of the Commons
of the Realm have provided, and ordained etc. as follows; That no great Man,
nor other of what Estate, Dignity or Condition soever he be, that came in with
the said King, that now is, and with the Queen in Aid of them, to pursue their
said Enemies, and in which pursuit the King his Father was taken and put in
Ward, etc. shall be impeached, molested or grieved in person, or in goods, in
any of the King's Courts, etc. for the pursuit, and taking in hold the body of
the said King Edward, nor for the pursuit of any other persons, not taking
their goods, nor for the death of any Man, nor any other things perpetrated, or
committed in the said pursuit, from the day of the King and Queens Arrival,
until the day of the Coronation of the said King.

This Act of Indemnity is so full a Justification of the necessity, and
lawfulness of the Resistance that was then made against King Edward the Second,
and his wicked Counselors the Spencers, that it needs no Comment: And though
King Edward the Third took warning by the example of his Father, and was too
wise then to follow the like Arbitrary Courses; yet Richard the Second his
Grandson, being a wilful, hot headed young Prince, fell into all the Errors of
his great Grandfather, and found the like, if not greater Resistance from his
Nobility and People; for when he had highly mis-governed the Realm by the
Advice of his favorites, Alexander Archbishop of York, the Duke of Ireland,
and others; a Parliament being called in the 10th Year of his Reign, the
Government of the Kingdom was taken out of their hands, and committed to the
Bishops of Canterbury, and Ely, with Thomas Duke of Gloucester, the King's
Uncle, Richard Earl of Arundel, and Thomas Earl of Warwick, and nine or ten
other Lords and Bishops; but notwithstanding this, the King being newly of Age,
refused to be governed by the said Duke, and Earls, but was carried about the
Kingdom by the said Duke of Ireland and others, to try what Forces they could
raise, and also to hinder the said Duke and Earls from having any Access to
him: But see what followed these violent, and arbitrary courses, as it is
related by Henry de Knighton, who lived and wrote in that very time, and is
more exact in this King's Reign than any other Historian; Col. 2697.
he there tells us, that when Thomas Duke of Gloucester, and the other Bishops
and Earls now mentioned, sound they could not proceed in the Government of the
King and Kingdom, according to the Ordinance of the preceding Parliament,
through the hinderance of Mich. de la Poole, Robert de Vere, Duke of Ireland,
Nich. Brembar, and Robert Tresillian Chief Justice, and others, who had seduced
the King, and made him alienate himself from the Council of the said Lords, to
the great damage of the Kingdom; whereupon the said Duke of Gloucester, and the
Lords aforesaid, with a great Guard of Knights, Esquires, and Archers, came up
toward London, and quartered in the Villages adjacent; and then the
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Lovat, the Lord Cobham, the Lord Eures,
with others, went to the King in the name of the the Duke, Ibid. 2700.
and Earls, and demanded all the persons abovementioned to be banished as
Seducers, and Traitors to the King; and all the Lords then swore upon the Cross
of the said Archbishop, not to desist till they had obtained what they came
for; the conclusion of this Meeting was, that the King not being able to
withstand them, was forced immediately to call that remarkable Parliament of
the 11th Year of his Reign, in which Mich. de la Poole, and the Duke of Ireland
were attainted, and Tresillian, and diverse other Judges sentenced to be hanged
at Tyburn upon the Impeachment of the said Duke of Gloucester, and the Earl of
Arundel, for delivering their Opinions contrary to Law, and the Articles the
King had not long before proposed to them at Nottingham.

I shall omit the Resistance which Henry Duke of Lancaster made after his
Arrival by the Assistance of the Nobility and People of the North of England
against the Arbitrary Government of this King, being then in Ireland; not only
because it is notoriously known, but because it was carried on farther than
perhaps it needed to have been, and ended in the Deposition of this King. Only
in the first Year of Henry the 4th, there was the same Act of Indemnity almost
word for word, passed for all those that had come over with that King, and had
assisted him against Richard the Second, and his evil Counselors, as was
passed before in primo of Edward the Third. I shall not also insist upon the
Resistance of Richard Duke of York, in the Reign of King Henry the 6th, who
took up Arms against the Evil Government of the Queen and her Minion the Duke
of Suffolk: because you may say, that this was justifiable by the Duke of York
as right Heir of the Crown; nor will I instance in the Resistance made by the
Two Houses of Parliament, during the late Civil Wars in the time of King
Charles the First, since it is disputed to this day, who was in the fault, and
began this Civil War, whether the King or the Parliament: Only thus much I
cannot omit to take notice of, that the King in none of his Declarations ever
denied but that the People had a right to Resist him in case he had made War
upon them, or had introduced Arbitrary Government, and expressly owned in his
Answer to one of the Parliaments Messages, that they had a sufficient power to
restrain Tyranny, but denied himself to be guilty of it; and still asserted
that he took up Arms in defense of his just Right and Prerogative, to the
Command of the Militia of the Kingdom, which they went about to take from him
by force.


M. I have with the greater patience hearkened to your History of Resistance in
all the Kings Reigns you have mentioned, because I cannot desire any better
Argument to prove the unlawfulness of such Resistance, than those Acts of
Pardon, and Indemnity: You cannot but confess, have still followed it even when
the Barons proved most fortunate, as in that of Henry the Third, to the Earl of
Gloucester, and those of his Party; and that of Edward the First, to the
Constable and Marshall, and their followers; nay, after the former Kings had
been unjustly deposed, we still find the Actors and Accomplices of such wicked
Actions, did not think themselves safe till they had an Act of Indemnity passed
to them, of all the Robberies and Murders they had committed in the War, as
your self have recited in the two Acts of Parliament in the Reigns of Edward
the Third, and Henry the Fourth. Now if these Resistances had not been
downright Rebellions in the Eye of the Law, to what purpose were these Acts of
Indemnity passed, since no man needs a Pardon, but rather merits a Reward for
defending the Government Established according to Law?


F. In answer to this Objection (for which I am already prepared, since I
foresaw you might make it) pray give me leave to ask you whether you can find
the words Treason, Rebellion, Robbery, or Murder, in any of these Acts of
Pardon? and if you cannot, whether you think Treason, or Murder, could be
pardoned by general words or not; and the reason why I ask this Question, is,
because if they could not, then the consequence will be, that none of these
Parliaments supposed that the Resistance that had been made, or all the other
Acts performed in pursuance of such Resistance, were looked upon by those that
had done them, no nor by the Parliament it self, to be Treason, Rebellion, or
Murder, since certainly those that were Actors in such Resistances, and taking
up of Arms, having the power in their hands, would not have failed to have had
those words inserted into those Acts of Indemnity, if they had supposed
themselves guilty of those Crimes.


M. I cannot say that the words Treason, and Rebellion, or Murder, are expressly
mentioned in these Statutes, since even the Actors in them did not think it for
their Credits to own themselves to have been guilty of any such Crimes; yet all
the particular words and expressions in these Acts amount to the very same
thing, for the taking up Arms with one that is not King, against him that is,
and the actually seizing upon his Person, and keeping him in hold, was Treason
at Common Law before the Statute of the 25th of Edward the Third; and is not
taking men's Goods by force, and destroying their Persons in time of Peace,
Rebellion, and Murder at Common Law? So that if these were the Facts, they had
been guilty of; and if these Acts were Treason, Rebellion, Robbery, and Murder,
then certainly all Treasons, Rebellions, Robberies and Murders are likewise
pardoned by those Statutes: And though it is true, the Law is now, that no pardon
of Treason or Murder shall be good, unless those Offenses are particularly
named; Stat. 2. chap. 1.
yet this was so ordained by the Statute of the 13th of Richard the Second, by
which it is particularly provided, that no pardon shall be allowed before any
Justice for the death of a Man, etc. Treason, etc. unless the same Murder,
Treason, etc. be specified in the said Charter, before which Statute Sir Edward
Coke in his second Instit. tells us, P. 236.
that by the pardon of all Felonies, Treason was pardoned, and so was Murder,
etc.


F. I cannot deny but that these Facts you mention were Treason, in strictness
of Law, before the making that Statute; yet does it not follow that even these
may be in some cases justifiable (as well as binding a King, when he is out of
his Wits) if the public Peace of the Kingdom, and preservation of the
Government according to the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom require it: Thus
for example; suppose King John, after he had made actual War upon his Barons
and People, had happened to have his Forces routed in the Field, can any one
believe that it had been unlawful for them to have secured his Person to
prevent his making a new War upon them? and yet this by the Letter of the Law
had been Treason. Now there are many actions, which in strictness of Law are
Treason, yet being for the public defense and security of the Nation, deserve
a pardon of course: Thus if Foreign Enemies should Land in England, and a
Neighboring Nobleman or Gentleman, who has no Command over the Militia of the
Country, should raise on the sudden such a Force of his Tenants and
Neighbors, as were sufficient to make ahead against them till the Militia of
the Country could come in to their Assistance; though this taking up of Arms
without an Express Commission for it, be a high Misdemeanour; (^ay Treason,
according to your Principles) yet I suppose you will not deny but that the
persons engaged in it, do not only deserve pardon, but thanks for their
Courage, and so speedy Assistance of the Government. And I remember I have read
a famous Instance of this kind, that when the Traitors concerned in the
Powder Plot found themselves discovered, they fled into Warwickshire, and
thence into Worcestershire, and were pursued and taken by the High Sheriff of
that County in Staffordshire; which though a great Misdemeanour, since no Sheriff
can justify carrying the Posse Comitatus out of the County; yet this was so
well taken* that King James the First rewarded him, and (as I take it) Knighted
him for his pains.

But to apply this to the matter in dispute, though it is true, taking, and
imprisoning the King's Person is Treason in the Eye of the Law; yet (as in the
case of Edward the Second) if the Government could not be restored to its
pristine State without that extremity, it must, and will ever deserve a pardon;
and therefore you see the Parliament in the first of Edward the Third, not only
pardons, but justifies the doing of it, because done for that end. So likewise
the Statute of the 11th of Richard the Second, Chap. 1. not only indemnifies,
but justifies the Duke of Gloucester, the Earls, Lords, and all others of his
Party, for taking up Arms against the persons abovementioned, though maintained
and backed by the King himself, as being done for the weal, and safeguard of
the King^ the maintenance of the Crown, and Salvation of the Realm: So much for
the Point of making War against the King, and imprisoning his Person; so that
if taking up Arms for the safeguard of the King, and Salvation of the Kingdom,
were just, and necessary to be done, the consequences of it, viz. the taking of
men's Goods, and killing of these that resist them, cannot be Robbery, or
Murder, because done in a State of War; which can never be carried on without
such Acts of Hostility: And therefore you see in the Act of Pardon to the Earl
of Gloucester, and to the Londoners granted in Parliament of the 51th of Henry
the Third (which I have now cited) those that took part with the King are as
expressly pardoned, as those that were with the Earl; and in the like pardon to
the Constable and Marshall in the time of Edward the First (which I now also
quoted) those Lords would not own they had transgressed; but the words are
only, etiam transgressiones si quas fecerit: So that since such Reformations
could not be brought about without violence and bloodshed; and some
Irregularities, which in times of Peace could not be justified by the strict
Letter of the Law, it was but reason, that for the quieting of men's minds, and
their future security, they should be indemnified for what they had done with
so good an intent, and for the common good of the Kingdom: But that such Acts
of Pardon do not relate to the Titles such Kings had to the Crown, but only to
their being Kings in the Eye of the Law, appears by a like Act of Pardon passed
in Parliament in the first of Henry the Seventh to pardon, and save harmless
all those that came over with the King, and all that helped him to recover his
just Right to the Kingdom against King Richard the Third, there called, that
Usurper: So that you may see such Acts of Pardon do not concern the just Titles
of Princes, nor the Justice of the War, but are to quiet men's minds under the
new Government; whereas those that took part with the Usurper, were not
pardoned, but left to the Law, since the present Government would not take care
for their security that had obstructed its settlement. So the Act of Oblivion
of the second of Charles the Second, though it pardons Treasons expressly, yet it
as well pardons the Treasons of them that had Commissions from King Charles the
First or Second, as well as those that acted by Commissions from other
pretended Authorities: So that you see in the Judgment of this so modern a
Parliament, men might be supposed to be guilty of Treason, though they had taken
part with the King, and had acted by ^is Commission, if the things commanded
were illegal.


M. I confess you have taken a great deal of pains to justify taking up Arms
against, nay, Imprisonment of our Kings, when that which you call the
preservation of the Government requires it; that is, when there is a ^action in
the Kingdom strong enough to make a disturbance; for it was very well said by
Tacitus in the speech he makes for Otho to the Soldiers, to take up Arms, and
kill Galba, then Emperor, that it was in vain to speak more for the
justification of that Action; quod Laudari non potest nisi peractum: Treasons,
if successful, have never wanted a sufficient Party in the Nation to make up a
Parliament to countenance them, and to pardon, nay justify all those that have
been Actors in them; as we may see by those Acts of Indemnity you mention; and
therefore I am not the more convinced, that such Resistance was lawful,
notwithstanding those specious Declarations of Parliament, of their being made
for the public good, and preservation of the King and Kingdom.

But you have done very warily to pass by without any Justification, the
Deposition of King Edward the Second, as also, that of the Resistance (as you
call it) of Henry Duke of Lancaster against King Richard the Second; as also
his Deposition, though done in Parliament; since all the proceedings against this
King were repealed in Parliament, in the first of Edward the 4th, as appears by
the Parliament Rolls of that King's Reign, wherein the taking up Arms against
King Richard by Henry Earl of Derby, is said to be done contrary to his Faith,
Rot. Parl. 1 Ed. 4. m. 9. etc.
and Legiance, and his taking the Crown called Usurpation, and the killing of
King Richard his Sovereign Lord, termed (as it justly deserved) Murder* and
Tyranny, which does (though not directly, yet) by consequence, condemn his
Deposition too, since he is after that here called King; and you do as warily
pass by the late Rebellious War of the Long Parliament against King Charles the
First, as also his horrid Murder before his own Gates; because you know cry
well, that this Doctrine of Resistance seldom stops with a bare Reformation of
what is amiss; but commonly ends with the Murder, or Deposition of the King, or
else driving him from his Throne, as we now find it by woeful experience in the
Person of our Unfortunate King, who was so lately forced to quit this Kingdom
for the security of his Person; and therefore to put an end to this part of the
Dispute, the Parliament of the 13th of King Charles the Second were so sensible
of the great Mischiefs that attended this Rebellious Doctrine, as having been
the destruction of one of the best Princes that ever Reigned, and the occasion
of the loss of so many brave Men; besides the ruin of so many great and Noble
Families, that they were resolved to do their utmost to prevent it for the
future; and therefore the King and Parliament in the 13th and 14th of King
Charles the Second, passed those remarkable Acts concerning the Settlement of
the Militia in the King and his Successors, to take away all dispute about it,
though they declare it to have been his Ancient Right; and therefore to take away
all pretense for taking up Arms either by the Two Houses of Parliament, or any
other person whatsoever; they, in preamble to both these, 13 Car. 2. Chap. 6.
that these Acts thus expressly declare, Forasmuch as within all His Majesty's
Realms and Dominions the sole Supreme Government, Command and Disposition of
the Militia, and of all Forces by Sea and Land, and of all Forts and Places of
Strength is, and by the Law of England over was the undoubted Right of His
Majesty's and His Royal Predecessors, King and Queens of England; and that
both, or either Houses of Parliament cannot, nor ought to pretend to the same,
nor can lawfully raise, or ^evy War offensive or defensive, against His
Majesty, His Heirs* or Lawful Successors; and yet the contrary hereof has of
late been practiced almost to the ruin and destruction of this Kingdom; and
during the late Usurped Governments, many Evil and Rebellious Principles have
been distilled into the minds of the People of this Kingdom, which unless
prevented, may break ^orth to the disturbance of the Peace and Quiet thereof,
etc.

And in pursuance of this Statute, it was likewise ordained by the Authority
aforesaid, in the 2d Statute for the Militia in the 14th year of the same King,
Chap. 3d.
wherein not only the same preamble is recited verbatim, as before in the
former Statute, but it is also Enacted, That no person, (no not a Peer of the
Realm) shall be capable of acting as Lieutenant, Deputy Lieutenant, Officer, or
Soldier, by virtue of this Act, unless after the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy they take this Oath following; viz. I A. B. do declare and believe,
that it is not lawful upon any pretense whatsoever, to take Arms against the
King; and that I do abhor that Traitors Position, that Arms may be taken by his
Authority against his Person, or against those that are Commissioned by him in
pursuance of such Military Commissions; and it is also to be noted, that all
Mayors of Cities, or other Corporations, were obliged by a former Statute of
the 13th of this King to take the same Oath: From both which Statutes, and
Declaration, we may draw these Conclusions; First, That the Militia ( i. e. the
Command of all Military Forces and Warlike Affairs) are declared to be wholly
in the King. Secondly, That either, or both Houses of Parliament cannot make
any War offensive or defensive against him, etc. Pray mark that. Thirdly, That
the contrary practice has tended almost to the destruction of this Kingdom,
and that many evil and Rebellious Principles (whereof this without doubt is
intended for the chief) have been instilled into the minds of the People, etc.
And lastly, That in pursuance thereof, all persons abovementioned were not
only obliged to renounce taking up Arms against the King upon any pretense
whatsoever; but also against any that shall be authorized by the King's
Military Commissions, without any Exceptions. And it is farther Enacted, That
all Clergymen should be obliged to take this Oath as well as the Laity; and it
is likewise there ordained, That all Clergymen who were to enjoy any Livings
or Preferments in the Church, were likewise for the space of Twenty Years next
ensuing, obliged to subscribe this Declaration; so that it is no wonder if the
Loyal Clergy of the Church of England, think themselves not only tied by the
Express Rules of Scripture, but also by the Laws of the Land, strictly to
observe this great Law of Passive Obedience, and Non-Resistance: Now pray see
here the Doctrine of Non-Resistance in its full amplitude; Iov. p. 219.
yea, this very Doctrine declared to be the Law of this Kingdom, and that by
two express Acts of Parliament. And can you think the Two Houses were not in
earnest when they made this Declaration; surely had they not been so, they had
been very ridiculous to jest with all our Laws and Liberties, had they not
been, I say, verily persuaded of the truth of this Doctrine by Law as well as
by Scripture: So that I hope you must now be forced to confess, that even our
own Representatives have solemnly renounced for themselves and the whole
Nation, all right of Resistance, so much as defensive, against those
Commissioned by the King, upon any pretense or occasion whatsoever; and we have
left us nothing whereby to defend our selves against our Kings, or those
Commissioned by them (no not if they never so much abuse their power) but the
old Primitive Artillery of Preces, and Lachryma.


F. As for what you have more than once said, that this Doctrine of Resistance,
if carried home, always ends in the Deposition* and Murder of the King, though it
has I grant sometimes happened, yet that has not been always so, but most
often to the contrary, as appears in those Resistances that were made in the
Reigns of King Richard the First, Henry the Third, Edward the First, and diverse
times in Edward, and Richard the Second's Reign, before things were driven to
that extremity, as they afterward were; and as I will not justify the
Deposition of those Princes, though done by Parliament, yet will I not absolutely
condemn them, since no Act of Parliament has, as I know, ever done it: And
though it is true, all the proceedings in Parliament against Edward the Second,
are taken off the Rolls, yet was it not done by Order of Parliament, but by
Richard the 2d alone, when he by his exorbitant courses feared to be served
after the same manner; but that there was in those times some Ancient Law
extant, which was also destroyed by that King, appears by that remarkable
Declaration of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, sent by way of Message to
the King (then wilfully absenting himself from the Parliament) by the Duke of
Gloucester his Uncle, and the Bishop of Ely, who sure were too great to tell so
notorious a Lie: Col. 2683.
The Speech you will find at large in Knyghton, beginning thus; Domine R^x. And
after many Petitions, and good Advices, at last thus concludes; which I shall
give you in Latin, -- Sed and unum aeliud: de animo nostro superest nobis ex
part Populi vestri vobis intimare, habint enim ex antiquo Statuto, and de
facto non long retroactis temporibus experienter quod dolendum est habito, si
Rex maligno Consilio quocunque, vel inepta con^^macia aut contemptu, seu
protervae voluntate singulari, aut quovis modo irregulari se alienaverit a
Populo suo, nec voluerit per jura Regni, and Statuta, and laudabiles
Ordinationes cum salubri Consilio Dominorum, and Procerum Regni, gubernari, and
regulari, sed captios^ in suis in^anis Confiliis propriam voluntatem suam
singularem proterve exercere, tunc licitu^ est iis cum com^uni assensu Populi
Regni, ipsum Regem de Regali solio abrogare and propinquiorem aliquem de stirpe
Regis loco ejus in Regni solio sublimare.

From whence you may observe, that the Lords here relate to an Ancient Statute
or Law then in being, though the execution of it on the person of his great
Grandfather Edward the Second, was but of times not long passed; and that King
Richard might as well destroy the Record of that Law, being not then commonly
known, or in private men's hands, as well as he did diverse other Records, as
appears in the 24th Article against this King, wherein it is set forth, That
the said King had caused the Rolls of the Records touching the State, and
Government of this Kingdom to be defaced and razed, to the great prejudice of
his People, and the disinherison of the said Realm, etc. So that nothing is
more certain, than that the Two Houses of Parliament, at that time, did look
upon it as their undoubted right to Depose the King in case he violated the
Fundamental Laws and Constitutions of the Kingdom; though how this could consist
with that Power which the King then exercised, of calling and dissolving
Parliaments at his pleasure, I do not understand, since it can never be
supposed that a King, if in full power, would permit a Parliament, called in
his name to sit, to Depose himself for Evil Government.

As for the Resistance made by the Two Houses against King Charles the First, I
shall not undertake to justify, for the Reasons already given; as also because
it it was not a War undertaken by the general consent of the whole Kingdom, but
carried on chiefly by the Puritan or Presbyterian Party: For though the City of
London, and many other great Towns were for the Parliament; yet it is also
certain, that the major part of the Nobility and Gentry of England fought for
the King, and were so considerable a number, as to make an Anti-Parliament at
Oxford; so that this War could never have happened, had not the King parted
with the power of disobeying of the Parliament out of his hands; much less will
I justify the Murder of this King, or of any others abovementioned, as being
no necessary consequences of that Resistance I only allow for lawful, viz. that
of the whole or major part of the Nation; nor were Edw. the Second, or Richard
the Second put to death by any Act or Order of Parliament, but were murdered In
Prison; and the Murderers of Edward the Second were afterward attainted by Act
of Parliament, and Executed as they deserved: But as for the Murder of King
Charles the First, it is not to be taken into this account, it being not done
by the Authority of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, but by a Factious Rump
or Fag-End of the House of Commons, who fate by the power of the Army; after
far the major part of the Members who were for the King were shut out of doors,
and the Lords Voted useless and dangerous.


M. I confess you have made as good an Apology for these Actions as the matter
will bear; but that neither of the Two Houses can at this day have any Coercive
Power over the King, or to call him to an account for any thing he has done,
appears by the express Declaration of both Houses in the Statute of the 12th of
Charles the Second, as also in those but now cited, in which they utterly
disclaim all making War, whether offensive or defensive against His Majesty;
much less can he be subject to any other Coercive or Vindictive Power, or ought
any ways to be resisted by private persons; therefore supposing I should grant
(as I do not) that the Parliaments had formerly a power of Deposing of their
Kings, or that the Clergy, Nobility and People had formerly a right of taking
up Arms against the King in case of notorious Tyranny, and Misgovernment; yet
is all such Resistance expressly renounced, and declared unlawful by the Oath
and Declarations now cited; so that though in the dark Times of Popery such
Resistance might be counted lawful, not only by Laity, but also by the Bishops
and Clergy, who ought to have taught the people better Doctrine; yet I think it
had been much better for the Nation to have endured the worst that could have
happened from the Tyranny of Kings, than to have transgrest the Rules of the
Gospel, and the constant Doctrine of the Primitive Church by Resistance, and
Rebellion against the Supreme Power of the Nation.


F. I shall not now maintain that the Two Houses of Parliament have any
Authority at this day to Depose the King, or maintain a War against him, upon
any account; yet that they have still a power to judge of the King's Actions,
whether consonant to Law or not, and whether he has not broke the Fundamental
Constitutions of the Kingdom, is no where given up, as I know of: But that
Resistance in some cases is not contrary to the Doctrine of the Gospel, I have
already proved, and that it was not directly contrary to the Laws of the Land
before these Statutes, you do partly grant. But since the main strength of your
Cause, lies in this Oath appointed by these Acts of Parliament, therefore if I
can give a satisfactory Account of the true meaning and sense of these Acts, to
be otherwise than you suppose, I hope you will grant that Resistance may still
be lawfully made by the whole body of the people in the Cases I have now put,
against any persons, who under color and pretense of the King's Commission
should violently assault their persons in the free exercise of their Religion,
as it is by Law Established, or should go about to Invade^ their Just
Liberties, and Properties, which the Fundamental Laws of England have conferred
upon every Freeborn Subject of it.

And in order to the clearer proof of this, I shall make use of this Method: I
shall first explain the Terms of this Declaration, and then I shall proceed to
show you that in a legal sense all Defensive Arms, or Resistance of the King's
Person in some cases, or of those Commissioned by him is not forbidden, nor
intended to be forbid by these Statutes and Declarations: First then; By taking
Arms against the King, is certainly meant no more than making War against the
King, according to the Statute of the 25th of Edward the Third, which declares
making War against the King to be Treason, and this is unlawful upon any
pretense whatsoever. Secondly, The Clause by his Authority against his Person,
is only to be understood of the King's Legal Authority; and by his Person is
meant his Natural, and Politic Person when acting together, for the same ends,
as I shall show you by and by: So that both these Statutes are but declaratory
of the Ancient Common Law of England against taking up Arms, and making War
against the King, and do not introduce any new Law concerning this matter; so
that whatever was Treason by the Statute of the 25th of Edward the Third, is
Treason by these Statutes, and no more; viz. all taking up Arms, or actual
making War against the King in order to kill, depose, or imprison him, etc. as
Sir Edward Coke shows us in his third Institut. in his Notes upon this Statute;
yet notwithstanding after this Statute of the 25th of Edward the third, the
Clergy, Nobility and People of England assembled in Parliament, did suppose it
still lawful to take up Arms against those illegally Commissioned by the King
in case of notorious Misgovernment and breach of the Fundamental Laws of the
Nation, as appears by that general Resistance made by reason of the evil
Government of the Duke of Ireland, and those concerned with him, in the 11th of
Richard the Second, which, as I have already proved, was allowed for lawful by
Act of Parliament, and consequently by the King's own consent, without which it
could never have been so declared: The like I may say for that Resistance which
was made in King Henry the Sixth's Reign by Richard Duke of York, Vid.
Graston's Chronicle, p. 627.
and the Earls and Barons of his Party against the Evil Government of the Queen,
and the Duke of Sommerset, who governed all Affairs in an Arbitrary, and yet
unsuccessful manner, by reason of the easiness and weakness of King Henry: But
though this Resistance was also approved of in the next Parliament of the 33d
Year of this King, yet I shall not so much insist upon it, because I know you
will allege that this was made by the lawful Heir of the Crown against an
Usurper, since the Crown was not long after adjudged to be his right, though King
Henry was allowed to wear it during his life; yet however it shows the Opinion
of the Clergy, Nobility and People of England at that time concerning the
lawfulness of such Resistance, before this Declaration of the Estates of the
Kingdom concerning the Legality of the Duke of York's Title was made in the
Parliament abovementioned.

Thirdly, That the Parliament by these Statutes of the 13th of Charles the
Second for the Militia, never intended thereby to enable, or leave it in the
power of that King or his Successors, to make this Kingdom an absolute
Despotick Monarchy instead of a limited one, as they must have done, had they
declared that the King, and those Commissioned by him, might do what they
pleased with the Religion, Lives, Liberties, and Estates of the People of this
Nation, and that it was Treason to resist in any case whatsoever; sure they
could not but remember that Commission of Sir Phelim Oneals, in the year -- 41.
whereby he pretended to be empowered, to drive the English Protestants out of
Ireland, and to set up the Popish Religion in that Kingdom, and restore the
Irish to their Estates; and sure diverse of them could not be unmindful that
this was to give away all right of Self-defence in case any future King should
by his own innate Tyrannical Temper, or the evil Counsel of wicked men be
persuaded to use Force upon the persons of the Lords and Commons, either whilst
they were actually sitting, or in their passage to the New Houses, since by
this Act or Oath, if understood in your sense, they must have barred
themselves, and the whole Nation, of all right of Self-defence, in any case
whatsoever, though of the greatest extremity; and therefore I doubt not, but the
intent of this Parliament was to leave things as they found them; and as it was
absolutely unlawful for the People of this Nation to take up Arms against the
King, so it is also as unlawful in him, or those Commissioned by him, to make
War upon the People, or to disseize them by force of their Religion, just
Rights, Liberties or Estates; and if the King has a right to defend himself,
and his Crown and Dignity against Rebellion, so must the People of this Nation
have a right likewise to defend themselves against Arbitrary Power, in case of
an Invasion of any of the Fundamental Rights abovementioned; or else all
bounds between a Limited and Despotick Power will be quite taken away, and the
King may make himself as absolute as the King of France, or great Turk whenever
he pleases.


M. I will not dispute with you about bare matter of fact, or that a prevailing
Faction might not in turbulent times, and during the Reigns of weak and ill
advised Princes, take upon them by force of Arms to remove Evil Counselors,
and to put the Government of the Kingdom in what hands they pleased, and then
procure Acts of Parliament to indemnifie themselves for so doing; yet I cannot
allow that even such Acts could make it lawful to take up Arms against the
King, or those Commissioned by him, upon any pretense whatsoever: So that though
I grant that the intent of this Parliament of King Charles the Second, was not
to make any new Law against Resistance, or taking up Arms against the King, yet
was it their design so to explain the Ancient Statute of the 25th of Edward the
Third, that none should for the future doubt in the least, that all taking up
Arms, or Resistance of the King, or those Commissioned by him, upon any
pretense whatsoever, was unlawful and treasonable; and for this we need go no
farther than the very words of these Declarations, which the Parliaments of the
12th and 13th of Charles the Second have made concerning this matter; as first,
in the Statute of the 12th of Car. 2. Cap. 30. for attainting the Regicides,
that two Houses of Parliament expressly declared, That by the Fundamental Laws
of this Kingdom, neither the Peers of this Realm, nor the Commons, nor both
together in Parliament, nor the People collectively, or representatively, nor
any other persons whatsoever, ever had, has, or ought to have any Coercive
Power over the persons of the Kings of this Realm: Whereby not only all the
Traitorous Examples of the Depositions, and Imprisonments of King Edward, and
Richard the Second, are expressly condemned, but also all taking Arms to force
the King to redress our grievances, whether he will or not: And farther, that
all Arms, whether offensive or defensive, are expressly forbid. Pray mind that
Clause in the Preamble to these Acts of the Militia I now mentioned, wherein
that Parliament expressly renounces all taking up Arms, as well defensive as
offensive, against the King; and the words of the Oath it self are yet more
strict, that it is not lawful upon any pretense whatsoever, to take up Arms
against the King: Now can any thing be plainer than that all defensive Arms,
though for our Religion, Lives and Liberties, or whatsoever else you please, are
expressly declared to be against the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom.

But as for the dreadful consequences of this Law, if never so strictly taken,
they are not so bad as you are pleased to fancy; for as to your instance of Sir
Phelim Oneal's pretended Commission from King Charles the First, you may be
very well satisfied, that it was a notorious piece of forgery, since besides
that good King's constant denial of any such Commission granted by him, Sir
Phelim, when he came to suffer in Ireland, for raising that horrid Rebellion,
did voluntarily at the Gallows acknowledge, that he had forged it himself, by
putting the Seal of an old Patent which he had by him to that pretended
Commission you now mention: Nor indeed can it ever enter into my head, that any
King should grant a Commission to destroy or make War upon his People as long
as they continue in their duty to him, though of a different Religion from
himself; though perhaps he may think fit for some reasons, to disarm them, or
deny them the public Exercise of their Religion, or render them incapable of
bearing any Offices of public Trust in the Kingdom; but if these should be
lawful Causes of Resistance, why the Papists should not be allowed it as well
as the Protestants, I can see no reason to the contrary. As for your other
Instance, that the Parliament by renouncing all defensive Arms, must be
supposed likewise to give up all right of Self-defence in case the King, or any
Commissioned by him should use any violence to the persons of the Lords and
Commons assembled in Parliament, or in going thither, this is so unlikely, and
remote a case, that it hardly comes under the consideration of a bare
possibility: But however, let the worst that can be happen, I am very well
satisfied that the Parliament was then so thoroughly convinced of the Mischiefs
had befallen this Nation by this Republican Doctrine of Resistance, having been
the cause of the destruction of the best Constituted Church and Government in
the World; as also of the murder of one of the best Princes that ever Reigned,
that they were resolved rather to trust to the Coronation Oaths, and innate
goodness of our present and future Kings, than to suppose any War could be
lawfully made against them, upon any account whatsoever, which would have been
expressly contrary not only to the Doctrine of the Church of England, but the
known Laws of the Land.


F. I do not deny but the persons of the Kings and Queens of this Realm, are,
and ought to be sacred, and inviolable, and yet no man will therefore say, that
they are irresistible too in all cases whatsoever; as if the King (for example)
should attempt to ravish Women, or rob, or murder men upon the Highway, or in
the Streets, as the Ancient Historians relate of Nero and Commodus the
Emperors, and as is reported of the last King of Portugal, and which was one
of the reasons of the Estates of the Kingdom removing him from the Government:
And as our Henry the Fifth is related by our Historians to have robbed Men upon
the Highway before he was King; so if he had gone about to continue the same
frollick after he came to the Crown; I do believe his Person, and all those
that Robbed by his Commission, had not been irresistible; nor would it have
been Treason within the Statute of the 25th of Edward the Third, though he was
then actually King, any more than it would have been Treason had the like
happened when he was Prince, though he was expressly within that Statute, and yet
this would not have contradicted the Parliament^ Declaration in the 12th of
Car. the 2d. That neither the Parliament nor the People having Coercive Power
over the persons of the Kings of this Realm; since by Coercive Power must be
here understood, his being subject to the penalties of the Law, or being called
to an account by any ordinary Jurisdiction; but there is a vast difference
between that, and Resistance for Self defense, since I may use this against the
violence of my Father in the State of Nature, as I have already proved; though I
cannot justify the punishment of my Father, or calling him to an account as
his Superior; therefore it is only in the King's Politic Capacity that he can
be said to do no wrong, since you see he may personally commit the greatest
Crimes imaginable, though his person is unaccountable for want of a Superior
Power to call him to an account; yet is it not so with those who act by his
Illegal Commissions or Commands, since having delegated the Executive part of
his Regal Power to his subordinate Ministers, and Officers; it is they that are
accountable and punishable too by the Law of the Land in case they any way
transgress, or violate it, by his illegal Commissions or Commands, as I shall
prove more at large by and by. And as no War properly so called can be made
against a single person, but against a Man as he is aided or assisted by many
others: So this War against the King can only be interpreted of such Wars or
Rebellion as are made against him in his politic capacity as he is King, and
Supreme Governor of the Realm, and the Commander of all the Militia thereof to
Legal intents, and for the defense thereof against Foreign or Domestic Enemies;
nor was there any great fear according to the Ancient Legal Constitution of
this Kingdom, that this could often fall out, or indeed he put in practice by
the Kings of this Realm, if we consider the Ancient Form of ordering the
Forces, or Militia of this Kingdom.

For in the first place I desire you to observe, that by the Common Law of
England before these Acts of the Militia, the King himself could not but in
case of Invasion or Insurrection Levy or keep on foot any standing Forces in
England, unless for Foreign Succors, which was usually by Contract with some
great Lord or other Person, or by Tenure against the Scotch and Welsh; and as
for the Militia, it was never reduced into Troops, Companies, or Regiments,
till the Spanish Invasion, as will appear by all Acts of Parliament in the
Statutes at large where Acts for the Assize of Arms were made only for Men, to
provide and have in readiness such Horses and Arms, to show them before the
King's Commissioners when they should be required to take view of them, a
Regimented Militia, being of no elder date than Queen Elizabeth. King James the
First did by Act of Parliament in the first year of his Reign repeal all former
Acts for Assize of Arms, and never established any thing in (...) thereof. So
it stood till King Charles the Seconds time, that these new Acts for the
Militia were made. And (to confirm this point beyond all dispute) in all the
quarrels between the King and the Barons, and York and Lancaster, the
Parliament still refused to meet unless the Forces were disbanded that were
raised upon those occasions. Nor had any King standing Forces or Guards, till
King Henry the Seventh^ Time, when that of the Yeomen was settled by a special
Act of Parliament; and what is most remarkable, the Commons in the Long
Parliament of Charles the Second did by their Votes entered upon their Journals
declare and assert, that by Law no Armed Force could be kept up in time of
Peace, except the Militia; and as for Foreign Succors, they were obliged to be
carried immediately to the Port of their discharge, and were not to exceed one
Month at furthest from the time of their first Muster; as for Castles and Forts
within the Realm, they were all supplied and defended by Tenures; but for the
Militia, of old time, it was in the Sheriffs of the Counties to make use
thereof for the Execution of the Laws, and defense of the Kingdom, except in
the cases aforesaid; and it was Treason for any Subject to Levy Soldiers,
except by the King's Commission, and in the cases aforesaid; or so much as to
Ride or go Armed, as may appear by the Statute of Northampton, in the 2d of
Edward the Third; much less was it lawful for them to take up Arms, unless in
their own defense against Illegal Violence, and in such manner as the Law
directs; and it was one of the Articles that was adjudged to be Treason in
Parliament against Mortimer, Vide Parliam. Roll. 410 of Ed 3. de Reg. de Mort.
Mar. Art. the 2d.
that he Rid Armed to Parliaments, and threatened the Prelates and Peers that
did any thing against his will, and caused the King to make War on his Nobles,
who advised the King to Levy War upon his Subjects. See Coke's 4th Institutes
Title Council Board, where the 4th Article against the Spencers is, that they
falsely and maliciously had counseled the King to raise Horse and Arms in
destruction of the good People, against the Form of Magna Charta, and so by
their Evil Counsel would have moved War within the Realm to the destruction of
Holy Church and of the People for their proper quarrel; so that taking Arms by
the King against his Subjects, and the Subjects against the King, was both
alike against Law.

2ly, That taking Arms against the King in construction of Law, is Levying War;
but this by no means extends to defensive Arms in maintenance of the Law, which
is allowed and enjoined; and that nothing else was here mean, is plain, since
by the subsequent words in this Oath it is restrained to the taking Arms by his
Authority against his Person, or those Commissioned by him* which shows that
nothing here is intended to be forbidden, but taking up offensive Arms upon
popular pretenses without and against the Authority of the Law, which is
further explained in another Test by the Authority of both Houses of Parliament.

Thirdly, It Is observable, this is but a Test upon some that were to come into
Offices, and can by no means make any change in the Ancient Law, which cannot
be changed by Implication; nor does this amount to so much; the first part of
this Oath requiring only that the party admitted into Office, shall so declare
and believe,; and though the second Clause call it a Traitorous Position, yet
this is restrained only to these two particulars, That Arms may not be taken up
by the King's Authority against his Person, or those Commissioned by him, which
can have reference to nothing but that distinction taken up in the late Times
of Civil War, when the Parliament pretended to take Arms, and grant Commissions
in the Name of King and Parliament, by virtue of that Authority which they
supposed he left with them at Westminster; so that this Clause can by no means
exclude any Arms made use of for Legal defense according to Law.

Fourthly and lastly; Though the words against those Commissioned by him may seem
to extend the matter further, and is mistaken by some, as if ^t required at
least Passive Obedience to all Commissions of the King, though never so illegal;
yet there is not the least color for it, since nothing is a Commission but the
King's Legal Command or Authority pursuant to some Law, and for putting the
same in Execution, which is the Legal definition of a Commission; and when this
Test was first brought in to the second Parliament of King Charles the 2d, and
that the word Legal was offered to be added to the Bill; upon a long Debate it
was only left out, because it was declared by all the Lawyers in the House,
(even by Sir Hen. Finch, then the King's Solicitor) and agreed to by the whole
House, that it was clearly implied, and could bear no other construction, but
that all Illegal Commissions were Null, and void, and in no Legal sense could
be called Commissions; so that taking up Arms in the defense of the Law, and
pursuant thereunto, cannot in any wise be called a taking Arms against the
King's Person, or those Commissioned by him; and farther that by the words, in
pursuance of such Military Commissions are meant such as are warranted by that
Act, and such as the King may issue, by his Royal Authority which is bounded by
Law, and consequently cannot grant any Commissions, but what are according to
Law; so that if these Commissions are granted to persons utterly disabled by
Law to take them, as all are that will not take the Test appointed by the Act
of the 25th of K. Charles the Second, entitled, An Act to prevent the dangers
that may arise from Popish Recusants; as also all Commissions to do any
Illegal, violent action, are absolutely void, and consequently may be resisted;
or else our Magna Charta, with all the other Laws that establish Liberty and
Property, as also our very Religion it self Established by Law, may be either
undermined by the King's new Dispensing Power, or else subverted by open force;
and every Commission* Officer in a Red Coat, will be as sacred, and
irresistible as the King himself.

But to conclude; That the Instances I have given, that the King's Commission
may be abused to the destruction of the Nation, nay of the whole Parliament,
are not so unlikely and remote as you imagine. Pray let me put you in (...),
that as for that pretended Commission to Sir Phelim Oneal, though it is true, it
did prove afterward to be forged, yet was it not known to be so till long
after; and therefore having all the signs of a true Commission under the King's
great Seal, the poor Protestants in Ireland were to have had their Throats cut
according to this Oath, before ever they could be satisfied whether it were
true or not: But that a Popish King persecuting and destroying his Protestant
Subjects only for matters of Religion, is not so improbable a thing as you
would have it; the French King's late Dragooning, Imprisoning, and sending to
the Galleys all that refused to renounce Heresy, (as they call it,) and
subscribe to the Articles of the Romish Religion, has given us but too sad, and
recent an example; and how you can assure me that the King acting upon these
very Principles, and being governed by like Confessors, will never do the same
things, I should be glad to receive some better satisfaction than his bare word
to the contrary. Nor yet is my other Instance of its being left according to
your Doctrine in the King's power to make a violent assault upon the persons
both of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, whenever he pleased,
without any Resistance whatsoever, so remote and improbable as you are pleased
to make it; since you may find it still upon Record among the Articles
exhibited in Parliament against Robert de Vere, Duke of Ireland, Robert
Tresilian Chief Justice, and Sir Nicholas Brembur in the Parliament of the 11th
of Richard the Second, Vid. Rot. Parl. 11 Rich. 2. pars secunda.
(which I have already mentioned) the 15th Article of which was, That they by
their false Council had caused the King to command the said Nicholas, being
then Mayor of London, suddenly to rise with a great power to kill and put to
death the said Lords; ( viz. Thomas Duke of Gloucester, and the other Lords
there named) and the Commons ( viz. of the Parliament of the 10th of this King)
who were not of their Party and Conspiracy; for the doing of which wickedness,
the said grand Traitors abovesaid were parties and presents to the destruction
of the King, and his Realm: So that if this Treason had not been discovered,
and that no private persons might then resist those Commissioned by the King,
it would have been Treason according to your principles, for the said Lords and
Commons, to have resisted those that were thus sent to assault them, and take
away their Lives; and what has once happened, it is not impossible but it may
happen again. And we may remember how about little more than 30 years since
that the K. of Denmark shut up the Senators, and Nobility of the great Council
of that Kingdom in Coppenhagen, and threatened them with Death, or Imprisonment
if they refused to give up all their Liberties, and from an Elective King make
him and his Successors absolute hereditary Monarchs, as they are at this day by
means of the Bishops and Clergy of that Kingdom, who then basely gave up, and
betrayed the Liberty of their Country; and what they have now got by it, they
best know; therefore this is a thing to be considered as a necessary
consequence of your sense of this Oath: So that upon the whole matter, and
considering the late Scene of Affairs, I dare leave it to the Judgment of any
indifferent Foreiner, though a Papist, which was most likely before the
unexpected coming of the Prince of Orange into this Kingdom, that the People
should rise up in Arms, and expel the King from his Throne, or that he should
by virtue of the pretended sense of this Oath, backed by your Doctrine of
Passive Obedience, have enslaved this Nation, and set up what Government and
Religion he pleased.


M. I must confess you have given a very cunning, and specious gloss upon the
words of this Oath, and Declaration of the Parliament of King Charles the
Second; but whether it is legal or not, I very much doubt, since I never heard
of it before; and I could have wished, that if they designed not to lay a snare
upon Men's Consciences in this great point, that they would have been more clear
in expressing all those Cases wherein it might be lawful for us to resist the
King, or those Commissioned by him; as also who should judge when the King's
Commissions are so illegal and violent as to require Resistance; for if every
private Subject may judge of the legality, or illegality of the King's Military
Commissions, and can raise a Party strong enough to make opposition against
those that are Commissioned by them in the Execution of the King's Orders, a
discontented Party of this Nation may soon find a pretense to raise another
Rebellion, and Civil War as dreadful as the former; and notwithstanding your
great care and concern for the King's person, which you grant to be sacred and
inviolable, could it long continue so; for if the King himself appeared at the
Head of his Men to command, and encourage them in their duty, it would be much
worse, as long as the matter they took up Arms for, should be by them accounted
a violation of the Laws. Thus we may remember, that though the Parliament of --
41. did pretend to take up Arms for defense of the King's person, and only to
take away Evil Counselors; yet did they for all that, order their Generals and
Officers to fight a^ much when the King was personally present, as at any other
place or time; so that His Majesty's person (had not God thought fit to order
it otherwise) might have been as well destroyed in the Battles of Edg-hill, or
Naseby, as his great Grandfather King James the Third of Scotland was in that
Battle against his Rebellious Subjects headed by his own Son: So that according
to your interpretation, instead of mending the matter, this Parliament of King
Charles the Second had only left it far worse than they found it: For whereas
the Long Parliament made themselves the sole Judges, and Redressers of the
King's Violations of the Peoples Rights: Now according to your interpretation
of this Oath, and Declaration of the Parliament of King Charle^'s the Second,
every private Man may not only judge of the King's Violation of the Law by his
Military Commissions, but also make Resistance against them whenever they
think themselves able so to do; and then notwithstanding, that Parliament utter
renouncing all Arms, whether offensive, or defensive, to be raised by
themselves against the King, they would have still left a power in any part of
the People strong enough to make this Resistance which they had renounced for
themselves, who are their Lawful Representatives. Thus for example, supposing
the last Civil War had begun upon the account of raising of Ship Money, which
whether it was lawful, I will not now dispute; it was sufficient that all the
Judges except two gave their Opinions for it; and if any County in England
strong enough to make an Insurrection, had rose in Arms upon the Levying of
this Tax (as it has several times happened even about Taxes granted in
Parliament) this Tax (though small) yet being looked upon against Law, must have
engaged the whole Nations in a Civil War, and also endangered His Majesty's
person in case he had appeared in the Field with those Men he had raised to
subdue that Rebellion; so that I am still satisfied that it is far better to
suffer a mischief than an inconvenience; that is, it is better to trust to the
King's Conscience, and Discretion, what Commissions to grant, though sometimes
perhaps they may chance to be illegal, than to leave it in the power of the
people to rise in Rebellion whenever they think such Commissions to violate
their supposed, or pretended Liberties and Properties.


F. I see you will not argue against the Resistance of the King's person in
case he should go about to Ravish, Rob, or Murder his people: But now you raise
another difficulty who shall judge, and consequently make this Resistance
against the King's Commissions, when executed by illegal persons, to illegal
and violent ends; for if the people may judge for themselves of the illegality
of such Commissions, a Rebellion may be raised, and His Majesty's person
endangered, notwithstanding all the provision the Parliament have made against
it. But before I answer this Argument of yours, pray give me leave to ask you
one or two Questions; Do you think the King's Late Declaration for the
Dispensing Power, and the Commissions granted thereupon to be according to Law
or not?


M. I must confess I think they are unlawful, yet it does not follow that they
may be therefore resisted.


F. I do not ask you that now; but only tell me whether you think the Bishops
are obliged in Conscience to disperse that Declaration, or the Clergy to read
it in their Churches? and whether those have done well who have refused to read
it?


M. I must tell you, I am so good a Protestant, and so true an Englishman, that
I cannot allow the King that power; and therefore I must grant that the Bishops
did nobly, and like true Christian Bishops to refuse to disperse it; and where
it was dispersed the Inferior Clergy have done very well not to read it.


F. Well then, notwithstanding all the dreadful Mischiefs proceeding from
private Subjects juding of the legality, or illegality of the King's
Declarations, and Commissions, or Commands; yet they may, it seems, not only
judge whether they are lawful, or not; but a disobedience to them may not only
be lawfully exercised, but is very commendable: Now what is this disobedience
to these Commands, but a Moral, or Civil Resistance of the King's Power in this
matter? and why may not such a Judgment he made by the People in as plain a
case, and also Resistance follow thereupon against such violent illegal
Commissions (suppose to raise Money without Act of Parliament, or to Dragoon
Men to go to Mass) since the violence is more evident and apparent in this case
upon Men's persons, than in the other upon the bare Consciences of the Bishops
and Clergy? for the force being more immediate, and pressing upon their Persons
and Estates, there is no other means left but to resist it if they are able.


M. I can give you very good reasons to satisfy you, why, though I grant private
Subjects, may judge of the Legality or Illegality of the King's Commissions,
and also refuse to obey His Illegal Commands, and also that all public
Officers ought to take care at their peril how they act by or execute such
Illegal Commissions; yet that it does not therefore follow that such illegal
Commissions or Orders though executed upon the whole body of the People, may be
resisted by them; for all limitation of the Royal Power being only voluntary,
and proceeding from the mere grace, and favor of our Kings, they are not
compellable by force, or resistable if they should impose their own
Proclamations, S. C. R. p. 190. and deinde.
or Edicts upon us instead of Laws. For though I grant that the King has no
Just, or Legal Authority to act against Law, and that if he knowingly put any
Subject to death contrary to Law he is a Murderer; and no Prince can have any
such Prerogative, as to commit open downright murders; either in his own person
or by those who act by Commission from him; but what follows from hence? That
they may resist or oppose them if they do. This I absolutely deny, because God
and the Law have Commanded us, not to resist, and I see no inconsistency
between those two Propositions; That a King has no Authority to act against
Law, and yet that neither He, nor those commissioned by Him though acting
against Law may be resisted. Both the Law of God, and the Laws of our Country
suppose these two to be very consistent.

For notwithstanding the possibility that Princes may thus abuse their Power,
and transgress the Laws whereby they ought to govern, yet they also command
Subjects in no case to resist, and it is not sufficient to justify Resistance
if Princes do what they have no just Authority to do, unless we have also a
just Authority to resist, he who exceeds the just bounds of this Authory is
liable to be called to an account for it, but he is accountable only to those
who have a Superior Authority to call him to an account. No Power whatsoever is
accountable to an Inferior, for this is a contradiction to the very Notion of
Power, and destructive of all Order and Civil Government. Inferior Magistrates
are on all hands acknowledged to be liable to give an account of the abuse of
their Power, but to whom must they give an account? Not to their Inferiors, not
to the People whom they are to Govern, but to Superior Magistrates, or to the
Sovereign Prince who Governs all. Thus the Sovereign Prince may exceed his
Authority, and is accountable for it to a Superior Power; But because he has
no Superior Power on Earth, he cannot be resisted by his own Subjects, but must
be reserved to the Judgment of God who alone is the King of Kings.


F. In the first place I deny (and I have sufficiently proved the contrary)
that all Limitation of Royal Power proceeded at first from the mere grace, and
favor of our Kings, since the Crown of England, has been from its first
Institution Limited by Laws, and the People have likewise always enjoyed a
property in their Lives, Liberties and Estates by the same Laws: Though I grant,
you and I are thus far agreed, That the King has no Just and and Legal
Authority to act against Law, and that if he put any man to Death, or take away
his Estate contrary to it, it is Murder, and Robbery: And likewise that the
Subjects may be capable of Judging concerning such illegal Commands; but you
will not allow, that if such a Limited Monarch should send his Mercenary
Forces to take away our Estates, or to Dragoon us till we will own our selves
of his Religion, that those Instruments of his Tyranny may be resisted; or that
I have brought any reason for it. Whereas if you had but attended better to my
discourse at our 3d and 4th Meetings, you might have remembered that I plainly
enough proved to you, that God has not given Princes, nor those Commissioned
by them, any Authority to Murder, or enslave their Subjects; and your self then
granted, That every Man has power to defend his Life against him who has no
Authority to take it away; S.C.R. p. 59.
which holds more strongly in our Constitution; where if the King give a Man a
Commission to act contrary to the Law of the Land, it is altogether void, and
the People may as well justify their Resistance of those Officers, or
Soldiers who should come to Dragoon, or persecute them, for professing the
Religion Established by Law, as if he had sent them downright to cut their
Throats; and this being their Right by the Laws of God, and Nature, whether God
has taken away this Right by any express Precept in the holy Scripture, I also
examined at those Meetings; but whether any Municipal Law of the Land has
restrained us from it, I have also now considered, and proved it contrary to
the true intent and meaning of these Acts concerning the Militia. And therefore
to say, that it is not sufficient to justify Resistance if Princes do, or
command what they have no Legal Authority for, unless we can also show an
Authority to resist, is a mistake, if by Authority you mean an express Civil
Law for it, because such Resistance in absolute Monarchies is justifiable by
that which is Prior to all Civil Laws, the Right of Self-defence, or
Preservation: And so likewise in Limited Kingdoms there is the same necessity
of Defensive Arms upon a general Breach, or Violation of any Fundamental
Constitution of the Government, since it cannot be kept, or maintained without
such Resistance be allowed.

So that if the King has no Authority to act contrary to Law, he cannot sure
delegate that to others, which he had not in himself; and consequently such
Commissions to Persecute, or Murder Men contrary to Law, being in themselves
void, the persons that Execute them being no Officers, may be justly resisted,
and the Resistance of such an Illegal Act does not at all derogate from his
Sovereignty as King, since (as I told you before) that is limited only to the
performance of Legal Acts, and extends not to Illegal Orders, or Commands; and
as for the rest of the Reasons you give against this Resistance, viz. because
he who exceeds the just bounds of his Authority, is liable to be called to an
account for it, only by those who have a Superior Authority to do it; Whereas
no Power whatsoever is accountable to an Inferior: You do but impose upon me
and your self, the same Fallacy which you have so often made use of, in making,
being accountable, all one, with irresistible, which are vastly different, and
therefore your Conclusion is as false, that because the Sovereign Prince may
exceed his Authority, and is only accountable for it to God; that therefore he
cannot be resisted by his own Subjects; for he may be resisted, and yet be
still unaccountable, those two differing as must us Self-defence does from
punishment, as I have more than once told you.


M. I cannot rest satisfied with this Reply; for though I so far agree with
you, S. C. R. p. 192, 193.
that an Act without a Legal Authority carries no Obligation at all along with
it, and therefore cannot oblige the Subject to Obedience: Now this is true, if
by Obedience you mean an Active Obedience; for I am not bound to do an ill
thing, or an Illegal Action, because my Prince commands me; but if you mean
Passive Obedience, it is as manifestly false; for I am bound to obey, that is,
not to resist my Prince when he offers me the most unjust and illegal Violence.
Nay it is very false and absurd to say, that every Illegal is an
Inauthoritative Act, which carries no Obligation with it. This is contrary to
the practice of all Human Judicatures, and the daily Experience of Men, who
suffer in their Lives, Bodies, or Estates, by an unjust, or illegal Sentence.
Every judgment contrary to the true meaning of the Law is in that sense
illegal; and yet such illegal Judgments have their Authority, and Obligation,
till they are rescinded by some higher Authority. This is the true reason of
Appeals from Inferior to Superior Courts, to rectify Illegal Proceedings,
and reverse Illegal Judgments, which supposes, that such Illegal Acts have
Authority till they are made null, and void by a higher Power: And if the
higher Powers, from whence lies no Appeal, confirm and ratify an Unjust, and
Illegal Sentence; it carries so much Authority, and Obligation with it, that
the Injured person has no Redress, but must patiently submit, and thus it must
necessarily be, or there can be no end of Disputes, nor any Order, or
Government observed in Human Societies.

And this is a plain Demonstration, that though the Law be the Rule according to
which Princes ought to exercise their Authority and Power; yet the Authority is
not in the Laws, but in the Persons that Execute them: For otherwise why is not
a Sentence pronounced according to Law by a private person, of as much
Authority as a Sentence pronounced by a Judge? or how does an Illegal Sentence
pronounced by a Judge come to have any Authority? For a sentence contrary to
Law cannot have the Authority of the Law: And why is a Legal, or Illegal
Sentence reversible, and alterable, when pronounced by one Judge, and
irreversible and unalterable when pronounced by another? For the Law is the
same, and the Sentence is the same, either according to Law, or against it,
whoever the Judge be: But indeed the Authority of the person is not the same,
and that makes the difference. So that there is an Authority in persons in some
sense distinct from the Authority of Laws, nay superior to it: For there is
such an Authority, as, though it cannot make an Illegal Act Legal; yet it can,
and often does make an Illegal Act binding and obligatory to the Subjects when
pronounced by a competent Judge.


F. I think notwithstanding all you have now said your distinction of a Supreme
Authority in Persons above, and distinct from the Authority of Laws will prove
a mere Notion, for you grant that the King has no Just or Legal Authority to
act against Law, and that if he put any man to death contrary to it, it is
downright murder; but you will not allow that if the King should thus murder
never so many thousands, either he, or those Instruments of Tyranny may be
resisted; And therefore you would fain top upon me your old distinction of an
Active, and Passive Obedience: The former of which I very well understand, but
as for the latter I have long since proved, that it is so far from being any
Obedience, that it is indeed downright Disobedience, or a refusal to do that
which the Prince Commands, so that truly your self have taught me to
distinguish between the King's Personal Authority and his Legal, for otherwise,
why are you not as much obliged to yield an Active Obedience to the King's
Personal Illegal Commissions or Commands as to his Legal ones, if there were no
difference between them? So then all the difference between us lies in the
measure of the Disobedience, you maintaining that it is sufficient not to yield
Obedience to such Illegal Commissions and Commands; and I that besides this
denial of Obedience, (if it be in a fundamental point, and that which generally
concerns the whole body of the Kingdom) that they may not only be disobeyed but
resisted too, if forced upon us with violence; and therefore all that you have
said to prove that the Authority to which we are bound to submit, consists not
in the Laws, but in the Persons though acting contrary to Law; is according to
your own way of reasoning altogether unconclusive.

And farther, when you say, that it is false, and absurd to affirm, that every
Illegal, is an unauthoritative Act which carries no Obligation with it; I shall
prove, that this absurdity lies wholly on your side. For 1. Legal and
Authoritative, I. R. S. p. 15.
are all one in our Law, for that which is not Legal carries no Authority along
with it; so that Illegal Authority is in plai^^ English, unlawful, lawful
Power* nor had K. Charles 1. any such extravagant Notion of his Royal
Authority, (who certainly understood his own Power better than you or I,) when
he owns in his Declaration to the Long Parliament dated, from Newmarket 1641.
That the Law is the measure of his Power, which is as full a Concession of the
thing I affirm as words can express; For if the Laws be the measure of it, then
his Royal Power, or Authority (which is all one) is Limited by it. For the
measure of any thing is the Limits or bounds of the thing Limited, and when it
exceeds those bounds it is an Illegal, and consequently an Unauthoritative Act,
which carries no Obligation either Active or Passive along with it. So likewise
in the said King's answer, to both Houses concerning the Militia, speaking of
the Men by them named to him to be Commissioners for it; He thus replied, If
more Power shall be thought fit to be granted to them than by Law is in the
Crown it self, His Majesty holds it reasonable, that the same be by some Law
first vested in him, with Power to transfer it to these Persons; etc. In which
Passage it is granted, that all the Power, or Authority of the Crown concerning
the Militia is by or from the Law, and that the King has no more Authority
than what is vested in him by the Law of the Land.

2. Your Argument from the practice of Human Judicatures is also very
fallacious, for you Argue from the bare abuse of a Trust, or Commission, with
the Execution of which all Judges and Officers must be entrusted, to that which
is quite of another Nature, ( viz:) When the Person entrusted Acts directly
contrary to his Commission, or without any Commission at all: And therefore you
are quite out in your Law, when you tell me, that an Absolute Illegal Judgment
is valid, till it be reversed, for if it be appearantly contrary to the known
Forms of Law, and practice of the Kingdom, it is so far from being valid, that
though it be put in Execution, it would be looked upon as null, and done without
any Authority at all: As suppose the King in person, or any Inferior Judge,
I.R.S. p. 15, 16.
should condemn a Man to die, either contrary to the Verdict of his Jury, or
without any Jury at all; this is so far from being Authoritative, or valid,
that such a Judgment is void in it self, and those are guilty of Murder, who
execute it, and it will need no Writ of Error to reverse it: But I suppose by
Illegal Judgments, you mean such Judgments, which have some Error in them,
either in matter of Law, or Form, for which they may be reversed: I grant if
these should not be looked upon as valid, and hold good till they are reversed
in a higher Court, there could not be any Judgment given at all, since all
Human Judicatories whatsoever are subject to Errors and Mistakes; and there is
sure a great deal of difference between such actions as are done by that
Authority which the Law entrusts them with, though not duly exercised, and those
violent and illegal acts which a Prince, when he persecutes, and enslaves his
Subjects, performs by his wicked Instruments, contrary to all Divine and Human
Laws: So that the validity of such an Erroneous Judgment, is not from the
Judges personal Authority, above the Law, nor from his mistake or ignorance of
the Law, but from that high Credit and Authority which the Law has given to
all Courts and Judicial Proceedings, which if they are done in due form, are to
be taken for Law, however unjust and must be presumed to be free from Error,
till they are reversed in some higher Court.


M. But if you please better to consider of it, you will find a necessity of
owning a Supreme Power in the King beyond all Appeal, or Resistance, S.C.R. p.
196. and deinde.
and that there must be a personal Authority in him; antecedent, and superior
to all Civil Laws; for there can be no Laws without a Lawmakers; and there can
be no Lawmakers unless there be one, or more persons invested with the Power of
Government, of which, making Laws is one principal branch; for a Law is nothing
else but the public, and declared Will, and Command of the Lawmakers whether
they be a Sovereign Prince, or the People.

And hence it necessarily follows, that a Sovereign Prince does not receive his
Authority from the Laws, Ibidem 197. and deinde.
but Laws receive their Authority from him: And I must be still of the same
Opinion as to Bracton's words, which you before quoted, Lex facit Regem, the
Law makes the King; by which I cannot believe that that great Lawyer meant that
the King received the Sovereign Power from the Law, for the the Law has no
Authority, nor can give any, but what it receives from the King; and then it is
a wonderful, riddle, how the King should receive his Authority from the Law.
And therefore I must stick to my former Interpretation, that when he says the
Law makes the King, that is, it distinguishes him from a Tyrant, as appears
from the reason he gives for it, i. e. Non est enim Rex ubi dominatur voluntas
and non Lex, he is no King that Governs by his Arbitrary Will, and not by Law,
not that he is no Sovereign Prince, but he is a Tyrant and not a King.

And hence it as evidently follows, that the Being of Sovereign Power is
independent on Laws, that is, as a Sovereign Prince does not receive his
Sovereign Power from the Law, so should he violate the Laws, by which he is
bound to govern: Yet, he is not to be resisted, much less does he forfeit his
Power. It Is true he breaks his Faith to God, and his Country, but he is a
Sovereign Prince still. And now I hope it plainly appears that every Illegal
act the King does, or Illegal Commission that he grants, is not an
inauthoritative Act, or Commission, but lays on the Subject an Obligation to
yield if not Active, yet a Passive Obedience. And in the King's most Illegal
acts, though they have not the Authority of Laws yet they have the Authority of
Sovereign Power, which is irrisistible, and unaccountable. In a word it does
not become any Man, who can think three consequences off, to talk of the
Authority of Laws in derogation to the Authority of Sovereign Power; The
Sovereign Power, made the Laws and can Repeal them, and Dispense with them, and
make new Laws; The only Power, and Authority of the Laws is in in the Power,
that can make, and execute Laws; Sovereign Power is unseparable from the Person
of a Sovereign Prince; though the exercise of it may be regulated by Laws, and
tho the Prince does very ill who having consented to such a Regulation, breaks
the Laws, yet when he acts contrary to Law, such acts carry Sovereign, and
irrisistible Authority with them, while he continues a Sovereign Prince.


F. I am very well satisfied, notwithstanding all you have hitherto said, that
the Government of England owns no such thing as this Arbitrary Power with which
you would invest the King; since I have already proved at our ^th meeting that
the King is not the Sole Legislator, and consequently not the Sole Supreme
Power. So likewise our Law it does as little understand any such thing as a
Personal Authority in the King, antecedent and Superior to all Laws. For since
God has now left off making Kings by his own special appointment, as he did
among the Jews, every King must either be so by the Law, or Custom of that
Country, or else a bare possession of the Throne is sufficient to make him so;
and then every Usurper has as much right to a Crown as the most lawful Prince,
and Oliver Cromwell was as rightful a Prince as King Charles the Second. It is
true the first King of any Race could not be invested with the Crown by the
same Law, as his Successors are, that is, by an Hereditary proximity of Blood;
Yet such a King, whenever he began to be so, could have no Legal Right, without
the Election, Recognition, or Consent of the People. And as for an Hereditary
Right, that is but a Right by the Law of the Land, or general Consent of the
People, (testified by an uninterrupted Custom) to entail the Crown on such a
Family, so that in either Case they are Kings by Law; and therefore I conceive
it can be only in this sense, that Bracton says Lex facit Regem, i. e. The Law
of the Kingdom, makes the King, which more plainly appears, by what immediately
follows, attribuat igitur Rex Legi, quod Lex attribuit ei, viz. Dominationem,
and Potestatem, in which words nothing seems more plain, than that the King
ought to yield the like Dominion, and Power to the Law, as the Law had given
him before; or else how could Bracton call the Law (in the place I have already
cited,) the Kings Superior? And if the Kings Title to the Crown were not by
Law? How came it to pass that the Stewards for Example had a better Tittle to
the Crown of Scotland than the Bayliols? but only that the Laws of Scotland,
that is the Consent of the States of that Kingdom, made them so, for otherwise
any man that looks upon the Pedigree of both those Families, will see, that
Bayliol according to our rules of Descent was the nearer of Blood to the last
King David than Bruce, and was so ajudged, upon a solemn hearing by our King
Edward 1. ih Parliament. And as for William whom you call the Conqueror under
whom all our present King's do claim at this day, he could have no just Right,
or Title to the Crown of England by Conquest, but by the Election, or
Submission of the People declared by them at his Coronation. And therefore that
Law by which he was made King must be precedent, or at least concurrent with
his being so; and upon whatever terms, or Conditions he then accepted it, his
Successors are bound both by the Laws of God, and Man to observe them. And
therefore whatever you have built upon, or would infer from these Principles is
of no force. And If the King be the Sole Sovereign Power, that makes the Laws,
repeals them and dispenses with them when he pleases; I would be glad to know
upon what grounds so many of the Bishops and Clergy refused to read the King's
Declaration of Indulgence, Since certainly if he alone made the Laws, he also
could dispense with them; But I shall say no more of these Points now because
they are not directly to the matter in hand.


M. As for what you say concerning the King's not being the sole Supreme
Legislative Power, I confess you and I have discoursed long upon that point;
and if I were thoroughly satisfied of it, I could much easier assent to what
you have said; as also if you could prove to me, that the King received his
Power from the People, and not from God, the matter would be yet plainer; for
then it would evidently appear, that the People might have reserved to
themselves such a Right of Resistance as you now maintain; but that they never
could have such a power in England, from the Constitution of this Monarchy, I
need go no farther than your own Instance of William the Conqueror, who owed
all his Right to this Kingdom to the power of the Sword, and not to any
Hereditary Right, much less Election, or Confirmation of the People, as I think
Doctor Brady has proved beyond dispute in his Learned Answer to Argumentum
Antinor manleum; so that since we owe all the Rights and Liberties we enjoy to
the gracious Concessions of our Kings of this Norman Race, we ought not in
reason, or gratitude to resist them, if they should sometimes encroach upon
what we take to be part of those Liberties so granted; no not if the King (who
derives an Indefeasible Right to the Crown from the Title of the first
Conqueror) should go about to take away all those Liberties, nay our very
Religion and Property too from us.

But I have not time to pursue this Argument further now, and therefore shall
leave it to another opportunity.


F. As for what you have now said concerning William the First's having no
Right to the Crown of this Kingdom, but what he owed to his Sword, is false in
matter of fact, it being more than that Prince himself ever asserted or
pretended to; and in the next place, as for your Dr's. proving him an Absolute
Conqueror over the English Nations, supposing he had done it (which yet I
positively deny) yet will not this serve to do the business for which the
Doctor urges it; viz. to set up an Arbitrary, Irresistible Power in that King,
and all his Successors, but may be urged against him to a quite contrary
purpose, as I shall show you more at large, whenever you please to discourse
farther upon that Subject: And as for all those things we call Legal, our
Rights and Privileges, which you say were wholly granted us by the Charters of
his Successors, I have already proved that to be false in matter of fact at
our fifth Meeting, where I showed you that the English Nation had the same
Liberties, as to their Persons and Properties in their Estates before your
pretended Conquest, as they enjoyed afterward; and that Magna Charta was but
the recital and confirmation of our Ancient English Laws, as Mat. Paris affirms
in the place I here formerly cited; but admitting these Liberties and
Privileges you mention had been owing to the favor and bounty of former
Kings, yet can I see no Rebellion or ingratitude the People of this Nation are
guilty of, if they keep and defend them now they have them, but would rather
betray a servile, base spirit if we part with them: For since it is a Maxim in
Law, concerning all Grants, as well from the Crown as private persons, that
they ought so to enure ut Res magis valeat, quem pereat; i. e. that the Parties
to whom the Grant is is made, may not lose the benefit of it; when ever the
Grantor pleases. Therefore it is also a rule in such Grants, that they are
still to be interpreted in favor of the Grantee against the Grantor, and also,
that the Grantee shall not be left without some means or remedy of keeping, and
defending his right against the Grantor whenever he goes about to take it away;
nor do I know any exception there is for the Kings Grants more than those of
private Subjects; Bract. l. c. 8. Fleta. l. 1. c. 17.
since both Bracton, and Flita tell us non debet esse Rege major in Exhibitione
Iuris, minimus autem esse debet in judicio suscipiendo si pecatur (which I take
to be the true reading of that place, and not peccat, parcat, or petat) (as
diverse copies have it.) That is, as the King is the greatest in distributing of
right, or Law to his Subjects, so ought he to be no more than the least of them
in submiting to right judgment if he be Petitioned to, and that it be required
of him, (either of which senses this word will well bear,) but if he absolutely
refuses to do this, but will take away their Rights and Liberties by force, and
will deny them the benefit of the Laws, what other remedy is there left them
but a general resistance? since otherwise the King may alter the Government and
take away all our Legal Rights and Liberties, whenever he pleases.


M. I confess this dispute concerning the Resistance of those commissioned by
the King; and the Kings being the Sole Legislator, and Original of all the
Civil Liberties, and Privileges we now enjoy: has carried us from the main
points in this Question: pray therefore satisfy me (if you can) those great
Objections I have made. First how this Resistance can consist with with that
sacredness, and inviolableness which you your self suppose to be due to the
Kings person, for either this Resistance in case of an invasion of our Civil
Rights must be made even when the King's Person is actually present, to back
those Illegal Commissions, or it must be forborne out of that due Reverence, and
Care of his Royal Person, which the Law enjoins. If the former, the King's
Person is in danger to be destroyed whenever a factions Party is strong enough
to rise in Arms and oppose the King's Commissions upon pretense of their being
against Law: But if on the other side this Resistance is not allowable when the
King's Person is present, then all such Resistance will signify nothing, since
as soon as ever the King in Person shall appear in the Field to back his
Commissions; all your Defensive Arms (as you call them) must be immediately
laid down, unless they mean to destroy the Sacred Person of the King: So that
take it either way, all Resistance is either Illegal, or else unpracticable.
Secondly, I can as little understand (as I told you before) how the Two Houses
of Parliament should renounce all taking up Arms, as well offensive as
defensive against the King for themselves, and yet should leave a Power in the
diffusive Body of the Nation; nay, in any part thereof strong enough to make a
Rebellion, which they thought unlawful to exercise themselves. Lastly, By what
Legal Authority the People, or any part of it, can justify the taking up even
defensive Arms, since you your self acknowledge that no Arms can be taken up
regularly, but by the King's Authority; and you have also disclaimed all taking
up of Arms by his Authority against his Person, or against those Commissioned
by virtue of such Authority; though I confess, you except the Cases of
Self-defence, and in maintenance of the Law; yet I cannot find those Exceptions
allowed of in any of our Law Books, either ancient or modern.


F. I hope to give you such Satisfaction to every one of these Objections you
have made, as may serve any indifferent person; therefore as to the first,
concerning the Sacredness of the King's person, which I allow of as well as
you, we must in the first place distinguish between such Commissions as the
King ^ssures by color of Law, when the Judges for example had given their
Opinions in the Case of Ship Money; for they being the sole Interpreters of the
Law in the Intervals of Parliament; I do acknowledge that their Determinations
are not to be opposed by force; but legally reversed when the next Parliament
mee^, and they are then to answer in Parliament for their false Interpretations
and Opinions; as Tresillian and his Companions did in the 11th of Richard II.
and as the Ten Judges did upon the two Houses Declaration against Ship Money,
and their Impeachment thereupon. Thus, though Mr. Hammpden refused to pay
Ship Money when demanded of him, and rather chose to lie in Prison than pay it,
yet it had been downright Rebellion, in case any resistance had been made by
him against the levying of it: But had this Tax been laid by the King's sole
Power, without such color of Law, I doubt not, but resistance might have been
made even against those that were Commissioned by Him to levy it; and if any
one Town, or Hundred, were not strong enough to seize such Officers as presumed
thus to levy it against Law, the Sheriffs of every County in England might have
raised the Posse Comitatus, and seized all such Offenders and carried them to
Jayl; since the King's Commissions never did, nor can indemnifie the persons so
Commissioned, in case the thing they were about to execute was contrary to Law:
and for this, I need go no farther than the Old Mirror of Justices, Chap. 1.
Sect. 10.
which is owned for good Law at this day, which speaking of Robbery, and the
several Kinds thereof, has this passage, which I shall here render out of the
old Law French; Into this Offense ( viz. Robbery) all those fall, that take
other Men's Goods by Commandment of the King, or any great Lord, without the
Owners consent. Where you see there is no difference at all made between those
that took away other Men's Goods by the Command of the King, or any other, but
it was Robbery in all of them alike, and consequently the Actors might be alike
seized, and punished as Robbers: The same is also allowed, by the Statute of
the 20th of Henry the 6th. whereby the King's Purveyors are forbid to take any
thing to the value of 40 s. or under, Chap. 8.
without ready Payment in hand, of any person (...) that it then should be
lawful for every one of the King's Liege-People to retain their Goods and
Chattels, and to resist such Purveyors and Buyers. So likewise the last Clause
in this Oath, viz. In pursuance of such Military Commissions seems to restrain
it to such Commissions as were granted by the King's Authority, that is
according to Law, and no other.

So that you see by the old Law of England the King's Commission did not render
any man irresistible, unless he executed it according to Law: since the
Constable of each Town might raise the Inhabitants thereof, to seize such
Wrong-doers; and if they were not strong enough, the High-Constable of the
Hundred might raise the whole Hundred; and in case they were not sufficient;
the High Constable might crave Aid of the Sheriff, and assemble all the several
Hundreds of the County till these Malefactors were seized: So that as long as
there were no standing Forces kept up, in the Nation, (as I have shown you
there was not till the Reign of King Charles the Second) there could never be
my Clashing between the King's Civil, and Military Commissions; and this is one
great Reason why no King of England, since the Act de Tallagio non Concedend^
was so hardy as to issue any Commissions to levy Money without color of Law*
because they knew they were void in themselves, and consequently would be
resisted by the whole Nation. So that this would not have been taking up Arms
by the King's Authority against those Commissioned by him, but only in order to
bring those to Justice who had not any Commissions at all to do what they did;
the Law taking no Cognizance at all of the King's Personal Commissions, when
absolutely against Law.

Nor if the King had joined his own Presence to such illegal Commissions, would
it have mended the matter, or rendered these Robbers of other m^^^ Goods, any
more irresistible than they were before; since the King can give no m^n
Authority to do that which he has not Power to do himself, and therefore face
his single Person may be resisted in case he go about to Ravish, Rob, or Murder
People; then sure his joining himself with such Men, though never so numerous,
can never make him more irresistible than he was; unless you will suppose that
the King may not rob with a few, without resistance; but may justify the doing
of it with an Army: and if so, pray tell me, what number they must be to render
the King, and all those with him, thus irresistible? And therefore it is no
wonder if our Law has made no express Provision for resisting the King's
Person, since it had so high a regard for his Honor, as not to suppose He
could be guilty of making War upon his People: But if the King shall be among
such wrong doers, either by Force, or Fraud, the case will be otherwise. Thus
when K. Edward, and Richard the Second, joined their own presence to the
Illegal Actions of the two Spencers, and Robert de Vere Duke of Ireland; yet
the Nobility and People took no notice of that, but prose cuted them,
notwithstanding the Kings personal joining himself with them; and Thomas Earl
of Lancaster, though he had the worst of it, and was taken and executed, yet was
his Attainder reversed in Parliament, as I have already said; and his Quarrel
with the Spencers declared to be good and just; as the like resistance was also
declared to have been for the safety of the King, and safeguard of the Realm,
in the Parliament of 11th of Rich. the Second, wherein the Duke of Ireland, and
the rest of his Faction were Con^emned, as I have already shown you: and though I
grant that in such a division between the King and his People, his Person may
run a great hazard; yet it is his own fault, and not theirs, if it so fall out;
and they are not to lose their Lives, Liberties and Properties, in case the
King will fully join himself with Murderers, or Robbers, since this is not to
resist Royal Authority, but Illegal Force, without any Authority at all; and if
he will thus expose himself to the mercy of blind Bullets, charge is to be
given to all, not to kill him wilfully, or wittingly, since we are never to
despair of his Repentance, till he absolutely renounces all reconciliation with
his People: and thus, even in the midst of such a resistance, the King's person
may be as safe as he can be in such Circumstances, though not so safe as if he
were in his own Palace. But if an Army of wicked and lawless men must not be
resisted because they have got the King's person on their side; then Prince
Edward (afterward K. Edward the First) could not have justified his fighting
with Simon Montfort, and those of his Faction, who had, as you your self
acknowledged, (...) the Person of King Henry the Third into their Power, and
acted all things in ^is Name, and by his seeming Authority; as the Historians
of those times expressly tell us: and the King being in Montfort's Army at the
Battle of Ev^sham, was in great Danger, being then wounded in the Neck with an
Arrow: So that if this Oath had been then to be taken in this sense, this
rescuing of the King by his own Son out of the hands of these wicked
Counselors, had been taking up Arms by his Authority against his Person.


M. Pray give me leave to answer this instance you have now brought, because I
think it does rather make against, than for your Opinion: I grant Prince Edward
might well justify his fighting with Simon Montfort, though he had the King's
Person then in his Power, because the Prince very well knew that his Father was
carried about with them as a Prisoner against his will; and therefore ought to
release him, though with some hazard to his Father's Person; since it could not
be otherwise brought about. But sure there is a great deal of difference
between fighting to release my Prince, when made a Prisoner against his will,
and fighting against him to take him away from Evil Counselors, whether he
will or not; as the Long Parliament did against King Charles I. though they knew
he was in the Head of his Army with his own consent; and this was sure taking
up Arms by the King's Authority against his Person, and is that which is to be
expressly disclaimed by this Oath; and will be also Treasonable, if done in any
Case whatsoever where the King shall think fit to be at the Head of his Forces,
whether the thing be lawful or unlawful for which they are raised.


F. Well then, it seems the fear of endangering the King's Person is nothing,
if the end for which it be done be lawful. And why it may not hold in other
Cases as well as this, I can see no reason. I grant that what the Parliament
did was unlawful, because the Occasion of the War began on their side, as it
was then said; but supposing the King made War upon the People, I doubt not but
the Case had been otherwise. And for proof of this, pray give me leave to put
you a Case which may well happen, now we have a Standing Army distinct from the
Militia: Suppose that in a Suit with a great Favorite of the King's, a Man
recovers a House and Lands against him by a Judgment at Law, and he also by
Course of Law put into Possession thereof by the Sheriff; afterward the King's
Commission is obtained by the Interest of this Favorite, to Command an
Officer, and some Companies of Soldiers of the Standing Army, to take
Possesion of this House, and deliver it back to the person who first had it.
The Man in Possession being a stout, and powerful Person in his Country,
hearing of it, resolves to maintain the Possession of his House according to
Law, and therefore gets in good store of his Tenants, and Neighbors to defend
it: The Officer comes with his Soldiers, and Summons the House; they within,
refuse to yield up the Possession; whereupon an Assault ensues, in which a
great many are Killed; The Man in Possession is by the King's command, Indicted
for Treason or Murder for fighting against those commissioned by the King. Now,
pray tell me, whether the Judges ought, according to their Oaths, to direct the
Jury to find this Man, and those of his Party guilty of the Crimes above
mentioned, or not; and whether the Officer and his Soldiers are not rather to
answer for this Offense.


M. Truly I cannot deny but this Military Commission to put a Man out of his
Freehold is Illegal, and consequently void; and so may be resisted; since I
know the Law says, That a man's House is his Castle, and he may justify the
defense of it against all Subjects whatsoever; but what is this, to resisting
the King's Person, who was not there; for if he had, I doubt not but this
Person ought to deliver it up to the King, rather than endanger His Majesty's
Sacred Person. Nor is this resistance considerable, it being only in a
particular Case, which can no way by a general Rebellion alter this Government
over the whole Nation.


F. You speak agreeable to your own Principles. Well, but suppose the King
should be persuaded by some very ill men about him to play this or the like
trick, whenever he had a mind to favor one party more than another, and so
should hinder the execution of the Law whenever he pleased, can you think the
Nation would long endure this, without any resistance: Or suppose, to make the
Case more general, the King should undertake to lay a Tax upon the whole Nation
without consent of Parliament, and fearing it should not be Levied, should
resolve to do it by his Officers and Soldiers of his Standing Army; and lest
they should be resisted, should march with them in person, from one County
throughout to another to see the Money raised: Do you think the whole Nation
out of pure deference to the King's Person were bound to permit him to do
whatever he pleased, and let the Soldiers take this Tax, which they were
certainly not obliged to Pay, had he not been personally there?


M. Yes, I am of that opinion that they ought; for it were better to Pay it,
then that a Civil War should happen about it, in which the King's Person, as
well as the Government, may be destroyed.


F. I see you are of this opinion, because you fancy that the whole Government
consists in the King's Person alone, which it does not; but in the Legislative
Power, which is not in the King alone; but in the King together with the Lords
and Commons assembled in Parliament: Therefore you are mistaken in supposing
that this Resistance must needs alter the Frame of the Government, since it is
undertaken to maintain the fundamental Constitution of it; for if the King may
take what Money he pleases from the People, and make what Laws he will without
the Parliament, and without supposing it lawful to resist him if he does, the
Fundamental Constitution of this Kingdom will be but a Jest, considering how
light some Princes make of their most Solemn Declarations to their People; nay,
their very Coronation Oaths now adays: And it is a strange Paradox that one man
may defend his Life and Property against the King's single Person, in case he
go about to Rob or Murder him; and yet that a whole Nation should not have the
like Right; and that a Prince may not Rob or Murder men by himself, yet may do
it without any resistance, in case he can raise an Army to back him.


M. Let what will happen, I am for understanding this Oath and Declaration, in
the strict literal sense, which you by your false glosses go about to destroy;
therefore to tell you plainly my mind, I think, neither one single Person, nor
yet the whole Nation can justify resistance of the King's Person, no, though he
should go about to Rob or Murder me; it were better I were killed, or lost all
I had, than that the Sacred Blood of my Prince should be shed by my hands:
Since the whole Parliament have on behalf of the People actually renounced all
defensive Arms against the King, (by which I suppose they mean all defensive
Arms against his Person;) nor have you as yet answered my two last Objections,
concerning that Renunciation of the Two Houses, and the want of a competent
Authority to raise the Arms of the whole Nation in case of that which you call
a General Invasion of Men's Religion, Liberties, and Properties; if ever any
such thing should happen, as it is not likely it ever will.


F. Your Principles and Mine are so diametrically opposite, that it is no wonder
we may draw quite contrary Conclusions; for whereas you suppose that Nations
were made for Princes to Govern, and dispose of at their Pleasure, without any
resistance on the Peoples side, let them do what they will: I suppose that
Princes are made for the common good of their People; and where their Happiness
and Preservation do not interfere, ought inviolably to be preserved; but when
through the Folly, Negligence, or Tyranny of Princes, that which was ordained
for their Protection proves their Ruin and Destruction; I think the
Preservation of the Princes Person ought to give place to the Public Good; and
better that he than the whole Nation should perish; which though it was the
opinion of Calaphas in relation to our Savior, yet it is so well approved of,
that it is said by the Evangelist St. John, that he spoke not that of himself,
but being High Priest that year he Prophesied. For there may be a Common Civil
Government without a King, but there can be no King without a People. Of this
Opinion our English Ancestors always were, who though they often resisted, and
sometimes deposed their Kings; yet they still maintained Kingly Government,
though with the change of the person. And if it failed in the last Civil War,
it was because it was at last managed by a faction of men of quite different
Principles both in Religion and Politics, and not by the Nobility and Gentry
of the Nation, whose interest it was, and ever will be to maintain the ancient
Government of a limited Monarchy; without falling into a Commonwealth or
giving up their just Rights, and Liberties to an Arbitrary Power.

But to answer the rest of your objections, which, if what I have already laid
down be Law, and reason too, may be easily done. As to the first Objection, The
two Houses might very well renounce the power of making any War offensive or
defensive against the King, and yet leave the right of resistance for self
defense and preservation to the whole nation in general; since the former was
necessary unless they would have asserted a right in themselves of sitting
whether the King would or not, and waging a War against him whenever they
pleased; after he had actually dissolved them; which would be to set up two
equal absolute powers at once in the Kingdom. But that they did not renounce it
for the whole Kingdom, is plain; for though by the Statute of the 12th of
Charles the II. they disclaim all coercive power over the Kings person for
themselves and the People either collectively or representatively, yet do they
neither there nor in any of these Acts for the Militia renounce all defensive
Arms for the defense of their Religion, Liberties, and Properties: There being
a great deal of difference between such a defense and a coercive power over the
King, as I have already sufficiently proved; nor indeed was it in the power of
the Parliament to have done it if they would, since they are but Trustees for
the People to preserve their just right and had no power so really to give up
their Religion, Lives, Liberties, and Properties to the Kings mercy. So that
this renunciation of all defensive Arms on the behalf of the whole People had
been absolutely void in it self: And since it would have rendered the legal
constitution of the Government of this Kingdom wholly precarious, if
notwithstanding the illegality of the Kings Commissions, and their being void
if granted to illegal purposes; the King's presence shall render it downright
Treason to resist them. And if this be so, the last difficulty will be easily
answered, viz. By what Authority or Commission the People may make this general
resistance? To this I say, That in the first place all Commissions granted to
persons incapable by Law to take them, or for illegal purposes, are to be
supposed to be issued contrary to the Kings will and knowledge, and therefore
are to be looked upon as void in Law; and consequently the Persons not to be
commissioned at all, and so may be resisted by the Kings legal Officers all
over England, as I have already proved; but if once the King should Countenance
and Abett such Robbers by his own personal presence, this resistance may then
be made, and justified by the whole nation, not by the King's Authority against
his Person, but by another higher and precedent right, viz. The Right of
Self-defence, and the Common-safety of the whole Nation; which the People must
have reserved to themselves at the first Institution of the Government, or else
all Monarchies would be alike and there would be no difference at all between
absolute and limited Kingdoms.


M. I shall not trouble my self about other Kingdoms, but this much I firmly
believe that our Kings are absolute Monarchs notwithstanding they have limited
themselves by Law to the manner of their administration of these grand
essentials of Government, the making of Laws, and raising of money; so that
since the supremacy of the Government is still in themselves as Gods
Vicegerents here on Earth, and not as the Peoples Deputies; I cannot but still
understand this Oath in the strict litteral sense in which I am confident this
Parliament meant it, and therefore since they have expressly declared the Law to
be so, I will not be wiser than the Law; especially since it is most agreeable
to the Scriptures, and the known doctrine of the Church of England, that the
Kings Person is not only unaccountable, but irresistible too upon any pretense
whatsoever; and I think I am able to show you that it is much better for this
Nation or any other of a like constitution to suffer the worst that may happen
from the ill Government, nay Tyranny of our Kings, than to involve themselves
in blood and confusion by Rebellion and Civil Wars; as often as the People
shall judge, though never so falsely, that their fundamental Rights and
Privileges are forceably invaded by the King.


F. I think I have very expressly proved at our 5th meeting, and that from
undoubted Testimonies from our ancient Histories, and Writers of the Laws of
England, as also from the whole constant Tenor of the Statute Law of this
Nation that the Kings of England are not limited by their own concessions in
the manner of the Administration of their Sovereign Power, but from the first
constitution of the Government; and if the King be not the sole supreme
Legislative power, I care not what some Divines have writ to the contrary; and
since it is a Law question, the supreme Authority alone ought to decide it. And
therefore it is no matter in this case what the Scriptures say, nor yet the
Church of England, the former has not, and the latter cannot determine what is
the Legal constitution of the Government in this Nation; and where the supreme
power resides: and therefore suppose it to have been the intent of this
Parliament never so much to bar all resistance of the Kings Person in any case
whatsoever, yet I am sure it was not in their power to do things absolutely
inconsistent and contradictory in themselves, as they must have done had they
made the Persons of all Officers however commissioned by the King absolutely
irresistible; and much more if they had induced the Kings Presence with an
absolute power for them to commit the most violent and illegal action; and yet
have supposed they had thereby altered nothing in the constitution of the
Government, though they had rendered it instead of a Limited, an Absolute
Despotick Monarchy; which as I am not yet convinced it was in their will, so
neither was it in their powers to grant if they would: And therefore as I do
not desire to be wiser than the Law, so I cannot allow this to be any Law at
all in the sense you would put upon it; so that make the most of it this was
but the unwary declaration of a Parliament of very young Men, not long after
the King's coming in; who thorough the great Abhorrence they had of the late
Civil War raised by the Parliament, under color of the King's Authority, were
drawn in before they were aware, to be a little too free in their Expressions,
not considering the consequences that might follow: But when this sond Fit was
over, and that a standing Army had been raised in England under pretense of the
Dutch War, and that the King had by his Declaration of Indulgence made some
approaches to an Arbitrary Power, and in order thereunto, would in that very
Parliament in 1675. have imposed this very Oath or Test, not only upon those
who were to take it before, but upon all Peers and Parliament Men before ever
they sat in the Two Houses, as also, upon all Officers in Church and State, to
the very Justices of Peace; so that the Disguise being now seen thorough, it
made diverse of the Peers, even those of greatest Loyalty and Wisdom stiffly to
oppose the laying this Test upon all the Clergy, Nobility, and Gentry of the
whole Nation, as it was then the design of the Bishops and Court-Party to have
done: Which vigorous Opposition, though in the smaller number, yet met with such
good success, that the Bishops and Lords of the contrary Opinion, could not
then carry it; and the Eyes of the whole Nation were afterward so much opened,
that the King durst never offer this Test any more to either of the Two Houses:
So that if you will but consider this matter of Fact, how this Test was first
obtained; and how afterward, when it was thought to be intended to set up
Arbitrary Power, was also as vigorously opposed by them; and their being
sensible that the Parliament had gone too far already in doing what they had
done: I think none can take this Oath in your sense except those Clergymen, who
will allow none to be of their Church, but those who are for this Passive
Obedience; according to their prejudicate Notions of Loyalty, or else some few
mercenary Lawyers, who in hopes of Preferment (which they can never otherwise
obtain) would interpret this Oath in such a sense as should make us all
Papists, and Slaves too, whenever the King has a mind to it. Now which of these
extremes are worst, that the people should judge for themselves (though perhaps
erroneously) when the King, or those acting by his illegal Commissions, shall
violently assault them in their Religion, Lives, Liberties and Estates; that
thereupon they make Resistance with one consent, when they find themselves
brought to this extremity; or else that the King should be thus invested with
an irresistible Power of doing whatever he pleased with us; I durst leave to
any indifferent person to judge.


M. I confess you have told me more concerning the History of this Oath, than
ever I knew before; but let the legal sense of it be what it will, and setting
aside the Precepts in Scripture for absolute Submission without any resistance,
I think I am able to prove from your own grand Topic of the common good and
preservation of Mankind; that it is much better to submit to the worst, and
greatest Tyrant that ever was, than to resist him, if he be our lawful Prince,
for if you consider what is the Subject of all Humane Happiness and
Contentment, it is certainly life; now what Tyrant ever in his whole Reign
destroyed so many Men's lives by force, Vid. An Answer to Dr. King's State of
the Protestants in Ireland, p. 32, 35, 36.
or unjust Prosecutions, as a Civil War, if carried on with violence and
animosity does in a years time; so vast a distance there is between the Evils
of Tyranny and Rebellion, and so much is the Remedy worse than the Disease; the
Cruelty of a Tyrant (says one) is like a Clap of Thunder, it strikes with great
terror; but Civil War is like an Inundation, it sweeps away all before it,
without noise: Thus one Man brought to the Scaffold by the Arbitrary Command of
a Tyrant, makes more noise than ten Thousand killed in the Field in a Civil
War, but that does not make the Evil the less, but the greater Evil while we
are made willing to destroy our selves, and do it more effectually in one day,
than the bloodiest Tyrant could find in his heart to do in his whole Reign: All
the men put to death by the Arbitrary Commands of Tyrants since the beginning
of the World in all the Kingdoms of it, will not amount to half the number of
those who have perished in the Roman, or English Civil Wars; so much safer are
we in God's hands than in our own, and in theirs under whom God has placed us;
and though he often makes them like the Sun, and Sea, (though highly useful in
themselves) scourges for our Sins, yet he has promised to keep their hearts in
his hand, and to turn them as seems best unto him; we have more Promises of
safety there, Ps. 68.30.
than when we are delivered over to the Beasts of the People, whose madness
David compares to the raging of the Sea.

In short, The strict Restraint of the People by Government is their truest
Liberty and Freedom, since if they were at Liberty from Government, they would
be exposed to Combat one another: which would be worse than the greatest
slavery in the World: the great mistake is in the foolish Notion we have of
Liberty, which generally is thought to consist in being free from the lash of
Government, as Schoolboys, from their Master, and proves in the consequence
only a Liberty to destroy each other; and yet it is for such a Liberty as this,
that men most commonly begin Civil Wars, and fall a cutting of each others
Throats. Therefore though I grant it were much better for all Princes to let
their Subjects live happily, and enjoy a competent share of Ease and Plenty;
but on the other side, if they will not permit them so to do, but will
tyrannically oppress them, it were much better for them to sit down contented
with poverty, nay, slavery it self, rather than to destroy so great part of a
Nation, as may be lost in a Civil War, whenever it begins. Thus even the Poet
Lucan, though of Cato's party, reckoning up the Miseries of the Civil Wars of
Rome, which were all for Liberty, as if envying the happy Condition of those,
who lived under absolute Tyrants, cries out, Faelices Arabes, Medioque Aeaque
Tellus,
Quos sub perpetuis tenuerunt Fata Tyrannis.
I could give you instances of the truth of this in most Nations, enough to
make a History: and if such a History were written, of the Mischiefs of this
false and pretended Liberty, and good of the people, I durst undertake the
Comparison, that more visible Mischiefs come upon the people, more destruction
of the public good, and greater loss of Liberty and Property by this one
Method, than by all the Tyranny and Violence of Mankind put together: and
consequently, that there is no Comparison 'twixt the Evils of Tyranny, and of a
Civil War, for public good; and that the Mischiefs of this pretense of public
good, is infinitely less tolerable, and a more Universal Ruin to the people,
than any Tyranny of lawful Governors, that ever was in the World; whereas this
is by many degrees the greatest, and most lawless Tyranny, and always brings
greater mischief along with it, such as Confusion, Rapin, Violence, Contempt of
all Laws, and legal Establishments, with more intolerable Evils of all sorts,
than those it pretends to remedy.

But of all pretenses for Rebellion, Religion is the most ridiculous; since a
Man's Religion can never be taken from him, or a false one imposed upon him,
whether he will or not; and also because a Civil War introduces greater
immorality, and more loosens the Reins of Discipline, and is more contrary to
the Spirit of true Religion, than any other Thing in the World: true Religion
is not propagated by the Sword, it is a small still Voice that cannot be heard
in War; War confounds it, and debauches it, the most profligate, and licentious
Court bears no proportion in wickedness to the lewdness, blasphemy, and
contempt of all that is Sacred, which reigns, and overflows in Camps. It was an
old and true Saying, Nulla sides, Pietasque viris qui Castra sequuntur.


F. I see when neither the Scripture, nor the Law can justify your absurd
Doctrine of Passive Obedience; then you fly back to your old Topic the Law of
Nature and common good of Mankind: I allow your Principles, but not the
deductions you draw from thence, which are indeed but Paralogisms, as I will
show you by and by; but I see there is nothing so false and absurd, which
Prejudice and Education will not make men swallow; I confess, you have made a
long and ingenious Harangue in a Commendation of the Benefits of Tyranny and
Slavery: which had you done only for an exercise of your Wit, I should have
ranked it with Cardan's Panegyric of Nero, and the praise of the Government;
but if you vent such Notions in good earnest, I cannot forbear showing you the
absurdity of them.

First therefore admitting what you say for truth, that a Civil War does
destroy more men in one Battle, than the greatest Tyrant has ever done in his
whole Reign; Is this an Argument that no man may defend either his Life or
Liberty against Arbitrary Power? if this were true Reason, it were the greatest
folly in the World for the Poles, or any other Nation that are at Wars with the
Tartars, ever to resist them; for their Emissaries might thus make use of your
Argument to make them submit to them: Life is the only state of Happiness in
this World; and without which nothing can be enjoyed: It is therefore better
for you to be made Slaves than to venture a Battle; for in the Fight God knows
how many of you may be destroyed, whereas if you quietly submit, we promise to
hurt none of you, we will only carry you away, and sell you for Slaves, and
sure Slavery is better than Death; for even Slaves enjoy a great many Comforts
of life, though with some hardships, and you may be redeemed again, or make your
escape; but life once lost can never be recovered: The same Argument a Tyrant
may use for the exercise of his Arbitrary Power over men's lives; that he will
not (nay, cannot) destroy the whole Nation, but only use them as Butchers (...)
their Sheep, cull out the fattest, and let the poor ones live, thrive and grow
fat, till they are likewise ready for the Knife: This perhaps may be a proper
life for those Beasts that cannot live without Man's protection; but what man
of any courage or sense, would be willing to live under a Government where his
Poverty was to be his only Protection? who would not venture his life in one
brisk Battle, rather than live in such a vile and slavish Condition? and who
would not rather argue thus, It is great odds, if among so many Thousands, I am
the person ordained for Death; or if I am, I may perhaps purchase Victory for
my Countrymen, and Liberty for my Posterity; but let the worst happen, I
venture my life for the public good; and it is better once to die, than always
to live in fear.

But if the Calculation of the number of men's lives, that may be lost in the
recovery, or maintaining any right whatever, should be the only rule to render
War either reasonable, or lawful; I doubt whether most of the Wars Princes make
for small Territories, or Punctilio's of Honor; (as lowering the Flag for
example) nay, even for the recovery of their Crowns, when unjustly detained or
taken from them, can upon your principle ever justify either Princes in
Conscience to make such Wars, or oblige Subjects in prudence, (according to
your Rule of the public good) to fight in such quarrels; since none of them
but often cost more Lives to defend, or regain them, if lost, than the things
are worth that the Princes of the World usually make War about, against each
other.

But if you tell me, that men are bound by the Law of God, and of their Country
to assist their Prince in any Wars he shall Command them; without inquiring
into the Consequences of it: and let what will happen as to the loss of men's
Lives, Estates or Liberties; that we are likewise to obey and submit to lawful
Princes; because, let them tyrannize, enslave or destroy us never so much, yet
God has put us into their hands; and we are safe in God's hands whilst we are
in theirs; This is all a mere fallacy, for what is this to your main Argument
from the destruction of Mankind; for, if so many men are to lose their lives in
the War, what difference is it as to them, whether the War be made by a lawful
or unlawful Power, it is still upon this Principle unlawful to be made, and
consequently unlawful to be fought for; and if you once grant that Princes may
tyrannize without resistance, kill or enslave any of their Subjects; what
difference is it, as to the people that are to suffer it, whether he be a
lawful Prince or a Tyrant or Usurper that does it: for as for being delivered
by God into the hands of a lawful Prince to be dealt withal as he shall think
good, it is all mere Jargon: pray prove to me (if you can) that whilst a
Prince thus tyrannizes, oppresses, and enslaves his people, that God ever thus
delivered the people into his hand for that design, or that whilst he does so,
he acts as God's Minister. This I have urged you to prove at our 4th meeting;
but since you could not do it, I take the case for desperate.

But to answer your Comparisons of the Sun and Sea, to which, you compare
lawful Princes that turn Tyrants; they are as easily retorted upon you: if the
rays of the Sun are too hot, we may resist them, and put on thicker Clothes: or
set up shelters to defend our selves from them: the like we may say of his
malignant Influences or Effects upon men's Bodies, could there be any means
found out as easily to avoid them. So likewise for the Sea, suppose the
breaking in of it upon any Country to be sent by God for their Sins, you will
not say it is unlawful for the people to make Banks or Dikes, or use any other
natural means to keep it out, or to drain it away; and the case is the same as
to Tyranny, for if resistance be as natural a means against it, as these I have
mentioned are against the too violent heat of the Sun, or breaking in of the
Sea, I cannot see why we may not as lawfully exercise it; But since we are
^alking of Waters, this puts me in mind of the place you have now cited out of
Proverbs, That the heart of the King is in the hand of the Lord; which without
doubt is a great truth: but then you should have added what immediately
follows; as the Rivers of Waters he turns it whithersoever he will; now, how
does God turn Rivers of waters? it is not by any supernatural means, but
either by a strong VVind, or else by the hands of Men. So likewise that
Solomon's Comparison of God's turning the Hearts of Kings like Waters, is but
an allusion to the Custom of those Eastern Countries, Vid. Dr. Patrick's
Paraphrase, and Annotations on this Text.
that as a Gardener draws the streams of water through the trenches he cuts,
into what part of the Garden he thinks good; so does God turn the Hearts of
Princes to act, or do quite contrary to their first intentions, nay, to what
they have actually done before; but how, is this performed? it is only as he
makes use of the Gardener to turn the streams of Water; it is wholly by Humane
means, such as Advice of good and wise Counselors, and a prudent Consideration
upon it; to which also may be added, the Resistance of their Subjects, when
after all Remonstrances and Entreaties to the contrary, Princes still go on
outragiously to oppress them; when they see they will no longer bear it, and
find themselves engaged in a troublesome War with them, they then see their
Error, and send to their Subjects and offer them terms of Peace. Thus diverse
of our Kings hearts were turned, when they saw the Nation would all as one Man
resist their tyrannical Arbitrary Proceedings, they came to Terms with them,
and granted them Magna Charta, and other good Laws for the security of their
just Rights and Liberties: But as for what you say of our being safe in the
hands of Tyrants, as being in God's hands; I grant we are still in God's hands
even when we fall under the power of Thieves and Robbers; But is our safety
then so great, as when we are out of their hands? Or, may we not get from them
by force, if we are able? Cap. I. f. 107.
especially if what Bracton tells us be true, in these words in his Third Book,
Exercere igitur debet Rex potestatem juris sicut Dei minister, and Vicarius in
Terra, quia illa Potestas solius Dei est; potestas autem injuriae Diaboli non
Dei, and cujus horum operum facit R^^, ejus minister erit cujus borum operum
facit, igitur dum ^acit justitias vicarius est Regis aeterni, minister autem
Diaboli cum declinet ad injuriam. Now pray tell me, if the King can thus cease
to be God's Lieutenant, and become the Devil's Officer? whether he can properly
be said to be under the Power ordained by God, or that we can be very safe in
such hands, I cannot very well see.

As for unnecessary Wars undertaken, without any such cause, for mere pretenses
of Liberty, and the public good; and which may have sometimes caused many more
Mischiefs and Inconveniences than those they pretended to cure; merely does it
therefore follow that no Wars, though against insupportable Tyranny, and for
self-defence have never been nor may be undertaken by any Nation in the World?
and that the state they are in after such a War, is always much worse than it
was before; which is notoriously false, as you may see by so many instances I
have given you from our own Histories; as I could also show you from other
Countries, such as the Switzers and Dutch, who have by defending their
Liberties when unjustly oppressed, brought themselves into a state of Plenty,
Liberty, and Safety; and therefore notwithstanding your making so light of men's
Just Rights, Liberties and Properties, there are certainly such things that
distinguish a free people from slaves, as any who will but travel into France,
Turkey, or any other Arbitrary Government, may easily satisfy themselves: and
if these things ought to be really esteemed, as the causes of all the earthly
happiness we enjoy, then certainly they may be defended, and fought for; and if
in the purchase of them many men's Lives happen to be lost, this is no necessary
consequence; since such Reformations are often brought about with very little
Bloodshed; as appears by many instances I have now given of such resistance,
and may more evidently appear by this late great and wonderful Revolution; but
admitting it should happen, (as you say) and that a great part of a Nation
should be destroyed in a Civil War for their just Rights and Liberties; yet it
is still upon your own Topic better for Mankind that ^t should be so, if true
Liberty (I do not mean from lawful Authority) may be but obtained at last
thereby, since life is not to be esteemed only for mere living, but living
happily, non est vivere, sed valere vita; and life is enjoyed by Slaves in
Galleys, as much as by the greatest Prince, yet no rational man but will allow
that Men may venture their lives, rather than suffer themselves, and their
Posterity to fall into that miserable Condition; the like he may, if they were
only to be reduced to the Condition of the mere Peasants in France, or ordinary
Christians in Turkey; and if so, I think I may then safely affirm, that it is
better that half the people of any Country should be destroyed by a Civil War,
if their just Rights, and Liberties may be preserved to them, and their
Children at the last, then that Slavery, with all its consequences, such as
Ignorance, baseness of Mind, Cowardice, Beggary, etc. should ever be entailed
upon a Nation; for as for the loss of Men, it may be made up again in some
Generations; but when Men's civil Liberties and Properties are once lost, they
cannot without some rare and unexpected Revolution be ever regained; as we see
in the Subjects of all sorts in France, Turkey, and Muscovy, etc. at this day:
and therefore if you please better to consider, the real Liberties of a people
(such as we contend for) are not that of Schoolboys to be free from the Lash
of their Masters, however that if such a Discipline were to be exercised upon
Men all their life-times, I think no man but would say it were worth venturing
his life, rather than to fall into so miserable a state; so that what you cite
from the Poet Lucan, is only to be taken as a Poetical Exclamation against the
Miseries that Civil Wars often bring upon a Nation; but to say that it was
Lucan's Opinion that Subjection under the severest Tyrant was better than the
Liberty the people of Rome enjoyed, is to suppose that either you or I have
never read that Author since nothing is more plain, than that the main design
of that Poem is to magnify Cato and Pompey, who fought for the Liberty of
their Country above Caesar, and those that joined with him to destroy it: As
for all the rest that you have said, that you could make a History of greater
Miseries, as loss of Liberty, etc. that have come upon whole Nations by
fighting for their Just Rights and Liberties against Tyrants, than by all the
Tyranny, and Violence of Mankind; I think you would have a hard task to make it
good, since I suppose under Absolute Monarchies it is unlawful for the People
to take up Arms, till they are either like to be enslaved, or destroyed by the
Tyranny of their Prince, or else so intolerably oppressed by his Soldiers, that
they can scarce even in a state of War live in a much worse condition; and if
they are ever subdued and reduced to their former condition, they cannot be
worse than what they were under before: The like I may say as to Limited
Monarchies, or Commonwealths, that degenerate into Tyrannies, the People may
perhaps better their condition by Resistance, and recover their Liberties, but
cannot be in a worse, if, they are overcome; for I do not allow such Resistance
lawful till the very Fundamental Constitutions of their Government, whereby it
is distinguished from an Arbitrary Despotick Power, be actually invaded, or
taken from them; so that let the worst that can happen, they can scarce fall
into worse condition than they were before: And as for England, we may speak it
experimentally, that of all the Resistances that have been made by the Major
part of the Nation, or greater part of it in defense of their Just Rights and
Liberties, every one of them have happened for the b^^t, and been a means of
restoring this Kingdom to its former Estate; except the last, in which I grant
we lost it by that War; yet that was not from the Doctrine it self, but because
the War was begun and carried on by a Violent Faction upon unjust grounds, and,
which was worse, the Government and Discipline of the Church as Established by
Law was altered without any Legal Power; all which could never have happened
had not that War been not only begun, but continued to the very last by a
Standing Army, which could give what Laws they pleased even to those that
pretended to command them: So that why the Abuse of this Right once in a
Thousand years should be made any just Argument against the ever using it at
all, I can see no reason in the World for it.

As to the rest of your Discourse against making any War about Religion that is
also as fallacious; for though I grant that true Religion is not to be
propagated, yet I think it may lawfully be defended by the Sword, especially
where it is the received Established Religion of a Nation, or else the defense
of Religion against Infidels would be no Argument at all to fight against a
Turkish or Popish Prince that unjustly invaded us: For though it is true that
Religion cannot be taken away from any Man without his consent, yet a Man may
be taken from his Religion; and when the Professors are destroyed either by
Martyrdom, or violent Persecution, as bad, or worse than death, what will
become of the Church and Religion Established by Law, when all the Persons that
constitute that Church are driven away, destroyed, or made to renounce it? And
for this we need go no farther than over the Water to our next Neighbor. It is
likewise as fallacious what (...) urge of the great Corruption of Manners by
Civil Wars, which if it be any Argument at all, is so against all Standing
Armies whatever, whether raised by lawful or unlawful Powers: And I think there
was much more debauchery in the King's late Camp at Hounslow-heath, as also in
all places where they quartered, than was lately at York, or Nottingham, among
those that took up Arms in defense of their Religion or Civil Liberties
unjustly invaded by the King and his Ministers; nor does it always happen that
Armies raised for defense of Religion and Civil Liberty must prove debaucht,
since we may remember that the Parliament Army (to its praise be it spoken) was
infinitely more sober, and outwardly religious than the King's; but if you will
say that this proceeded from their Principles, as well as good Discipline, I
know no reason why Men who fight in defense of their Religion and Civil
Liberties, may not upon Church of England Principles as to Church Government
and Common Prayer, and also by a strict Discipline, be as little debaucht as
any Standing Armies the most lawful Monarch can maintain; who if they lie idle,
as ours have done all this King's Reign till now of late, are more likely to
fall into all the wickedness that attend a loose Discipline, and want of
Employment, and consequently may also corrupt the Places where they Quarter by
their ill example.


M. I shall not longer argue this point since I see it is to no purpose. But
you have not yet told me what these fundamental Rights and Liberties are, that
you suppose the People may take up Arms to defend; nor yet what number of the
Nation may thus judge for themselves, and take up Arms when they please; for it
may so happen that the whole Nation may be divided as to their opinions
concerning these things: And the South part of England (for example) may think
their Religion, and Liberties in great danger, and that it is very necessary to
take up Arms for it, when the North parts are not under those apprehensions,
but lie still; as was lately seen in the riseings for the Prince of Orange.


F. As to the first of these queries I think I can easily give you satisfaction
and such as you can have nothing material to reply to: And as for the other
though I do not say I can give you such an answer as will bear no exception or
reply, yet I doubt not but it will be that which may very well be defended and
may serve to satisfy any indifferent and unprejudiced person; And which if not
allowed will draw much worse consequences along with it. And therefore as for
the just Rights and Liberties we contend for, they are only such as are
contained in Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right, and are no more than the
immemorial Rights and Liberties of this Kingdom, and that first. In respect of
the safety of men's lives and the liberties of their persons: aly. The security
of their Estates and Civil Properties. And 3ly. The enjoyment of their Religion
as it is established by the common consent of the whole Nation. All which I
will reduce to these plain Propositions.

1. That no Freeman of England ought to be imprisoned, or arrested contrary to
Law, Vid. Pryns 1 st. part of the Vindication of the Rights of English Freemen.
without specifying the cause of his commitment in the warrant or mittimus,
whereby he is sent to prison: And he ought not to be sent out of the body of
the Country, or Jurisdiction where the crime was supposed to be committed,
unless he be removed by due course of Law: neither ought he by the Law of
England to be detained in Prison without Trial only for a punishment; but ought
to be Tried the next Assizes or Jail-delivery, or within some reasonable time
to be allowed of by the Court. And this was Common Law many Ages before the Act
of Habeas Corpus made in the 31st of King Charles the Second, which does but
ascertain that Law concerning bailing men for all manner of Crimes in case no
Prosecution come in against them: much less can the King or any Court below the
whole Parliament banish any man the Kingdom in any case unless by some known
Law already made whereby he is bound to abjure it upon a lawful Trial by his
Peers and conviction by his own Confession.

2. Nor can the King nor any Courts of Justice condemn a man to loss of Life,
or Members, without due Trial by his Peers, and Legal Judgment given thereupon.

And for proof of this I need go no farther than Magna Charta, and the Petition
of Right which are both but declaratory of the Common Law of England^ see
therefore Magna Charta cap. 29. Whereby it is declared, and enacted, that no
freeman may be taken and imprisoned, or be disseised of his freehold, or
Liberties, or his free customs, or be Outlawed, or exiled, or in any manner
destroyed but by the lawful Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the land,
which is also farther confirmed and explained by these Statutes, viz. the 37,
38, 42. of Edward III. and 17. of Richard the II. all which are summed up, Cap.
18.9.3. Cap. 6.
and more particularly declared against, contrary to the fundamental Laws of
the land in the Petition of Right exhibited to King Charles the I. in
Parliament in the thirtieth of his Reign; wherein the late imprisonment of the
Kings Subjects without any cause showed, and the denial of Habeas Corpus are
expressly resented; as also putting Soldiers and Mariners to death by Martial
Law in time of peace: And the King's answer to this Petition is remarkable, The
King wills that Right be done according to the Statute^ and Customs of the
Realm, Vid. Ru^hwaths Hist. Col. pt. 1. p. 597. 598. 625.
etc. Which not satisfying as too doubtful and general, the King at last gave
this full and clear answer in legal ^orm, Soit Droit fait comm^ il est desire.

The Second point in relation to our Civil Properties is this, That no Tax,
Taillage or Aid shall be laid or levied by the King without the consent of the
Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, Knights, Burgesses, and whole Commonalty
of the Realm in Parliament; this was first of all granted by the 56th Law of
William the First, which I have already cited; as also more particularly forbid
by the Statute de Tallagio non concedendo in the 34th of Edward the First,
which was but a revival, or explanation of the former Law of William the First,
and also by the 25th of Edward the Third, whereby it is Enacted, That no person
should be compelled to make any Loans to the King against his will, because
they are against Reason, and the Franchise of the Land; and it is also
provided, that none should be charged by any Charge or Imposition called a
Benevolence, nor by such like Charge, which is also more fully set forth in the
said Petition of Right, to have been lately executed by certain Commissioners;)
as also that diverse other Charges have been laid and levied by
Lords-Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, etc. contrary to the Laws and free
Customs of the Realm.

The Third Point declared against in this Petition of Right, is against
Quartering of Soldiers (though they pay for their Quartors) contrary to the Will
of the Owners and Inhabitants, much more when they did take free Quarter in
time of Peace, as has been too much practiced of late: So that by the Common
Law of England, not only Private-houses, but Inns, and Alehouses are not
compellable to Quarter Soldiers, unless they will: so much was this Nation
anciently a Stranger to standing Armies; and Quartering of Soldiers in time of
Peace; that there was no Provision made for it, either at Common Law, or by any
Statute that I know of.

4thly, That no new Law can be made without an express Act of Parliament; or
the joynt-consent of the King, Lords and Commons: and therefore that
Parliaments ought to be duly summoned and held for the good and safety of the
Kingdom, by Common as well as Statute Law, once every year, and according to
more modern Statutes, once in three years at least; or whenever there is a just
and necessary occasion for it: And for proof of this, I need go no farther than
the old English Saxon Law, which ordains, that the great Council, or Mycel
Synod should be held twice in the year, as the ancient Mirror of Justices
recites, and the constant Custom long after the Conquest, in which there never
passed a year without a general Council of the whole Kingdom; and when this
came by degrees to be discontinued, then were those Statutes of Edward the
Third, and Richard the Second made; whereby it was enacted that a Parliament
should be held every year, and oftener if there were occasion.

5thly, Since the Legislative Power of Parliaments is the very Soul, and
Essence of the Government, the Election of Knights, Citizens and Burgesses to
sit and serve in Parliament, ought to be free; and all the Members of
Parliament who have places there, either by Patents or Writs of Summons, as the
Lords; or else by Election or Writs, as the Bishops ought to be present, and
there to have freedom of Speech and Votes, without any Guards to overawe or
terrify them; and none to be forced, threatened, bribed or tampered with to
give their Votes contrary to their Consciences; either by the King or any of
his Ministers: This is ordained by the Stat. of Westminster. 1 Chap. 5. whereby it is
expressly provided that all Elections ought to be free; which Sir Edward Cook in
his Notes upon this Statute extends to Elections of Knights of Shires as well
as other Elections since. I have sufficiently proved, that the Commons elected
Members to Parliament, when this Statute was made; and that this was the
ancient Law of England, N. 36.
you may see in the Rolls of Parliament. 1 Hen. 4. wherein it is alleged as by
the Parliament, as one of the Articles against Richard the Second in these
words: Item licet de stato and consuttudine Regni sui in Convocatione
enjuslibet Parliamenti Populus suus in singulis Comitatibus Regni debeat esse
liber ad eligendum, and deputandum Milites pro hujusmodi Comitatibus ad inter
^ssendum Parliamentis, and ad exponendum little gravamina, and ad prosequendum
pro remediis superinde prout videntur expedire.

Tamen praefatus Rex ut in Parliamentis suis liberius consequi valeat suae
temerariae voluntatis effectum, direxit mandata sua frequentius Vicecomitibus
ejus ut certas Personas per ipsum Regem nominatas, ut milites C^mitatuum,
venir^ saciant ad Parliamenta sua; quos quidem Milites eidem Regi faventes
induc^re poterat, prout frequentius fecit, quandoque pro minas varias, and
terrores, and quandoque per munera ad consentiendum illis qu^a Regno praedicto
pr^ejudicialia fuerant, and Populo quam plurimum onerosa, etc. So that you here
may see, that it was then judged by the whole Parliament to be a brench of one
of the Fundamental Liberties of the Nation, for the King to make false returns
to be made of Parliament Men, as also, to corrupt, or overawe their Votes,
either by Promises or Threat^ings.

But to conclude, that we have such things as Fundamental Laws, and
Privileges, I shall go no farther than King James I. his Speech confirmed by
an Act of Parliament of the First year of his Reign; wherein it is recited,
That the King has vouchsafed to express many ways, how far it is, and ever
shall be from his royal, and sincere care, and affection, to the Subjects of
England to alter, or innovate the Fundamental Laws, Privileges, and good
Customs of this Kingdom, whereby not only his royal Authority, but the Peoples
Security of Lands, Livings, and Privileges (both in general and particular)
are preserved and maintained, and by the abolishing, or alteration of which it
is impossible, but that present Confusion will fall upon the whole State, and
^rame of this Realm. So that if this Judgment of the King and both Houses of
Parliament was true; sure we may justly suppose, that things of such vast
concernment deserve our contending for, by all means possible and lawful to
preserve them; for what the Nobles of the Land upon occasion once said with one
Voice in full Parliament, every Freeborn Subject of England, may as well say
at this day, Nolumus Leges Angliae mutari; which is a Maxim that ought to be
imprinted upon the Hearts of all true Englishmen; who, (as my Lord Bacon very
well observes) take themselves to have as good Title to their Laws, Lord
Bacon's Letters p. 43.
as to the common Air they breathe in; and King Charles the First, somewhere
says, That it was his Maxim, that the King's Prerogative is to Defend the
Peoples Liberties, and that the peoples Liberty strengthens the King's
Prerogative: For indeed, if the Foundations are destroyed, the Superstructure
cannot stand; and if this Rule had been well observed by this King's Sons, we
had not been reduced to this great Confusion we now lie under. For my Lord
Bacon calls those Flatterers who put the King upon such Dangerous Courses,
Ibid. p. 41.
as great Traitors to him in the Court of Heaven, as he that draws his Sword
against him: And King James I. in his Speech in Parliament, 1609. Calls all
those who persuade Kings not to be confined within the limits of their Laws,
Vipers, and Pests, both against them, and the Commonwealth.


M. For my part, I shall not go about to defend such ill men, whoever they be;
yet since such Insinuations are done privately, and in a Corner it is very hard
for Subjects to judge when such Evil Councils are in^used into the Ears of
Princes; and much more unjust for them to make any resistance on pretense to
remove them: and therefore besides the absurdity of making Subjects both Judges
and Parties, you have not yet told me, what number of men must be at once
oppressed in their Fundamental Rights (as you call them) and who may make this
resistance; for methinks it is very absurd to give one County, for example,
upon the account of free Quarter, a Power of rising in Arms and resisting the
King's Officers and Soldiers, when perhaps all the rest of the Nation where no
Soldiers are, feel no such thing.


F. I am not so unreasonable, as to maintain that Subjects ought to take Arms
merely because the King gives too much ear to Flatterers and wicked Ministers,
or is too much led by them; let him be so, provided the people do not smart for
it. But if once it comes to that pass, that they grow intolerable, and set the
King upon a General Invasion of the peoples Rights in any of the great Points I
have now laid down, let them look to themselves, if they will not permit a
Parliament to sit, and redress those Grievances* they must expect the Nation
will rise at last against them, as they did against Gaveston, and Spencers; and
make them undergo that punishment they so well deserve: But as for what you say
of making the people Judges, when their Rights and Liberties are invaded; the
Consequence is as bad if the King alone shall judge, as for example in the Case
of Ship Money, the Judges gave their Opinions that the King might raise Money
for Ships of War in case of Necessity, without any control; but if he be sole
Judge of this Necessity, he might lay this Tax as often, and raise it to what
degree he pleased. Therefore as I shall not deny that the King may judge it fit
to do a great many things against the strict Letter of the Law, in cases of
urgent necessity; but it will be at his peril if he judge amiss; as for
example, Every man's House is his Castle, and he may lawfully defend it against
all Illegal Commissions: Yet I think no man will deny, but that in case of a
Fire in London, the King may by Common Law command his Officers to break open
some of the next Houses, and blow them up with Gunpowder to stop the Fire; but
admit he should out of malice, or misinformation command some Houses to be
blown up that stood a Mile off, under pretense of stopping the Fire, do you
think the Owners were bound to stand still, and let them do it?

But if the People must not judge when their Fundamental Rights and Liberties
are invaded, because they will be both Judges and Parties; then no man whatever
by this Argument ought to defend himself against the violence of another; for
who can be judge, but he that feels the blow? Nor indeed could Princes make so
much as Defensive Wars, since whenever they do so, they are themselves both
Judges and Parties, as I told you at our Third Meeting, when I answered (as I
then thought) all your Arguments against the peoples ever judging for
themselves. So that if it be proved that the people in a limited Kingdom
remain, as to the defense of their Lives, Liberties, Religion, and Properties,
always in the state of Nature, in respect of their Prince as well as all the
rest of Mankind, they must certainly make use of defensive Arms when necessity
requires it, or else become Slaves whenever he pleases to make them so; may
people have no right to judge of his Violence and Oppressions?

But as for the number that are to make this Judgment and Resistance thereupon;
I grant in most Cases this is not to be done, as long as the Oppression is
begun by color of Law, without actual violence. Secondly, when it concerns
only some particular Bodies of Men; thus if free Quarter should be taken in one
or two Towns or Counties I do not allow it a sufficient cause for all the
Neighboring Towns, much less the whole County, or the Neighboring Shires to
take an Alarm, and rise in Arms upon it, since, perhaps, the King may know
nothing of it: and if he were once informed of it, would redress it; but can
you affirm the Case would be the same if this Grievance should become general,
all over the Nation? and that the King should be so far from redressing it,
that he should put out a Declaration, setting forth that it was his Prerogative
so to do; would not the whole Nation then take it for granted, that the King's
Design was to govern by a standing Army, who should live upon the people, and
devour them (as they do in France) to the very Bones; and might not they make
Resistance against these Robberies and Oppressions? the same I say for all
other breaches made in any other of our Fundamental Rights; I do not allow any
resistan^e to be made, till it become a general Oppression upon all, or the
major part of the Nation, and without all hopes of being otherwise remedied,
and this must be also so evident, that there can be no doubt or denial of the
Matter of Fact: for so long as the Case is disputable, or the Grievance is not
of a general concern, I grant the people ought never to stir; but of this they
alone must Judge; since our Constitution has left us no other Judges of these
breaches, but the diffusive Body of the whole people in the intervals of
Parliament.

But for your last Question, as to the number that may thus rise to make this
Resistance, I answer thus, that when once the Mischief becomes general, and
without all other remedy; any part of the People who think themselves strong
enough to defend themselves against such violence, may begin to rise if they
can, till the rest of the Kingdom can come into their assistance; as I told you
the Town of Brill did against the Tyranny of the Duke D'Alva, in the beginning
of the Belgic Wars, and it was soon after seconded by the revolt of diverse
other Cities and Towns in those Provinces; till the Spaniards were quite driven
out.


M. I do not deny but you speak more moderately on this Subject than most of
your opinion, who think every private man has a right to take up Arms and raise
a Rebellion, whenever he judges his Person or Estate is invaded; or injured by
the Government. And indeed this remedy of Resistance seems at first sight pretty
tolerable, if it were not that we very well knew that this many-headed Beast,
the Multitude, is very apt to be deluded by the cunning Speeches, and sly
Insinuations of factious and ambitious Men, whose Interest it will always be to
fish in troubled Waters, and raise Disturbances to make themselves the Heads of
a Party: Thus in the Year -- 42. what Lies and Stories were there raised to
incense the People against that good King, to make them take up Arms against
him, as an Invader of their Liberties; and one that was about to make War upon
them; And who that is not over-partial to his own Opinions, does not see, that
the Nation has been blown up into a flame by the lying Reports of a French
League, and a Supposi^irious Prince of Wales; neither of which, I durst pawn my
life, have the least tittle of truth in them; so that this Doctrine can scarce
fail* almost every time it is put in practice, to bring all Government to
Anarchy and Confusion.


F. I have already in part answered this Objection at our Third Meeting; but
since you will urge it over again, I shall in the first place admit the Matter
of Fact to be as you say, that the People may, by some turbulent Demogogues, be
sometimes so far incensed as to take up Arms when there is no just Occasion*
but let me tell you* I doubt that neither of the Instances you have given, will
make good your Assertion; for in the first place, as to King Charles the First,
it is said by all Writers on the Parliaments side, that the King by leaving his
Parliament, and going to York, and there taking a Guard when no Enemy was near,
and when the Parliament had as yet, raised no Forces at all; as also by his
going to Hull to remove the Magazine of Arms that lay there, in order to put
them into the hands of an Army, to make War upon the Parliament, who then
demanded the Settlement of the Militia, to be in Commissioners of their
Nomination; that he thereby broke his Coronation Oath, whereby he was Sworn to
Govern according to Law, and not by force. But as for what you say, as to the
present juncture of Affairs: I never can desire a more plain proof of the
Peoples necessity of ^aking up defensive Arms; since admitting that neither of
the Reports concerning the French League; and the false Birth of this supposed
Prince be true; yet, I think, the Nation has had sufficient Provocations to
rise as one man, and join with the Prince of Orange for the obtaining of a free
Parliament to set all things right, which the King's violent illegal
Administration has so much discomposed. But admitting the utmost you can
suppose, that sometimes the people may Judge amiss, as well as the King, and
through that misinformation may take up Arms against their Prince, when there
is no real Occasion; shall this abuse of a right be a sufficient cause against
there ever exercising of it at all; I am sure this is no good Argument against
the natural Right of Self defense between private persons in the state of
Nature, that some men do often abuse it; nor can I see how upon these Grounds,
even Sovereign Princes may be allowed to make so much as Defensive Wars, (as I
said but now) since they may pretend that themselves are wronged, and invaded,
or at least are like to be so, when no such thing was really done, or intended;
and so by their mis-judgment or false pretenses, many millions of Lives may be
lost* What then? must no Princes ever make War at all, till all the World be
satisfied of the Justice of their Quarrel? If so, I doubt the last War of King
Charles the Second made against the Dutch, and this late War the King of
France, has now made upon the Empire, should never have been by your Principles
so much as begun; much less carried on with so great an Effusion of Blood, and
the Destruction of so many Cities and Towns: and whether this, as well as
Tyranny at home, is not more often put in practice by Princes, than any
Resistance this Nation, or all the Subjects of the World have made against such
Tyranny, and Arbitrary Power, I leave it to your self, or any indifferent
Person to judge.


M. I doubt not but I may very well join issue with you upon this point, for I
think that upon those very conditions, and grounds you have now laid down the
Clergymen, Lords, Gentlemen, and Commons of this Kingdom, who have either come
over with the Prince of Orange, or have taken up Arms in defense of his Late
Declaration cannot justify themselves by any of the Instances you have given
for joining themselves with him in Arms, for though I grant His Majesty by
harkening too much to Popish Counsel^ may have done many things which in
strictness of Law cannot be justified; yet since they do not strike at that
which you call the fundamental constitution of the Government, and has been
also done without any force on the People of this Nation; but has been either
transacted by Judgment of Law, or the color of it at least, viz. by the
opinion of all or the Major part of Judges; all the Parties above mentioned,
ought (according to your own Principles) to have waited for the meeting of the
next Parliament, to whose determination they ought, by the Law of the Land, to
have referred all such grievances, and violations of Laws which they had to
complain of; and if then the King had refused to have remedied them, they might
have had some color (I do not say right) for taking up Arms* and doing what
they have done; whereas I cannot see how you can, even upon your Principles
defend the late risers from wilful Rebellion against the King.

And for proof of this, I need go no farther than the Prince of Oranges Late
Declaration, which being drawn by the best advice of the Malcontents then in
Holland; would not fall to mention all the violations of Law, which they
thought his Majesty's Government had been guilty of ever since his coming to
the Crown, and therefore not to insist upon the want of right, which I conceive
the Prince had to concern himself with the affairs of another Kingdom, which he
had no right to: I shall however mention every Article, in which his Highness
conceives the Religion, Laws, and civil Liberties of this Nation to be
endangered. In the first place as to the dispensing Power, which the King has
lately assumed to himself in matters of Religion; and thereby putting into
Offices and Commands persons incapable by Law of bearing them, without taking
the Test; as I shall not now dispute the Legality or Illegality of the Kings
Declaration concerning it, so as to that part of it that concerns Liberty of
Conscience, or dispensing with the Papists and Dissenters to meet in Assemblies
for their Religious Worship notwithstanding all the Acts made against Mass and
Conventicles, it was no more than what King Charles the IId. had done before
with the Advice of his Privy Council; in which if it had been Rebellion to have
opposed him, sure it is the same crime in the Reign of his Brother.

2. As for the Commission for causes Ecclesiastical


F. Since I foresee your discourse upon this Subject is like to be long; and to
consist of many more heads than I doubt my memory will serve to bear away; pray
give me leave to answer all your instances one after another as you propose
them. First then as to the late Declaration concerning the Dispensing Power, it
was so far from being done by Law, or so much as the Color of it, that besides
its being against diverse express Acts of Parliament, which tie up the Kings
hands from dispensing with the Act against public Mass and Conventicles; as
also that disable all Persons whatever to act in any public Employments, till
they have taken the Test appointed by the said Act, (in which all non obstances
are expressly barred.) But this Declaration was never so much as shown to the
Privy Council, till it was ready to be published, and then indeed the King
caused it to be read in Council, declaring that he would have it issued forth,
though without ever Putting it to the Vote, or so much as asking the consents of
the Privy Councillors there present; though I grant the Title of it sets
forth, that it was done by his Majesty in Council, to impose upon the Nation
that stale cheat, whereby this King, (as well as the last) would have had us
believe, that their Declarations had been issued by the consent of the Council,
when God knows there was no such thing.

And as for any judgment, or opinion of the Judges to support it, and make it
pass by color of Law, it was never, as I can hear of, so much as proposed to
them in their judicial capacities, though perhaps it might be proposed to the
Lord Chancellor, and some of the Judges who were of the Cabal, which is nothing
to the purpose; all that I ever heard to have been brought judicially before
them, was the Case of Sir Edward Hales taking a Commission for a Colonel of a
Regiment; after he had openly declared himself a Papist; in which great point
though I grant the Major part of the Judges gave their opinion for the
dispensing Power, yet was it only in the case of Military commissions, as
several of them afterward declared, and not of all sorts of Employments, as
well Civil, as Military, much less for Popish heads of Colleges, Parsons and
Bishops to hold their Livings, Headships, and Bishoprics, if they pleased to
turn to the Romish Religion; or that the King should please to bestow them upon
Popish Priests, it would have been as legal in the one case as in the other;
Since as for Popish Heads of Colleges, and Parsons, we have had too many
instances of it, and if we had none for Bishops, we must thank either the
constancy of most, or the timorousness of some of them, if they have not openly
declared for the Romish Religion, and yet might have kept their Bishoprics,
notwithstanding; but I do not at all doubt but that such a general dispensation
for professed Papists to take and hold all sorts of Offices, and places of
Trust, not only Military, but Ecclesiastical and Civil, would have in a little
time brought all Offices and Employments into their hands.

Nor is this dispensing power in matters of Religion, the sole thing aimed at
by this Declaration, as appears by the very words, and whole purport of it,
which is not confined to matters of Religion only, but claims an unlimited
power of dispensing with all sorts of Statutes in all cases whatever, none
excepted: and if so, pray tell me, what Magna Charta, or the Statute de
Tallagio non concidendo, or any other Law, will signify, whenever the King
pleases to dispense with them, either as to raising Money, or taking away men's
Lives, or Liberties, or Estates, contrary to Law; nay the Papists already give
out (and that in Print) that all Laws for taking away Religious Orders, and
Suppressures of Monasteries, are against Magna Charta, by which holy Church
(that is, the Popish Religion then in being) is to enjoy all her ancient
Rights, and Liberties; and the Abbots, and Priors, do thereby, as well as the
Bishops, and Lay Lords, reserve to themselves all their Ancient Rights, and
free Customs: now whether this unbounded Prerogative would not quickly have
destroyed not only the Ecclesiastical, but Civil constitution of this Kingdom,
as they now stand established by Law, and would have soon introduced both
Popery, and Arbitrary Government on this Nation, I leave it to your self, or
any indifferent person to consider.

And though I do not say, that the bare giving of Papists or Protestant
Dissenters a Liberty of Religious Meetings, or Assemblies for Mass, or
Preaching, is an infringment of the free exercise of our Religion established by
Law, yet pray take one thing along with you, which is a matter of great moment
both to the Dissenters, and to our selves; that if the King can thus by his
Prerogative give both Papists, and Fanatics a Liberty to meet publicly
contrary to Law; let the latter look to it; for he may by the same Prerogative
(whenever he pleases) dispense only with the Papists, and keep the Laws still
on foot against the Dissenters; nay, he may by the same unbounded Prerogative,
dispense with all the Laws for the public exercise of our Religion, and under
pretense of dispensing with them only in some particular cases, shut up our
Church Doors one after another, beginning with the Cathedrals, and so
proceeding by degrees to Parish Churches: and though I grant King Charles the
IId. did assume a power of dispensing with all Statutes concerning Religious
Meetings contrary to Law; yet the Nation had not then any sufficient reason to
rise in Arms against this Declaration; since it did not extend the Kings
Prerogative beyond those Acts concerning Religious Worship: and farther the
Nation was not out of all hopes of having it redressed by the next Parliament,
and so was not in that desperate condition in which it was lately, before the
Prince of Oranges coming over. And you may remember that the Late King upon the
joint Address of the Lords and Commons against that Declaration was forced to
call it in, and cancel it, which certainly ought to have been better considered
by his Majesty, and those of the Popish ^unto that advised him to issue out the
late Declaration, so expressly contrary to Law, and the sense of both Houses of
Parliament, and which gave the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the rest of his
Brethren a sufficient ground of petitioning against it; and this was so
evident, that a Jury in which the greatest part were high Prerogative Men could
not upon a fair trial, but acquit them.


M. I shall not further dispute this point, since you have dwelt so long upon
it, though I must still tell you, I do not look upon this as a sufficient cause
for the Nations taking up arms for a reason I shall show you by and by; and
therefore I shall now proceed to the next head complained of in the Princes
late Declaration, ( viz.) the late Commission for erecting a new Court for
Causes Ecclesiastical, but as I will not enter upon the question of the
Legality of it; so on the other side it was also done by color of Law; and the
King as supreme head of the Church, was told by his Ministers that he had power
to erect what new Court Ecclesiastical he pleased, provided it was not of the
same kind with the High Commission Court, which had been abrogated by the Stat.
of the 17th of King Charles the I. as likewise particularly excepted in the
Proviso, in the Stat. of the XIIth of King Charles the II. for restoring
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to the Bishops Courts: so that admitting that Court
was not legal; yet the Persons who advised the King to erect it, and the
Commissioners who sat in it were only answerable for it; in the next
Parliament; and though the Bishop of London was suspended, and the President,
and Fellows of Magdalen College were unjustly expelled by this Court, yet sure
none of these miscarriages could give the Subjects of this Kingdom any just
pretenses to take up Arms to redress them, being done (as I said before) by
color of Law, without any force or violence; and was also submitted to by the
Parties against which these Decrees were given, and was at the most but a
matter of particular concern, and reached no farther than the said Bishop and
College, and did not touch the Religion and Civil Liberties of the whole
Kingdom: and consequently was not of that general importance, as to be any just
cause of the whole Kingdoms taking Arms, much less for the Kings Officers and
Soldiers to run over to the Prince of Orange, as they lately have done.


F. To answer what you have now said concerning the Ecclesiastical Commission;
that I must also tell you was issued forth without so much as any color of Law
for it; and though the late Chancellor, and some of the worst, and most
Mercenary Judges countenanced it by appearing for and acting in it, yet it is
very well known that it was never proposed to all the Judges to be argued in
the Exchequer Chamber, as it ought to have been, before a thing of that great
importance to the whole Nation had passed the Seals; as to what you say, that
the Kings Ministers told him it was according to Law, and that they alone ought
to answer for it in the next Parliament, and that no public disturbance ought
to have been made about it, because the things that, that pretended Court did,
were but of a particular concern, and only reached the Bishop of London, and one
single College; that is but a fallacy which you put upon your self; for sure
if you had better considered of it, you would find that what these
Commissioners have already done is of a little more public concernment than
you are aware of, for pray tell me, why by the same Law, by which the Bishop of
London was suspended for his refusal to silence Dr. Sharp, all the Bishops in
England might not have been suspended one after another by that pretended
Court, if they had refused to obey or execute any Letters or Orders from the
King, though never so illegal or unreasonable? since what command could be more
illegal, than the King's positive order to the Bishop to suspend a Clergyman
from his Diocese, without first hearing him, or giving him leave to answer for
himself? So likewise for the case of Magdalen College, by the same Law by
which these Ecclesiastical Commissioners took upon them to turn out the
President, and Fellows for disobeying the Kings Mandamus, by the same Law the
King might put upon any other College in either University, Popish Heads, and
Popish Fellows, till instead of Nurseries for the education of our youth in the
Protestant Religion, they may become as absolute Popish Seminaries, as the
Colleges of Doway, or St. Omers; and though I grant that the persons concerned
in these unjust Decrees, might have patiently submitted to them without any
protestations against the jurisdiction of that pretended Court, since they
might for some prudential reasons have thought fit to submit to them, without
making any such protestation, and yet for all that not allow their Authority;
but indeed the matter of fact was far otherwise, for when a part of these
Commissioners sat at Magdalen College to expel the said President and Fellows
from their places contrary to Law, and the express Statutes of the College,
they did all severally protest against their whole proceedings, and appealed to
the Kings Courts at Westminster. And it is a plain proof how willingly Dr. H.
the President of this College submitted to this Sentence, by his locking the
Doors of his Lodgings, and leaving the Commissioners to break them open before
they could get in, and put in his pretended Successor by force.

But as to what you say, that the King was told he might as supreme Head of the
Church, set up what new Court he pleased for the execution of his
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: it is certainly a great mistake, for I utterly
deny, that the King has power to erect any new Courts either Ecclesiastical or
Civil, unless by Authority of Parliament: the Kings power to make a Vicar
general, being only confirmed by the Statute of King Henry the Eighth, as was
also the Authority of the high Commission, by the Statute of the first of Queen
Elizabeth, and if either of those high spirited Princes had^ believed
themselves to have been invested with such an unbounded Prerogative, they would
certainly have exercised it, without being beholding to the Parliament, but
indeed it is but a subterfuge, to allege that this Court was not of the same
Nature with that of the high Commission, because it did not take upon it to
^^ne, or commit Men to Prison, nor to administer the Oath, ex Officio, to those
that were convened before them, since it is not the different name, or some
small difference in the manner of the judicial proceedings, but the Causes or
Matters that a Court pretends to take Cognizance of, that can make it a Court
of a quite different nature; now it is notoriously known that this late
Ecclesiastical Court took upon it to Judge of Matrimonial Causes, about
Alimony, and concerning ^lmoniacal contracts, and all other misdemeanors both
of Clergy and Layety, against Religion and good Manners, which were the same
things the late high Commission Court took upon them to determine; and if they
did not meddle with Popish, or Nonconformist Meetings, it was because their
hands were so tied up by the Late Declaration of Indulgence, that they had no
power to meddle either with Papists or Dissenters.


M. I shall make no farther reply appresent to what you now say, till I come to
answer once for all, therefore I shall go on to the next things excepted
against in the Princes Declaration, ( viz.) the erecting of public Chapels
for Mass, the protecting of Priests, and the making a Jesuit a Privy
Councellor, all which though I confess they are against the express Letter of
diverse Statutes, yet since all these things depend upon the Kings dispensing
power, set forth in His Majesty's late Declaration, which as I will not assert,
so I will not positively deny; since the said Declaration of Indulgence, and
all proceedings thereupon have issued out and executed under color of Law,
viz. of the Kings Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, without any force or violence
upon the Conscience, Religion, or Properties of the Kings Protestant Subjects,
whom the King in his said Declaration solemnly promises to protect in the free
possession, and enjoyment of their Religion established by Law: and I cannot see
how a liberty granted to Popish Priests to say Mass, or the putting in a
Jesuit into the Privy Council; or making Popish Judges, or putting a Papist
into the Ecclesiastical Commission, can be looked upon as any Invasion of the
Protestant Religion, the free, and public profession of which we have (God be
thanked) as quietly enjoyed as we did in the Reign of this King; or in that of
his Brother.


F. Since you cannot directly justify the Kings setting up public Mass Houses
in London, and in most other parts of the Kingdom; and his so public
protecting and countenancing Papists and Jesuits, even to the making a Jesuit a
Privy-Councellor, though they are all in judgment of Law alike public Enemies
and Traitors to the King and Kingdom, and that all these (as you cannot deny)
are contrary to the express words and intent of all Statutes against Priests,
and Popish Assemblies, so you endeavor to palliate it under the Kings
dispensing power, which you suppose to have had a color of Law (at least) to
support it, but though the giving Liberty to Popish Assemblies, and the
Conventicles of the Dissenters was no direct hindrance of the free exe^ercise
of the Protestant Religion established by Law, yet I must utterly deny that the
King has any such prerogative, as to dispense with those Laws, and by his sole
Authority to declare those that the Law calls Enemies and Traitors, to be good
Subjects, and you may as well tell me, that the King has not only a prerogative
power to pardon High-way-men; but may also protect them, and put them into his
Guards, with a Commission to rob whom they pleased, as to give Papists Power to
bear Arms, or to protect, and employ declared Traitors, (as Popish Priests, and
Jesuits are by Law,) as the King had done; not the like I may say for putting
in Popish Judges and Justices of Peace, ( viz.) that it was all done by force
of the Kings Personal Orders, without his Legal Authority, which is that alone
we can take cognizance of, or render any Obedience to; and though it is true, I do
not deny the King a Power of making whom he pleases Judges, yet this
prerogative is still to be exercised according to Law, and therefore if the
King should make an illiterate man a Judge, who could neither Write nor Read,
the Writ or Patent would be void in its self; the same I may say of a Popish
Judge, the Law making no difference (as I know of) between a natural and a
legal disability: but however the turning out honest and able Judges, because
they would not give up our Religion and Liberties to the Kings Arbitrary Will,
is certainly a much greater breach of the Trust committed to him by his
Coronation Oath, wherein he swore he would maintain the Laws of the Land, and
mix Equity with Mercy in all his Judgments: now where is the Equity, or
Justice of this, that whereas the Judges anciently held their places quam diu
se been gesserint they should now (by a notorious encroachment of the
prerogative) not only be made durante beneplacito: but that the King should
stretch this prerogative so unreasonably, as to examine the Judges before hand,
whether they would agree to the dispensing power, and to turn out those that
refused to comply, merely because they would not serve his Arbitrary designs?
and then to put in the meanest and most mercenary Lawyers at the Bar, (nay some
who never come thither at all) into their places, for no other merit, or good
qualities, but because they would serve a turn, is so notorious a breach of his
Oath, that it could not fail in a little time to destroy all our Common, as
well as our Statute Laws, since these were all lately lodged in their Breasts
and resolved into their Arbitrary determinations, which yet (as all the World
knows) were wholly managed by the influence and commands of the Court; and this
I say again was as notorious an abuse of the Kings prerogative, as if he had
put in High-way-men into his Guards with Commissions in their Pockets to rob
whom they pleased, since these Gentlemen in Scarlet have taken the same Liberty
under color of Law, to raise Taxes upon the Subjects against the express
letter of an act of Parliament, as may be seen in their late determination
concerning Chimney Money, making Cottages built for the use of the poor, and
houses of persons exempted from payment liable to Chymney Money, contrary to
the express words of that Statute.


M. I cannot deny but the things you now mention have been great abuses of
Prerogative, but whether so great as to require resistance I must still
disagree with you, therefore I shall now proceed to the next particular
complained of, ( viz.) the examining of the Lords Lieutenants, Deputy
Lieutenants, Sheriffs, and Justices of Peace, to know whether they would concur
with the King in the repeal of the Test, and Penal Laws, and turning all such
out of Commission as refused to comply with the Kings desires in this matter;
now though I will not say it was well or prudently done, yet it was no more than
(what I think) the King by his Prerogative might Justify the doing of; since
he may by Law give a quietus est to what Judges he pleases, and put in or out
of Commissions, whether Civil, or Military, what persons he thinks fit, and as
for the persons so examined they might have chosen whether they would have
given any positive answers to the questions put to them, by the Lord
Chancellor, and Lord Lieutenants, and if they had refused to answer positively
to those questions proposed to them, I know no other penalty they had been
liable to, more than being put out of Commission, which sure is no punishment,
but rather an ease; and though I do not defend those evil Ministers that put the
King upon this Method of distrusting, and disobliging his best Protestant
Subjects (I mean those of the Church of England) by putting them out, and
putting in either Papists, or Fanatics in their steads, yet all that own
themselves of that Communion, ought to have been of more loyal Principles than
to have taken up Arms as some of them have done, upon pretense of standing by
the Prince of Oranges Declaration, against these abuses.


F. I see though you cannot directly justify the examining of the Lords
Lieutenants, and Deputy Lieutenants, and Justices of the Peace, about taking
away the Penal Laws and Test, and turning those out of Commission that refused;
yet you strive to mitigate it (as far as you can) by making it part of the
Kings Prerogative, to put in and out what Judges, Justices, and other Officers
he pleases: well, granting this to be so, yet sure you cannot deny but that the
clositing of Judges, and all other Officers you have now mentioned, and putting
those out of Commission, that refused to comply with the Kings Will, (and that
for no other reason) was sure a strange abuse of that Prerogative; and the
excuse you make that the persons examined had a liberty to refuse whether they
would give any positive answer, or not, is yet more trivial, since it is very
well known, that as well those who gave doubtful answers, or refused to make
any answer at all, were as much turned out, as they who positively denied to
comply with the Kings demands; so that no answer was looked upon as
satisfactory, but such as seemed to give up all freedom of Elections, and Votes
in Parliament; none being to be chosen by the Kings directions but such as
would engage before hand to repeal the Test, and Penal Laws: and I think you
will not deny but that the King by thus examining all these Magistrates and
Officers you now mention, and by turning those out that refused to comply, did
all he could to hinder the free Election of Members to serve in Parliament, and
the freedom of giving their Votes when they came thither, and the King might as
well another time have declared that he would have no Members chosen but such
as would agree to take away the Statute de Tallagio non concidendo, or any
branch of Magna Chart^, which he should think fit to have repealed; and as this
strikes at the very fundamental constitution of the Government, ( viz) the free
Election of Parliament men, so it was inserted among the Articles against
Richard the II. that he had caused the Sheriffs to return whom he pleased for
Knights of Shires, as I have already showed you.

But what say you to the Kings late calling in almost all the Charters of
Cities, Towns, and Corporations in England, and putting in Popish or Fanatic
Officers and Magistrates, into the rooms of those that were turned out, only to
influence Elections, and to procure what persons he desired to be returned for
Parliament men; is not this a grand breach of the fundamental constitution of
the Kingdom, thus to take away the legal Rights and Privileges of these
Corporations, for no other cause than to procure the King such Parliament men
as he had a mind to?


M. I beg your pardon, I forgot to mention this sooner, and though I will not
take upon me absolutely to defend the Legality of it; much less the design for
which it was done, since I grant that it was in order to destroy, or at least
to humble the Church of England: yet since i^ was done by color of Law, and
Judgment of the Court of Kings Bench, and no more than what has been formerly
done in the Reign of King Charles, I cannot see how the Noblemen, and Gentlemen
lately in Arms, could defend their rising upon that ground, unless they would
also at the same time justify the lawfulness of the Plot, and Rebellion
intended in the same Reign, and in which so many of the Whig Nobility, and
Gentry, were deeply engaged.


F. To answer what you have said in vindication of this great violation of one
of the fundamental Rights and Liberties of the Kingdom; I must in the first
place tell you, that as I shall not now examine into the matter of Law, whether
a Corporation can forfeit it is Charter for misdemeanors or not; much less
shall I concern my self whether it were done by, or without color of Law, or
the Judgment of the Court of Kings Bench, since it is notoriously known that
none of the Judges were permitted to sit there, nor any new ones put in, but
such as would blindly agree to all the Court would have done, and therefore I
value nor any thing they did, nor think it one ^ot the more legal for their
Judgments: nor is it any excuse, that the same thing was done in King Charles
Reign, and therefore might as well be done now without any rising against it;
for though I must tell you I look upon the taking away of the Charters from the
City of London, and the other Cities and Corporations of the Kingdom, one of
the most arbitrary, and illegal acts of that Kings Reign, yet there were
several reasons which made it unlawful for the Nation to rise then; yet it
might not be so now, as in the first place, because most of those Charters,
were either willingly surrendered by the members of those Corporations, or else
were declared forfeited by due trial and Judgment of Law, whereas it was much
otherwise in this Kings Time, when notwithstanding that all the Cities and
Towns Corporate in England, had but a few years before taken out new Charters
to their great trouble, and expense, they were now summoned anew to surrender
these again, for no other reason but because it was the Kings pleasure it
should be so, for who can imagine that all the Corporations of England could
have forfeited their Charters in so short a time as three or four years? and
they were plainly told, that the King must and would have them, and that it was
to no purpose to stand out, and therefore it was no wonder, if all the Cities
and Corporations of England were forced to submit patiently to this violation,
since they found by experience the Judges were ready to give Judgment against
them, right or wrong.

And besides this I have already laid it down as a Maxim, that no resistance
whatever is to be made, till matters become desperate, and all other means are
become absolutely ineffectual, which I think they were not, as long as King
Charles lived, who besides the inconstancy of his humor, which seldom
persisted long, either in well or evil doing, (especially if the ill
consequences of it were well laid open to him*) was too timorous then to have
put in any Magistrates into Corporations, but such as were for the Protestant
Religion, as it stands by Law established; and such however angry they might be
with those they called Whigs in respect of their opposing the Dukes succession
to the Crown, yet I believe most of them would never have given up the freedom
of Elections of Parliament men, or have done any thing to bring in Popery among
us; so that as long as things remained in this State, there were some hopes
still lest of a redress of our grievances, whenever a Parliament had met, and
that the Nation was grown more cool, and had come to it self again after those
heats which had risen in the late Parliaments about the succession, and other
things; whereas now the case was far otherwise in this Kings Reign; wherein we
found not only our Religion, but the fundamental Rights and Privileges of the
Nation, struck at by the Kings dispensing power, and the Arbitrary proceedings
of the Judges: and not only the freedom of Elections of Knights of Shires, but
of Citizens and Burgesses endeavored to be taken from us: either by
threatening the Electors, or else by open force; as I shall prove by and by;
when I shall have occasion to speak farther upon that head; so that unless a
great part of the Nation had declared for the Prince of Orange, he had been
repulsed with shame and ruin and our Chains tied faster upon us, than ever
they were before.


M. I shall forbear replying further to what you have now said, till I come to
conclude, but in the mean time I cannot omit another material grievance, set
down in the Princes Declaration, ( viz.) the turning out and disarming the
English Protestant Magistrates, Officers, and Soldiers in Ireland, and putting
of Irish Papists in their Rooms, as also the late Declaration of Indulgence in
Scotland; but as I will not defend the Justice or Prudence of those Councils,
so I think none of them could give any sufficient cause for the people of this
Kingdom to rise in Arms, for sure it is enough (if not too much) for them to
concern themselves with the grievances, and miscarriages of their own Country,
without taking upon them to take up Arms to reform those of their Neighbors,
since they are not only ignorant of the Laws and Constitutions of those
Kingdoms, but may also mistake the true reasons and grounds on which those
alterations were made.


F. I see you can as little defend what has been illegally acted in Scotland,
as in Ireland, only you would sain put me off by telling me that the people of
this Nation have nothing to do to take notice of what is done in other
Kingdoms; and you may as well tell me, that a man ought not to take any warning
as to defend himself against Thieves, though he see's another man robbed by
them before his Eyes, or that the Protestants of England should not take
warning by the sad example of those in France, from ever suffering a Popish
King from having the same power here as the French King has in France, for fear
of the like fatal effects, since I never found Papists give Protestants the
least forbearance, or show them any mercy longer than whilst it was not in
their Power to hurt them.

But to come to the matter in hand, we cannot but concern our selves with what
has been so lately done in Scotland and Ireland, for the introducing of Popery
and Arbitrary Government in those Kingdoms, since the latter is notoriously
known to be governed by the same Laws as England, and it is as much against the
Laws of that Kingdom, as it is of ours, for the Irish Papists to be put in
Arms, and the Protestant Militia disarmed, and for Popish Judges, and Justices
of Peace to be put in Commission, as has been practiced under the Government
of the Lord Tyrconnel; and if English Protestants in Ireland, cannot enjoy
their Estates and Liberties, without being turned out of them by the Papists,
how could we in England expect better treatment whenever they shall think
themselves strong enough; and as for Scotland, though it be not wholly governed by
the same Laws as England, yet the fundamental constitution of the Government is
the same in both Kingdoms, and the King can no more make, abrogate, or dispense
with Laws in Scotland without the Parliament, than he can here, and therefore
for the King not only to issue out such a Declaration of Indulgence, and
suspension of all the Penal Laws in Scotland against Papists, but also therein
to declare that he expected an obedience to all his commands without reserve
(whether legal or not) was so bold a stroke, that we could not but expect the
like in England, though his Majesty thought it not fit at present to discover his
Mind so plainly to us.


M. I shall not any longer dispute these points with you, but own that the
abuses you mention, were indeed of great concern both to the Protestant
Religion and our Civil Liberties, yet however besides the Laws of the Land,
(which I still suppose do expressly forbid all resistance of the King upon any
account whatsoever) I think there ought to have been no such thing done by any
Subject of this Nation, even upon your own principles, which seem not to allow
of such resistance, but in case of an actual and violent assault upon men's
Religion, Lives, and Properties, and that by open force of Arms; now I desire
you to show me, whom it is that the King has ever yet Dragoon'd, or persecuted
till they would become of his Religion, or whose Life his Majesty has taken
away, even of the most notorious Traitors, but by due Trial, and course of Law,
nay he has pardoned diverse, several after they were condemned, merely because
he was informed they were not really guilty of the Crimes whereof they stood
Condemned; and as for men's civil properties, I defy you to show me any persons
Estate that has been taken from him without due course of Law, or any Taxes
that have been Assessed upon the Nation, but what have been granted by
Parliament: or else raised by the opinion of the Judges, by whom if his Majesty
has been misinformed, they only ought to answer for it in the next Parliament,
who are the only proper Judges of their Miscarriages without having any course
to Force, which the Laws of this Kingdom so much abhor, and therefore make the
worst of it you can, all these Greivances already mentioned were no more than
some breaches upon the outward Splendor of our Church Religion or some of our
civil liberties; whilst the main and Essential parts of both continued
untouched, since, God be thanked, we have hitherto enjoyed the Free and public
profession of our Religion, together with our lives, Liberties and Estates in
perfect peace, and undisturbed by any outward Force, or Violence from the King,
or any Commissioned by him; and as for those Grievances you mention, viz. The
turning out the President and Fellows of Magdalen College by the late
Ecclesiastical Commission, as also the turning out of the Deputy Lieutenants,
and Justices of Peace, and all other Magistrates out of Cities and
Corporations, the King has sufficiently redressed them by restoring the first
to their places, and by putting all the rest into Commission again* and turning
out those that came in their rooms, and all this before the Prince of Orange
came over, and I doubt not but his Majesty would have been content to have
given the Nation any other reasonable satisfaction they could have desired in
the next Parliament: Which ought to have been patiently waited for until his
Majesty thought sit to call it, without going about to right our selves by
Force.


F. I confess you have made not only the most plausible defense you can of the
Kings late actions, but have also urged the utmost that can be said against
those defensive Arms, that have been lately taken up by those Lords, Gentlemen,
and others who have associated themselves to stand by the Prince of Orange,
till our grievances were redrest by a free Parliament; but if what you have
said be strictly looked into, I doubt it will prove but a mere Subtersuge to
hide the nakedness of the Cause you have undertaken: In the first place
therefore let me tell you, that though I confess the King has not yet Dragoon'd
us to Mass, nor has made an actual War upon the Lives and Properties of the
People of this Nation; yet that he has not only invaded our Liberties, but also
endangered the Protestant Religion of the Church of England established by Law,
you your self have not the confidence to deny; only you will not suppose it to
have been done by any Armed Force, and therefore ought not to have been
resisted by Force, but to have waited for their redress by Parliament; which is
but an evasion, for in the first place it is plain, that the things complained
against, in the Prince of Oranges Declaration do most of them strike at the
Fundamental Constitution, both of the Church and State, as I have sufficiently
proved, and shall do it more particularly hereafter when there is occasion: all
therefore that remains to be proved is this, that all these breaches, and
violations of our Religion, and Civil Liberties, though done under color of Law,
yet were acted and maintained by Force; and Secondly, that all other hopes of
remedy or redress, unless by joining with the Prince of Orange, was wholly taken
from us; the first of these I prove thus: It is notoriously known that for the
King to maintain a standing army in time of peace, has been always declared
against in Parliament, as contrary to Law, and dangerous to the Religion, civil
rights, and Liberties, of this Nation; now it is also as certain that the King
has ever since the Duke of M^nmouths coming over, set up, and maintained a
standing Army in this Kingdom; in which he has also put in as many Popish
Officers, and they as many Popish Soldiers (contrary to the Laws of the Land)
as ever they could find, besides the many Irish Papists that have been of late
sent over, for no other purpose than to be listed here, and whilst Protestant
soldiers were turned out of several regiments to make room for them, not to
mention the listing of vast numbers of loose, and pr^^ligate fellows, and some
of them pardoned Highway men, who provided they had their pay would not have
^luck to Rob or Murder any body they had been ordered, as may be sufficiently
proved, not only by their common taking of free quarter, but by their frequent
taking it in the houses of Gentlemen, and other private Persons in diverse
places of this Kingdom; and that without any amends or redress as I know of,
though frequently complained of at Court, all which being done by the Kings
arbitrary Power, without the least color of Law, and in contempt of the
Militia, the only legal Forces of this Kingdom, what was this but plainly to
declare that as the King had thought fit to Act so many arbitary things clean
contrary to Law* so he was likewise resolved to maintain 'em by force, since it
is plain that the King never dur'st undertake to do all these Illegal and
arbitrary things we have now mentioned, until such time as his standing Army
was raised; and though it is true, men's Lives, Liberties, or Estates cannot be
taken away unless by some Force or other, either Legal, or Military, yet as for
those Civil rights, and Privileges, which are the main Bulwarks and defenses
of the former, they can only be invaded or taken from us by Illegal Judgments,
and Declarations, which if supported by a visible Force beyond what the Nation
(in the Circumstances it was in) was able to resist, this is as much a taking
them by Force as if there had been resistance made about them. Thus if
Soldiers come into my House, and say that the King has given them Orders to
quarter there upon free cost, I suppose you will not deny, but this is a
forceable taking of my goods, nowithstanding I dare not, (because I cannot)
resist them; the same I may say for a whole Nation, when once oppressed in their
Civil Liberties, and those oppressions are once backed and defended by a
standing Army contrary to Law: But that this Army was raised chiefly to this
intent, I can give you a remarkable instance from the mouth of the late chief
Justice Wright, who sent for Officers, and Soldiers to make the Scholars keep
silence, because they Hum'd at what the President, and Fellows of Magdalen's
had just before done against the authority of this pretended court; so that to
conclude, from that very time that the King beagn to keep up an Army, and to
list Popish Officers and Soldiers, (though utterly disabled by Law to take
Commissions, or to bear Arms) by virtue of his Dispensing Power, and all this
in Order to back and support his Arbitrary proceedings, I look upon this Nation
under such a force, as that they might Lawfully remove it by Force, when ever
they could. And that either by joining with some Foreign Prince, or else by
their own Domestic Arms. But to come to the second point to be proved, viz.
That there was no other means but Force lest us to redress these mischiefs and
to retrieve us out of that sad condition in which we lately were, as also to
hinder us from falling into worse; I shall only suppose, (that which I think
you will readily grant) that there could be no other means to cure these evils
but either by some sudden change in the Kings inclinations, or else by a Free
Parliament; the former you must acknowledge was not possible, as long as he
continued of the Religion he is of, and suffered himself to be managed by the
Counsels of the Jesuits, and French King; and as for a Free Parliament what
hopes could there be of that, as long as the King had done all he could to
hinder Free Elections, and due returns of Parliament Men, by making either
Popish, or Fanatical Sheriffs, and putting Mayors and other Officers of the
like Principles into most of the Cities and Corporate Towns in England? nor can
I tell but that force would also have been used, if they found they could not
have compassed their designs without it, in those places where Soldiers were
Quartered; since I am credibly informed that at the late intended Elections of
Burgesses for Northampton, and Brackly, the Officers and Soldiers Quartered,
at those places declared, that none of the Townsmen should be admitted to give
Voices at the Election, unless they would promise to Vote for those that the
Court would set up; and the like instances I believe I might give you of other
places had I time to enquire into it: and as for the house of Peers, pray
consider how many of the Bishops and temporal Lords the King might have gained
either by threats, or fair promises to the Kings party, or at least prevailed
upon to stand Neuters, and not to oppose his designs, and if these had failed,
it had been but calling up some Popish, or high Tory or Fanatic Gentlemen to
the House of Lords, and to have sat their as Barons, Peers, pro tempore, till
this Jobb was done, and I doubt not but there would have been enough found out,
of each sort, for that purpose, and that I do not speak without Book, I have
had it from persons of very good Intelligence, that such a design was lately on
foot, and the Court party thought they had very good Authority for it; since
Mr. Pryn, and Sr. Will. D^dgdale pretended to show us several examples of this
Kind, as low as the Reign of King Henry the 4th. and a great part of the design
of your Dr. Bs. late Books seem to have been only to prove, that the King might
not only have Summoned to Parliament what of the Commmons he pleased, but what
Lords too, and have omitted the rest, as I have already shown you at our two
last meetings, and sure if the King had such a prerogative two or three hundred
years ago, these Gentlemen would not have denied his Present Majesty the like
Power; Since they have in all their Writings and addresses declared him as
absolute as any of his Predecessors.

But to make an end, as for what you say of the Kings Redressing the Grievances
of the Nation before the Prince of Orange came, it is very true, he did by the
advice of some of the Bishops, endeavor to put things into the same state they
were in at his first coming to the Crown; but I very much mistrust the
sincerity of his Majesty's intentions, since it is plain he never offered to do
it till the Prince of Orange was ^ust upon coming, and that his Declaration had
been spread about the Kingdom, and then he did it so unwillingly, that when the
news came of part of the Princes Fleets being Shipwrack'd, and that his design
was quite put off, the Bishop of Winchester who was then but newly gone down to
restore the President and Fellows of Magdalen College, was immediately called
back, under pretense of being present as the Examination of the Birth of the
Prince of Wales, and did not return again to finish that business, till such
time as fresh News came that the Prince was certainly come, notwithstanding his
late disaster. And which is also more remarkable, His Majesty in none of His
Declarations ever disowned his Dispensing Power, or so much as put out Father
Peter's from the Council, or Disbanded one Popish Officer, or Soldier out of
his Army, which is another great Argument of the Sincerity of his intentions.
So that I think this was sufficient to convince any reasonable Man that there
was no other means left us but Resistance, and that by Force, and a hearty
Joining with the Prince of Orange at his Landing.

Since this resistance was not made either in Opposition to the King, or the
Laws, but for defense of both, against a Standing Army kept up contrary to Law,
and headed by Officers, the greatest part of which, by not taking the Sacrament
and Test, according to the Act made for that purpose, had rendered themselves
wholly incapable of holding those Commissions, and consequently whilst in Arms
were to be looked upon as common Enemies to the Nation.

But as for his Majesty's Gracious and merciful disposition; as I shall not
make it my business personally to Reflect upon him, so I must needs tell you
the Execution of Mr. Cornish, Mrs. Lisle, Mrs. Gaunt for Treasons falsely
alleged; or else for such as Women could scarce be capable of knowing to be
so, were no great Evidences of such highly Merciful Inclinations.


M. I confess you have taken a great deal of pains not only to set forth the
Late Miscarriages of the Government, but also to prove that the Army which the
King raised upon the Duke of Monmouth's Rebellion, and which he has since kept
up to prevent either fresh Rebellions at home, or Invasions from abroad, has
been merely maintained to support all these Late breaches upon our Laws, and
Civil Liberties, which you say were made upon them: now this is very
uncharitably done for as His Majesty was Forced to raise that Army at first
because the Late Rebellion in the West was too powerful to be quelled by the
ordinary Trained Bands of the Kingdom whom he had too much reason to suspect,
by the running over of several of them to the Rebels, not to be so Loyal as
they ought to have been; and if His Majesty had not had a small body of an Army
on Foot, the last Summer before the Prince of Orange came over, he must upon
his Landing have Yielded to his terms, had they been never so unreasonable; and
though I will not defend the Listing of Popish or Irish Soldiers, or the
Granting Commissions to Popish Commanders, yet it is very hard to prove this to
be a making War upon the Nation, unless you can suppose there may be War made
without Fighting, and as for those Violations of the Laws which you suppose
were made only upon the presumption of this standing Army, this is likewise
very hard to affirm, since how can you tell that the Judges and Ministers would
not have given the same Opinions and advices concerning the Dispensing Power,
Chimney Money and the Ecclesiastical Commission, had there been no Army at all
raised, since they might for ought I know have presumed that the People of this
Nation, had been sufficiently convinced of the truth of the Doctrines of
Passive Obedience and Non-resistance, as not to have needed a Standing Army to
back what he had already done, though contrary to Law: but as for the latter part
of your Dicourses, say the People ought to have waited till the King had called
a Parliament, and then if they had betrayed their trust and given up our
Religion and Liberties as you suppose they would have done, it had been then
time enough and not till then for the Nation to have called in the Prince of
Orange, and His Dutc-hmen to their Deliverance; so that till this Parliament
had been tried, you could not say that matters were altogether desperate.


F. I see you do all you can to prove that the Kings Raising an Army, wherein
he had Listed so many Popish Officers and Soldiers, (and which were like to be
daily increased upon us) was no making War upon the Nation, because they had
not yet actually robbed or murdered People; and you may with as much reason
tell me that a Thief upon the Highway does not use any Violence upon the party
he robbs, if he should only clap a cok'd Pistol to his breast without asking
him to deliver his Money: Now I suppose you will not deny, but that the
Passinger would quickly understand the meaning of that sign and would soon
deliver his Purse for fear of loosing his life; apply this to the Chimney Money
that has been raised upon the poor part of the Nation, and the taking away the
Charters from the Corporations, merely through the Terror of this standing
Army, and see if the Similitude does not exactly fit, and for what you say
concerning the presuming upon the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, and so might
have done the same Arbitrary things whether he had raised an Army or not, though
I am very glad you confess that those Doctrines encouraged the Kings Arbitrary
proceedings, yet I must Beg your Pardon if I cannot believe the rest whatever
thoughts the King might have of the Major part of the Clergy, Nobility and
Gentry: Yet certainly he had no such good Opinion of the Ordinary People who
composed the Militia, (and indeed are the Hands of the Kingdom) since you
confess the King did not look upon them as sufficiently Loyal, and therefore
was forced to maintain a Standing Army for fear of them; So that it seems the
Nation was not yet thorough paced in your Doctrines of Passive Obedience and
Non-resistance as you would have had them, but that even this Standing Army
when it was to Fight against the Religion and Liberties of their own Country,
it was not to be trusted, the King himself was convinced of, when he so lately
ran away from them at Salisbury; and because some of them deserted him he
feared the rest would not Fight, in so unjust a Quarrel.

But as for the rest of Tour Speech, that the People should have ^arried till
matters had become altogether desperate, and that a Parliament had actually
given us our Religion, Civil Liberties and Properties to the Kings Arbitrary
will, that had been indeed intalling Slavery upon us by a Law, and would have
made good the Proverb, of shu^^ing the Stable Door after the Horse is Stolen,
and puts me in mind of a Story I have heard of a Gentleman whose House being
beset by Thieves, who were actually breaking in at a Window, and that he was
about to shoot at them, his over scrupulous Chaplain (who I suppose had nicely
studied your Doctrine of Nonresistance) desired his Patron to forbear, because
the Thieves had not as yet sufficiently declared their wicked intentions by
assaulting or robbing any Body in the House, But I suppose the Gentleman was
not such a Fool as to take his Chaplains advice, and a great part of the Nation
was too sensible of the dangers they saw hang over their Heads than to follow
your Opinion.


M. I see you are very free in your Comparisons, in making the Kings Late Army
little better then Thieves, and then what Opinion you have of the King himself
who headed 'em, I leave it to your self to consider; but since Similitudes are
no Arguments; I shall not trouble my self to argue this point any longer with
you, since I see it is to little purpose; but yet let your right of Resistance
be what it will in desperate cases, yet I am sure that diverse Lords and
Gentlemen of your Opinion can no way justify their renouncing all Allegiance to
his Majesty, by adhering to a Foreign Prince, and by their Late advising the
same Prince to call a Free Parliament, without taking any notice of the King:
or making any more Addresses to him about it, than if he had never been their
Anointed Sovereign; and indeed it was a burning shame, as well as a crying Sin,
for the Nobility, Gentry, and People in and about this great and populous City
to let their King be hurryed away Prisoner by a handful of Dutchmen, though
his Majesty has had since the good Fortune to escape out of their hands, when
he saw there was no other means to fail him.


F. In answer to what you have now said, I must freely tell you; that if the
resistance that has been made against the Army Commissioned by the King was
Lawful, so has all that has been done in pursuance of that resistance been
alike Lawful and necessary; and therefore what if I tell you that the King by
breaking the Fundamental Constitution of the Kingdom, and by twice going away
without ever offering to repair those breaches, and give the Nation any
sufficient satisfaction for the same, has not only put himself in a state of
War against the People, but has also thereby ceased to be King; or if you will
have it more plainly, has lost and forfeited his right to the Crown.


M. This is rare Commonwealth Doctrine, and of the same batch with that of
Bradshaws, and Cooks Speeches against King Charles the First, but I thank God I
have learned Loyaler Principles, and do firmly believe, that a King of England
cannot for any Tyrrany or breach of Laws whatsoever forfeit his Crown or Royal
Dignity, as you suppose. But since this is a new Doctrine I shall not be
unwilling to hear what you have to say upon this Subject another time, since it
is now too late to pursue this Argument any further.


F. Before I make any reply to what you have now said, I desire not to be
misunderstood as if I call all the Kings Late Army Thieves or himself the
Captain of them, since in Similes it is sufficient if they agree in some common
property without being the same things to which they are compared, tho this
much I may safely say that those that take Free Quarter without consent of the
owners in time of Peace, and those who support 'em in it are no better than
Thieves; but since you desire to hear my reasons for this opinion I have now
given you, I desire that we may have another meeting to debate this weighty
question: and then I will likewise hear whatever you have to say against it;
but I must tell you by the way, that you are very much out in making my opinion
of the same batch with that of the Regicides; for it appears plainly by the
Printed Trial of the King, that they acknowledged him for King of England at
the same time, when they read his Indictment to him, whereas I affirm the
contrary, and say that the King cannot be judged or deposed by the Parliament
or People; and that he has without any effect of ours absolutely Abdicated the
Government, and Deposed himself: but that I may not seem to speak out of any
prejudice to this Kings Person or Government, I desire we may first debate it
in General whether a King of England can ever fall from, or forfeit his Royal
Dignity let him behave himself never so like a Tyrant: and when that is
despatcht it will be then time to consider whether the King has so behaved
himself or not.


M. I like your Proposal well enough only let me desire you to come again as
soon as you can, for since I hear there is like to be no Term, I intend to go
visit some Friends in the Country, till I see the times clear up a little
better.


F. I will not fail to wait on you, within a Night or two, and in the mean time
am your Humble Servant.


M. And I am Yours.


FINIS.
Bibliotheca Politica: OR A DISCOURSE By WAY of DIALOGUE, On these Questions;
I. Whether a King of England can ever fall from, or forfeit his Royal Dignity
for any breach of an Original Contract, or wilful violation of the Fundamental
Laws of the Kingdom. II. Whether King William (commonly styled the Conqueror)
did by the Conquest acquire such an absolute unconditioned Right to the Crown
of this Realm, for Himself and his Heirs, as can never be lawfully resisted; or
forfeited for any maladministration, or Tyranny whatever.


Collected out of the most Approved Authors, both Ancient and Modern.

Dialogue the Tenth.

LONDON, Printed for R. Baldwin in Warwick Lane, near the Oxford-Arms; where
also may be had the First, Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Seventh, Eighth
and Ninth Dialogues. 1693.

Authors whose sense is made use of in this Discourse, and how denoted in the
Margin.

Dr. Hick's Iovian. H. I. Mr. Petyt's Right of the Commons asserted. P. R. C.
Dr. Brady's Answer thereunto. B. A. P. His answer to Mr. Atwood's Ianus, etc.
B. A. I. His Answer to Mr. Cook's Argumentum Antinormanicum B. A. A. Mr.
Atwood's Treatise called Ius Anglorum ab Antiquo. I. A. A.
I desire the Reader to remember that I do not make use of the word People, for
the mere Vulgar or Mobile, but for the whole community, consisting of Clergy,
Nobility and Commons.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
I AM come to one of the last parts of my intended task, (which in pursuance of
the last discourse of resistance,) is whether the Late King James by any breach
of the Original Contract made between his Predecessors, and the People of this
Nation, expressed by a Notorious violation of the Fundamental Laws of this
Kingdom, has forfeited his Crown, and Royal Dignity, and has thereby
discharged the Nation from all Allegiance to him; in the discussing of which to
let the World see I do not Write any thing out of particular spleen, or
prejudice to the Late Kings Person, or Government, I have chose to handle this
question in general, without making any mention at all of him, and therefore
have urged all that I think can be spoken on either side, in this question,
without applying it to any King in particular; but because I find the chief
Argument (next that of a Divine Right) for the Absolute, and Unconditioned
Power of the Late King, is a Right of Conquest over this Kingdom, and Nation
from K William I. (commonly called the Conqueror) whereby he is supposed to
have acquired an absolute indefeasible Right to the Crown of this Realm, both
for himself and such lawful Heirs of his Body as shall succeed thereunto; I
have also examined all things consider^ble that have been or may be urged on
either side on this question, as well from Ancient as Modern Authors: though I
confess it is the more difficult to be resolved, because not only our later
Antiquaries, such as Sir H. Spelman, Sir Roger Twisden, and Mr. Seldom, are
p^int blank against Sir William Dugdale's and Dr. Brady's Notion of King
William's Title by Conquest; but also the Ancient English and Norman Historians
do extremely differ in their Relations, for though they both agree to Found the
best Title he had on the Testamentary Donation of King Edward the Confessor
(which they also call an Hereditary Right) yet do they very much differ about
the manner of his Government. Some of the most Ancient of the Norman and
English Historians, setting him forth as a Just, and Pious Prince, and others
of them, and especially Mat. Paris, making ^im a m^er Tyrant that observed
neither Oaths nor Laws, farther than stood with hi^ own convenience; I have not
therefore omitted to my knowledge any considerable Authority or Argument, that
has been made use of; and not to seem partial, have added several new ones
that have not been taken notice of before; and though this subject may seem
antiquated, and trivial to diverse nice Readers, yet I doubt not but it will
prove sufficiently pleasant and instructive to those who are Studious in our
English History and Laws.

But as for the Authorities I have given you on either side, I have confined my
self wit^in the space of 200 years, after the reputed Conquest; because the
Authors that writ within that time, may be supposed to speak either on their
own Knowledge, or else from the then recent Tradition of their Grandfathers,
or great Grandfathers at farthest; as for the Arguments; they are the best I
could find among our pretended Authors, and where they fell short I have added
the best I could think of, or have heard in those conversations I have
frequented; and if these do not satisfy, I hope the Reader will not blame me,
since it is not my fault they are no better: but if the reverend Dr. Hick's or
the learned Dr. Brady, (whom these questions may chiefly concern) shall
vouchsafe to peruse this discourse, and will take the pains so far to consider
them, as to show me my omissions, or wherein the person whom I have all along
introduced to oppose their sentiments, has either argued falsely, or is
mistaken in matter of Fact, I shall be so far from taking it ill, that I shall
thank them for their pains, provided it be done with that civility and candor,
which may be expected from persons so eminent as they are for Knowledge and
Civility; I have no more but to beg the Readers pardon, for the length of this
Discourse, which I could yet have enlarged farther, but that I leave him to
satisfy his Appetite to the full upon this Subject of the Norman ^onquest,
whenever Mr. Petyt and Mr. Atwood shall think fit to publish their laborious
and learned collections on this Subject: till when I hope the Reader will stay
his Stomach with these remainders, though they have in great part been served up
already in the learned Entertainments of those Authors mentioned immediately in
the Title Page.

THE Tenth Dialogue BETWEEN Mr. MEANWELL a Civilian, AND Mr. FREEMAN a
Gentleman.
M. OH! Are you come at last; I have looked for you these two Nights; and now
began to fear you were not well, or else had distrusted your cause, and
declined another Conference.


F. I beg your Pardon for disappointing you; which yet I had not done, had no^
some Business hindered me; but however to let you see I do not decline another
Conference with you upon this Subject, pray let us go on where we left off; and
tell me freely your sense of my Notion of the Kings forfeiture, or Abdication
of the Government by his violation of the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, and
refusal to repair those Breaches, when he might have done it?


M. In answer to your demand, I will deal freely with you, and must tell you,
that I have perused all Writers, that have Writ any thing considerable
concerning the Laws of Government, or of Nations; and cannot find in any of
them, any thing to countenance your Notion of forfeiture, or Abdication of an
absolute Sovereign Prince, a^ I must still take ours to be, notwithstanding all
you yet said to the contrary; unless what you have cited at our third meeting,
Vi. grot. de J. B. L. 1. cap. 4.. 7.8. Pufendorf de Iure not. L. 7. cap. 8..
6.7.
out of Barclays third Book, contra Monarchs; where he allows the Subjects to
resist their Prince, in case he go about to destroy the Body of the People or
Common wealth, whereof he is the Head: To which I may also add another Case
which you have omitted, viz. if the Prince make over his Kingdom to another,
without the Consent of his People: And I confess that both Grotius, and
Pufendorf, agree with Barclay in this Notion: Because they look upon both these
Cases, as their plain downright Renunciations of their Civil Authority, over
those whom they were obliged to Govern: But indeed, the first of these Cases is
so improbable, nay, almost impossible to happen, that were it not for the
overgreat niceness of these Writers, it need not to have been so much as
mentioned; since none but a Madman, can ever go about to destroy his whole
People; and therefore as a Man out of his Wits, such a Prince may be Resisted;
and locked up, if ever it should so fall out (as you your self have confessed it
has very rarely) for a Nation to be so unhappy, as to have such a Prince; but
as for the Second, viz. the making over their Supreme Power to a Foreign
Prince; that likewise so very rarely happens, That it is scarce worth the
while, to make any dispute about it; But in all other Cases, they held the
Supreme Power of every Nation, to be absolutely Irresistible in any case
whatsoever; and if irresistible, then certainly incapable of forfeiting their
Right to govern, by any pretended, or real Violation of the Liberties and
Privileges of the People. And Bodin in his first Book, Cap. 8.
de Republica; though he grant that absolute Princes are obliged in Conscience,
to keep and maintain all such Privileges, which have been granted to the
People by either themselves, or Predecessors, which are for the good of the
Commonwealth; yet since the Prince is sole Judge, whether these Privileges
are consistent with his Supreme Right to Govern, and Protect his People, he may
therefore have occasion sometimes, not only to Detract from them, or dispense
with them in some Cases; but may wholly break and lay them aside, by turning
Tyrant: Lib. 11. cap. 5.
Yet nevertheless in all these Cases, People are still bound not to resist
them: And that he looked upon the King of England, as such an Absolute Monarch,
as well as others he there mentions, pray read me the place I now Cited, where
after he has allowed Resistance to be lawful against those Princes, who were
not properly Monarchs, as enjoying but a share of the Supreme Power, and among
which, he reckons the German Emperor, and the Kings of Denmark, Sweden, and
Poland: But then, when he comes to speak of Real and Absolute Monarchies, his
Sense is quite different, as you may see by these words. Quod si Monarchia
quaedam est, summa unius potestate constituta, qualis est Francorum,
Hispanorum, Anglorum. Scotorum, etc. (I shall slip all the rest, because not to
our purpose) ubi Reges sine controversia jura omnia Majestatis habent per se;
nec singulis civibus, nec universis fas est summi Principis vitam, famam,
Fortunas in discrimen vocare, seu vi, feu Iudice constituto id fiat, etiamsi
omnium scelerum, ac Flagitiorum quae in Tyrannis convenire antea diximus,
turpitudine infamis esset; where you may observe that Force or Resistance, by
which such an absolute Princes Life or Regal Power (here called Fortunas) are
as much forbid, as calling him in question, by appointing Judges to sit upon
him. And he there gives us a very good reason for it, because all Subjects of
what degree soever, cannot pretend to any Coercive Power, over the Person of a
Sovereign Prince.


F. We have discoursed enough concerning the Resistance of Absolute Monarchs,
at our third and fourth meeting, and therefore I desire we may not fall into
that Subject, which can produce nothing but needless Repetitions; and I have
already proved, at our 5th Conversation, that the King is not an Absolute
Despotick Monarch, but is limited and tied up by the Fundamental Laws of the
Kingdom, from making of Laws, or raising Taxes without the consent of his
People in Parliament; and that our Government is mixed, and made up of
Monarchy, with an allay of Aristocracy, and Democracy in the constitution; the
former in the House of Lords, the latter in the House of Commons, as K. Charles
the First himself confesses in his Answer to the Parliaments 19 Propositions;
and I have farther enforced this from diverse Authorities out of our An^ient as
well as Modern Lawyers; viz. Glanvill, Bracton, Fortescue, and Sir Edward Coke:
So that since we have such clear proof for our Constitution from our own
Histories and Authors, nay from the King himself, besides the whole purpor^ and
style of the very Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom; I do not value the
Authority of Bodin a Foreigner, whose business it is to set up the Authority of
the French King to the highest pitch he could; and therefore being sensible
that anciently the Government of France and England were much the same, he
could not with any face make his own an Absolute Despotick Monarchy, unless he
had made ours so too: But this is not the only Error he has been guilty of in
our History and Constitution, as I can show you when there is occasion. But
Arnisaeus, who, as well as Bodin, is so much for Absolute Monarchs, yet does in
his Treatise of Government called his confess that a Tyrant in an Hereditary
Monarchy, who violates all the Laws of Justice and Equity to the endangering
the Ruin of the Commonwealth, does ixcidere Iure haereditario, fall from, or
forfeit his Hereditary Right. But pray make it out by some convincing proofs
either from History, or Law, that our Kings are such Absolute Monarchs as you
would make them, that by the fundamental Constitution of the Government they
cannot be resisted, nor can fall from their Regal Power, let them carry
themselves never so Tyrannically; for I do not see you have been yet able to do
it by any Arguments you have hitherto made use of.


M. I have already at our 5th, as well as at our last Meeting, given you diverse
Arguments and Authorities whereby I proved the Kings of this Realm to be
complete, and absolute Monarchs; especially that place from Bracton, Lib. 1.
Cap. 9.
where he thus speaks of the King, that every one is under him, and that
himself is under none but God; that he has no Peer in his Kingdom, because so
he would lose his Power, since an Equal has no command over an Equal; much more
has he any Superior, because then he would be inferior to his Subjects, and
Inferiors cannot be equal with their Superiors, which sufficiently destroys
that Notion of yours, that Subjects can be in any case equal with their
Princes, so as to judge and resist their actions; which is also farther
enforced by another passage just aforegoing, de Chartis vero Regiis, and factis
Regum, non debent, nec possunt Iusticiarii, nec privatae personae disputare,
nec etiam si in illis dubitatio ulla oriatur, possunt eam interpretari; and in
dubiis, and obscuris, vel si aliqua dictio duos contin^at intellectus, Domini
Regis erit expectanda Interpretatio and voluptas, cum ejus sit interpretari
cujus est concedere; from which we may conclude, that the King's actions were
above all censure and dispute, much more forcible opposition of his Subjects.
And I defy you to show me any passage in Bracton, Fleta, or even your beloved
Author Fortescue, that in the least countenances your Doctrine of Resistance,
much less your Opinion of the King's forfeiture of his Crown and Royal Dignity
for Tyranny, or the highest Violation of Laws; but rather the contrary in all
those passages that I have either observed my self, or found quoted out of them
by others: For though I grant both Bracton and Fleta call the King, if he prove a
Tyrant, or one that governs contrary to Law, not God's, but the Devil's
Minister; yet for all that, they no where maintain, that then he ought, or may
be resisted by his Subjects, or that they are discharged of their Allegiance
toward him: For Bracton tells us in the same place, Lib. 2. cap. 7.
that if the King do any man wrong or injury, Locus erit supplicationi quod
factum suum corrigat, and emendet; quod quidem si non fecerit, satis sufficit
ei ad paenam, quod Dominum expe^tet ultorem; nemo quidem de factis suis
praesume^ disputare, multo fortius contra factum suum venire: The same he says
likewise word for word in another place of any other King or Prince, who has no
superior Lord, against whom there is no Remedy by Assize (or Legal Trial) as
against an Equal, but only place left the injured Subject for Petition: And
Bracton gives us a very good Reason for it in this maxim, omnis quidem sub eo,
and ipse sub nullo nisi tantum sub Deo. So that though I grant this Moral
Obligation, which the King has to observe the Laws, is farther increased by
his Coronation Oath, H. I. P. 244, 245. cap. 9.
as Bracton observes in his third Book de Actionibus: But then, as in the Oath
of Allegiance, the People swear nothing to the King but what they are bound to
observe unsworn; so the King in his Coronation Oath promises nothing to the
People, but what in Justice and Equity he is bound to perform whether he swear
or not; for, ad hoc (says the same Author, of the King) electus, and creatus
est ut Iudicium faciat universis, etc. and separare debet Rex, cum sit Dei
vicarius, Ius ab Injuria, etc. But then if he will pervert this great end for
which God made him King, if he will not act as it becomes God's Vicar, if he
will obstruct or pervert the Laws, and govern never so Tyrannically; yet still
there is left no Remedy to his Subjects by the Law, but Moral Persuasion; for
the Laws Imperial of this Realm have declared him to be a free, unconditioned,
and independent Sovereign exempted from all coaction, and outward force, much
more from any forfeiture of this Crown, or Regal Authority.


F. I hope I shall be able to return you a satisfactory Answer to the
Authorities you have now brought; for, as for Reasons, I see none in the first
place; as to what you say concerning Barclays, and all other Writers agreeing,
that in these two Cases you mention, the People may resist their Prince,
because he does as good as renounce the Government of them, and abdicate the
Crown he wore. Pray observe that they also allow the People to judge for
themselves when the King thus goes about to destroy them, to make over his
Crown to a Foreign Prince: Now I desire you to show me, why the People in a
limited, or mixed Kingdom (as ours is) cannot as well judge when the King has
broke the Fundamental Laws of the Government, whereby it is distinguished from
an Absolute Despotick Monarchy; and has either actually set up, or is going
about to bring in Tyranny, or Arbitrary Power; since according to the Rules I
have laid down at our last Meeting, the matters to be judged of may be as plain
and evident, not only to a single person, but to a whole Nation: All that you
have to say against this is, only an Hypothesis you have laid down without any
just grounds, that the King is a Sovereign Prince, who holds his Crown without
any Condition whatever, and therefore free from all forfeiture of his Crown, or
Regal Authority, which is the Point to be proved: Now if I have already made
out (as I suppose I have) that the King of England is not an Absolute Monarch,
as not having the two main parts of it, viz. the power of raising Money, and
making Laws, in his own disposal, without the consent of his People, and these
so reserved by his own Concessions, or that of his Predecessors, from the very
beginning of Kingly Government in this Island; and if I have also proved at our
last Meeting, that if we have such Fundamental Rights, we have also some means
left us to keep, and preserve them inviolable, and that this means is only a
forcible defensive Resistance, in case they are forcibly invaded by any of the
King's Officers, or Soldiers, nay, by his own Personal Power, in case he shall
be so ill advised as to join himself with such Instruments of Tyranny; it will
then also follow, that such a Resistance is really a suspension of their
Allegiance to the King for the time it lasts; and till they can see whether
there be any hopes lest of a Reconciliation with Him, and that he will amend
his Errors, and Misgovernment; and if so, and that he will give his People any
sufficient Testimony of his amendment and sincerity, by giving up such evil
Ministers to punishment, that put him upon such desperate courses; I do then
readily grant, that the People ought to lay down their Arms, and be again
reconciled to their King, and submit themselves to him as before, according to
that Clause in King John's Magna Charta I have already cited, wherein there is
a Power left for the Barons in case of any Breach of it, to take Arms, and
constrain the King by taking of his Castles, Lands, and Possessions, to amend
those transgressions; and when all was thus amended, the Charter says, Tunc cum
fuerit emendatum (then, and not before) interdent nobis sicut prius fecerunt;
they shall be subject to us as they were before; but what followed upon this,
the King not only refused to observe this Charter, but procured the Pope's
Dispensation to be absolved from the Oath he had taken to observe it, and also
did all he could to bring in Foreigners into this Kingdom to support his
Tyranny; and raised what Forces he could of his own Subjects to that end;
whereupon the Barons at last were forced to renounce all Allegiance to him, and
to declare he had forfeited all Right to the Crown by his Tyranny and Perjury
toward his People, as Mat. Paris and other Authors show us at large. Now what
the Barons did in the case of King John, may be also done by the People of this
Kingdom in all succeeding Times; or otherwise the King will be in a better
condition after he has done the worst he can by force of Arms against the
People, than he was before; for if (as I have already proved) he may be
resisted, till he give the Kingdom satisfaction that he will surcease from such
Tyrannical courses; and that such Resistance is really a Suspension of
Allegiance for the time it lasts; it will likewise follow, that if the King
will still persist in these wicked courses, he must at last forfeit his Crown,
and discharge his Subjects of all Allegiance to him; or else he would be in a
better condition, by his wilful persisting in his Tyranny, than he could by
quitting it, and reconciling himself to his People: For whereas by this Method
the best he can expect is to return to the exercise of the same Limited Power
^e before enjoyed: If he push things to the utmost extremity, he may perhaps
get the better of his People, and then he may set up for an Absolute King by
Conquest; or if he fail in that, and be beaten, or taken Prisoner by them, he
can still lose nothing, since by your Principles he still continues an Absolute
Sovereign Prince, as he was before, and must be immediately put in the same
state and ability of destroying the Government, and enslaving the Nation; but
your Civil, as well as our Common Law, has a very good Maxim, Nemo ex proprio
Delicto beneficium c^piat, no man may take advantage of his own wrong, and
therefore such a Prince ought certainly to lose, and not to get by his own
Illegal and Tyrannical Actions; and therefore I grant, that the King is not
tied to observe any new things that he was not, before he was Crowned, bound to
do; only there is the higher obligation of an Oath added thereunto; so if the
King be a Limited Prince, whose Authority depends upon the right exercise of
it, and that he can claim no Allegiance of his Subjects but upon that
condition; if such a Prince wilfully breaks all those conditions, and
a^solutely refuses to amend, he must at last forfeit his Crown, and lose all
Allegiance from his Subjects, or else all their Resistance would signify just
nothing, and they would after all be in a much worse condition than they were
before.

Now if this be so, all your Quotations out of Bracton and Fleta will signify
nothing; for as Pufendorf very well observes, a Supreme Power may reside in a
Limited King in respect of all his particular Subjects, L. 7. c 7. 7.10.
yet they may have a right to disobey him in those things to which his Power
does not extend; for, says he, it does not follow, that because I am not bound
to obey him in all things, therefore I must be his Equal, or Superior, or
because I cannot in any wise command him, therefore he may enjoin me what he
pleases; for Supreme and Absolute are by no means one and the same, for the
former denotes the absence of a Superior, or an Equal in the same order, but
the latter a faculty of exercising all the Rights of Government according to
his own Judgment and Will; Lib. 7. cap. 8.
and therefore this Author in the next Chapter says very rationally concerning
resisting of Tyrants in extreme cases, that their scruple is nothing, who will
not admit any Liberty of resisting the most cruel Tyranny of Rulers, because
there cannot be supposed any lawful Call of Subjects taking Arms against the
Supreme Power, since no Jurisdiction can belong to any Subject toward such a
Power; as if (says he) that Self-defence were an Effect of Jurisdiction, or
that there is required any peculiar Call or Precept for Men in case of extreme
necessity to defend themselves, and to repulse any unjust force from taking
away their Lives or Estates, any more than there is for those who are like to
starve, to allay their hunger by eating; though it may be the Meal they eat is
not their own but another Man's; so far he; and if this be lawful even in
Absolute Monarchies, in case of defense of Life; the same, I say, may be
exercised in Limited Kingdoms, when the King goes about by force to take away
the Religion, Lives, Estates, or Liberties of the People contrary to Law; since
they both act upon the same Principle, that a King, by destroying the
Fundamental Laws and Conditions by which he is to Govern, renounces the
Government, and indeed so far dissolves it, that he ceases to be King.

And though I grant Bracton and Fleta, and other old Lawyers have no^ in express
words taught this Doctrine, yet they do it in effect, since the former tells
us, Lib. 1. c. 8.
Non est Rex, ubi dominatur voluntas, and non Lex; that is, he is not a King,
when his own Will, and not the Law governs: Lib. 9. c. 9.
And in another place, Rex est dum been Regit, Tyrannus dum Populum sibi
creditum violenta oppri^it domination^; and in the very same place, (as you
have also observed) he tells us, exercere debet Rex potestatem Iuris, ut
Vicarius and Minister Dei, potestas autem injuriae Diaboli est non Dei; cum
declinat ad injuriam Rex, Diaboli Minister est: Now, if what Bracton says be
true, then the King, when he does injury, is the Devil's Minister, and not
God's. I cannot see how he can then act as God's Lieutenant; or why it is not
as lawful to resist the Devil's Minister as the Devil himself: And as to what
you allege out of the same Author, that there is no Remedy lest against the
King in case he does wrong, or oppresses any man, but only petition, and after
that, the only Remedy is expectet Deum ultorem, in case he refuse to do right;
this is to be only understood of Remedy in ordinary Courts of Justice, and by
ordinary means, for otherwise this Author would contradict himself, whereas he
tells us expressly, (as I have already noted out of Bracton and Fleta) in Populo
Regendo Rex habet Superiores, Legem per quam factus est Rex, and Curiam suam,
viz. comites and Barons, that is the highest Court of Parliament, called by
way of eminency, the Earls and Barons; who, he here says debent ei s^^^num
imponere, in case he transgress the Law; and therefore if he go on still
wilfully to violate all the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, by the same Power
by which they may put this Bridle upon him, by the same Power may they also
declare (in case of manifest and downright Tyranny,) that he has forfeited his
Crown; and though they cannot depose him as his Superiors, yet they may declare
that he has by violating the Original Contract between him and his People
ceased to be King; and that both themselves and all his Subjects are discharged
of all Allegiance to him.

And agreeable to this Opinion, the Old Mirror of Justices tells us in the
place I have formerly cited at our third Meeting, that though the King have no
Peer in the Land, nevertheless if by his own wrong, he offends against any of
his People, none of those that Judge for him ( i. e. none of his Justices) can
be both Judge, and Party; therefore it is agreeable to Right, that the King
should have Peers, or Companions to hear and determine in Parliament all Writs,
and Complaints, concerning the wrongs of the King, Queen, and their Children,
of which wrongs they could not otherwise have common Right: Now can any one
imagine that any private person might have Right against the King, or his
Queen, and Children, and that there should be no Remedy left for the general
Oppression, and Violation of the Laws and Rights of the whole Nation in
general, and that whether the King would or not? for if it had lain in his
power to have hindered it by dissolving the Parliament, this Law had been wholly
in vain; so that this will serve to answer your other Quotation out of Bracton,
concerning the King's Charters, or Grants, (for so I suppose factis is to be
rendered in this place) that no private persons, no not the Kings Justices could
in those days take upon them to dispute about, or interpret their meaning, but
it was to be left to the King himself; but how! not to his private
Interpretation in his Chamber or Privy Council, but to his Interpretation in
his Great Council in Parliament; which as I proved in our fifth Meeting
consisted of all the great Officers of the Crown, together with the Judges;
who, the King being present, were in the nature of Counselors or Assessors to
him, and there all matters not determinable in ordinary Courts were heard, and
determined; and of this nature were the King's Charters, though now that Power
since the dissolution of that great Court, is fallen partly to the Chancery,
and partly to the King's Bench, who do both of them at this day judge of the
King's Grants, whether they are according to Law, or not; and can declare them
to be void if they are not.


M. This is right Rum^ Parliament Doctrine, or rather worse (if worse can be;)
for whereas Bradshaw and those Mock-Judges appointed by that pretended Iuncto
plainly asserted an Inherent Right in the People of England, and the
Parliament, as their Representatives, to call the King to an account, and to
judge and condemn him as his Superiors; you, to evade that Doctrine, as being
expressly condemned both by the first and second Parliaments of K. Charles the
Second, in the Statutes I have already cited, do fall into a much more
dangerous Error; for whereas those men supposed it was only in the Parliament
(and in themselves as their Commoners) to judge and depose the King, and to put
him to death for Tyranny; you take this Power out of their hands, and place it
in every private person, which you call the diffusive Body of the People, which
are not only more fallible, but more dangerous Judges, as being more apt to
errors and mistakes; but if you would have better considered the words, and
meaning of that Act I have formerly cited of K. Charles the Second, 12 Car. 2.
c. 30.
for attainting the Regicides, you would there find these words in the Preamble
to that Act expressly against you; Whereby it is by both Houses of Parliament
declared, That by the undoubted, and Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, neither
the Peers of this Realm, nor the Commons, nor both together in Parliament, nor
the People collectively, or representatively, nor any other persons whatsoever
ever had, have, has, or ought to have any Coercive Power over the Persons of
the Kings of this Realm. Where you see by this Act, that all Power of Judging
or Deposing the King is expressly renounced, not only for the Two Houses of
Parliament, but for the whole People, whether collectively, or
representatively, or for any other persons whatsoever: But as for what you say,
that the King in case of a wilful, and constant Violation of the Fundamental
Laws of the Kingdom, is not then deposed by the People, but deposes himself,
and thereby renounces the Government over them; this is but a mere fallacy, and
an evasion, which you, and those of your Party have now found out to make the
King to have forfeited his Crown without any Judgment of the Parliament or
People; for who can believe a King will ever depose himself, or do any Act,
besides an evident destruction of the People, or a making over his Royal Power,
or else an express resignation of the Crown, whereby he can ever be construed
to have parted with it; and therefore your Notion is no better than the
equivocation of the Jesuits, who if they are asked whether it be lawful or not
for Subjects to murder their Kings, will tell you by no means; but it is still
with this mental reservation, that Princes Excommunicated and Deposed by the
Pope do thereby cease to be Kings; and therefore their Subjects being thereby
discharged of all their Allegiance to them, they may not only be resisted but
murdered by them as Tyrants, and Usurpers. Put the People here instead of the
Pope, and see if the Parallel does not hold exactly.

But as to your argument, from a necessity of resistance, to a necessity of
laying the King aside, because he has forfeited all Rights to the Crown, upon
his persisting in the violation of the Fundamental Laws, and refusing to make
the People satisfaction, and this upon the account of I know not what original
contract; for as to the Coronation Oath, I see you dare not insist upon it, so
that I do not now wonder that the Gentlemen of your Principles are so violent
for this right of Resistance, since it is only in order to introduce your
Darling Doctrine of the Peoples Power of deposing or laying aside their Kings
(as you term it) whenever they shall judge they turn Tyrants, and have thereby
forfeited their Crowns, which is a most dangerous Doctrine: and if it should
take effect, the Princes of the World had need look about them, since the
People may make up such a pretense (for ought I know) even against the very
best of them, that are now Regnant in Europe.

But sure absolute Monarchs ought not to be outted of their Crowns by strained
consequences or forced interpretations of Laws, therefore pray show me this
original Contract you so much insist upon, and those conditions on which you
suppose our limited Monarchs hold their Crowns; I confess if you could show me
any clause in our Laws, or ancient forms of the Coronation of our Kings, as
there was at the Coronation of the Kings of Arragon, wherein the chief Justice
on the behalf of the People plainly told him that they made him King upon this
Condition, that they would have more Power than himself: or that in the
conferring of the Regal Power it was expressly reserved in what cases it should
be lawful for them to resist the King; or to absolve his Subjects from their
Allegiance; as Bodin tells us, it was expressly inserted in the Coronation Oath
of Henry II. Duke of Anjou (afterward King of France,) when he was made King
of Poland: that if he broke his Oath and violated the Laws, and Privileges of
the Clergy and Nobility of Poland, then the People of that Kingdom should not
be obliged to render him any obedience: I grant then that the Liberties of such
a People might be preserved, but the King that took upon him the Regal Power
upon such conditions, would not be properly a Monarch, but liable to the
Judgment of his People, whenever he really did, or that they imagined he had
thus violated their Laws, since the Supreme Authority would still reside in
them.

But indeed the Case (God be thanked) is much otherwise with our Monarchs who
are Kings by right of Inheritance, whether ever they take any Coronation Oath,
or not: as K. Edward the first was, whilst he was in the Holy Land, almost two
years before he could come over to be Crowned; and K. Henry the sixth was not
Crowned till the eighth year of his Reign, as well as of his Age. But that our
Kings are so by Inheritance, and by the Laws of God, and Man previous to any
Coronation Oath, or consent of the People, is expressly declared by the Act of
recognition of K. James I. and that Treason could be committed against him
before he was Crowned, Sir Edward Cook tells us in Calvin's Case, Vid. Cooks 7
th Rep.
was the opinion of all the Judges of England in the Plot wherein Watson and
Clerk the Priests were Executed, and Sir Walter Rawleigh condemned. So that
what you have now urged from Reason, or Authority of our Ancient Lawyers, is
either quite mistaken, or else does not reach the matter in hand; that it
cannot be made out from reason, is plain; since your whole Argument is built
upon this false foundation, that it is lawful in some cases to resist the King,
in case of a notorious breach of the fundamental Laws, and therefore it is
necessary also to declare him to have forfeited his Crown, if he persist in
this violation; whereas I deny your Assumption, for I hold it utterly unlawful
to resist, on any pretense, or for any cause whatsoever; and therefore it is
impossible for the King who (as I said but now) is an absolute unconditioned
Monarch, to forfeit his Crown for any such violation of your Original
Contracts, or Fundamental Laws of Government: so that let me tell you, that the
citations you have brought out of History, as also Bracton, and Fleta, do not
prove either the one or the other of these: for first as to the clause in King
John's Charter concerning resistance, and the Barons having a Power thereby to
constrain the King to amend his violations of it, by making War upon him, and
that they should not return to their former Allegiance till all was redressed;
make the most of it, it could be no more than a particular concession for
himself alone, and was not intended to reach his Successors, who are not at
all mentioned in this Clause; and that it was never intended to reach them, may
further appear, because that this clause of resistance is omitted out of all
the subsequent great Charters, that were granted by Henry the III. or his Son
Edward the I. and instead of this, it was thought a sufficient security upon
the last confirmation of these Charters in the 37 year of King Henry III. for
the King, Bishops, Earls and Barons to agree, that the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and all the rest of the Bishops should declare all those, that
wilfully transgressed or infringed the great Charters in any point,
excommunicated ipso facto, not excepting the King himself, according to the
form of it, which you will find in Mat. Paris; and other Writers of this
Transaction. But for the places you have cited out of Bracton, there is none of
them reach the point in question; for as to the first, non est Rex ubi
dominatur voluntas and non Rex* the meaning of it is not that he is no King,
but that he does not act as a King, but a Tyrant, when he thus governs by his
mere Will, and not by Law; and to the same effect is the next passage, Rex est,
dum been regit; Tyrannus, dum Populum fibi tradi um violenta opprimit
dominatione; all which we readily grant; yet since he is still an absolute
Monarch, all Writers hold, that his governing without or against Law, cannot
give the subjects a power to resist him, much less can it be construed as a
renunciation or forfeiture of his imperial Power; and therefore though it is
true, that as Bracton, and Fleta tell us, whilst he thus acts, he does not act
as God's Lieutenant but the Devils Minister; yet does it not follow that we may
therefore resist him with carnal Weapons, or force, since we cannot so resist
the Devil himself; and though he may in this matter of breach of the Laws, which
he has sworn to observe, act as the Devils Minister, yet notwithstanding in all
other points of Government, as in the Punishment of Robbers, and other
notorious offenders, and in the due Administration of Justice between Man and
Man, he still acts as Gods Lieutenant; and it is much better that we should
have some civil Government though mixed with Tyranny, and oppression, than that we
should fall into all the mischiefs and confusions of a Civil War; nay, that
Anarchy too which has been often produced by it: and though I confess the last
place you have made use of, to wit, Rex habet Superiorem, Legem, and Curiam
suam, viz. Comites and Barons, etc. who ought, if he transgress the Law, to
put a Bridle upon him, yet by this (as I have already proved) neither Bracton
nor Fleta could mean any co-active ^orce, but only a Moral restraint upon the
King by Petitions, Remonstrances, or denial of aids, till he would be Reformed
by fair means; but that it does not go farther, appears by the parrallel
Bracton there makes between our Savior Christ and the Virgin Mary, who being
both free from the Law of Moses, yet voluntarily chose to be obedient to it;
which sufficiently proves, that those Authors never designed that the
Parliament should oblige the King by force, or whether He would or no, to amend
his faults; since that was as you your self must acknowledge against their very
institution; since both their mee^ing, and their dissolution, wholly depend
upon the Kings Will.


F. I confess you have made a long, and elaborate speech in answer to my
notion, that a King may forfeit his Crown, that is, by his own act, cease to be
King; but I shall be able to give you a satisfactory answer to all this, if you
please to take it; In the first place therefore, I cannot but observe, that all
your Discourse depends upon two Principles, alike false; first, that no
absolute Monarch, can by his own act forfeit, or lose his right to the
Government, without a formal resignation of the Crown; or, secondly, that the
Kings of England have ever been such absolute Monarchs: which if they are both
great mistakes, all that you have said on this head falls of it self. Now that
a King, though an absolute Monarch, may do such an act as shall make a forfeiture
of his Crown, without any solemn resignation of it, you your self are forced to
allow, in the two cases you have put, viz. that of such a Monarchs becoming an
Enemy to his People, and going about to destroy them; and that of his making
over his Kingdom, to another without the Peoples consent: now if the diffusive
body of the People in an absolute Government, can judge of these two cases
whenever they happen, without appealing to any General Council, or Assembly of
the whole Nation; I desire to know why it may not be as easy and lawful for
the People to judge without a Parliament, when the fundamental Laws of the
constitution are generally and wilfully broken and violated; and that violation
persisted in by the King, for the introduction of Tyranny and an Arbitrary
Government; since the Rules I have laid down to know it are but a few, and
easy to be known and judged of by the most common capacities. Now that a
Superior or Governor may lose all that power and authority he once had, and
that without any act of the party governed, may appear by those great and
natural relations of a Husband, and a Master: in the former of which, if a
Husband, in the state of nature, use his Wife so cruelly, that she can no
longer live or co-habit with him, without danger of her Life, I doubt not but
she may quit him; and may also when she is out of his Power, Marry her self
again to another Man that will use her better: so in the other relation of a
Master, if such a one, in the state of Nature have a Slave, and will not allow
him sufficient Clothes, Victuals, or will beat him, or use him so cruelly for
no just cause, that he cannot enjoy the ordinary comforts of Life; no man will
deny, but that such a slave may lawfully run away from such a Master, and ^s at
liberty either to live of himself, or to choose another Master if he think good:
and this instance is much more strong in an hired Servant; who is to serve his
Master, for such and such Wages, or to do such and such Work, and no other; if
in this case the Master refuse to pay him his Wages, or put him to do other
work than what was agreed upon between them; or instead of an hired Servant
will make him his absolute Slave; in these cases no man can doubt, but by this
unjust treatment of the Master, the Servant is discharged of his Service, and
may go whether he pleases; and of these actions, I have already proved at our
first meeting, the party injured, be they Wife, or Servant, must be the only
Judges in the state of Nature, where there is no Civil Power over them; or else
if the Husband or Master shall Judge for himself, the Wife or Servant is never
like to get any Redress; apply this to the case of a limited, or conditional
King, and his Subjects, and see if it be not absolutely the same, upon the
total breach of the Original constitution of the Government; and whether the
Bond of Allegiance is not then as absolutely dissolved, by the sole act of the
Prince, without any authoritative power in the Subjects, as it is in the case
of such a Wife or Servant, by the sole Act of the Husband, or Master without
any Superior Authority in such Wife or Servant, to quit them, and so to
discharge themselves of their Wedlock, or Service.

Therefore as to your accusation, that my notion is worse than that of the Rump
Parliament, that put the King to death, I deny it; for they supposed that there
was no way of being rid of a Tyrannical King, but by making the People, (and
consequently the Parliament as their Representatives) his Superiors or Judges,
to call him to an account, and Judge and Punish him for his Tyranny; this I
abhor, as much as your self, for I grant that a King cannot be properly the
Supreme, and at the same time own another Power above him, to Punish, or call
him to an Account for his Miscarriages; but this Power that I insist on, is not
(as I have all along told you) a power of punishment, but a right of resistance
for self-defence, in the first place, and of Judging and Declaring the King to
have forfeited his Crown or Right to Govern, if he persist in his Tyranny,
without any amendment, or satisfaction given to the People.

Nor is this Doctrine of the Peoples thus Judging for themselves, so dangerous
as that of the Rumpers (as you suppose,) who put this right of Judging, when
the King had thus forfeited his Power in the Parliament, of which they thought
themselves the only lawful, or necessary Members; but indeed it was not so, for
they still supposed him to be their lawful King, and yet at the same pretended
to Arraign him, as you may see by the Title of the Charge, or Indictment they
drew up against him; all which I grant to be altogether unjust and illegal; but
it is not more, but rather less dangerous to put this power of Judging, when
the King has thus dissolved the Government, and forfeited his Crown, upon such
notorious and wilful breaches of the Fundamental Laws, in the whole or
diffusive body of the People, rather than in the Parliament, or great Council
of the Nation; for as to your assertion, that the whole People are more
fallible, and consequently more dangerous Judges in such a Case, than the great
Council, I deny it, since all the matters of fact must be so evident and
notorious to the senses and feeling of the greater part of the People, that
there can be no doubt or denial of it, by any reasonable and indifferent
Judges; and the greatest part of the People are willing to live in Peace,
without making any disturbance or alteration in the Government, if it may be
avoided; whereas in any great Assembly or Council, there are, many and those of
the most eloquent and leading Men, who commonly carry the rest which way they
please, who are governed by faction, ambition, or self-interest; and upon all,
or some of these, etc. may be desirous to raise Civil Wars, or to declare the
King to have done things that require resistance, or to have forfeited his
Crown, when indeed he has not; and for this the very Long Parliament you
mention is an evident example, since you cannot but grant, that if the
differences between the King and that Parliament had been left to the Judgment
of the whole People, there had never been any Civil War at all, nor had the
King ever been beheaded; since it is notoriously known, that before the
Parliament stirred up the People to War, by seizing of the Militia, they were
not at all inclined to it. It being a restless, and factious, ambitious party
of men on both sides, who brought on the last Civil War: Not but that I defer
much to the Judgment of a free, and unbyast Parliament, who may confirm, and
declare what the diffusive body of the People have already justly done, to be
right, and lawful, which may be as great a satisfaction to private Men's
Consciences in Civil Disputes, as a general Council is in Spiritual
Controversies about matters of Religion; wherein though such a Council cannot
make new Articles of Faith, yet we Protestants hold that it may declare what
were anciently believed: but if the People have a right of Judging during the
intervals of Parliament, when the King has notoriously broke the Fundamental
Constitution, and so may make resistance accordingly (as I have already proved
they have;) since otherwise the King may absolutely refuse ever to call any
Parliament at all, or at least may not let them sit, till all grievances are
redressed; so that I cannot see why they may not also Judge, when the King has
so wholly broke his Original Contract, and so obstinately persisted in it, as
to create a forfeiture of his Crown, since the one is not harder to judge of,
than the other; nor is your parallel between our opinion, and that of the
Jesuits at all true, unless you could also prove, that I had put the same
authority in the People to depose their Kings by a right conferred on them by
God, as the Jesuits do in the Pope by such a pretended Power, as Superior to
that of all the Monarchs in the World, but there is nothing like it in my
hypothesis. Since I do neither allow the People to Judge, or Depose the King,
much less to put him to Death, though a Tyrant, but only to Judge, and declare,
when he has made such notorious breaches on the fundamental Constitution, as do
necessarily imply a forfeiture, or rather an implicit Abdication of his Royal
Power, and whereby he deposes himself.

But to come to the second Point, to prove, that our Kings were never absolute
Monarchs, or had the sole and absolute authority over the People of this
Kingdom, and if so, that there was somewhat still reserved by the People at the
first institution of the Government; and which the King by the original
contract, when he or his Ancestors took the Crown, must be still supposed as
bound to maintain; now that there must have been such a thing as an Original
Contract (however light you are pleased to make of it) I thus make out; you may
remember that at our fifth meeting, I proved, that at the first institution of
Kingly Government in this Nation, it was not by right of Inheritance, but
Election. 2. That this Election was made either by the whole body of the People
in Person, or by their lawful Representatives in the great Councils, or Mycel
Synods of the English Saxons. 3. That this great Council did then reserve to
themselves these material parts of Government. First, A right of Meeting or
Assembling at stated times of the year; and that without any previous summons
from the King. 2. A right of proposing or at least o^ assending to all Laws
that should be made in all future times. 3. A right of granting general Aids,
or Taxes for the People, and that without their consent no Taxes could be
imposed. 4. And as subsequent to all these a right of agreeing to all Wars, and
Treaties of Peace ^o be made with Foreign Nations: but the first and last of
these though I could prove to have been constantly observed, during the Saxon
Government, and long after, yet since the People have parted with their right
to their Kings in these matters, I shall not now insist upon them, only that
this People have still a right to Parliaments, once in three years at least,
and oftener if necessity require.

These then being the Original Constitutions of the Kingdom, the King must have
either entered into a compact with the People for the maintenance and
observation of these fundamental rights, or else it must have been left to his
discretion, whether he would suffer the People to enjoy them or not: if the
latter had been true, then I grant they had made him an Absolute Monarch, and
had left it wholly at his discretion, whether they should enjoy these
fundamental Rights and Privileges or not; but it appears plainly to the
contrary that they did not, for I shall prove (if need be) that the Succession
to the Crown was at first Elective, and not Hereditary; now in all Elective
Kingdoms of the Gothic Model, it is very well known that their Kings were so
far from being absolute, that the Assembly of Estates, or great Councils of
those Kingdoms reserved to themselves a power of Deposing their Kings for
Tyranny and Mis government; as I have already proved was frequently done, not
only in England, but in all the neighboring Kingdoms without any imputation of
Rebellion: and I have also given you a quotation out of the ancient mirror of
Justices; which tells us, that upon the Election of the first King of this
whole Island. Mirror. p. 8.
The Princes that chose him then caused him to swear, that he would maintain
the Holy Christian Faith with all his power, should Rule his People justly
without regard to any person, and should be obedient to suffer Right, or
Justice, as well as others, his Subjects.

And now that upon a failure to perform these things, a forfeiture of the Crown
would follow, and that thereupon he would cease to be King: Pray see those
ancient Laws in Lambards Saxon Laws, and Sir H. Spelman's Councils which go
under the name of King Edward the Confessors: Spel. Council. Leges G^il. cap. 6.
Hoveden's Annals part 2. p. 608.
(though they were made as Hoveden shows us in the time of King Edgar his
Grandfather) where among those Laws of King Edward that were confirmed by K.
William I. This is one. Rex autem qui est vi arius summi Regis ad hoc est
constitutus ut Regnum terrenum, and populum Domini, and super omnia sanctam
veneretur Ecclesiam, and ab injuriis defendat, and m^leficos ab ea evellat, and
penitus dispendat, quod nisi fecerit nec nomen Regis in eo constabit, that is,
not so much as the Title of King shall remain to him: and in the same sense
Bracton is to be understood, as an explanation of this Law, Cap. 24.
in his second book; est enim Corona Regis facere Iustitiam, and Iudicium, and
pacem tenere, sine quibus confistere non potest, nec teneri; which may be thus
rendered; that it is the Royal office or dignity, (for so I construe Corona
Regis) to do Justice, and Judgment, and to maintain peace* without the
observation of which, his Crown or Royal Dignity cannot hold* nor consist: so
that this is but an explanation of my sense of that other passage I have
already cited out of this Author, non est Rex ubi dominatur voluntos, and non
Lex, i. e. He is not a King, (that is, ceases to be a King) when his Will, and
not the Law Governs; and he gives the reason for it in another place, speaking
of the King, when he was not then Hereditary, for, ad hoc electus est Rex, and
constitutus, ut faciat Iustitiam universis.

Therefore if he thus totally deviate from the end of his Creation, his
Authority ceases, and is at an end. So that nothing is plainer, than that our
Ancient Laws have declared, the King to have lost the Title and Right of being
King in case of notorious Tyranny, and breach of this Original Contract; and
that the ancient Lawyers, Bracton and Fleta, gave the same interpretation of
this Law, is also as plain.

So that what you have said to evade or misinterpret the authority of these
Authors, as to the points of Non-resistance and Forfeiture of the Regal Power,
will signify nothing; for as to what you say of that clause of resistance
being left out in all subsequent Charters after this of K. John's, and
therefore that it was no binding Law to his Successors, I do not deny the
matter of fact, that it was so omitted; yet that does not prove, that the whole
Nation ever renounced their right of resistance in the cases mentioned; since
as they exercised it before that Charter was given; so also they continued to
do it in the Reigns of his Successors, as I have shown in the History I have
given you of this Resistance at our last meeting, and therefore constant
practice is the best Interpreter of this Fundamental Law: as for our evasion of
that place of Bracton, non est Rex, etc. I have sufficiently confirmed my sense
of it, by this Law of K. Edward, as also by other passages out of this Author:
and I will leave it to any man to judge which is the most genuine
Interpretation of this place; He is not a King, (that is ceases to be so) when
his Will, and not the Law Rules; or that he does not act as a King, as you
interpret it: but you grant such a King is really a Tyrant, yet may not be
resisted, nor can lose his power; and why? because it is absolute and
unconditional; this is to take that for granted which we deny, for he that has
not the full and sole power of making Laws, and imposing Taxes, is not absolute
Monarch; but the King of England has neither of these, Ergo, etc. and if this
be so, see what Grotius says expressly of such a Prince, Lib. I. Cap. IV. 13.
(as high as he is for the non^resistance of Absolute Monarchs,) Si Rex partem
habeat summi Imperii, partem alteram populus, aut senatus, Regi in partem non
suam involanti vi^ justa opponi poterit, quia tatenus Imperium non habet; quod
locum habere cense^, etiam si dictum sit, belli potestatem penes Regem sore; id
enim de Bello externo intelligendum est, eam alioqui quisquis imperis summi
partem habeat, non posset non jus habere eam partem tuendi, quod ubi fit,
potest Rex etiam suam partem belli jure amittere; Where you see, that the
opinion of this learned Author, is, that a King may not only be resisted in
case he invade that part of the Supreme Power that does not belong to him, but
may also lose his own share of the Empire by right of War: now further that our
ancient Lawyers believed, that our King had not the whole power, or (...) in
their hands, appears by that passage so often cited out of Bracton, Rex habet
superiores, legem per quam factus est Rex, and curiam Baronum, etc. which you
strive to evade by supposing I know not what moral superiority which the Court
might only exercise toward the King by Remonstrance, or Pe^^^on, in setting
forth his deviations against a Law; but what if he had refused to hearken to
them? Why then, say you, all the remedy was, expectet Deum Vltorem; now if this
was all, then every private subject had such a moral superiority; for Bracton
says of them, locus erit supplicationi, ut factum corrigat, and emendet, quod
sinon fecerit, etc. then he was to look for God to revenge it: but Bracton and
Fleta are more express in this point, and say, that this Curia Baronum, were
not only Socli, but Magistri; for say they, qui habet Socium, habet Magistrum,
so that surely this Bridle must have been somewhat more than bare Prayers,
Remonstrances, or denial of Money; nor is your reason to the contrary cogent,
since it is only drawn from a simile between Christ, the blessed Virgin, and
the Law of Moses: now you know very well, that similes are not arguments, nor
can any argument be drawn from them, but indeed it plainly appears by what
follows in Bracton, that he supposed this power to be somewhat more than merely
moral; for he there says, that if the People cry to God for want of Justice
against the King, he will send for a Foreign Nation who shall come and destroy
both them ( viz. the Barons) and their King, which would have been a vain
threat, if He might have chosen whether he would be reformed by them or not.

To conclude, if the first King of the Saxon Race took the Crown upon condition
to maintain the Fundamental Laws, and constitution of the Government, and that
he was never invested with an absolute despotick power of making Laws, and
raising Money at his pleasure, but the people reserved to themselves their
share of both, at the first institution of the Monarchy; all those Princes that
claim by Virtue of their Right, are tied by this first original contract,
whether they ever took any Coronation Oath, or not; nor tho the Crown now
become no more Elective, does it, at all alter the condition or the limitation
of his Ancestors, as long as the present King holds by, and under the same
Title, and by virtue of the same original contract; since, as it was by the
Peoples will, that it was at first Elective, so it was also by their Will, that
it became successive; since every entail of the Crown upon heirs, can only
proceed from the Peoples agreement or consent to maintain it as a standing Law,
or else every King might alter it at his pleasure.

As for your next reply, that if we resist the King, because when he turns
Tyrant, he Acts not as Gods Lieutenant, but the Devils Minister; for, so that
though it is lawful to resist the Devil, yet we cannot use carnal force against
him, this assumption is false, since if we can suppose the Devil does ever use
carnal force, we may also repel the same by force, or else those famous Stories
of Witches, and Spirits being afraid of, and flying from naked Swords are all
false: I beg your pardon for speaking so long; which I could not well contract
into less compass without passing by your arguments and answers to my
quotations.


M. You have indeed outdone me in making long Speeches, but I have heard you
patiently, because I cannot deny, but that you have argued fairly, had it been
upon a right foundation; but since it is not, pray give me leave to set you
right, and show you, that notwithstanding all you have urged to the contrary,
yet all our Kings since the Conquest were absolute Monarchs; and if so, not
only irresistible upon any breach of their Coronation Oaths, but also have been
invested with such an absolute unconditioned power, as can never be lost or
forfeited upon account of the highest acts of Tyranny; but before I come to my
proofs, give me leave to say somewhat to those last citations you have brought
from King Edwards Laws, as also from Bracton and Fleta. First, as to that Law
you have cited, that passes under the Title of one of those confirmed by King
William the Conqueror; give me leave to tell you, that I much question whether
it be genuine, and not foisted in by some of the Monks that had the keeping of
the Copies of those Laws in their Monasteries, after the Original it self was
no more to be found; for in the first place I must observe, it does not savor
of that absolute Power, that I take K. William to have acquitted by his Sword,
to own his Royal Dignity forfeitable, or that he could lose the name of King
upon any account whatsoever, at this pretended Law seems to intimate, by these
words, nec nomen Regis in to constabit; now that it strongly savours of the
ignorance of the Monks, I shall show you by the very Law it self, wherein the
chief points, for which the King must lose his Royal Title, is not only if he
does not defend his Earthly Kingdom, but also the People of God, that is, the
Clergy, and also shall fail to reverence Holy Church, that is, the Bishops and
Clergy, of whom the Monks looked upon themselves as the chief, and most
considerable part; as also if he fail to destroy evil doers, (that is Heretics
out of the Church) then (forsooth) not so much as the name of King must remain
to him; now pray see the consequence of this, and whether you will own this to
be a fundamental Law of the Kingdom, for then at this rate, Henry the VIII. who
suppressed Monasteries, and took away Abby-Lands, and let injurious persons
spoil the Church by Sacrilege, and also all other Princes, who have not
extirpated those, who, when this Law was supposed to have been made, would have
passed for Heretics (that is all Protestants) must have all forfeited their
Royal Dignities, and consequently the Pope did Henry VIII. and Queen Elizabeth
no wrong, if in pursuance of this Law, they Excommunicated them, and declared
they had forfeited their Crown, since this Law says, that Pope John testified
this truth quod nomen Regis perdet... But nothing makes out more evidently to
me the forgery of this pretended Law, than the notorious faults there are in
the Chronology, where the sentence of Pope John against King Childerick is
mentioned as an evidence to make it good, whereas indeed it was not Pope John,
but Zachary who gave this sentence; But in Hovedens Copy of this Law, there is
yet a more gross error; for it makes Pipin, and his Son Charles to have writ
to William the Bastard, upon their hearing this definitive sentence, so wisely
given by him concerning the Title of King; all which is so notorious a piece of
folly, and ignorance, that it needs no other confuration; But granting that
part, containing the Law it self, to be genuine, it does not at all set forth
your Original Contract, or make it a forfeiture in the King to do any of those
things which you supposed to be main parts of the Fundamental Constitution;
only says in general, that unless he defend his Earthly Kingdom, and the People
of God, and reverence Holy Church by defending it from injurious Persons, and
removing Evil doers from it, name of the King will not belong to him; now all
this the most absolute Monarch in Christendom, even the King of France himself
will say he performs to a tittle; and therefore there is no fear of a
forfeiture for any King, though never so Absolute and Tyrannical upon these
Terms, unless he will do that which I think he is too wise ever to go about, to
destroy his People wilfully, or to fall upon the Church of Rome and its Clergy.

As for the rest of the places you have cited out of Bracton and Fleta, to
prove this Notion of a Forfeiture, I must freely tell you that they do not seem
to me to come up to the point for which you bring them; for as to that place
you have cited out of Bracton, non est Rex, etc. you and I differ about the
sense of it, and I see no reason why I may not still keep my own opinion: the
other place I confess seems more express, viz. That it is the Crown or Dignity
of the King to do Justice or Judgment, without which it cannot hold or consist;
this also does refer only to such Justice and Judgment as the King is to give
and distribute between Man and Man, without any relation to his own actions
toward his Subjects; and if a Prince will not do this, either by Himself or
Deputies, I grant his Crown, or Royal Dignity cannot long subsist to be
maintained, since this will bring all things to utter confusion, so that
strangers will soon be encouraged to Invade the Kingdom, nor will the People be
at all concerned to assist such a King against them; since they can be in no
worse a condition under a stranger than under him; But as for the ancient
Superiority of the Law and Court of Barons, there mentioned, to be over the
King, that still seems to me to be only a Moral, and not a Co-ercive Power;
since the law alone is but a dead letter, and can force no man of it self,
without the power of Men to support it; and there can be no Interpreters of
this Law but the King, and his Judges out of Parliament; and the Parliament
sitting, that alone, that is, not the House of Peers or Commons alone, or both
together, but the King, Lords, and Commons that can interpret Laws: but let the
power of this Court of Barons have been anciently what it will, it seems to
relate only to the Peers or Tenants in Capite and not to the Commons at all,
since none ever heard them called the Kings Companions; but suppose it so, it
is now gone, and as for any co-ercive power in the two Houses over the King, I
have already showed you, that the two first Parliaments of King Charles the
second, have expressly renounced it from themselves and the whole Nation; and
therefore I must still stick to my first conclusion, that the King is not to be
resisted upon any Terms whatsoever, neither can forfeit his Royal Dignity by
certain general, antiquated Laws, or by the forced interpretations of some
doubtful obscure passages in our ancient Lawyers: But I shall now proceed to
prove,


F. I pray give me leave to reply to what you have now said, before you go to
any new Head, First, In answer to what you have now objected against the
Genuineness of this Law of Edward the Confessors, it is certain, that it is
found in these very words, with very little alteration in all the Copies of
King Edwards Laws; only in Hoveden, instead of Rex quia Vicarius summi Regis,
it is, Rex atque Vicarius ejus, which is no great difference, and may relate to
the Kings Lieutenant in his absence beyond the Seas, as there was often
occasion for our Kings, after their Accession to the Crown of England; and
therefore though I grant some Clergymen (they having then all the learning of
the Nation among them) might draw up this Law into the form it was made, and so
render it as advantageous for the Church as they could, yet that this Clause
was not the addition of any ignorant Monk (as you suppose) will appear from
this, that it is Recorded by Hoveden, who lived and wrote about a hundred years
after it was thus confirmed; and we cannot suppose all the copies of these Laws
to be lost, and one single copy to be left and corrupted in so short a Time;
and though it is true, this Law is not found among those set forth in the last
Edition of Iugulph, yet does it not therefore follow, that there was no such
Law ever made or confirmed by King William, since those Laws in Ingulph seem to
be more like an Epitome of the criminal and feudal Laws confirmed, or added by
that King, than an exact body of all the Laws of the Confessor, those having
been writ in Latin, and confirmed by K. William in the fourth year of his
Reign; whereas this Copy was published in French for the use of the Kings
Norman and French Subjects, and that long after K. Williams coming to the
Crown; for Ingulph tells us, That after Domesday book was made, he brought
those Laws down from London in the French Tongue (in which they were put forth,
lest he or any of his Monks, should through Ignorance happen to offend his
Royal Majesty by an unwary breach of them;) But as for the faults in the
Chronology in the Story of Charles and Pipin in all the best Copies of these
Laws, this Letter is said to be written by them to the Pope, and not to K.
William at all, and then it will be at most but a miss-nomer or error of the
Transcriber putting in Pope John, for Zachary; but if you will have my opinion
of this matter, I do freely grant that this passage in the Law concerning
Princes writing to the Pope about the deposition of K. Childerick might be an
Addition of those Monks who first Transcribed those Laws, and made short
glosses upon them, and yet the law it self might be genuine notwithstanding;
and if the Law it self be so, it must be understood in a larger sense than what
you would put upon it, for sure by defending of his Kingdom must be meant, not
only the bare defending it against foreign Enemies, but also against the wrongs
and oppressions of his own Ministers, and Officers, which if he suffer by a
wilful negligence, or on se^ purposes, he will as much offend against this Law,
as if he had done it himself, and so will lie under the same penalty. Much less
will these passages concerning defending the Clergy, and reverencing the
Church, render this Law either void, or impracticable; for suppose, you take
Populus Dei, in the strictest sense to signify the same with Servu Dei, (which
I grant always to signify the Clergy in our ancient Saxon Laws and Charters)
yet all this does not make this Law void and impracticable* since, sure
maintaining the Worship of God is one part of the duty of a Christian King, nor
can this be well performed without some Men set up for that purpose, and that
these Men cannot attend their Sacred Function without being maintained in their
just Rights and Liberties; neither is it any consequence that these Clergy must
always consist of the very same Orders of Men, as when this Law was made, so
that suppose the Monks were then held as a necessary part of this Clergy, it
will not follow; that it was not lawful for the State to alter or take them
away; for then no Religious Order that was then in being, could have been
suppressed afterward, which no Papist will say; so that the meaning of this
clause in the Oath, is no more than that the King should from time to time
defend all those Clergy, such which the Nation, that is, the Legislative Power
should think useful, and necessary for Gods service, without being tied to any
certain Orders or Degrees of Men; provided those that are particularly ordained
by Christ and his Apostles, for the service of his Church, be inviolably
maintained and preserved; so likewise for the Church it self, granting (which
may also be questioned) that at the time when this Law was made or confirmed,
Popery was come to its height, and so was the established Religion of the
Nation: and consequently that by the Church here mentioned, was then to be
understood the Romish Church or Religion, (as we now call it) yet does it not
follow, that the King by this Law is to forfeit his Crown, if he ever alter;
for the Law only says in general, that he shall reverence the Church of God;
that is, that Profession of Christianity, or Way, which he, and the great
Council of the Nation, shall upon the most mature Judgment and Deliberation
think to be so; so that all that can be deduced from this clause is, that the
King shall reverence the Church, that is, maintain the profession of Religion,
which shall be established by Law, and shall make no alteration therein,
without the general consent of the whole Nation in their great Councils or
Synods, consisting as well of Ecclesiastical as Secular Members; and so
likewise he shall defend it from all injurious Persons, that would invade the
Rights of the Church and its Clergy, contrary to Law, and shall root out all
evil doers; that is, all debaucht, and wicked Professors of Christianity; for
so malesicos properly signifies, and not Heretics; as you would render it (who
are not Evil doers, but false Believers) or if it should be interpreted for
Heretics, it is not those that then might be looked upon as such, but what the
present Church shall so determine; or else we must own the former Church to
have been infallible in all her determinations. So that I can see no reason
upon the whole matter, why this Law should now become void; or unprofitable by
reason of any alterations in Religion, or of those men that were then to
exercise the functions of it; as long as all the necessary and material parts
of both are preserved, as they are to this day: for otherwise this Law would
have tied up the King and Nation, from making any Reformation in Religion, though
never so much for the better, or though the National Church had never so much
required it, which I suppose no true Protestant will affirm.

But as for those passages out of Bracton and Fleta which I have brought to
confirm and support our sense of this Law; and which you labor to avoid by
putting too general and loose an interpretation upon them; whereby you would
make them only to signify that the King is to maintain right Judgment and
Justice between Man and Man, without which his Royal Dignity cannot hold or
subsist; but that he is not obliged upon any penalty to observe the same things
in respect of himself, or his own Officers, or Ministers; this is all one, as
if a Shepherd, who had a Flock of Sheep committed to his charge by the owner,
having first fleeced, and then killed, and destroyed them, and converted the
Wool and Carcasses to his own private use, should then tell the owner, that he
was indeed to defend the Flock from Thieves, Wolves, and Foxes, but that it was
no part of his bargain to keep them safe untoucht from himself, or his
Servants: or so much as his own Dogs; but that the sense of Bracton and Fl^ta
is quite otherwise, sufficiently appears by these places I have now cited, and
if those will not do, pray consider these that I shall nere add; for Bracton
also in the same chapter tells us, Lib. 3. Cap. 9.
ad hoc creatus est [Rex] and electus, ut, Iustitiam faciat universis, and he
also there recites the ancient Coronation Oath in these words. Debit enim [Rex]
in Coronatione sua nomine Jesus Christi haec tria promittere Populo sibi
subdito, Imprimis se esse praecipturum, and pro virious opem impensurum ut omni
Populo Christiano vera pax omni suo tempore observetur. 2. Vt rapacitates and
omnes iniquitates interdicat. 3. Vt in omnibus Iudiciis equitatem praecipiat,
and misericordiam, ut indulgeat ei suam misericordiam Clemens Deus. Now how can
a King observe this Oath, that spoils the people of their Goods, and raises
Taxes contrary to Law, or how can he continue King, who violates all the ends
of his Creation? from all which it appears, that by this Justice and Judgment
must be meant, not only the Kings own observing Justice toward his People, not
only by not commanding, but also hindering his inferior Ministers and
Officers, from spoiling and oppressing them, and that no prerogative can
justify him in the doing otherwise, is as evident from another place in
Bracton, where he tells us, that Regia potestas Iuris est, n^n Injuriae, and
nihil aliud potest Rex nisi quod jure potest. But Fleta is somewhat larger on
this head, though to the same effect, Lib. 1. Cap. 17.
when speaking of the Kings Power or Prerogative, he says thus; and licet omnes
potentia praecellat, cor tamen ipsius in manu Dei esse debet, and ne potentia
sua man^a^ infranata fraenum imponat temperantiae, and lora moderantiae; ne
trahetur ad injuriam, quia nihil aliud, hoc est^in terra, nisi quod de Iure
potest nec obstat quod dicitur, quod Principi placet Legis habet potestatim,
quia sequitur cum lege Regia, quae de ejus Imperio lata est, non qui^quid de
voluntate Regis tanto pere praesumptum est, sed quod Magnatum suorum consilio
Rege authoritatem praestante, and habita super hoc deliberatione, and tractatu
recte fuerit de^initum, which not only shows, that our ancient English Lawyers
in this agreed with the Civil Law, and gave the same account of the original of
the Royal Power as that Law does, viz. that it was conferred by the People of
Rome, on the Roman Emperor, by the Lex Regia mentioned in the old Civilians I
have formerly cited; and also shows that our ancient Lawyers supposed that by a
like Law among us, the Royal Authority was originally derived from the consent
of the People of England; without whose advice, and assent included in that of
their Representatives, here called consitium Magnatum ( consilium being taken
for consent in this place, as I have proved it often signified) no Law can ever
be made: now if the King will not be ruled by this bridle of moderation, this
Author as well as Bracton tell us, that the King then has his Superiors, the
Law and his Court of Barons; who were as Masters to put this Bridle upon him.
But admit he will run away with this Bridle between his Teeth, all this had
signified nothing, if there be no other remedy left us, besides bare
supplication, or remonstrances to the King of his duty; and he might have
dissolved the Parliament before ever it could have any time to do either the
one or the other.

To conclude, if the King was at first elected, and created for this end, that
he may do Justice to all men; and that this Justice does not only concern his
maintaining Justice between his Subjects one toward another, but also in
respect of himself, his Children and Subordinate Officers and Ministers, that
act by his Commission, appears by what follows in Bracton after the Kings
Coronation Oath: Potestas (scil. Regis) itaque Iuris est non injuriae, and cum
ipse sit Author Iuris, non debet inde injuriarum nasci occasio, and etiam qui
ex officio suo alios prohibere necesse habet, id ipsum in propria persona
committere non debet. So that it is as plain, that if he either command, or
permit these willful injuries generally, or all over his Kingdom, he fails to
defend it according to K. Edward's Laws, and if he thus fail to defend it, he
thereupon loses or forfeits his very Title or Office of a King, since he cannot
keep or hold his Crown, or Royal Dignity, for without Justice it cannot
subsist, and this by the original contract; since upon whatever Terms the first
King of this Race, took the Crown, upon the same Terms all his Posterity who
succeed either by election or right of blood, by virtue of that first compact
are to hold it under the like penalty of a forfeiture, in case of a wilful
neglect, or violation of his duty.


M. I confess you have made a specious proof of this original contract you so
much talk of, and more than ever I thought could have been said for it; but let
it be what it will, it is certain in the first place, that whatever co^ercive
Power the two Houses of Parliament might pretend to when Bracton wrote, they
have solemnly renounced it in two successive Parliaments in the Reign of K.
Charles the II. therefore I shall not insist any longer upon old antiquated
Laws, or original contracts; which are not directly expressed, but
consequentially deduced at best: but I must now tell you, that let the first
institution of this Government have been what it will in the Saxon times, and
what original contract soever you may please to fancy between them and their
Subjects, yet this was all gone, and out of doors, by that absolute Conquest
which K. William I. made of this Kingdom for himself; and his heirs who do not
at all claim under the Title of our English Kings. For since their Ancestor had
no just Title to the Crown but by the Sword, and that he gained this Kingdom by
the Conquest of K. Harold; and the People of England who had elected him, and
fought for him; as also by the subsequent recognition of this right, by all the
People of England, in their Oaths of Allegiance so often repeated to himself
and his Successors, have thereby acknowledged it to be as absolute a Monarchy
by conquest, as ever was instituted by any Prince in the World; and though I
grant that several of the Conquerours have been graciously pleased to grant
diverse Privileges to the People of this Nation, and some of them perhaps the
same they enjoyed in the Saxon time; yet can they not enjoy it by virtue of
that Original Contract you suppose to have been made, between the first King of
that Saxon Race, and the People of England; for as I said but now K. William
had no right by any Title from K. Edward the Confessor, but wholly by his
Sword, as I shall prove by and by.

But however these concessions ought not at all to derogate from the
absoluteness of the Power, or the indefensibleness of our Kings Title, for
since these limitations of absolute, or imperial Power did not proceed from any
other Original, than the free and voluntary concessions of our King^, and not
from any compacts with their People; they do not at all derogate from the
uncontrollable and unancountable Sovereignty thereof, It. I. p. 211.
so that we may very well distinguish between the Being, and Essence of
Imperial or Sovereign Power, and the exercise or emanation thereof; as to the
Being and Essence of it, it is in as full perfection in the Limited, as in the
Arbitrary Sovereign, though the Law confines and limits him in the exercise
thereof; but to be confined in the exercise does not destroy the Being, nor
diminish the perfection of Sovereign Power, for then the Power of God himself
could not be Sovereign, because there are certain immutable Rules of Truth, and
Justice within which it is necessarily limited, and confined; but God is
nevertheless a perfect Imperial Sovereign over the Universe, though the exercise
of his Government over his Creatures, be limited by the eternal Laws of Truth
and Equity; it is true, that this limitation of Almighty God is intriasical,
and proceeds from the perfection of his Righteous and Holy Nature; but yet it
shows, that the most perfect and absolute imperial Powe, may, without a
contradiction, be confined within bounds, and limited in the actual exercise
thereof, and that such limitation of Absolute Imperial Power (proceeding wholly
from it self) does only qualify, and temper, but not destroy the essence of
it; and therefore Cook in Cawdrey's Case, says, that by the Ancient Laws of
this Realm, England is an Absolute Empire and Monarchy, and that the King is
furnished with plenary, and entire Power, Prerogative and Jurisdiction, and is
Supreme Governor over all Persons within this Realm.

Therefore whoever will consider the Original of this limitation of Sovereign
Power, to have proceeded wholly ab intrinsico, from the voluntary Grants of our
first Monarchs after the conquest; and will also distinguish the Essence from
the exercise of Sovereign Power, will find, there is no contradiction between
the fullness of Sovereign Power in the Root, Ibid.
or Essence of it, and a legal limitation of the use and exercise thereof; and
from hence it comes to pass, that the King of England, though he be thus limited
in the use and exercise of his Power, yet he is still as much the Fountain of
all Power, and Jurisdiction within his Dominions, as if he were Arbitrary; he
has none to share with him in the Sovereignty, but all Power and Authority is
derived from him, like light from the Sun, in him alone it is radically and
originally placed, he has no sharers or copartners with him in the
Sovereignty, none coordinate with him in the Government, no Equal, Lib. 1. c.
8.
no Superior, but only God to whom alone he is Subject. Hence says Bracton,
omnis quidem sub to, and ipse sub nullo sed tantum sub Deo, non est inferior
sibi subjectis, non parem habet in regno suo, and afterward, ips^ autem Rex
non debet esse sub homine, sed sub Deo.

Therefore I grant the King is obliged by his Coronation Oath, to keep to these
limitations, which both he, and his Predecessors have sworn to; yet if he any
ways fa^l in the performance of i^, this failure cannot give his People any
manner of right to take up Arms against him, and to resist him in any such
case, much less can it cause a forfeiture of his Royal Power; since being at
first the sole Sovereign Power, he did not by putting this limitation
thereunto, intend to part with any share of it to the great Council of the
Kingdom or Parliament, but only to take them into a part of the care and
trouble of the Government, and to limit his Prerogative Power from passing any
Laws, or raising any Money without their assent, unless in cases of great
necessity; and then if he is still judge of this necessity, as certainly he is
in the intervals of Parliament, it can never be supposed, that the first
Prince, or his Successors, that first parted with these Privileges to the
People, ever intended to be so straightly tied to them, as that in no case
whatever, though never so pressing, they should not depart from them, much less
that he should forfeit his Crown if he should wholly break them, nay should
persist so to do, and resolve to turn this limited, into an absolute despotick
Monarchy; since the observation of these Laws, being but concessions of his
own, or his Predecessors, can never be looked upon as conditions of his holding
the Crown, nor of the Subjects Allegiance to it, there being as you your self
confess no such clause expressed in either part, neither in the Kings Coronation
Oath, nor yet in their Allegiance to him, as you your self cannot but
acknowledge; and though it is true, the King swears at his Coronation, to keep
and maintain the Laws; yet Grotius tells us, Lib. 1. cap. 3. that an Empire
does not cease to be Absolute, although he who is to rule, promise some things to
God, or to his Subjects, even such which may appertain to the manner of the
Empire, and that not only concerning the observation of the natural or divine
Law, but of certain Rules to which without a promise he were not obliged. So
that in all Promises of this kind the manner of the obligation is not
reciprocal, or of the same sort on both sides; as for example, it is only moral
in respect of the King, and it is lef^ wholly to God to judge between the King
and his Subjects, and to punish him when he breaks his part; but, to the King
as God's Lieutenant on Earth, it belongs not only to judge of his Subjects
breach of their Oath and Contract, but also to punish them for so doing, and
compel them to the performance of it: and of this Judgment are all the Modern
Civilians; as for Bodin I have given you his opinion in the chapter I last
cited, concerning this matter: and he as well as Grotius is clearly of opinion,
that Absolute Monarchs, such as he reckons the King of England to be, are not
to be called in question or destroyed, let their breach of Laws and Tyranny be
never so notorious, much less can they forfeit their Royal Dignity for such
maladministration: and though Grotius is of opinion, that in cases of great and
evident danger of Life, Subjects may have a right of resistance against
absolute Princes, and those commissioned by them, what is this to the case in
hand? viz. a resistance, against an Absolute Monarch for violation of those
Privileges, and Liberties, that were granted by himself, or his Ancestors, and
without which Subjects may very well live, and subsist as we see they do, under
the most Absolute, Despotick Monarchies, where they enjoy no such thing; though
perhaps they do not live so well, and freely as we do; L. VII. cap. 8.. 6.
nay Pufendorf, the Author you so much make use of, in his seventh Book, will
not allow Subjects to take up Arms or resist Absolute Princes, nor for too
great cruelty in punishment, nor for imposing too immoderate Taxes, since the
presumption of Justice, and necessity for the doing of these things is always
on the Princes side; nay, if his Promises are not kept, or privileges formerly
granted are taken away, if the Prince be Absolute, and will pretend any fault,
necessity, or remarkable benefit thereby to the commonwealth, he shall be
deemed to have acted by a right, of which the faculty of judging is wholly
wanting to the Subjects; since all Privileges have this exception; unless the
welfare, or necessity of the Common weal forbid them to be observed.


F. Since your last Discourse consists of two parts; matter of Fact, and matter
of right deducible from that fact, I shall speak to each of them in order:
first as to the matter of Fact, it is a great mistake in you, and Dr. Brady to
maintain that K. William I. was really a Conqueror, and by his Sword (without
any other Title) obtained such an entire Victory over K. Harold, and the whole
English Nation, as gave him an Hereditary Right for himself, and his Heirs to
the Absolute Allegiance of the whole English Nation without any reserve, or
conditions whatever; so that all our Ancient Liberties, and Privileges, being
thereby lost and forfeited, this Nation can claim nothing of that kind, but
from the grants and concessions of that King or his Successors: every one of
which Propositions contain so many notorious mistakes in matter of Fact; for in
the first place, King William never claimed the Crown by Conquest, but by the
adoption, and Testament of King Edward the Confessor, and I desie you to show
me any Ancient Law or Charter, either of his own, or any of his immediate
descendants, wherein he is styled Conqueror; it is true, in his Charter to the
Abbey of Westminster, Per Inspex. 1. E. IV. Part. 7. m. 26 vi. Selden's Review,
p. 483.
he says in one, that by the Edge of the Sword he obtained the Kingdom, by the
Conquest of Harold, and his accomplices; yet does not found his Right in that
Victory, alone, but on the donation of King Edward his Cozen: the words are
remarkable; in ore gladii adeptus sum Regnum Anglorum, devicto Haraldo Rege,
cum suis complicibus; qui mihi Regnum divina providentia destinatum and
beneficio concessionis Domini and Cognati mei gloriosi Regis Edwardi concessum
conati sunt auferre And this donation he calls an Hereditary Right in diverse
other Charters; as particularly in one also recorded by inspeximinus, Carta. 4.
Ed. IV. m. 27. per Inspexi. Vi. Seldeni ad Eadmer: notae, etc. Fol. 211.
beginning thus, In nomine Patris and Filii and spiritus sancti. Am^n. Ego
Williel^us, Rex Anglorum haereditatio Iure factus. So likewise his Son K. Henry
I. in his Charter to the Abbot of Ely, creating him a Bishop, calls himself the
Son of William the Great, (not the Conqueror) Qui Edwardo Regi Haereditario
jure successit in Regnum.

And in virtue of this Donation; he was after his Victory against Harold, by
public and full consent of the whole Nation, or People of England, as also of
the Normans he brought with him, Elected and Crowned King, and at his
Coronation took the same Oath at the High-Altar at Westminster, which his
Predecessors the Saxon Kings, had taken before him; with this one Clause
farther, which was very necessary to be done at that time, viz. quod aquo Iure
Anglos, and Francos, tracta^t; so that let his Title by Conquest have been what
it would, it was either by a just right of War, to recover his due, or by none
at all; if the former, he could only succeed to such Rights as K. Edward the
Confessor before exercised and enjoyed; since he came hither only to take the
Crown that was so bequeathed to him, and to hold it under that Title; but if he
had no Title at all, but his Sword, he then could obtain no just right to the
Crown, of England, either for himself or his Successors; but if they will only
insist upon their Title by the Sword without any preceding or subsequent
right, they may be as lawfully turned out again by the Sword; since it is owned
by all Writers on this Subject, that a Conqueror in an unjust War can obtain no
right over a free People.

So much for the matter of Fact, I come in the next place to point of Right in
Law; I grant indeed that a simple Oath, or Pact between an Absolute Monarch and
his Subjects, to do, or perform such or such a thing; or to let them enjoy such
and such Privileges, does not immediately give the People a Power to compel
such a Monarch, and his Successors, by Force of Arms, to the strict observance
of them, in case of a violation on his part; but our case is very different
from this; for here a Foreign Prince recovers a former Right to the Kingdom,
and that by Force; and is invested with the Crown in Virtue of that Right by
which he claimed it, and is also sworn to maintain the Ancient Government and
Laws; according to which the whole Legislative Power was not in the King alone,
but jointly in the King, and the great Council of the Nation; without whose
grant, or consent, he ought not to have laid any Tax; upon the Nation, as I
shall prove if there be occasion. Now all our Ancient Rights, being granted,
and acknowledged by him, and a constant common Council of the Kingdom appointed
to meet, to see them observed, as it did many times in this King's Reign, as
also in those of his Successors; they were not bare Privileges conferred of
favor, and which might be observed, or broken at the Will of the Prince that
granted them; but a Form or Rule of Government by Laws to be made and agreed
upon in a standing Council, appointed not only to make them, but also to see
them observed; as appears by that passage so often cited, wherein the King is
expressly said to have a Superior, viz. the Law, and the Court of Barons, who
were to put a Bridle upon the King; in case of his governing without Law: and
this farther appears by the great Charters of Henry I. K. Stephen, and K. John,
etc. In the first of which it is declared, that the Nation having been
oppressed by unjust ( i. e. illegal) exactions he therefore forbids all Common
Money, or Taxes; not taken through all Cities or Counties, in the time of K.
Edward; and also confirms the Laws of his Father, whereby his Barons, and
Tenants in Capite, should be free from all Taillage or Taxes; and he also
thereby restored to them the Laws of K. Edward, with those emendations which
his Father had made by the Common Council of his Barons. Now the great Charter
of K. John was but an Addition, or rather Explanation of this Charter of K.
Henry I. which was at first demanded by the Barons to be again confirmed by
this King, at the instigation of Stephen Langton Archbishop of Canterbury, P.
240, 241*
as Mat. Paris shows us at large.

Now since neither K. William the I. nor his Successors, ever changed the
fundamental constitution of the Government, as to the Legislative part of it,
as (has been already proved) and that those breaches that had been made upon
it, by taking Taillage or Taxes, without the consent of the great Council, are
all hereby expressly forbid: these are certainly more than such mere
Privileges, which the King himself is the only keeper of, and can dispense
with at his Pleasure; but are indeed such Fundamentals, as concern the very
cos^i^uent form or Rule of Government; which, as I have also proved, was mixed
not limited, in that very institution; and though the learned Pufendo^f agree^
with you in the case of compacts between an Absolute Monarch and his Subjects;
yet as to the point in hand, he is wholly of my mind, P. 272.
as you may see by this passage in his Academick Dissertations, in his
Discourse de Interreguis; where arguing against Mr. Hobs who will not allow of
any compacts between an Absolute Prince and his Subjects, he has this passage,
which I shall here read to you in English. That though in Pacts, in which
submission is wanting, certain and defined performances may be set forth, to be
observed on either side, from an intrinsic impulse of Conscience; when either
of these refuse to perform them, nothing but War or the compulsion of a
Superior Lord, common to both of them, remains; yet in pacts, by which one
Party is made subject to the other, it belongs to the latter to define, what
ought to be performed by him; as also a power over the other compelling him, to
the performance whether he will, or not; which power does not belong
reciprocally to the other party against the former; hence the party commanding
cannot be questioned for a breach of compact, unless he either wilfully
abdica^e all care of the common wealth, or put on an hostile mind toward his
Subjects; or manifestly, or deceitfully, ( in latin, dolo malo) depart from the
rule of governing; on whose observance as upon a condition, the subjects
Allegiance depends* which is easily to be avoided by any Ruler; if he will
consider, that not the highest of Mortals are free from the Laws of humane
chance: so that let the power of your Conqueror have been never so great, or
Absolute, it is plain he not only renounced it himself, but several of his
Successors have done the same for themselves, and their heirs; therefore make
the most of it, they must still claim by ^ertu^ of the contract, to maintain
the constitution, as they found it; or else resolve all their right into mere
force; and then vim vi pellere licitum est.


M. It is no wonder that you and I differ in our conclusions, since we also
differ so much in the premises; and in the very matter of fact, concerning King
William the Conquerors coming to the Crown; you saying, he came to it partly by
the Sword, but founded on a donation of Edward the Confessor; and partly by the
consent and election of the People of England, yet you your self cannot deny,
but force or conquest had a great share in the business, and indeed was all the
right he had; for as for that donation of K. Edward, it is either forged, or
else K. William could claim nothing by it; since England was then either an
Hereditary Kingdom, or elective; and take it which way you will, this donation
of the Confessors could signify nothing, either to the prejudice of the People
that were to Elect, or the next Heirs who were to succeed after K. Edward's
decease; neither could he claim as Heir to him by blood, for the relation
between him and K. Edward, was by his Mother Emma, Sister to Richard the second
Duke of Normandy, this William's Uncle; so that the Conqueror was no way
descended from the Blood Royal of England; Therefore his true quarrel with
Harold, (Let his pretense be what it will) was not, because he kept a Kingdom
bequeathed to him, by K. Edward; since some Writers relate this King named not
him, but Harold for his Successor; Vi. Hoveden pars prima, p. 449. Will. Malms*
Lib 2.
though others say, that he recommended Edgar to the good will of the English
Nobility. So that the only true and just cause D. William had of making War
upon Harold, was his breaking the Promises and Oath he had not long before made
him of securing the Kingdom of England for him, upon the Death of K. Edward;
instead of doing which, he had seized it for himself; and which is worse,
refused to restore it, or so much as to hold it of Duke William as his Homager.
So that though for the strengthening of his own Tide, he pretended to the Will or
Donation of King Edward, and to avoid the envy of the name, might out of
modesty or to put a better color upon this matter, refuse to take the Title of
Conqueror; and to insist upon the Donation of K. Edward: yet nothing is plainer
than that he could claim by no other Title, but the Sword: and that he looked
upon himself as no other than an Absolute Conqueror, may appear by these great
and evident instances. 1. His change of the English Laws, and introducing the
Norman Customs in their stead, and also changing the Tenures of Lands, not only
of the Layety, but also of the Bishops and greater Abbeys. 2. By his debarring
all those of the English Nation, from enjoying any Honor, Office or
Preferment, either in Church or State; and also in taking away the Estates of
all the Nobility and Gentry; not only from those of their Heirs, that had been
slain in the Battle of Hastings, but also of the rest; so that they had left
them, but what they could purchase of those Norman or French Noblemen, to whom
King Wiiliam had given their Lands, as a reward of their good service; for the
proof of both which Assertions, I have so very good authority on my side, and
that of Writers of, or near those times in which these things were done, that I
think no indifferent man can have any cause to doubt the matter of Fact to have
been as I relate it; nor did he by any after act, ever renounce this right of
Conquest, as you suppose, much less refer it to the Election of the English, or
Normans; since the former were not in a condition to make any farther
resistance against him, the Clergy and great men of the Kingdom having been
forced to submit themselves to him without any other precedent conditions, or
stipulations, than for the saving of their lives; and as for the Normans they
were his Subjects, and they Conquered the Kingdom only for his use and benefit,
as his Soldiers, and Vassal^; and it is not likely he would owe the Kingdom
which he had thus acquired by the Sword, to their Votes, or Election; neither
does any Author that I know of mention any Election before his Coronation; when
though it is true, he took such an Oath as you mention, yet it was in too general
terms to bind him to any observation of the ancient English Laws, much less to
preserve their Rights and Privileges, farther than he thought fit; and
therefore could never take the Crown upon your Conditions of Resistance or
Forfeiture, in case of any alteration in that which you call the Fundamental
Constitution.

This being the true matter of Fact without any disguise, it is easy to answer
all that you have said against K. William's requiring an Absolute, Hereditary
Right to the Crown of England for himself, and all his descendants by the
Sword; first then, as to the Justice of the War, and Conquest it self, I
suppose you will not deny, but that Duke William had a good cause of War
against Harold for the breach of his Oath; and if so, against all that took his
part, at the Battle of Hastings; so that upon the Conquest of Harold, and those
that were in that Fight, he also acquired a Right by Conquest to all that they
enjoyed; and consequently had a right to Harold's Crown, as well as his other
Estate; as also to the Estates of all those that were either slain, or escaped
alive from that Battle, and not only to these, but also to all the Lands of the
whole Kingdom; since the War was made not only against Harolds Person, but
against the Kingdom of England; the People of which, according to their
Allegiance assisted him in that War, either with Men or Money: Vi. Grot. l. II.
cap. 4. Pufendorf, l. VII. cap. 6. 16. cap. 7. 3, 4.
but admitting the War to have been in it self never so unjust, yet all Writers
on this Subject (even Grotius and Pufendorf) agree, that Conquest even in an
unjust War, with a thorough settlement in the Conqueror and his Successors, by
the non claim, dereliction, submission, or exstinction of the next Heirs of the
former Kings, together with a long uninterrupted possession beyond all time of
memory, will confer as good a Title; especially when all these confirmed by a
constant submission, and recognition of the People, testified not only at the
first Conquest, but in all succeeding times, by as absolute, and unconditioned
Oaths of Allegiance, as can be invented; or that were ever taken to the most
Absolute Monarch: and such Oaths are always to be interpreted in favor of the
Prince, to whom they are sworn, and as strictly against the People that take
them; as all Writers also agree: now granting this to be the case of K. William
the Conqueror, that by all or some of these means he acquired a right to the
Crown, not only for himself, but his Heirs; this Power was Absolute, without
any conditions to be observed on their part, for the Oath of Allegiance is
positive, without any condition or restriction; so that I can see no manner of
pretense that the People of this Nation can have, of forcing their K's. to the
maintenance, or observation of those rights, and privileges, which they or
their Predecessors have so freely granted to them, or their Ancestors; As
Pusendorf whom you now cited very rightly observes; and consequently can have
no right to repel force, by force; since our Kings do not now hold their Crown
by force, or right of Conquest alone, but by all things required by the Law of
Nations to create a full, and absolute right, viz. a long uninterrupted
Possession, and the Absolute submission of the People for themselves, and all
their descendants; so that though I grant bare conquest considered as a Force can
give no right alone, yet it may often be the Mother of Right, and may at last
grow to a Right, by the means I have already mentioned.


F. Before I reply any thing farther to what you have now said to the matter of
Right acquired by your Conqueror, and his Heirs, pray in the first place prove
the matter of Fact to have been as you lay it; and therefore produce your
quotations from the Authors you mention: but first give me leave to tell you,
that Dr B. and you are the first I have heard to make so light of this
Testamentary Do^^tion of Edward the Confessor; which the greatest part of the
Writers nearest that time, do suppose to have been really made on the behalf of
Duke William; and that notwithstanding this bequest, Harold unjustly, and
contrary to his own Oath, did by force set the Crown upon his own Head, without
any precedent Election of the Clergy, Nobility, and People, as was required at
that time; since it was impossible for them to meet in so short a time; for
King Edward dying on the Eve of Epiphany, was buried on Twelfth day, and on the
same day Harold took upon himself the Crown, by the consent of some of the
Bishops and Nobility of his Faction, then at London; so that he was certainly
no better than an Usurper: and therefore by the Conquest of Harold and his
party, your Conqueror could acquire no right upon the free People of England,
since they never gave their consents to place Harold on the Throne; and
consequently K. William could have no just cause of making a conquest upon the
whole Nation, since neither did he ever in all his Reign (as I can find) call a
common Council of the Kingdom to recognize, or confirm his Title; and though it
is true, Harold proving a Valiant and Popular Prince, got the good will of the
common People, by diverse Acts of Grace, (which he had lost by his violent
taking the Crown while Edgar Atheling the only remaining Male Heir of the Saxon
Race was in being;) and found very many who were willing to fight for him, not
only against the King of Norway, who had a little before Invaded the Kingdom,
but also against Duke William; yet all those in his Army could amount to
nothing near the whole Kingdom, who never contributed to the War by any public
Vote, or Tax; and therefore did not countenance it by giving Money, or raising
of Men as you suppose; so that D. William could not pretend a right of making
War against any body, but only Harold and his Accomplices; but as for the
Testamentary Donation of Edward the Confessor, though you make so light of it,
yet Ingulph says expressly, P. 68. Edit. Oxon.
that Edward the Confessor some time before his Death, sent Robert Archbishop
of Canterbury as his Ambassador to D. William to let him know That he had
designed him his Successor, not only by Right of Kindred, but by the merit of
his Virtue; and that after this Harold, coming into Normandy, promised upon
Oath to assist him in it; and Will. Malmesbury says also, that Edward the
Father of Edgar Atheling, P. 93.
dying almost as soon as he came into England, K. Edward his Cozen being dead,
gave the Succession of this Kingdom to William Duke of Normandy; with whom also
agree, Florence of Worcester, and William of Poi^tou, and all the rest of the
Historians of that Age, as well English as Normans: nor do I know any of them
except Simeon of Durham, and Roger Hoveden, who make Harold to have been
appointed Successor by K. Edward, or to have been so much as solemnly Crowned
by the Archbishop of York.

But I confess your main objection is still to be answered, viz. what precedent
Right Duke W^lliam could have to the Crown of England by this Testament of King
Edward; since it was then either an Elective, or else an Hereditary Kingdom;
and so this Donation could confer no right on this Duke in Prejudice of the
Peoples right to Elect; or else of the next Heir to succeed? In answer to which
I must tell you that which perhaps you may have never considered, that the
Crown was then neither properly Elective nor Successive, but a mixture of both.


M. That seems a kind of a Paradox, and what I never heard before, pray explain
your self, for I do not understand how it could be.


F. Why then I will tell you, the Crown of England in those times, was very
like what the Crowns of Denmark and Sweden were not long since, and as the
Empire is at this day; in which though the Estates or Diet might choose whom they
pleased for King or Emperor, yet they still kept to the same Family or Line, as
long as there were any Males left of i^, fit to succeed; which custom often
gave the King in Being a power, which by degrees came to be looked upon as a
kind of Right, either upon his Death Bed, or else at any time before, to
nominate one of his Sons, or near Kinsmen to be his Successors, by his last
Will or Testament: especially if he had no Sons of his own, as happened in the
case of King Edward the Confessor; now this nomination, though it did not alone
confer a right to the Crown, yet it made the person so named the fairest
candidate for it; and was such a recommendation to the Estate^, or great
Council of the Kingdom, as they never passed, by or denied, as I can ever find
by the best inquiry I have made; and for proof of this, I shall appeal to the
Testament of K. Alfred, as you will find it Printed from an Ancient Manuscript,
in the second Appendix to his Life, in Latin, published at Oxford. Which begins
thus. Ego Alfredus Divino munere, labor, ac Studio Athelredi Archiepiscopi,
nec non totius Westsaxoniae Nobilitatis consensu, pariter and assensu,
occidentalium Saxonum Rex; quos in Testimonium meae ultimae voluntatis
complementi, ut sint advocati in disponendis pro salute animae meae regali
electione, confirmo, tam de haereditate, quam Deus at Principes, cum senioribus
Populi misericorditer ac benign dederunt; quam de haereditate quam Pater meus
Aethelwulfus Rex nobis tribus fratribus delegavit, viz. Aethelbaldo,
Aethelredo, and mihi; ita, quod qui nostrum diutius foret superstes, ille
totius Regni dominio congauderet, etc. From whence you may collect first, that
though this King in the very beginning of his Testament ascribes his obtaining
the Crown, not to any Hereditary Right, but the consent, and assent of the
Nobility of West-Saxony; yet he also here mentions the entail of the Crown by
his Fathers Will, upon his two Elder Brothers, and himself successively, before
any of his Elder Brother's Sons, who were living at the time of the making of
this Testament of K. Alfred's, as appears by the Will it self, in which they
are expressly mentioned: now how could this be that he was King, as well by the
consent or election of the West Saxon Nobility, as by his Father's Will, unless
both these had been required to make him so? Also Will. of Malmesbury tells us
of K. Athelstan, Lib. II cap. 6.
the Grandson of K. Alfred, that, Iussu Patris in Testamento, Aethelstanus in
Regem est acclamatus: but in the beginning of this chapter, he also tells us,
that Aethelstanus electus apud Regiam aulam quae vocatur Kingston Coronatus
est, quamvis quidem Alfredus cum factiosis suis obviare tentasset; upon that
pretense that Athelstan was a Bastard: so that you may see, that his Fathers
Testament was not sufficient without the election of the Wittema Gemot; who
preferred him, though perhaps Illegitimate, before this Alfred who was set up
against him. And I doubt not, if more of the Testaments of the English Saxon
Kings were now extant, that I could give you more instances of this Nature. But
that the person so nominated, and elected, though not the nearest always of
blood, claimed jure haereditario, is also as certain, since Bracton expressly
tells us, That haereditamentum, or inheritance is not derived ab Haerede, but
heir from the Inheritance; and that inheritance is the Succession to all the
right which the Predecessor had; with whom also the Civil Law agrees, Haeredis
significatione omnes significare successores credendum est, etsi verbis non
sint expressi. Nor did this custom of thus recommending a Successor prevail in
England alone in those times, but also was in use among the French Kings of the
Race of Charlemain, wherein the last will or Adoption of the King, in being
confirmed by the Election or Recognition of the Estates of France, gave a
sufficient Title to a Prince of the Blood Royal, though not Legitimate, nor the
next heir by blood, to succeed; but the Will of the Prince was not alone
sufficient; as Monsiour M^ze^a^ has very well observed in his Chronological
Abridgement of the History of France, in the Reign of King Clotair the second.

So that to conclude; if Duke William of Normandy was thus adopted; named by K.
Edward the Confessor for his Successor, by his last Will and Testament; and
this had been without any blows confirmed by the Council of the Kingdom, by a
subsequent Election, and Coronation, and that he had received the Oaths and
Recognitions of the English Subjects, which always followed that solemnity, I
doubt not but he would have had as good a Title to the Crown, as any of the
Kings of the English Saxon Line; I am sure a much better than Harold, who I am
not satisfied came in either by the adoption of K, Edward, or by the Election
of the People, and therefore Duke William had a good Title against him as an
Usurper; and Conquering him, and those of his party in the Battle, and being
thereupon Elected, and Recognized, and Crowned by the general consent both of
the English, and Normans; I cannot see why his obtaining the Crown against
Harold by force of Arms, should extinguish his former right, and create a new
Title by Conquest, which he never claimed by; or suppose his renouncing the
Confessors Will, which gave him a right to be Elected King, according to the
custom of those times; and to demand the Crown from an Usurper, who had
solemnly sworn to assist him in this Right. But since you so positively affirm,
that no Author whatever mentions D. William's Election; I doubt not but to show
it you from more than one Author, and those of, or near those very times.

I shall in the first place give the account that a short History, Printed at
the end of Mr. Taylor's History of Gavel-kind, from an Ancient Msc. in the
Bodlia^ Library, gives us of this affair, and who seems to be an Author that
lived very near those times. Londoniam Convenientibus Francis, and Anglis (ad
nativitatem Domini) illisque omnibus concedentibus, coronam totius Angliae, and
Dominationem suscepit: and William of Poictou, this Kings Chaplain in his
History relates it thus; Die ordinationi decreto locutus ad Anglos condecenti
sermon Eboraci Archiepiscopus sapiens, bonus, eloquens, an consentirent eum
sibi Dominum Coronari inquisivit; protestati sunt hilarem consensum universi
minime haesitantes, ac si caelitus una mente data, unaqu; voci; Anglorum quam
facillime Normanni consonuerunt sermocinato apud eos, ac sententiam
praecunctatoriam Constantini Praesule, sic electum consecravit Archiepiscopus,
imposuit ei diadema, etc.

So likewise Ordoricus Vitalis, a Norman Author, alive at the same time relates
it thus. Lib. III. pa. 503.
Die natalis Domini Angli Londoniae ad ordinandum Regem convenerunt, and
G^lielmum Ducem Normannorum in Regem Anglorum consecravit Archiepiscopus, etc.
and goes on to relate the manner how, just as the nameless English Author had
done before; but then agrees with William of Poictou in all the rest. Dum
Aldredus Praesul Alloqueretur Anglos, and Godofredus Constantiniensis
Normannos, an concederent Gulielmum Regnare super se, and Vniversi consensum
hilarem protestarentur una voce non unius Linguae locutione; with whom also
agrees Willielmus Gemmenicensis, P. 288.
in the History of the Dukes of Normandy, who was also an Author that lived
in, or very near the times of this King: his words are; Anno incarnat. Domini,
ab omnibus tam Normannorum, quam Anglorum proceribus Rex est electus, and sacro
oleo ab Episcop^^ R^gni delibutus, atque regal ^^^demate Coronatus?

So that you see here are no less than four Ancient Authors, who all agree upon
the solemn Election of King William; and yet your Dr. has the confidence to
tell us, that Mr. Petye only endeavors to prove this El^ction of King William
out of some fragments of Authors, who lived at some distance of time from his
coming over hither.


M. I confess you have showed me more for this mixed slight of K William's by
Testament, and Succession; than ever I knew before; But you had dealt more
fairly, B. A. A. p 206.
if you had also added what Dr. B. takes notice of our of Guli^^^^^
Pictaviensis concerning King William's being advanced to the Crown; for
immediately after the mention of him being Crowned, he conludes thus, (...)
Liberi and ^^poles justa (...) Anglle terrae, quam haereditaria delegatione
Sacraments Anglorum firmata, and Jure Belli ipse possedit. So that here you
see he grounds a Title to Him, and his postaerity, not only on his Hereditary,
but the Oaths of the English, and the Right of War; but as for the word Electus
made use of by those Ancient Authors, Dei B. has made it very plain in his
History of the Succession of the Crown of England, as also in his Glossary,
that this word does not there signify Elected, but Recognized, and
Acknowledged, that such a one is to be King. Yet I very much doubt whether this
could be properly termed an Election or not, since the same Historians also
tell us, that part of K. William's Army kept Guard without the Church door,
during his Coronation, by this good token, that when they heard so great a
shout given upon the Peoples declaring their Assents: the Soldiers suspecting
some Treason, set Fire to the Houses; so that I cannot see how that could be
properly an Election, when the People durst not refuse: and I know that even at
this day, the King is shown to the People on all the four sides of the Scaffold
on which he is Crowned, and their consent is formally asked, whether they will
have this Man to be their King; yet no man will say that their Acclamations and
crying, yea, yea, will make our Kings Elective, any more than it could do it in
the Case of K. William, who had a Title by Conquest precedent to this pr^tended
Election; though I grant this custom may have been in use ever fined this
Coronation of the Conqueror.

But that King William claimed indeed by Conquest, and by no other Title, let
us not mind his specious colorable pretenses, but his actions, which are the
best Interpreters of the Thoughts of Princes; and we shall find that thorough
all his Reign, he Governed this Kingdom as a Conqueror; and this I shall prove
by making good the three Instances I have already given, of his great
alterations of the Property, Laws, and Civil Liberties of the People of this
Nation: to begin with the first of these.

For the proof of which, I shall make use of the Authority of Gervace of
Ti^bury, a considerable Officer in the Exchequer, B. A. P. p. 33.
in the time of Henry the Second, and who received his information from Henry
of Blo^s Bishop of Winchester, and Grandchild to the Conq^eror, who is most
full to that purpose, which he thus delivers in the Manuscript Treatise, called
the black book of the Exchequer; which I shall read to you according to the
Learned Dr. B's Translation of it. After the Conquest of the Kingdom, and the
just subversion of the Rebels, when the King himself, and his great men, had
viewed and surveyed their new acquests* there was a strict enquiry made who
they were, which had fought against the King, and secured themselves by Flight;
from these and the Heirs of such as were slain in the Field, all hopes of
possessing either Lands or Rents were cut off, for they counted it a great
favor to have their Lives given them; But such as were called and solicited
to fight against King William, and did not, if by an humble submission they
could gain the Favor of their Lords and Masters, they then had the liberty of
possessing somewhat in their own persons, but without any right of leaving it
to their Posterity, their Children enjoying it only at the Will of their Lords;
to whom when they became unacceptable, they were every way outed of their
Estates, neither would any restore what they had taken away.

And when the miserable Natives represented their Grievances publicly to the
King, informing him how they were spoiled of their Fortunes, and that without
redress, they must be forced to pass into other Countries. At length upon
consultation, it was ordered, that what they could obtain of their Lords by way
of Desert or Lawful Bargain, they should hold by ^unqestionable Right; but
should not claim any thing from the time the Nation was Conquered, under the
Title of Succession or Descent; upon what great consideration this was done, is
manifest (says Gervac^;) for they being obliged to compliance and obedience, to
purchase their Lords ^avour, therefore whoever of the Conquered Nation
Possessed Lands, etc. obtained them not as if they were their Right by
Succession or Inheritance, but as a reward of their service, or by some
intervening agreement.

This alone were sufficient, coming from an Author of such Credit, and living
so very near the time: but besides his, I shall give you the Authority of
diverse other Authors to the same purpose, and particularly Ordericus Vitalis
(whom you but now cited) tells us how William the first circumvented the two
great Earls of More^a; and that after Edwin was slain* and Morcar imprisoned,
then King William began to show himself, and gave his Assistants the best, and
most considerable Counties in England and made Rich Colonels and Captains of
very mean Normans: and that he thus disposed of whole Counties to diverse great
men, appears by Domesday Book, wherein it is seen that the whole County of
Chester was given by the Conqueror to ^upus a Norman; so likewise the greatest
part of Shropshire was given to Mon^gomery.

And further he took away from the English their Estates, and gave them to his
Normans; and this he did from his first coming in; for Fitz-Osbern was made
Earl of Arundel and Hereford, at his first coming in, and was Lord of Bettivil
in Normandy, and established the Laws of that Town at Hereford; Alan Earl of
B^itain, had all Earl Edwin's Lands given to him at the Seige of York, about
three years after his arrival; to these I may add the 795 Manors Robert Earl
of Mor^ton in Normandy and Cornwall in England, had given to him by K. William;
so likewise ^lan Earl of Britain and Richmond 442 Manors, and Ieffery Bishop
of Constance had 280 Mann^rs given him by the Conqueror, besides many other
Lands of the Saxon, Earls, Thains, etc. were all given to the Normans, who took
their Title from King William's Conquering Sword.

So that I think it is very evident that this King had distributed most of the
Lands of the Nation to his Norman's, long before the survey was begun, and by
that infallible Record it is clear, that he gave near all the Lands of the
Nation to his followers, and very little or none to the English, who held that
they had his new Title, and new services from the Conqueror or his great Lords,
or became Tenants to, or Drudges upon their own Lands, as we heard before from
Bracton and Fleta. Here is enough to satisfy any unbyassed person, that the
Conqueror did not lay by his Sword after the Battle of Hastings.


F. In answer to what you have now said, concerning your Conquerors taking away
the Lands of a great many of the English Nobility and Gentry, it is so apparent
in matter of Fact, that it were a high piece of impudence to go about to deny
it; yet will it not therefore follow, that what he thus disposed of were almost
all the Lands of England, as I shall show, you by and by; but in the mean time
to let you see that I am a fair adversary, I will at present suppose, that K.
William took away all the Lands from the former owners, and gave them to his
followers, who helped him in his Conquest; but these were not only the Normans
his Subjects, but French, Flemmings, Anjovins, Britains, Poictovins, and People
of other Nations, who made up a great part of his Army, and came in with him
under great and considerable men their Leaders, and whom your Dr. tells us came
not out of sta^k love and kindness, B. A. P. p. 35.
without any consideration of sharing with, and under him in the Conquest. Now
I desire to know by what Law or Act of theirs, they thus constituted K. William
an Absolute Monarch, over them and their Descendants. For as for the Normans
though they were (it is true) his subjects; yet they enjoyed diverse considerable
Rights and Privileges at home, and surely never intended to come over hither,
to make themselves as great Slaves as the People, they had Conquered; much less
can it be supposed of these of other Nations, who were not subjects to Duke
William before he was made King; nor can I see how their taking of Lands from
Him could make him become an Absolute and Irresistible Monarch over them, and
their Descendants; so that if upon your supposition, all the owners of Lands in
England, at this day, hold their Estates either by descent or purchase from
those Ancient Normans, or French Proprietors they must also succeed to the same
Liberties and Privileges, as those under whom they claim, did formerly enjoy.
But before I conclude, I cannot but take notice of what you have said, against
my proofs of the formal election of King William, for if the keeping of a guard
about the place where the King is Elected and Crowned, should void the freedom
of the Election; I doubt whether the election of any elective Kings, or
Monarchs, no not of the German Emperor himself would hold goods as for the
other reason, that they could not choose but ^lect him that is yet m^re trivial,
for there being no more than one tha^ stood to be chosen, they could indeed
choose no other; but if not having a Liberty to refuse, must void the Right of
Election, pray consider (as I told you before*) whether there be any Canonical
Election of Bishops in the Church of England at this day: therefore I doubt not
but that King William I. was as lawfully and freely elected as K. Edward the
Confessor, his Predecessor, whom all Authors agree to have had no other Title;
and Willi^lmus Gemeticensis in the place I now cited, tells us, he was Elected
King as well of the Norman, as English Nobles: and if the custom had not ^^en
^^cen to El^^^ the King before he was Crowned; it is not likely tha^ your
Conqueror would have introduced a new custom to the prejudice of his pretended
right by Conquest; but indeed there is not only more cogent argument to prove
that the Crown was formerly elective, than ^he constant usage (as you your self
confess) ever since your pre^ended Conquest to this day* of asking the People
whether they are content to have such a one for their King* As for your Doctors
quotation out of William of ^oicto^, pray take notice that he places your
Conquerors* Hereditary bequest together with the Oaths of the English as his
best Title, and the right of War last, by which this Author did not understand
a Conquest of the People of England, but his prevailing against Harold*


M. I do own with the learned Dr. B. that the Descendants of those ancient.
Norman and Fre^^h Earls and Ba^ons* than came in with the Conqueror and their
Posterity afterward, seeing the Yoke of feud^l Tenures, and other prerogatives
this King and His Descendants exercised over them to press as hard upon them,
as the Ancient English were, those that made such a disturbance for their Right
and Liberties in the Reigns of H. John, and Henry the third; and though I grant
their Ancestors were never conquered, and consequently could not be obliged to
him as to a Conqueror, (...) may for all this maintain* that they and their
Posterity were as much bound to an Absolute Subjection without any resistance,
a^ the English whom they conquered; for they were either his own Subjects in
A^^mand^* before his coming o^e^ hither or else, were such Volunteers who
followed him but of hopes of Estates, and Br^ferment was for all those of the
former (...), and (...) were his subjects before, they were tied, not only by
their (...) Oaths of a Regiance, which they had taken (in Normandy, but, were
also bound by the same obligation of Non resistance, as all other subjects must
always be, both in that, and all other Governments; to all which was added
another Obligation in respect of those who were not his subjects before his
entrance, since this whole Kingdom was by Conquest the Conque^ors* as appears
in that he bestowed the (...) part of (...) his Followe^^ (whose blood runs at
this day in the Veins of most of our English Gen^ry and Nobility*) as a reward
for their Service and Assistance* though he might have some part to the English
Natives and their Heirs, yet so a^ that he altered the Tenure, and made it
descend with such burdens, as he pleased to lay upon them; so that as well ^his
own Countrymen Normans, as those of all other Nations, who thus became Subjects
and Feudataries to him for all the Lands they possessed in England, since he
was the only Directus Dominus or Lord Paramount of the whole Kingdom; were also
his Vassals and Subjects; for in case of Treason and Rebellion, or Death
without Heir, those Lands were to return to him again* and to be a^ his
dispossal; so that all subjects as well Normans as other Foreigners, who had
Lands granted to them by the Conqueror, thus became his homines Ligei,
Liegemen, and did owe Faith and true Allegiance to him, as their Supreme and
Liege Lord, as the King is called in several Statutes, and the definition of
Liegeancy is set down to the grand Customary of Normandy, Ligeantia est ex qua
domino tementur vasalli sui, etc, that is, Liegeancy is an obligation upon all
subjects, to take part with their Liege Lord against all men living, to aid and
assist him with their Bodies and Goods, and with their advice and power, (...)
to lift up their hands against him, nor to support in any wise those who oppose
him; and though I grant that the Supreme or Liege Lord, is likewise bound to
govern and defend his Liege People, according to the Rights, Customs, and Laws
of the Country; yet is he not liable to resistance, much less forfeiture if he
neglect it; For though if Subjects break their Covenants, and prove disloyal, all
their Lands and other Rights are forfeited to the King; yea if the King, or
Supreme Lord break his Oa^^^ notwithstanding his sailing therein, neither his
Crown, nor any Rights belonging to his Royal Dignity are thereby ^orfei^ed: the
reason of this inequality is, because the King gave Laws to the people, but the
People did not give Laws to him, so that it is plain, that however you (...)
the Conquerors entrance, whether by the Sword, or (to avoid the Envy of the
Title of a Conqueror) by a voluntary submission of the English Nation to him,
as to their Sovereign, the conclusion cannot vary, because the duty of
Non-resistance arises from their own Act, they taking an Oath of Allegiance, to
be, his True and Loyal Subjects; with which Oath Resistance can by no means
consist.


F. I must beg your pardon if I cannot take what you have now said, for a
satisfactory answer, since I doubt it will do you little service, whether you
make use of it either in respect of the Normans, or other Foreigners; for as to
the so^m^r, it appears from the Ancient Constitution of Normandy, that the Duke
was no absolute Monarch there; but Feuda^ary to the King of France; and farther
could make no Laws, nor impose Taxes in Normandy, without the consent of the
Estates of that Duchy, as appears by the Title to the Latin Customs of
Normandy, which are at the End of the Old French Edition of the Constumiers de
Normandy; Printed at R^a^, 1515. The Title of which is thu^, Iura and
Consuetudines Ducatus No^maniae. The Prologue to which, begins thus. Quoniam
Leges, and Instituta quae Normanorum Principes, non sint magna provisionis
Industria Praelatorum, Comitum, and Baronum, nec non and Caeterorum virorum
prudentum consilio, and Assensu ad salutem humani foederis Statuerunt. Whereby
it is apparent, that the Ancient Laws of Normandy were made by the Advice and
Consent of the Estates, for the Preservation of that humane Covenant they had
formerly made with their first Duke, Rollo, when he had that Duchy granted him
by the King of France; and whoever will consult the ancient Histories and Laws
of that Duchy will find the^^ Dukes of Normandy no more absolute Monarchs
there, than the Kings of Norway, from whence they came; so that if their Duke
should have gone about to take away their Estates, or inslave the Persons of
the Norman Nobility, and People, he might justly have been resisted by them;
and therefore their taking Lands from K. William after his pretended Conquest
here, must either have conferred an Estate upon them according to the Laws of
England or Normandy; not according to the former; for you assert that Tenures
in Capite, and Knight's service, were generally introduced by his coming; so
that if they were by the Normans Law, (as you suppose) they were then no
farther subjects to their Duke, by that Tenure, when made King of England, than
they were whilst he was Duke of Normandy, viz. only according to the Laws and
Customs by which they held these Estates: so that if their Duke was not
irresistible by them in case of Tyranny in his own Country, so he was also here
by the same reason; since whatever he did in respect of the English, he could
acquire no new right over them.

And that an Oath of Homage alone, does not make the Person to whom it is taken
irresistible, if he makes an unjust War upon his Vassals, appears by the Dukes
of Normandy themselves, who though they held that Duchy by Homage to the King of
France, and took the same Oath to him, upon every Kings Accession to the Crown,
of being his Liegeman; and to be True and Faithful to his Lord the King of
France, for the said Duchy of Normandy: yet might the Dukes of Normandy
without any Imputation of Rebellion have resisted the King of France, in case
he made an unjust War upon them: nor were ever the Dukes of Normandy accused of
Rebellion for so doing, in all the Wars that they had with the Kings of France;
And therefore the holding of an Estate by Homage, does not suppose that the
Lord of whom it is held was irresistible, nor does the word of Allegiance
signify any more than that duty which the Liegemen, by the Old Norman Law,
owed to their Supreme Lord of whom they held their Lands; and therefore when
the King or Supreme Lord of the Fee did not perform his part of the Contract,
but went about to turn them out of their Estates, or to invade any of their
just rights by force, it was usual for the Tenants to defy the Lords, and
renounce their Homage to them; Vi. Spelman's Glossary verbo diffidare. P. 388.
for which they used the Barbarous Latin word diffidare, in French to defy,
that is, to renounce that Faith and Allegiance, which before they owed them;
and the supreme Lords also oftentimes defied their Tenants, thus Mat. Paris
tells in Anno 1233. that K. Henry the Third by the Counsel of the Bishop of
Winchester, defied Richard the Earl Marshall: and the year following we find
the Earl justifying himself in this manner, Ibid. P. 398.
(being then in Ireland;) First I answer, that I never acted Treasonably
against the King; for he has unjustly spoiled me of my Office of Marshall,
without the Judgment of my Peers, and has Proclaimed me banished thorough all
England, he has burnt my Houses, destroyed my Lands, etc. he has more than once
defied me, when I was always ready to stand to the Judgment of my Peers: from
which time (said he) I ceased to be the Kings Liegeman, and was absolved from
his Homage not by my self, but by him: and whereas you say, that though the King
or Supreme Lord cannot forfeit his Right, though he breaks his part of the
Compact, because of the inequality, which there is between a King, and a
Subject; then this Prerogative of Non-resistance does not belong to the King,
as he is Supreme Lord of the Land, but as he is King, and gives Law to the
Subjects; which may have some color of Truth in Absolute Monarchies, but was
of no Force, either in the Government of Normandy or England, where the Duke or
King without the consent of his Estates, never could alone make Laws; but as I
will not deny our Government to be a Monarchy, so it is as certain, that it is
limited in the very constitution, either by the Saxons or Normans, begin where
you please; and therefore my conclusion still holds good, that if the English
have now succeeded to those very Lands and Privileges, which the Normans
anciently enjoyed, then whatsoever Right or Liberty the English Proprietors of
Estates do at this day enjoy, they do not only hold them as the Successors and
Descendants of those Normans and Frenchmen but are also restored to them Iure
postliminii (as you Civilians Term it) since they never submitted themselves,
or took an Oath of Allegiance to King William, and his heirs, but only to
himself Personally, there being no such clause in any Oath of Allegiance, till
it was so ordained many ages after in the Reign of K. Henry the fourth; nor was
this Oath ever taken by our English Ancestors to K. William as to a Conqueror,
but the lawful Successor of K. Edward the Confessor; and K. Williams actual
taking away the Estates of a great many of the English Nobility and Gentry,
contrary to his own Oath, and without any just o^use, could no more give him a
right so to do, than if Henry the fourth, or Henry the seventh, both which came
to the Crown by the assistance of a Foreign force, should upon a pretense of
being Conquerors have governed by an Army, and so have taken away whose Estate
they pleased, and given them to their followers that came over with them.


M. I shall not dispute this matter with you any further, therefore pray
proceed to the other Point you took upon you to prove, that King William did
not take away so great a share of the Lands of England, as the Dr. and those of
our Opinion affirm.


F. I shall observe your commands, and therefore in the first place I desire
you to take notice, that according to the Doctors own showing your Conqueror
never took away the Lands of all the Bishops and Abbots of England, much less
those that belonged to Deans, and Chapters, or to private Churches, and if his
Nobles or Followers had unjustly dissie^ed any Bishop or Abbot of their
Estates, the King caused them to be restored again, as appears by many
Presidents of this kind, which are to be found in Ingulphus and Eadmerus: this
being premised, let us see in the next place what proportion the Lands
belonging to the Church did in those days bear to the rest of the Lands in
England; now we find in Sprot's Chronicle, as also from the old Legierbook,
cited by Mr. Seldom in his Titles of Honor, and particularly from that
Secretum Abbotis (formerly belonging to the Abbey of Glassenbury, and now in the
Library of the University of Oxon) that there were not long after your
Conquest, 60215 Knights fees in England, of which the Bishops Abbots and other
Churchmen then enjoyed 28015. When it is supposed this account was taken, then
it will follow that in the Reign of your Conqueror there were above 28000
Knights Fees* which belonged to the Church; and in these we do not any where
find that K. William dispossessed their Tenants of their Estates, most of which
were held in Fee under them, and those Tenants were great and powerful men in
their Countries; and hence we read in the ancient Records and Legier Books of
the Barons and Knights that held of diverse Bishops and great Abbots, P. 84.
several examples which you will find in Sir Henry Spellman. Title Baro: now it
is certain that King William could not turn all these men out of their Estates,
and give them to his followers without committing sacrilege, and invading the
Rights of the Church, which that King durst not commonly do; so that the utmost
that you can suppose he could do, was to take the forfeitures of all such
Tenants of the Church, who had taken part with King Harold, or had any ways
committed Treason against himself, which were far from the whole number of
them; so that here goes off at once almost a half of all the Lands held by
Knights service, which the King did never dispossess the ancient owners of: to
these may be also added all Tenants in ancient Demesne, all Tenants in Socage,
as also all Tenants in Gavel kind, which in those days made at least two thirds
of the Lands of Kent, which by the way was never conquered but surrendered upon
Terms, to ^are their ancient Customs and Tenures, as Mr. Cambden himself
acknowledges in his description of this County; besides what was held in other
Counties by the same Tenure, as you will find in Mr. Taylor's History of Gavel
kind: all which being not Tenures in chief by Knights Service, are not
Registered in Domesday book; nor does it appear, that the owners were ever
dispossessed of them; to which may also be added the Lands of those smaller
Thanes; or Officers of King Edward, whose names are found in Domesday book, who
held their Lands ratione officii.

To all these we may also add, all such Norman Noblemen and Gentlemen, who
having come into England in Edward the Confessors time, and having Honors and
Lands given them by him, had continued here ever since; and these were so
numerous, Vi. Leges Guliel^i.
that it was thought worth while by King William, to make a particular Law
concerning them, that they should partake of all the Customs, the Rights and
Privileges of Native Englishmen, and pay Scot and Lot as they did: of these
was the Earl of Mo^ton; besides many others whose names appear in Doomesday
book; and not only these men, but also diverse Cities and Towns held Lands of
King William by the same Rents and Services, as they had formerly paid in the
time of King Edward the Confessor, as Oxford for example. But to give an answer
to some of your instances, A. A. Vi. 92, 93.
as when you say that King William gave away whole Counties, as all Cheshire to
Hugh Lupus, and the greatest part of Shropshire to Roger de Montgomery, etc.

It is a great error to suppose that these Earls had all the Lands mentioned in
these Counties to dispose of at their Pleasure, and that they turned out all
the Old Prop^ietors, which it is certain they did not, as I could prove to you
by several instances of Ancient English Families who have held their Lands, and
enjoyed the same seats they had in the Conquerors time; so that you see there
is a great deal of difference between a grant of all the Land of a County, and
that of the whole County; what is meant by the former is plain, but as for the
latter it generally implies not any thing more than the Government of that
County. Thus whereas your Dr. would have it, that the greatest part of
Shropshire was given to Roger de Montgomery, Doomesday says, only that he had
the City of Shrewsbury, and totum Comitatum, and the whole County; But that is
soon explained by what follows, and totum Dominum quod Rex ipse tenebat; where
it is plain that by Dominium is meant no more than that power to govern it
which King Edward had, for otherwise the Grant of totum Comitatum, had been
sufficient.


M. I confess this is more than I ever heard, or considered before concerning
this matter, but you do not give me any positive proof that at the time when
Doomes day Book was made, there were any Englishmen who held Earldoms, or
Baronies, or other great Estates of the King, or any of his great Men; so that
what you have said hitherto, though it carry a great show of probability, yet is
no positive proof against the Doctors assertion.


F. I shall not go about to deny what William of Malmesbury, and Henry of
Huntington so positively affirm, that for sometime before the end of King
William's Reign, there was no Englishman, a Bishop, Abbot or Earl, in England;
yet does it not therefore follow, that it was thus thorough his whole Reign; or
if it were so, that it will therefore follows, that there were few Englishmen,
who, when Domesday Book was made, possessed any Lands in England: but that in
part of King William's Reign there were many English Earls and Barons appears
by above a dozen Charters cited by Sir William Dugdale, in the Saxon and Latin
Tongues, in his Monast. Anglic. which are either directed by K. William to all
his Earls, and Thains, or else in Latin, Omnibus Baronibus, Francigenis and
Anglis, or else Omnibus Baronibus and Fidelibus suis, Francis, and Anglis
salutem; the like Charters also appear of Henry J. and the Empress Maud his
Daughter; so that if Francigena and Francus signify a Frenchman, and Anglus
and Englishman, and if Fidelis does (as your Dr. would have it signify a
Tenant in Capite, then I think nothing is plainer than that there were, for
great part of King William's Reign, both Earls, Barons, and Tenants in Capite
of English Extraction.

But to come to particular persons, it will appear by the Saxon or English
names in Doomesday book, as also by several recitals therein, that there were
diverse English Noblemen or Gentlemen, who held Lands in diverse Counties of
England, at the time when that Survey was made; and for proof of this, since so
short a conversation as ours will not permit me to run into a long Bed-role of
names, I refer you to what the learned and ingenious Mr. Atwood in his Ius
Anglorum ab antiqua, P. 8. and deinde, ad P. 92.
has observed out of Doomesday book upon this subject, where though he has not
only gone thorough, but gone over Fifteen Counties of Thirty, that are surveyed
in that book, yet it will thereby sufficiently appear that your Dr. is much
mistaken, when he so positively affirms, that there were few or no Englishmen
that held Lands in England: but to give you a taste of this I shall run through
as many Counties as Mr. Atwood has given us the names of; To begin which
survey, where besides the Earl of Morton above mentioned, (who though he was a
Norman born, yet he was here before the entrance of the Norman Duke, and held
Estrehaw in Tenrige* Hundred in the time of King Edward) there was also Hugo de
Port, an Englishman who was a very great Proprietor, as may be found under this
Title in Doomesday book, Terra Hugonis de Port: many Manors he had; and as
thereby appears in Hampshire, he had at least two Manors, Cerdeford and
Eschetune, from his Ancestors before King William's entrance; and besides this
Gentleman, (and the Earl above mentioned,) there are no less than Ten or
Eleven, who as it appears either by their English Names, or else by this note
which so frequently occurs, Idem tenu^t T. R. E. i. e. tempore Edwardi Regis;
the like I may say for the other Counties there mentioned, as Hampshire in the
next place, where besides Ralph de Mortimer who had several Lands, T. R. E.
there are no less than above Thirty Freeholders more, who by their Saxon names
and want of Sir-Names seem to be English, diverse of whom held the same Thane
Lands, which themselves or their Fathers did in the time of King Edwards and
tho in Buckinghamshire and Barkshire, indeed there are but five or six, who
held the same Lands which they or their Ancestors possessed in the time of
their Conqueror; but yet in Wiltshire and Dorcetshire, there appears between
Twenty and Thirty English Proprietors, many of whom held whole Townships when
this Survey was made, in Sommersetshire, Devonshire, Staffordshire, Yorkshire
and Glostershire, their does appear in most of them a dozen or more English
Saxon names, who held whole Manors; it is true that in Nottinghamshire,
Linco^shire and Herefordshire, their appear fewest English names, and yet the
least of these have three a piece.

So much may suffice for Doomesday book; and I doubt not if any one will take
the pains to look over the Titles of the rest of the Counties, he may find
enough Instances of the like Nature, sufficient to prove that the English were
not wholly dispossessed of their Estates, at the end of K. William's Reign when
this Survey was made. Not to mention Northumberland, Westmor^land, and the
Bishopric of Durham, all which are omitted.

But that the number of English, which held the Lands in the time of King
William, the first and second, was very considerable, may appear by William of
Malmesburies relating how the Norman Lords then in England, would have
dethroned William Rufus and have set up his Brother Robert in his place, there
also shows the manner how that King prevented it. Rex Videns Normannos pend in
una Rabie conspiratos, Anglos probos, and fortes viros, qui adhuc residui ^rant
invitatoriis scriptis arcessit; quibus super injuriis suis Querimoniam faci^us,
bonasque Leges and Tributorum livamen Liberasque venationes po^licens,
fidelitati suae obligavit; where Residui must certainly be meant of the residue
of those English Gentry, whose Estates were still left; and herein Ordericus
Vitalis is more express, that King William as soon as he saw the contrivance
against him; Lanfrancum Archiepiscopum cum Suffraganeis praesulibus, and
Comites, Anglosque Naturales convocavit, and Conatus Adversariorum, and velle
suum expugnandi eos indicavit.


M. As for Mr. Atwood's Catalogue of English names from Doomesday book, I have
not yet examined them, and though I grant there are, may be diverse who held the
same Lands that they, or their Fathers did, yet they are but a few in respect
of the rest; nor are we certain that all these were Native English, and not
Normans who held Lands as well then, as before the Conquest; since the Normans,
and the English names were often the same; and as for the want of Sir-names,
that is no argument, that they must needs be English, since in those days very
few even of the Normans, but persons of Quality and Estates, had any, as Mr.
Cambden shows us in his remains; but as for those expressions in the Charters
of King William and his Sons, wherein the English; as well as the French Earls
and Barons, are mentioned; those Charters might be either made during the
three, or four first years of King William's Reign, when I grant the English
were not wholly dispossessed of their Estates, but that there were some of them
that still held Earldoms, and Baronies in their own right; but when the same
expressions occur after that time, B. A. A.
the word Angli, or Angligenae must be understood in another sense, though it
seems to be put in opposition to Francis; son as by these last are to be
understood such French or Norman Barons, who had Estates in England as well as
in France, so by the former could be only mean^ such Frenchman, or Normans who
had their Estates in England only; Or else though French by Original, were
Englishmen by Birth, are here called Angli, and Angligenae, to distinguish them
from such French Barons as are above mentioned, o^ from such as were born in
Franc^s and for the truth of this I desire you would consult Dr. ^^'s learned
Glossary at the end of the Folio Edition of his answer to Mr. P. and his two
seconds, Tit. Angli and Angligenae, where he tells us, that these Angli and
Barons, Anglae mentioned in these Authors and Ancient Charters, were not
English but Normans, and those men of no mean or ordinary Ranks, but Earls or
Barons, for they could never have met in such numbers as were requisite for
them to do, to protect and defend King William Rufus, had not they been headed
by such, if they had either Power or Estates lest, that depended not upon the
Normans; and if you or any man can show me an English Saxon that was then
either E^^l or Baron, or had any share in the Government, or any that had
considerable Estates, that did not hold them of the Normans, or had at that
time any great Woods, Forests, or Privileges of Hunting in them, then I will
confess my self mistaken. As for W. Malmesbury, saying these were Angli probi
qui residui grant these were only the antiqui and Legitimi Barons, who as
Ordericus tells us came in with his Father* and settled themselves here after
the Conquest.

But as for your Quotations out of William of Malmesbury and Ordericus Vitalis
^^ncerning the English assisting King William Rufus against his Brother Robert,
B.A.P. p. 50.
by using the common bait of Liberty, ( viz.) promising that he would alleviate
the Rigid Laws of his Father, and give free Liberty of Hunting in his Forests;
it is true he thereupon raised an indifferent Army consisting chiefly of
English, who as Matthew Paris tells us, were no better than Mercenary or
Stipendary Souldi^^^, and who had either no Estates, or else had been turned
out of them before: so that this does not prove that they were men of any
Fortunes who thus assisted William Rufus.


F. As for what you have now said against the citations of the names out of
Doomesday book is not material, since if English names were then common to the
Normans and them, then the Norman names might be as well common to the English;
and then many of those in England, whom by their names we suppose to have been
Normans, might be Native Englishmen, and as for what you urge against the
express words of the Charters I have now cited, I think it is a downright
wresting of the words Francis and Anglis since no Author that I know of, but
your Dr. and is of that opinion. For that the word Franci or Fran^igenae does
signify such Frenchmen who held Baronies in England, is granted on all hands,
but how Angli must also signify Frenchmen, seems a Paradox to me; for how
could these Frenchmen or Normans, be termed Englishmen, only because they held
Estates here and not in Normandy? for if the having such and such Estates in
England, would have turned Frenchmen into Englishmen, there needed no such
distinction to have been made between French and English Barons in these
Charters; since according to your Doctors Notion, the French Barons could be no
other ways mentioned here, but as they had Estates here, and therefore could be
only writ to in that capacity, since as mere Frenchmen they had nothing to do
here; so that if this Epithete was so in respect of the Tenure of their Lands,
they would have been styled English Barons as well as the other; nor is your
other evasion more to the purpose, that by the Angli might be meant in the
Charters of Henry the I. such Norman or French Barons, who because they were
born in England, might therefore be called English; for who can believe that in
so small a time, as from the beginning of the Reign of King William the I. to
that of King Henry the I. which was but a little above 30 years, so many of the
Norman Nobility were dead, as should make it necessary to use this distinction
of French and English Barons; since by their Tenures they were both alike
English? and thus to make Angli signify Normans, is to confound and make all
words though never so plain; uncertain and equivocal: but that a residue of the
English. And as for what Ordericus says of the old Norman Barons, it would have
signified if you could have proved he had called them Englishmen, as he does
not; But if you carry it further to the time of the Empress Maud and King
Stephen, when all the Old Race of Normans were certainly dead, then there was
much less need of this distinction, when all that were born in England were
English alike, and therefore the word French could only extend to those few
Barons who being born in Normandy had Estates here.

But since you are forced to confess, that for the first four or five years of
King William the I. Reign, there were both English Earls and Barons, till the
King had by degrees rooted them out, there cannot be a better argument against
your pretended right of Conquest; since it is plain, King William could never
pretend to take away their Honors and Estates as a Conqueror; since by his
Coronation Oath he was sworn to restrain all Rapines, and unjust Judgments, and
that he would behave himself modestly toward his Subjects, and Treat both the
English and French with equal right; so that if he afterward took away the
estates of English Nobility or Gentry, it was either because they deserved it
by Rebelling against him, and then it was justly done, or else it was done
without any cause at all, but only to oppress and root out the English
Proprietors; and if so, such actions being contrary to his own claim from
Edward the Confessor, as also to his Coronation Oath, could no more give him
any such right to Rob or Spoil Men of their Estates without any just cause,
then it could give him a right to Rob the Churches and Monasteries of all the
Plate, Money and Jewels which he found in them, even to the very Chalaws and
Shrines, as Matthew Paris and other Authors tell us he did in the fourth year
of his Reign, when likewise (according as you your self set forth) he began to
show himself a Conqueror, or rather a Tyrant in the taking away the Estates of
the English without any just cause.

But however the Authors of that time do not make so great a Tyrant of your
Conqueror as the Doctor; for William of Poictou expressly tells us, who was
Chaplain to this King, P. 208.
concerning his taking away the Estates of the English, and giving them to the
Normans, that nulli tamen Gallo datum est quod Anglo cuiquam injuste fuerit
ablatum.

And Ordoricus Vitalis speaking of his dealing with the English it the
beginning of his Reign says expressly, Lib. IV. p. 505, 506.
neminem, nisi quem non damnare iniquum foret damnavit, and therefore Sir Henry
Spelman shows us in his Glossary out of an Ancient Manuscript, belonging to the
Family of Shurnborn in Norfolk; Title Dreuges p. 184.
That Edwin of Sharborn, and several others that were ejected out of their
Estates and Possessions, went to the Conqueror and told him, that never either
before, or in, or after the Conquest; they were against him the said King,
either by their Advice, or any other aid; but kept themselves peaceably and
quiet^y. And this they were ready to make out, which way soever the King
pleased to appoint, whereupon the said King ordered an Inquisition to be made
throughout all England, whether it were so or no; which was plainly proved;
therefore he presently commanded, that all those who so kept themselves
peaceably in manner aforesaid, as these had done, should be repossessed of all
their Estates and Inheritances, as fully, amply, and quietly, as ever they had
or held them before this Conquest. This is so plain an Authority, that it needs
no Comment.

I shall now conclude with a reply to what you have said, to evade the
Authorities of those Ancient Authors I have brought to prove, that in the
beginning of the Reign of King William the Second, there were many English
Gentlemen left of considerable Estates, which you and your Doctor would ^ain
make to be no better than mere mercenaries, which is expressly contrary to the
Authority of Mat. Paris, whom your sel^ have cited in this point, as also other
Authors who have writ of this matter, for Matthew has immediately before these
words, Videns igitur Rex Willielmus, omnes pene regni proceres una rabie
conspiratos, Anglos fortitudine and probitate insignes, faciles leges and
tributorum levamen, illis venationes Hibarasque promittendo sibi primo
devinxit, and almost make use of the very words that Malmesbury had done
before; now I desire you or your Dr. would satisfy me, how men who were
remarkable for their Valor and Honesty, and who were so considerable* as to be
sent for by Letters writ on purpose, and when they came should be promised
easier Laws, and free Huntings, and relaxation of Taxes, all which are
privileges which belong to men of Estates, could be mean Soldiers of Fortune?
And to make it plain that they were not the Kings, but their own Woods they
were to Hunt in, Roger Hoveden speaking of this very matter tells us, and
concessit omnibus sylvas suas, and venationem. Sed quicquid promisit parvo
tempore custodivit, Angli tum fideliter ^um juvabant: but that he did not keep
his promise as to hunting, as well as other things, appears by a passage in
Eadmerus where he gives us as an example of K. William Rufus harsh nature, that
about fifty men of the ancient English Gentry, who seemed to please themselves
in those days, with some remains of Riches, were taken and accused, that they
had killed the Kings Deer; and having for this undergone the Trial of Fire and
Water, he was in a great Rage about it, which is sufficient to show you, that
there were at this time many English Gentlemen left, of sufficient Estates to
use Hunting, either in their own or the Kings Woods. As for what you urge
farther against Mr. A's instances out of Doomesday Book are not very
considerable, since it is only an exception against the names of persons there
mentioned, that they were not Native English, but Normans who either were born,
or had Lands in England, or else had the same names with the English, both
which are gratis dicta; for Doomesday book plainly proves, either that they or
their Ancestors were here before your Conquest, or else their names being
wholly English Saxon, it lies upon your side to prove that they were Frenchmen
or Normans by Original, which I believe is more than you or your Dr. is able to
do.


M. I shall not say any further about Doomesday book, until I have either
examined it my self, or can procure it to be done by some I can trust; but in
the mean time, as for what you say concerning Edwin of Sharborn the Learned Dr.
has so confuted this Story, B. A. P. p. 25, 26. Fol. 118. Coll. out of the
Book of the Family of Sharborr.
in his answer to Mr. P. that notwithstanding some learned and great men have
given too much credit to it, I think it will appear to have been altogether
false; and though Sir William Dugdale in the first Tome of his Barronage, has
this story otherwise, and says, that notwithstanding the Kings Mandate, all he
could get was to become Tenant to Warren, and William de Albius of part of his
own Land, under certain services; and he is there called Edwin the Dane, and
this (if any) is most likely to be true, being taken out of the Book sometime
belonging to the Family of the Sharborns. Here we see he applied himself to
William, but got not the Propriety of his Estate; what he obtained was but to
hold part of it from others; and this was then a common practice, as Bracton
and Fleta two of our most ancient Lawyers, and one of them at least a Judge do
inform us. That are the time of the Conquest, there were Freemen that held
their Possessions by free Services and free Customs, and when they were thrown
out of them by powerful men, afterward returning to them, received their own,
and the very same Tenements or Possessions to hold in Villenage by performing
servile works, but such as were certain and nominated; to this may be added,
what Mat. Paris says, that King William gave liberally to such as were with him
in the Battle of Hastings, when he Conquered England; and that little which was
left, he put under the Yoke of perpetual Servitude; yet further as to this
particular Report of Sharaborn, there could be no such thing, for his name is
not to be found as any Proprietor in Norfolk, in Sharnborn, in Doomesday-book;
and the owners of Sharnborn, which are there only to be found, are William de
Warrenna (from whom this Story says it was restored to Edwin) Odo Bishop of
Bajeux, Benerius Arbalistarius, and William de Pertenai, whence it is evident,
that Warren and others were possessed of these Lands in the 20 of the
Conqueror, not long before he died, and no Edwin to be found as Proprietor of
any of them, or other Lands; nor is the name of William de Albeni, or William
Pincerna to be found as a Proprietor in Norfolk, or in Doomesday, though this
Manuscript of the Family of Sharnborn says, he had that Village and several
Towns thereabouts, given him by the Conqueror, by which it appears that this
Report is groundless.


F. I cannot blame you if you do what you can to evade this testimony from
Sharnborn's Book, which gives so exact an account of the Original of those
Tenants, Glossary Title Drenches.
who held of the King, as Sir H. Spelman tells us per servitium Dreugarii, and
such Tennants were called Dreuches or Dreuges, as this Book of Sharnborn tells
us; but though it is true, as this Book it self sets forth, Edwin of Sharnborn
was never restored to all the Lands he held before the Conquest; yet it is
plain that he had the Kings Mandate for his restitution, and if he could not
obtain, it, by reason of the great power of the present possessors, yet that is
no argument against his Right, or King William's Intention to restore him,
since Ingulph tells us, that Ivo Talboi seized the Cell of Spalding, Hist. p.
71.72.95. Edit. Oxon.
and Diverse Lands belonging to the Monastery of Cr^yland, and kept them by
force, notwithstand- a solemn hearing before the King and Council: and if a
great man could do this with the Lands of the Church, It is no wonder that so
powerful a person as Earl Warren, could by his power, or perhaps by the
connivance of K. William himself, keep another Man's Estate, and make him
contented with such a share as he would allow him, when he found he could have
no other remedy against those that thus unjustly detained it.

But though in the beginning of your Discourse, you seem to allow a part of the
Story, as it is related in Sharnborn's Manuscript, and produce the Testimony of
Bracton and Fleta, to prove that diverse Ancient English Proprietors, who being
thrown^out of their Estates, by powerful men, presently after the Conquest,
were ^ain to take them again upon performing of Villain-Services, though they
themselves remained free men; but your Dr. from whom you borrow this, is very
much out in his application of those passages he cites; for neither of those
Authors do affirm this of all owners of Lands whatsoever, but only there to
give us the Original of Soccage Tennants on the Kings Demeasnes, as appears by
Bracton's Title to that Chapter, from whence the Dr. cites this passage, which
is, de diversis conditionibus personarum tenentium in dominicis Domini Regis,
and the first words of this chapter make it yet plainer, beginning thus, in
Dominico Domini Regis plura sunt genera hominum, sunt enim ibi servi sive
Nativi, ante Conquestum, in Conquestu, and post Conquestum; and under these
last ranges the persons you mentioned; but Fleta is more exact in his Chapter
de Sokemannis, where he tells us, that these men were Tenants of the Kings
Ancient Manors in Demeasne; and quia hujusmodi cultores Regis dignoscuntur,
provisa fuit quies, n^ sectas facerent ad Comitatum, vel hundredum tamen pro
terra, quorum congregationem tune socam appellarunt hinc est quod Sokemanni
hodie dicuntur esse; So that though King William might permit his Ancient Tenants
to be thus outed of their Estates they held in his own Demeasnes, yet does it
not therefore follow, that he took away the Estates of the Ancient Owners, all
over England, of whatsoever Tenure they were, or of whomsoever held. But as for
your quotation out of Mat. Paris it proves no more than what I readily grant,
that King William after his return out of Normandy liberally rewarded his
Followers with the Estates of the English, which might he only of such as
fought against him at the Battle of Hastings; and as for that little which was
left them, which he says, was put under the Yoke of a perpetual servitude, he
means no more by this expression, than that new Tenure of Knights service which
King William imposed upon them, as this Author in the very next leaf, speaking
of the Lands of the Bishoprics and Abbeys, which were held before free from
all secular servitude, sub servitute statuit Militari, and therefore you seem
to contradict your self when contrary to your own Author Sir William Dugdale,
you deny the truth of any part of the Story, because that in Doomesday book the
name of Edwin of Sharnborn is not to be found, and that William de Albeni is
not named amongst the owners of that Manor, which is not material, since this
William might obtain a share therein after this Survey was made; I. A. A. p.
103.
and as for Sharnborn himself, his not being there mentioned is no argument
that he had no Lands within that Manor, or the other that is mentioned in that
Narrative; since oftentimes the chief Lords of the Fee are only mentioned in
Doomesday book, though all the Proprietors under them are not particularly named,
but it is in vain to discourse any longer with you upon the Subject of your
Conquerors taking away the Lands of English owners; I have given you my
opinion, and the reasons against it, and if you are not of my mind I cannot
help it, therefore pray go on to your next head, and show me by sufficient
Authorities, that King William as a Conqueror altered all the Laws, and Customs
of this Kingdom.


M. I will not undertake to prove that he altered all the Laws of England, and
brought in quite new ones, yet that he did so in great part, and that by his
sole Authority, I think I can prove by sufficient Testimonies; and therefore I
shall begin with that of Eadmer, a Monk of Canterbury, a companion of
Archbishop Lanfranc's who tells us in his History that William designing to
establish in England those Usages and Laws, Hist. Nov. Fol. 6. n. 10.20, 30.
B.A.P. p. 32.
which his Ancestors and he observed in Normandy, made such persons Bishops,
Abbots, and other Principal men, through the whole Nation, who could not be
thought so unworthy, as to be guilty of any reluctance, and disobedience to
them; knowing by whom, and to what they were raised; all Divine and Humane
things he ordered at his pleasure. And after the Historian has recounted in
what things he disallowed the Authority of the Pope, and Archbishop, he
concludes thus. But what he did in secular matters I forbear to write, because
it is not my purpose, and because also any one may from what has been
delivered, guess what he did in seculars. From which I think nothing is plainer
than that K. William did not only design to alter many things in the Laws and
Customs, of England, but did also actually do it, since to that end he made the
Bishops, Abbots, and other Principal men, who were to be Judges in all Courts,
such as he could wholly confide in: now that K. William governed the Nation as
Conqueror, and did so live and repute himself so to be, and as such brought in
and imposed new Laws upon the People of this Nation, is as clear as I shall
prove from these particulars; first, The Justiciaries, or chief Justices, the
Chancellors, the Lawyers, the Ministerial Officers, and under Judges, Earls,
Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Hundre duties were all Normans, from his first coming until
above a hundred years after, as I can make it out by particular instances, and
undeniable Reasons were not the Catalogues too long to be here inserted. If
therefore the Justiciaries, Chancellors, Earls, Sheriffs, Lords of Manors,
such as heard Causes, and gave Judgment, were Normans; if the Lawyers, and
Pleaders were also Normans, the Pleadings, and Judgments in their several
Courts musts of necessity have been in that Language, and the Law also, I mean
the Norman Law; otherwise they had said, and done they knew not what, and
Judged they knew not how; especially when the controversies, were to be
determined by Military Men, as Earls, Sheriffs, Lords of Manors, etc. that
understood not the English Tongue, or Law, or when the chief Justiciary himself
was a Military Man, as it often happened, and understood only the Norman
Language, and it is hardly to be believed these Men would give themselves the
trouble of learning and understanding the English Law and Language.

Secondly, Though we have many Laws and Customs from the Northern People, and
North parts of Germany, from whence both Saxons and Normans came; yet after the
Conquest, the Bulk and Main of our Laws were brought hither from Normandy by
the Conqueror, from whence we received the Tenures, and the manner of holding
our Estates in every respect; from whence also have we received the Customs
incident to those Estates: And likewise the Quality of them being most of them
feudal; and enjoyed under several Military Conditions, and services, so that of
necessary consequence from thence we must receive the Laws also, by which these
Tenures, and the Customs incident to them were regulated, and by which every
man's right in such Estates was secured; according to the Nature of them; from
Normandy (and brought in by the Conqueror) we received most, if not all our
ancient Tenures, and manner of holding and enjoying our Lands and Estates, as
will appear by comparing our Ancient Tenures with theirs.


F. I shall not deny but that a great part of the matter of Fact is true, as
you have now put it; yet though I grant that the Bishop, Abbots, Chancellors,
Chief Justices, and other great Officers of the Crown, were all or the greatest
part of them Normans, during the Reigns of the two first Kings of the Norman
Race; it do^s not therefore follow, that these Men must have made a change in
the very substance of our Laws, though in matters of form of pleading or judicial
proceedings they might have introduced great alterations; for as to the Civil
or Municipal Laws of this Kingdom concerning the Descent and Conveyance of
Estates, Gl^a (...). Lib. 7. cap. 2.
they continued the same after the coming in of the Normans, and Lands held by
Knights Service, descended to the Eldest Son, and Lands in free Soccage, and
Gavel-kind to all the Sons alike so likewise there were Estates, In tail, and
Fee simple as now, and there were also the like Customs of the Courtesy of
England, Borough English, etc. as there are also at this day, as I can prove
to you by several passages out of our English Saxon Laws; so likewise for
Conveyance of Estates, those of the better sort of People called Bookland, were
conveyed by Deeds, with Livery and Seisin, either with, or without warranty as
they are now; but that which was called Fol^land held by the meaner sort, were
only by Livery and Seisin without any Writing; And though I grant that the custom
of sealing of Deeds is derived from the Normans, yet that is an alteration only
in matter of forn; and as for Goods and Money they were bequeathable by a Man's
last Will, as well after as before your Conquest; And if you can have the
opportunity to peruse a Manuscript Treatise of Sir Roger Owen's upon this
Subject, you will find it there sufficiently proved: That Livery of Seisin,
Licenses, or Fines for Alienation, Daughters to Inherit, Trials by Juries,
Abjurations, Utlaries, Coroners, disposing of Lands by Will, Escheats, Gaols,
Writs, Wrecks, Warranties, Felons Goods and many other parts of our Law, were
here in being, long before the time of King William: this being so as to the
common Law, let us see what alterations there were in the Criminal, or Crown
part of the Law; first, as to Treason and wilful Murder, they were punished
with Death in the Saxon times, as well as after, as were also Robery, and
Burglary in the night time; but as for lesser of^ences, such as Batteries,
Maims, Robberies, and other breaches of the Peace, they were punished by Fine,
as well before the Conquest as after; but as for the Law of Englisherie, which
was, that if a Man were found Murdered, it should be presumed he was an Alien
or Frenchman, and the Town thereupon where the Body was found was to be fined,
unless Englisherie was proved, i. e. that the person was an Englishman; this
Custom though it lasted to the Reign of Edward the Third, when it was taken away
by a Statute made on purpose, tho it may seem a badge of the Norman Conquest,
yet was it indeed a Law introduced by King Knute in behalf of his Danes, who
being often found killed, and none could tell by whom, he obtained this Law to
be made to prevent it; as you will see at large in Bracton, and the Mirror of
Justices; But as for trial of all offenses, it was either by Juries, Fire, or
Water ordinal, by Dewel or Battle; or else by Witnesses, or Compurgators upon
Oath, as well before as after King William's entrance; so that I can find
nothing material as to the alterations of the Laws, either in matters Criminal
or Civil, from what they were in the Saxons time; and this being so it is
easily answered, how the Judges, and Officers might be Normans, and yet the
Laws continue English still; for first it is certain that for four or five
years, in the beginning of K. William's Reign, he made no great alteration in
the Judges, and other great Officers of the Kingdom, and by that time those
whom he was afterward pleased to employ in the Rooms of such as either died or
were turned out, might very well come to understand the Laws of England, as far
as they distered from those of Normandy, which was not in many particulars;
since, as your self very well observed, the Saxons and Normans being both
Northern People, had many of the same Laws and Customs common to both, and the
same persons might in three or four years time, have very well learned English
enough to have under stood the Evidence that the Witnesses gave before them,
without any Interpreter.

But, say you, all the Pleadings and Judgments were in French, and therefore
the Lawyers and Pleaders must be Frenchmen, which is likewise a false
consequence; for Pray tell me, why might not the English Lawyers have learnt
French enough to Plead in three or four years time, which must necessarily be
required before so great an alteration could be made, or Lawyers enough he
brought out of Normandy and sufficiently instructed in our Laws and Customs
could be fitted for their employments: again supposing all Pleadings and other
Proceedings to have been in French, it does not follow that this practice could
have obtained in all the Courts of England; for though I grant that in the Kings
Court at Westminster, where the Judges (as you say) were for the most part
Frenchmen, or Normans; Vi. Coke Proem.
yet this could only have some effect either in that great Court, or Curia
Regis, where the King often sat in person together with his Chief Justiciary,
and other Justices; or else in the Court of Common Pleas, which followed the
Kings Court, till it was ordained otherwise by Magna Charta; or else the Court
of Exchequer, where in those days only matters concerning the Kings Debts,
Lands, and Revenues were chiefly heard and dispatched: but as for the Court of
Chancery, it was not then used as a Court of Equity, nor long after till the
Reign of Henry the IV, V, and VI. when it arose by degrees, as you will find in
Sir William Dugdale's Origines Iuridiciales.

So that granting all the proceedings in these Supreme Courts to have been in
French, because the King himself, who sat there with the chief Justice, and the
rest of the Judges were either Normans or Frenchmen; yet was this of no great
importance in comparison of the Suits, and Causes which were first begun, and
tried in the Inferior Courts in the Country, before ever they could be brought
up to London, by Writ, of Error, or Appeal, which could only be in Causes of
great Moment, or between the Kings Tenants in Capite; So that now to let you
see that what say I say is true, we will Survey all the inferior Cour^s of
that time, beginning with the lowest and going up to the highest of them. The
first Court we find of this kind, was that of the free borough or Tything, Vi.
Spelman's Glos. Tit. Fribargus.
wherein by the Laws of King Edward the Confessor, the Tythingman or Head
borough was the Judge; who, as that Law tells us, determined all suits and
differences arising among Neighbors of the same Tything, concerning petty
Trespasses on one another grounds, which if they could not be there
determined, might then be brought before the Court Baron, which was incident to
every Manor, and wherein the Suitors, and not the Lord nor his Steward, were
the Judges: Vi. IV. Inst. cap. 55, 56, 57.
and this, as Sir Edward Coke tells us, was first instituted for the ease of
the Tenants, and for the ending of Debts and Damages under Potty Shillings at
home, as it were at their own doors; and let me tell you by the way, that sorty
Shillings was theo near as much as forty pound is now; Vide Spel. Glossary Tit.
Hundredus and comitatus.
and if the business could not be ended here, or was of too high a nature, it
was then brought into the Hundred Court, where the Hundreder together with the
Suitors were Judges; and if they had not Justice there, they might then remove
it into the Court of Trithing or Lathe, which was not the smaller Court of the
Tithing mentioned, nor yet the Court Leet, but a particular Court consisting of
three or four Hundreds; which though now quite lost, was in being at the time of
the Statute of Merton, as I shall show you by and by; and if the business could
not be decided in the Trithing, it was then removed to the Shire, or County
Court, as Mr. Lambert shows in the Laws of King Edward; which was then held,
(as now) from Month to Month, and in which as well as in the Hundred Court the
Suitors alone were Judges; and though it can now only hold Pleas (unless it be by
Writ of Justices) of any Debt or Damage to the value of Forty Shillings, or
above, yet we ^ind from ancient Authors, that this Court was so considerable.
that we have diverse examples of Causes between the greatest Persons of
England, and for Lands of great value, begun and determined in this Court: thus
Eadmertes relates the great Trial at Pinnesden-heath, between Odo Bishop of
Bayen^, Vide Hist. Ead. Lib. p. 8, 9.
half Brother to your Conqueror, and by him created Earl of Kent, and Lanfrank,
Archbishop of Canterbury, concerning diverse Manors in Kent, and other
Counties, whereof Earl Odo had diseized the Sea of Canterbury, in the time of
Archbishop Stigand his Predecessor; whereupon the Archbishop Petitioned the
King, that Justice might be done him, secundem Legem Terrae, and the King
thereupon sends forth a Writ to summon a County Court: the debate lasted three
days, before the Freemen of the County of Kent, in the presence of many
Chiefmen, Bishops, and Lords, and others skilful in the Laws; and Judgment
passed for the Archbishop Lanfrank by the Votes of the Freemen, Or primorum,
or probo^^^ hominum, as the Historian calls them.

So that to conclude this head, if no suit could be begun in those days, but
what was first commenced in the Hundred Court, no distringas could issue forth
till three demands were made in the Hundred, and from thence to be removed to
the County Court, where regularly all civil causes were tried by the Suitors as
the only Judges, as well as in the Hundred Court, and Court Baron; then it will
necessarily follow, that, unless you can prove, (which I think is impossible)
that all the English were at that time Slaves and Villains, and had no
Freehold of any sort left them; that all Pleading and Proceedings in any of
those Courts, being before mere Englishmen, must have been in English, and no
other Language; so that after all this great cry, nor a twentieth part of the
Suits in England, were brought to London; And as for Criminal Causes, unless in
cases of Treason, all Murders and other Felonies were Tried and Judged in the
Country, either within the particular Jurisdictions of Bishops, Abbots or great
Lords, or else of such Cities and Towns who had the Privileges of Infangthief
and Outfangthief together with Fossa and Furca, that is, a Pit to drown, and a
Gallows to hang Malefactors; and if the offense was done in the body of the
County, they were then tried and condemned in the County Court; Justices
Itinerant not being in use till Henry the seconds Reign.


M I must confess you have given me a great deal of light in these matters more
than I had before; but as I shall not dispute whether in the lowest Courts,
such as the Tythings and Court Barons, the smaller English Freeholders might
not Judge of Petty causes amongst themselves; yet that in those greater causes,
were brought in the Hundred, and County Courts, which only the greater Fleemen
of the Hundred, B.A. P. p. 38, 39. Glos.
or County were Judges: who these Freemen were, Dr. B. has sufficiently taught
us in his Commenes upon the Conquerors Laws, as also in his Glossary, (viz.)
That they were Tenants in Military Service, who in those times were the only
great Freemen of the Kingdom, and quite different from our ordinary
Freeholders at this day; These were the Men the only legal Men, that named and
chose Juries; and served on Juries themselves, both in the County and Hundred
Court, and dispatched all Country business under the great Officers; I do not
deny but that there might be other lesser Freemen in those times, Glos. p. 29,
30.
but what their quality was, farther than that their Persons and Blood was
Free, that is, they were not Nativi, or Bondmen, it will give a knowing man
trouble to discover it to us: we find in every leaf of Doomesday, Socmen, and
liberi homines, Possessors of small parcels of Land, but what there quality
was, and of what interest in the Nation, Dicat Apollo, no Man yet has made it
out, nor can it be done by the account we have of ordinary Freemen, for a
Century or two last past.

And for further proof of this; That none but Tenants in Capite or Military
Tenants at least could be Judges in the County Court, appears by the Laws of
King Henry the first, Cap. 1.
wherein it is expressly said. Regis Iudices Barons Comitatus qui liberas in
it is terras habent, per quos debent causae singulorum alterna prosecutione
tractari, etc. So that these Barons of the County being certainly Feudal
Tenants, this service of being suitors to the County and Hundred Courts, was a
service incident to their Tenures; and then it will also follow, B. I. A. p. 36.
that those Primores, and probi Viri, who as you have now related, tried this
Cause between Earl Odo, and Archbishop Lanfranc, and who (let me tell you) were
not only of the County of Kent, but of other Counties in England, where the
Manors and Lands lay, as Eadmerus shows us, and who were the Jurors in this
great Cause, consisted of the great Military Tenants, that were not Barons, and
the less which were the Probi Viri; for it can be no ways probable, that the
ordinary Freemen which made the greatest number, and were all bound to their
good behavior, could be the Probi, and legales homines, who served upon
Juries; to conclude, if I have already proved (as I think I have sufficiently)
that K. William took away the greatest part of the Lands of England, and gave
them to Normans and Frenchmen, who were the only true Freemen or Freeholders
of the Kingdom; and as such owed Suit and Service to the Hundred and County
Court, in which (as you your self set forth) all the considerable Actions as
well Real as Personal were then commenced and tried, it will also follow, that
the Suitors, who were the Judges in those Courts, being for the greatest part
at least Frenchmen, all the Trials and Proceedings therein must have been in
French, and not in English, which is contrary to what you have undertaken to
prove.


F. If this be all you have to object against what I have now said, that all
Pleadings in the Inferior Courts in the Country, must in the time of your
Conqueror have been in French, and not in English, I hope I shall give you very
good satisfaction to the contrary, and therefore I shall prove to you, that the
very same persons who were the Suitors or Judges in the Hundred Court, were
also Suitors in that of the County, though they were of never so small Estates of
Freehold; and those that were thus Judges in the Hundred Court, were also the
same persons of which the lowest Court ( Viz) that of the Headborough or
Tythingman did consist, appears by the very definition of a Hundred, as you may
see it in Sir. H. Spelman's Glossary, Tit Hundredus.
Est autem Hundredus portio Comitatus, qua Olim degebant Centum pacis regiae
fideiussores, uti Decuria qua december, complexus est igitur Hundredus december
Decurias, ut centenarius numerus decies denarium: now that the County Court
consisted of the same sort of persons, of that of the hundred, is also as
certain, since all England was then and is now divided into Counties, Hundreds,
and Tythings; so that as the Hundred Court consisted of a hundred Persons, who
had all given Pledges to the King, so did the County Court consist of all the
Freeholders or Freemen of the several Hundreds of the County, who all owed
Suit and Service to the County Court, and as such were returnable upon Juries
in all Trials in that Court, though they had never so small Estates of Freehold;
for there were no Laws that limited the estates of Freeholders returnable upon
Juries, on Assizes or Trials, to the yearly value of Forty Shillings, until the
Statute of West. II. But that these Suitors to the Hundred Court, Cap. 38.
must have been for the most English in all your Conquerors Reign, your Dr. has
given us a sufficient testimony in his answer to Mr. A's Ianus Anglorum, p. 35.
where he tells us, the Jurors were anciently called Tests, and often in
Doomesday-book it is thus sound, Testatur Hundredus, Test Hundreda, the
Hundred Witnesses that such Lands is such a Man's, or by the Witness of the
hundred such Land is a such Man's. See the claims in Yorkshire, Lincolnshire,
and Suffolk, at the end of the Book. Now the use that I shall make of these
words of the Drs. is this, that in many of these claims the Issue is, I. A. A.
p. 95, 201.
that such a one held the Land die quo Rex Edwardus suit vivus and mortuus: now
I desire you to tell me, if the freeholders of the Hundred, were all Strangers
and Normans at this time, as your Dr. supposes, they all were that served on
Jurles in the Hundred and County Court; how these men could testify who held
the Land at the time of K. Edward's Death, and by what Services? and I desire
you to be pleased to read and consider the Trial mentioned in Doomesday-book,
between Will. de Chornet and Picot the Sheriff, where the proof was by the best
and most ancient Men of the whole County and Hundred, that this Land in
question belonged to Chornet per haereditatem sui Antecessoris. So that then
the best and antientest Freeholders of the County of Berks, were the same who
were so in the time of K. Edward, or else how could they Witness this Land to
have been held by Chornets Ancestor.

But because you have two or three small objections against this truth, I shall
endeavor to remove them. The first is, that those who tried one another
Causes in the County Court, are in the Law of K. Henry I. (which you now cited)
called Barons Comitatus qui liberas Terras habent. Therefore you imagine that
these Barons Comitatus must needs have been all Tenants in Capite, or by
Knights Service at least, who by virtue of that Tenure owed Suit and Service to
the County Court, which is a great mistake; since every Freeholder of
whatsoever Tenure, who was resident within the County, owed Suit and Service to
that Court, and it is only by virtue of the twentieth of Henry the sixth, which
(as I have already showed you) limited that Service only to Free holders of
Forty Shillings per annum, or above: now that every Free holder though of never
so small Estate was anciently a Baron of the County, is also as certain in the
ancient and larger acceptance of the word Baron, which did not originally
signify only a Tenant in Capite, or by Knight Service, but any other
Freeholder, who could be returned upon a Jury concerning Freehold in the
County Court; now that every Lord of a Manor, and Freeholder, was anciently
called a Thane before the Conquest, appears by this Law of K. Knutes, Cap. 52.
and habet omnis dominus familiam suam in plegio suo; and si accusetur in
aliquo, respondeat in Hundredo, ubi compellabitur sicut recta Lex, sit: Quod fi
accusetur, and fugiat, reddat Dominus ejus Regi Weraem, i e. precium
nativitatis hominis illius; and si Dominus accusetur, quod ejas consilio
sugerit, adlegiet se cum quinque Thanis, (id est Nobilibus) and idem sit
sextus, si purgatio frangat ti, reddat ei (scil Regi) Weram suam, and qui
fugerit, extra legem habeatur. I shall nor trouble my self to translate this
Law, since the Latin is plain enough; only take notice that by this word
adlegiet, he shall wage Law, or make Oath together with five Thanes, that is
Noblemen or Gentlemen, and idem sit sextus, whereof he himself should be the
sixth; where you may see that every Freeholder, being Master of a Family is
here called a Thane, who was to give pledge or security, that all his Family
should answer the Law in the Hundred Court for any offense they should commit;
and these Thanes were such as Mr. Lambert expresses by Ascitus sibi ingenuis
quinque; I. A. A. p. p. 197. Lamb leges Ethelred^. Cap. I.
for what he calls ingenuus, Brompton calls liber homo, that is every
Freeholder, so that you see Thane, ingenuus and liber homo signify all the
same thing, that is the lower sort of Thane, or Freeholders who owed Suit and
Service to the Hundred and County Courts; and that these very men were such as
after your Conquest were called Barons Comitatus, appears in this, that those
who before the Conquest were called Thanes, are afterward called Barons of
Counties, in all our Ancient Laws and Charters; and for this I shall give you
the Authority of Sir H. Spelman in his Glossary, who though he does chiefly
understand by this word all sort of feudal Barons dwelling in each County, Tit.
Barons Comitatus.
Proceres nempe and Maneriorum domini, yet nor only these, but necnon liberi
quique Tenentes, hoc est fundo^um proprietarii, Anglice Freeholders, ut
superius dectum est. So that take it in which sense you will, this word cannot
signify only Tenants in Capite, or so much as Military Tenants, as you
suppose, since a man might hold a Manor by other Tenures than Knights Service,
as by grand or petty Serjeanty, or in Soccage by a certain Rent, and so
likewise might he hold any other lesser Estate of Freehold by the like
Tenures; which if it were so, your Drs. Fancy of Tenants in Military service
being then the only Freemen of the Kingdom, and who were capable of serving
upon Juries in the Hundred and County Court, is a mere Chimera, without any
ground, as I have already proved at our third meeting; when I showed you by the
words liberi homines, so often mentioned in King William's Laws, are to be
understood not only Tenants by Knights Service, but any other Freemen or Free
holders, who held Lands or other Possessions, which may be also proved farther
by the Stat. of Merton Cap. 10. as appears by this clause, Provisum est
insuper, quod quilibet liber ^omoq^^ sectam debet ad comitatum, trithingum,
hundredum, and Wapentagium, vel ad (...) domini sui, libere possit facere
Attornatum suum, ad sectas illas pro eo faciendas. Whereby you may see, that
every Freeman, who was a Master of a Family, and not under the power of
another, was then obliged to pay Suit and Service to the County, Trithing, and
Hundred Courts.

But, say you, these persons who were Jurors in this great Cause between Earl
Odo, and Archbishop Lanfranc are there called Primores, and Probi viri, not
only of the County of Kent, but other Counties where the Lands lay, and it is
not probable, that the ordinary Freemen, which made the greatest number, and
were all bound to their good behavior, could be the Probi and Legales homines,
who served upon this Jury: well I grant it, that these Gentlemen you speak of,
might be Lords of Manors and considerable for Quality and Estate, and who
alone were impannelled upon Juries in this, and other such great trials of
Novel Dissei^in; and yet for all that those lesser Freemen, or Freeholders
you mention, were Legales homines, and as such were capable of trying all
Causes, of what nature soever, since Sir H Spelman tells us in his Glossary,
Title Legalis, that In Iure nostro de eo dicitur qui stat rectus in Curia, non
exlex seu utlegatus, non excommunicatus, vel infamis, etc. sed qui and in lege
postulat and postul^tur. Hoc sensu vulgar illud in formulis juridicis; probi
and legalis homines. So that he does not make (as you do) that a Man's legality
must depend upon his Tenure, but upon his being rectus in Curia. So that it is
no more an Argument, that because in some great Trials in those times, none but
the chief, and most considerable Men in the County, were impannelled upon
Juries in the County Court; therefore none but they could ever serve there upon
Juries at all; then it would be now for a man to affirm, that because in great
Trials at the Assizes, or at the Bar at Westminster, only Knights, and
Gentlemen are Impannelled; therefore none but they, and not any Yeomen, or
Countrymen can ever serve upon Juries at all.

But let these Gentlemen you mention have been all Tenants in Capite, or by
Knights, Service, if you please, yet will it not make good your assertion, that
they were only Normans or Fr^nchmen, who, as the only Proprietors of Estates,
served upon this and other Juries at that time, for they must have certainly
been such, who of their own knowledge, knew the Lauds in question, and to whom
they did belong before K. William's entrance into England, and your Dr. himself
in his answer to Mr. Atwood's Ianus, B. A. I. p. 34.
fully agrees to this truth, as appears by this passage, which I desire you
would read; In Trials of Novel Diss^isin, and for the Possession of Lands,
Customs, Services, etc. the Juries at the time of the Conquest, and in several
of the King's Reigns next succeeding were Impannelled out of the same Town and
Neighborhood, of such as did know the Land and things in question, and who had
been possessed of it, and for what time; And to this purpose in an Assize, if
none of the Jurors knew the right it self, or truth of the matter, and did
testify so much to the Court upon Oath, recourse was then had to others, until
such were found who did know the truth; but if some did know the truth, and
others not, those that knew it not were put by, and others called into the
Court, until twelve at the least should be found to agree therein; and for this
purpose it was that all Suitors to Hundred and Country Courts were bound to
appear there under great penalties, that th^re might be a Jury of such as knew
whose the Land was; and so far your Dr. is very much in the right; but then,
that all the Gentlemen that served upon this Jury must be Englishmen, is as
plain from the reason he has now given us; and if he had not told us so, we
have an undeniable authority for it, to wit the ancient Mss. called Codex
Roff^nsis, P. 197.
quoted by Mr. Sel^en in his notes upon Eadmerus, where speaking of this Trial;
Praecipit Rex Comitatum totum ( viz. of Kent) absque mora considere, and
homines Comitatus omnes Francigenas and praeciput Anglos in antiquis legibus
and consuetudinibus peritos in^unum convenire. But it also adds, and alii
aliorum Comitatuum homines, and so confirms what Eadmerus says, so that nothing
is more evident by your Doctors own showing, as also by the Testimony of this
ancient Author, that this great cause was Tried either by Tenants in Capite,
and other great Freeholders were all Englishmen, or such Frenchmen as were
here before your Conquest; so that from this famous Trial we may draw two of
three confusions directly contrary to your assertions: First, That there were
many great Proprietors not only in Kent but in other Counties, as appears by
Eadmerus, who were a sufficient number to try Causes in the County Courts, a
good while after your Conquerors coming over. Secondly, That the Pleadings and
Verdict in this Cause being before Englishmen, and given by them, must have
been all in English; and if it were so in this cause, it will follow for the
same reason in all other Counties all over England. Lastly, That these
Gentlemen were well skilled in the Ancient Laws and Customs of England, which
had been in vain if they had been altered as you suppose.


M. I will not deny but that in the beginning of the Conquerors Reign, many
Englishmen might have Estates left them, which might not be taken away till
some years after, and Mr. Seldom in his Titles of honor places this Trial
between Earl Odo and Archbishop Lanfranc, about the first year of K. William,
and I suppose that it happened before the fifth year of his Reign; when Matthew
Paris tells us, that the Earls Eadwin, Morcar, and Siward together with Egelwin
Bishop of Durham, as also many thousands of Clerks and Laics not being able to
bear the severity of K. William fled into Woody and Desert places, and from
thence got into the Isle of Ely, where they fortified themselves, and whither
K. William followed them, and taking the Island made them submit to mercy; and
then this Author tells us, that the K. put the Bishop of Durham in Prison; and
as for the rest, some of them he killed, some he put to ransom, and others he
committed to perpetual imprisonment; so that I reckon from this time, the King
took away most of the Englishmens Estates, as not trusting them any more.


F. If this had all happened as you have put it, yet would it not prove what
you have maintained; for if those Englishmem who had not been engaged with
Harold, or else had been pardoned for it still held their Estates; and as you
say they forfeited them afterward for Rebellion; then it is certain K. William
did not proceed against the English as a Conqueror; since if he had, he would
have taken away their Estates Iure belli; which since as you your self confess
he did not, whatever Estates he took away afterward, was either for Treason
committed by the English, or else wrongfully; if the former, he did it as a
lawful King; if wrongfully, then as a Tyrant, and as such could, obtain no just
right against the English Nation, by his unjust proceedings.

But indeed after all, you are quite out in your account concerning this
matter, for as to the great Trial you now mentioned, it could not be in the
first or second year of King William's Reign, nor could happen sooner than the
sixth or seventh of his Reign, for Archbishop Stigand was not deposed till the
year 1070. which was the Fourth year of K. William; and in the next year being
1071. the Annals of Mailros, as also the Chronicle of Thomas Wiks place
Archbishop Lanfranc's Consecration, and fetching of his Pall from Rome, so that
it could not be until the year after this Rebellion at the soonest, when
Lanfranc was settled in his Bishopric, that this suit was commenced by him
against Earl Odo, and therefore a great many of the English Nobility and
Gentry, had still Estates let them after this Rebellion.

And that they continued to have so some years after this time, appears by
those Writs of K. William, which Mr. Atwood has given us in his Ianus
A^glorum, Page 42. B. I. A. p.
etc. concerning the restitution of the Lands belonging to the Church of Ely,
which are also transcribed and allowed by your Dr. in his answer to it; and I
desire you particularly to consider that writ of K. William's directed to
Archbishop Lanfranc, Roger E. of Morton, and Ieoffery Bishop of Constance,
commanding them to cause to be assembled all those shires who were present at
the Plea had concerning the Lands of the Church of Ely, before the Queen went
last into Normandy; the rest being most material to the cause in hand, I shall
give you in Latin, Cum quibus ^tiam sinc de Baronibus m^is qui competenter
adesse pot^^unt and praedicto placito intersuerunt, and qui ter^^s ejusdem
Ecclesiae tenent, Quibus in ^num congragatis eligantur plures de illis Angli^
quisciunt quo modo terrae jacebant praefatae Ecclesiae, die qua Rex Edwardus
obiit, and quod inde dixerint ibidem jurando testentur. From whence we may also
gather, that this Trial concerning the Lands which is here ordered was to be in
like manner, and by a Jury of the same sort of Englishmen, who tried the cause
between Earl Od^ and Arch bishop Lanfranc, that is, they were English Gentlemen
of sufficient Estates, or Tenants in Capite, if you please Now. let us look
into the time when this happened, since the Writ does not tell us when it was,
only that it refers to a Plea held concerning the Church of ELy, before the
Queens last going into Normandy, so that this trial here mentioned could not
happen till after the fourteenth year of K. William's Reign, which I prove
thus; this Queen did not come over into England, till the year 1068. when the
King returned with his Queen out of Normandy after his Coronation, at which she
was not present; after which K. William went not into Normandy till the seventh
year of his Reign, when he went over and took Man's, and then whether he carried
the Queen with him is uncertain; but the Annals of Waverly tells us, he went
over again the next year, and then he might carry the Queen with him, which
might be the first time she returned into Normandy, but it appears by the same
Annals, that the King went over the year after; and staying but a little while
returned into Normandy to fight against his Rebellious Son Prince Robert, where
staying not long, he returned as soon as he had driven his Son out of Normandy:
nor do we find he went over again till the 14 year of his Reign, being the year
1080. and then I suppose since he stayed there for some time, he carried the
Queen with him, and to this last going over I suppose this Writ we have cited
refers, for though the Queen went over again after this, yet she returned no
more, because she died in Normandy in the year 1083. as Iogulph who was then
alive relates; the use I make of these particulars is this, that long after the
time you suppose the English to have lost all their Estates, we here find a
great Jury of Englishmen, summoned out of several shires in England, to try
this great Cause, concerning the Lands which the Church of Ely had been
unjustly Disseised of; so that here you see after the fourteenth year of this
King, the English still continued to keep their Estates, and to serve upon
Juries, and consequently the Pleadings before them, as well as their Verdict
must have been in English.


M. I shall not insist upon this point any farther, yet this much you cannot
deny, but that all the Pleadings and Proceedings at W^stminster, as also the
old Law books were all in French, as appears by the Mirror of Justices,
Britton, not to mention those of latter days, as Littleton's Tenures, and
others; and so were also the ancient year Books or Reports of cases, all
written in Norman French, even in our own age; so that since this proceeded
from that great alteration which the Conqueror made in our Laws, it is also a
badge of that yoke which he imposed upon the Nation by his Conquest: and to
make this yet more plain, that very Copy of K. Edward the Confessors Laws is in
old Norman French, which (together with K. William's Additions to them) Ingulph
tells us, he brought down with him to his Monastery, and which he has inserted
into his History, as you may find them in the last Edition Printed at Oxford,
and were before published by Mr. Seld^n in his Notes upon Eadmerus.


F. I cannot deny but that some part of the matter of fact to be as you have
here laid down; yet it will not follow that this common use of the French
Tongue in our Reports and Laws, did proceed from the Norman Conquest, or is any
badge of Conquest; for first, the most Ancient Laws of K. William, which we
find in Spelman and Lambert's Collections are in Latin, as they were before
the pretended Conquest; I grant indeed those you mention in Ingulph are in
French, but they being most of them criminal or penal laws, or else concerning
Tenures, it is no wonder that they were published in the Language of his
Country, that the Normans and other Frenchmen he brought over with him might
understand them; and though they were written in French, yet they were proclaimed
in the English Tongue, that the English as well as Normans might take notice of
them: but after these Laws, you will not find any ancient Charter or Statute in
French, till the Statute of West. I. which was above 200 years after your
pretended Conquest; for all the Charters of this K. William, are in Latin or
Saxon, as that particularly granted by him to the City of London; so likewise
were all the Ancient Charters and Laws of the other succeeding Kings, as those
of K. William Rufus, Henry I. Henry II. King Stephen, Richard I. are all in
Latin or Saxon, and none of them in French, as appears by several of them
still to be seen in the Archbishops Library at Lambeth, and in Sir Robert
Cotton's, and also Magna Charta, and all other Statutes and Charters of K. John
and Henry the third till the Statute of West. I. above mentioned, and therefore
it is not likely that this custom should have taken its original from Normandy,
for if it had, it would have been begun immediately after your Conquest; and as
for our Law Books, though I grant those you mentioned to be written in French,
yet is it not the Norman French, since it differs very much from the Language
in which K. Edward's Laws are written, which are in Ingulph, the French of
which is so obsolete and obscure, that he that understands our Law French very
well, can scarcely make any sense of them; but our first Writers concerning the
Laws of England, writ in Latin and not in French, as you may see by Glanvil,
Bracton and Flet^, who writ before Horn's Mirror of Justices, or Britton's
Treatise of the Laws of England.

As for your Books and Reports, I grant they are in French; but that this
custom was not derived from Normandy, is also as certain, since the first
Reports we have begin with the first year of Edward the second, except some few
Memorandums of cases a^judged in the Exchequer in the Reign of his Father,
above 200 years after K W^lliam's coming in (as I but now noted;) nor could
they be writ in the Norman dialect, since we had then nothing to do in that
Duchy, which had been Conquered by the French in the beginning of K. John's
Reign, above eighty years before any Report, or Law book was writ in French at
all; and therefore we must ascribe the original of this custom to some other
cause than the mere will and pleasure of your Conqueror, and for this we must
go as high as the Reign of K. Edward the Confessor; who as Ingulph tells us,
having lived long in Normandy and bringing over diverse Normans with him, the
whole Nation began under this K. to forsake the English customs, and to imitate
the French manners in many things, so that all great men looked upon it as a
piece of good breeding, to speak French in their Houses, and to make their
Deeds and Charters after the French manner so that it was very easy for K.
William after his coming in, who (as Ingulph also tells us) abhorred the
English Tongue, Ibid. p. 71.
to make the Laws of the Land to be pleaded in the French Tongue, and to make
the Boys to learn at School the first rudiments of their Grammar in French, and
also the Saxon or English hand to be altered, and the French hand to come in
use in all Books, and Writings; and though I confess most of the chief Justices
and Judges, were Frenchmen or Normans, during the three or four first Kings of
that Race; yet that alone could not have caused this Tongue to be so generally
used, not only in the Kings Court, but also in all the Courts at Westminster,
after Englishmen began again to sit there, had it not been for the Tacit
consent not only of the King, and People of Quality, but also of the Lawyers
themselves; for the Law Terms being for the most part French, they did not only
thereby make the Law the greater mystery to the Vulgar, but they also supposed
that these Terms being French, could not be rendered into any other Language;
but for all that, it had been impossible for this Tongue, which was spoke by so
small a number of Persons in respect of the whole Nation, to have prevailed so
long among the better sort of People, had not our Kings for many Ages enjoyed
large Territories in France, which occasioning their frequent going over
thither about affairs of War or Peace, as also the French Gentry and Nobilities
frequent coming over hither, it is no wonder if that Tongue being the Language
of the Court, was generally understood and spoken by all Noblemen, Gentlemen
and Lawyers; so that I have heard it from a very good hand, a person who is
very well versed in Antiquity, that a Gentleman being returned on a J^ry in the
Reign of Edward II. was excepted against, because he did not understand French;
and hence it is, that not only the Terms of our Law, but also those of
Heraldry, Hawking, and Hunting, are almost all French to this day; and though by
the Statute of Edward the third which you but now mentioned, all Pleas should
be in English, and not in French, yet I desire you to take notice, that this
did no way extend to any matters of Process upon which suits are founded, but
that the Writs, Declarations, and all other matters of Record were always
entered and enrolled in Latin, from before the Conquest to this very day, so
that there was never any alteration as to that point; these things being
considered it is no wonder if the Judges and Clerks of Parliament, who were in
those days entrusted with the drawing up all Acts of Parliament, being greater
Masters of the French than Latin Tongues, chose rather to draw them up in the
former, and thus it continued until the Reign of Henry the seventh, when our
Statutes began first to be drawn up, and enrolled in English.


M I confess you have given me a greater light in this matter than I had
before, yet I suppose you cannot deny that the Tenure of Knights Service, with
those clogs that belong to it of Wardship, Marriage, and Relief were all
derived from the Normans as appears by the grand customer of Normandy, which I
have already men^ioned; so that though it be true that all these are now taken
away by a late Statute of K. Charles the second, yet since this Tenure, and
those services are not found among the Saxon Laws, there cannot be a greater
proof of the ancient power of the Conqueror, or of the servitude imposed upon
the Nation by him; and therefore I look upon it as a very imprudent part of the
late K. Charles, to part with so great a tie, which his Father and all his
Predecessors had over the Persons and Estates of all the Nobility and Gentry of
the Kingdom.


F. I shall not take upon me to decide whether it were Politickly done or not
of K. Charles the second, to part with the Wardship, and Services of his
Tenants by Knights Service; but this much is certain, that considering the
abuses and corruptions that had crept into that Tenure by degrees, since the
first institution, both by the unfit Marriages of the Heirs, as also by the
waste that was often times committed on the Wards Estate during his Minority, it
was certainly a very great grievance and burden to the subject, and
considering how many of those Wardships were begged by hungry Courtiers, they
were of no considerable profit to the Crown; and though I grant they were a very
great tie, (or rather clog) upon the Estates of the Nobility and Gentry of this
Kingdom; yet it did not thereby produce any such love or obedience, as would
retain the Tenants better in their duty before than since they were granted
away for the forfeitures for Treason and Felony, and also Fines for
Alienations, and are reserved to the Grown now as they were before; and as for
any love or respect which was anciently paid by the Heir, how could there be
any such thing? since the King granted away the custody of the Heir, and his
Lands, to persons who for the most part made a mere prey of them; so that they
were often Married against their consents, and their Estates were delivered to
them wasted and spoiled; besides also what was exacted from them for reliefs,
and Ouster lismaines we need not wonder if it were rather a cause of secret
discontent and hatred of the Kings Prerogative than otherwise* and therefore I
cannot think it was not so unpolitickly done by the King, to render himself
gracious, and acceptable to his People upon his return to grant their request,
and pass that Act for taking away Wards and Liveries, and to accept of a
Revenue by excise of treble the value in stead of it.

But to come to the Original of Knights Service it self, I do not think it was
derived from the Normans, since we are certain there were Thane Lands in
England; which were held of the King, and that by Knights Service, before King
William's coming over, and there were also middle Thanes who held of those
Lords above them by the like Service* insomuch that in the Laws of K. Knut^
there is one concerning the Heriots, Cap 69.
which an Earl, the Kings Thane as well as inferior Thanes, were to pay not
only to the King, but to other inferior Lords, which are almost the same as
were afterward reserved by the Laws of K. Edward the Confessor, confirmed by
K. William, as you will find them in Ingulph; only there is no Gold reserved,
but only Horses and Arms, whereas by the Law of K. Knute, each E. was to pay
two hundred Manenses of Gold, each Kings Thane fifty, and each inferior Thane
two pounds; only note that he who is called E. in K. Knutes Laws, is called a
Count in these, the Thane a Baron, and the inferior Thane a Vauasor: and that
which is there called a (...) is here termed a Relief.

And that this Tenure by Knights Service, which is now called Escuage or
Servitium Scuti, was of ancient time named expeditio hominum cum scutis, and
was in use before the coming in of the Danes, Cap. 35. p. 192.
is also as certain, for Sir E. Coke in his fourth Inst. tells us, that we may
in the Charter of K. Kenulph, who Anno Domini 821. granted to the Abbot of
Abbindon many Manors and Lands, and reserved, quod expeditionem duodecim
virorum cum tantis scutis exerceant, antiq^os pontes and arces renovent, and
also he mentions a like Charter of K. Ethelred to a Knight called Athel^e^,
Anno Domini 995, so that you see not only Spiritual Persons, and great Thanes
or Barons, but also Knights held Lands by the service of so many men before
your Conqueror, and your Dr. also himself allows it, for in his answer to Mr.
P. in all ancient Charters in the Saxon times he translates the word fidel^s by
Tenants in Capite, or Military Service.


M. I will not deny that Military Fees were in use before the Conquest, and
also that the feudal Law did obtain here in many things, and therefore I am so
far of the Doctors opinion, who in his Gossary Tit. Feudal Laws tells us, The
Feudal Law obtained to most Nations of Europe, and in Normandy was in its full
Vigor at the time of the coming over of the Conqueror, P. 3.
but afterward grew more mild and qualified, as also the Tenure it self, a
perfect description of which with all its incidents of Homage, Relief, Ward,
Marriage, Escuage, Ayds, etc. are to be found in the Grand Customer, Cap.
29.33, 34, 35. and although there were Military Fiefs, or Fees, here in the
Saxon times, yet not in such manner as after the Conquest established here by
William the Conqueror, and according to the usage in Normandy; when as it
appears by Doomesday-book, in every County he divided most if not all the Land
of England, amongst his Normans and Followers; Now that this custom of
Wardships is wholly derived from the Norman Conquest, you shall find in Sir E.
Cooks fourth Institutes in the same Chapter you last cited, P. 193.
as you may here read, You have heard before de regali servitio, before the
Conquest; but that regal^ servicium, (which was, Knights service) drew unto it
relief, but neither Wardship of the Body or of the Land, as has been said; it
is true that the Conqueror in respect of that Royal service, as a badge of the
Conquest, took the Wardship of the Land, and the Marriage of the Heirs within
age of such Tenants, but this extended not to the Tenures of the Subjects by
Knights Service, as it appears by Bracton, Dicitur Regale se^vitium, quia
spectat ad dominum Regem and non alium, and secundum quod in Conquestis fuit
adinventum, etc. Whereupon Sir E. C. notes (in the Margent,) the Tenure (as
before it appears) was not then invented, but the fruits of this Tenure of
the K. ( viz.) Wardship and Marriage, which was Bracton's meaning, so as the
Conqueror provided for himself; but other Lords at the first by special
reservation, since the Conquest provided upon gifts of Lands for themselves,
Regis ad exemplum totu^ componitur orbis, wherein that which we had from the
Conqueror we freely confess.


F. I shall not dispute his matter since it is doubtful whether this custom of
Wardship was Norman, or whether it was derived from the Saxons, who possibly
might have some respect to Orphans in such cases, to train them up for the
public Service in point of War; especially, being possessors of a known right
of Relief, as well as Alfred the Saxon King did undertake the work for the
training of some particular persons in learning, for the service of the public
in time of Peace, and Civil Government, and though Sir H. Spelman is of opinion
in his Title de Wardi^, that Wardship of the Heir came in with the Conqueror,
yet Sir John his son, (who was also a learned Antiquary) in his Epilogue to his
second book of K. Alfred's Life, Printed at Oxford, speaking of Military Fees
granted to the Kings Thanes, P. 117.
has this passage. Haec etiam Fioda baeredibus sub Hereoti, si^e relevaminis
cujus piam quod haeres in terrae redemptionem Regi solvere tenebatur condition
plerumque transibat; and si haeres minor natu a Patre moriente relinquebatur,
Regi educatio ^jus (utpo^^ Regis Hominis) committebatur, in utilitatem etiam
and commodum ipsius Regis. But whether the Wardship of the Body of the Heir,
was in use in K. William's time or before, is uncertain; for the land is in the
Charter of Henry the first in Mat. Paris, granted either to the Widow or next
heir.

But let these customs be derived from whence you please, it is a plain case it
could be no badge of Conquest upon the People of this Nation, and that by the
Doctors own showing; for were it a Norman custom never so much, if your
Conqueror first of all imposed it upon those he brought over along with him, it
could never be a badge of Slavery upon the English Nation, but rather upon the
Normans, upon whom it was chiefly imposed; and if they afterward granted Lands
to the English upon the same terms they held them themselves, they were no more
Slaves to whom they were granted, than they were under whom they held them; but
indeed this was so far from being looked upon as my badge of servitude, that if
the Dr. himself is to be believed, these were the only Freemen, Glossary. Tit.
liberi homines.
and their services, ( Bracton says) were so notoriously free; that in Writs of
Right it was never mentioned, because so well known Notandum in servitio
Militari non dicitur per Liberum servitium, and ideo quod Constat, Quia tale
Servitium Liberum est. And hour Rigorous the Feudal Law might be at the
beginning, it was when your Conqueror came in so far mitigated as to the rigor
of it, that the Tenants by Knight Service were not only free by K. William's
Law, from all Arbitrary Taxes and Tallies. but also obtained a settled
Inheritance to them and their Heirs, as appears by that clause in K. William's
Charter; and therefore in the Reign of Henry the Third, when William of Warren
Earl of Surrey was questioned after the Statute of Quo Warranto by the Kings
Justices, by what Warrant he held his Lands, Vid. An Ancient Msc. in the
Bodlian Library cited by Sir Will. Dugdale in his Baronage of England, Page 79.
pulling out an old Sword, he answered to this Effect; behold my Lords here is
my warranty, my Ancestors came into this Land with William the Bastard, and
obtained those Lands by the Sword, and I am resolved with this Sword to defend
them against any whosoever shall go about to dispossess me, for the K. did not
himself alone Conquer the Land, but our Progenitors were sharers with him and
assistants therein.

As for what you say, That the Laws in the Customary of Normandy, are the same
with the Laws of England; It is no more than what diverse French Writers have
taken notice of, but do not attribute their agreement to their being borrowed
from the Normans, Vid. Mr. Whitlock's Speech in Parliament, 1650. Printed in
his Memorial, p. 461.
but quite contrary; for in the first place most of the Learned Men say, That
the first establishing of the Customary of Normandy, was in Henry the first's
time, and afterward again about the beginning of Edward the seconds time, when
Normandy was not under the King of England; and S^querius a French Author
relates, that K. Henry I, established the English Laws in Normandy, and with
him do also agree Gulielmus Brito, Rutilarius, and other French Writers, who
mention also that the Laws in the Customary of Normandy are the same with the
Laws collected by our English K. Edward the Confessor, who was before the
Conqueror; an additional Testimony hereof is out of William de Reville de
Alenson, who in his Latin Comment upon the Customary, Vid. Coke. Preface.
proves and demonstrates that the Laws and Customs of Normandy came from the
English Laws and Nation, either not long before or after Edward the Confessor's
time.

In the Customary, there is a Chapter of Nampes or Distresses, and it is there
decreed; that one should not bring his action upon any seizure, but from the
time of the Coronation of K. Richard, and this must be our K. Richard the
first, because no K. of France was ever of that name; and the words Nampes, and
Withernams, were Saxon words, taken out of the English Laws, signifying a Pawn
or Distress, and in the same sense are used in the Customary. But if you have
nothing more to object against what I have now said, pray proceed to your last
head, and let me see how you will prove, that the English lost all their
ancient Liberties and Privileges which they enjoyed under the English Saxon
Kings.


M. I never heard so much before concerning the Original use of the French
Tongue in our Reports and Law Books, but yet this much I think you will not
deny; first, that the Norman French was never used in our Courts of Justice,
till after the Conquerors entrance, Secondly, That he did his endeavor totally
to root out the English Tongue, by ordering of Children to learn the first
rudiments of their Grammar in French: and as for what you have said concerning
the Customary of Normandy being especially as to Tenures derived from the
English Laws and Customs, I do not deny but that it may be the opinion of some
French Writers that it was so, but I shall believe it, when they can prove that
the Wardships and Marriage of the Heir of the Tenants by Knights service, as
also those aids they were to pay the King, or any other Lord they held of
toward making his eldest Son a Knight, and Marrying his eldest Daughter, were
in use in England before the Conqueror came over.

But to observe your commands, I shall now proceed to show that by the
Conquest, the English for a time lost all their ancient Rights and Privileges,
till they again obtained them either by their mixing with the Normans, so that
all distinction between them and the English were taken away, or else they were
restored by the Charters of K. Henry the first, K. John, and K. Henry the
third* I shall therefore divide the privileges of Englishmen into these three
heads; first, Either such as concerned their Offices or Dignities; Or,
secondly, Such as concerned their Estates; Or lastly, Such as concerned the
Trial for their lives: in every one of which, if I can prove the English
Natives as well of the Clergy and Nobility suffered confideracie lesses and
abridgments of their ancient (...) liberties which they formerly enjoyed. I
think I shall sufficiently prove the point in hand; As to the first head Ing^ph
tel^s us, that the English were so hated by the Normans in his time, P. 70, 71.
Edit. Oxon.
that how well soever they deserved, they were driven from their Dignities; and
strangers, though much less fit, of any Nation under Heaven were taken in their
places; P. 93.
and Malmesbury who lived and writ in the time of Henry the first says, that
England was then become the habitation of foreigners, and the Rule and
Government of strangers; and that there was at that day no Englishman an Earl,
Bishop, or Abbot, but that strangers devoured the Riches, and gnawed the Bowels
of England, neither is there any hope of ending this misery. So that it is
plain they were now totally deprived of all Offices and Dignities in the Common
Weal, and consequently could have then no place in the great Council, the
Parliament of the Nation, both for the raising of Taxes, and the making of
Laws: and though I grant Mr. Petyt and your self suppose you found a clause in
the Conquerors Magna Charta, B. A. P. p. 36.
whereby you would prove, that all the Freemen of this Kingdom, should hold
their Lands and Possessions Well and in Peace, free from all unjust Exactions
and Taillage, so as nothing be exacted or taken unless their Free-services,
which of right they ought and are bound to perform to us; and as it was
appointed to them, and given and granted to them by us as a perpetual right of
Inheritance, by the Common Council of the whole Kingdom. This Common Council
will not help you, for without doubt here were no Englishmen in it; for
certainly they would not grant away their own Lands to strangers; These were
the Saxon Lands which William had given in Fee to his Soldiers to hold them
under such services as he had appointed them, and that by right of Succession
or Inheritance.

We will now come to the second point, viz. the Privileges the Englishmen lost
as to their Estates, for whereas before the Conquest you affirm, the K. could
nor make Laws, nor raise Taxes without the Common Co^ncil of the Kingdom; it is
certain K. William, and his immediate Successors, did by their sole Authority
exercise both these Prerogatives: as for his Legislative power, it appears from
the words of his Coronation Oath, (as you your self have repeated it out of
Florence of Worcester, and Roger Hoveden,) the conclusion of which Oath is, se
velle re^^am legem statuere and tenere, Rapinas Injustaque Iudicia penitus
interdicire; Now the Legislative power was then lodged in him, why else did he
swear to appoint right Laws? For if the constitution had been settled as it is
at present, the Parliament could have hindered him from making any other; and
that he could do so appears by that yoke of servitude, Page 7.
which Matthew Paris (as well as other Authors) tells us, K. William by his own
Authority imposed upon the Bishoprics and Abbeys in England which held
Baronies, which they had hitherto enjoyed free from all secular servitude, he
now, says he, put under Military service sessing all those Bishoprics and
Abbeys, according to his pleasure, how many Knights or Soldiers each of them
should find to the King and his Successors: and putting the Rolls of this
Ecclesiastical Service in his Treasury, he caused to fly out of the Kingdom
many Ecclesiastics who opposed this wicked constitution: now if he could do
this upon so powerful a Body, as the Bishops and Abbots were at this time, he
might certainly as well raise what Taxes he pleased upon all the People of
England, and therefore Henry of Huntington tells us, that K. William upon his
return out of Normandy into England, Anglis importabile tributum imposuit. Lib.
3. p. 278. And that his Son William Rufus imposed what Taxes he would upon the
People, without consent of the Parliament appears, by that passage of William
of Malmesbury, which he relates in the Reign of this K. as also in his third
book de Gestis, Pontific^m, concerning Ranul^, whom from a very mean Clerk he
made Bishop of Du^ham, and Lord Treasurer; the rest I will give you in Latin,
Isle, siquando edictum regium processisset ut nominatum tributum Anglia
penderet, duplum adjici^bat, subinde* idente Rege ac dicente solum esse
hominem, qui sciret sic agitare ingenium, nec aliorum curares odium, dummodo
complaceret dominum. So that you may here see that the Kings Edict or
Proclamation, did not only impose the Tax at his pleasure, but his Treasurer
could double it when he had a mind to it, without consent of the great Council
or Parliament, as we now call it; and this Prerogative was exercised by diverse
of his Successors, till the Statute de Tallagi^ non concedendo was made.

But to come to the last head concerning the alteration of Trials for men's
Lives and Estates by the Conqueror, from what they were before; it is certain
that whereas before the Conquest there were no other Trials for men's lives but
by Juries, or else by Fire or Water Ordeal, which was brought in by the Danes;
the Conqueror, though he did not take way these, yet also added the law then in
use in Normandy, of Trying not only Criminal but Civil Causes by Duel or
Combat; all the difference was, that in criminal cases where there was no other
Proof, the accuser and accused fought with their Swords, and the party
vanquished was to lose his Eyes and Stones; but in civil causes they only
fought with Bas^oons headed with Horn, and Bucklers, and he or his Champion who
was overcome lost the Land, that was contended for; from whence you may take
notice also of a great alteration in the Law, not only concerning Trials, but
capital Punishments; so that whereas before the Conquest, all crimes, even Man
slaughter it self, were either ^ineable according to the Quality of the Person,
and the Rates set upon each man's pepzylo, or price of his head, as you will
find them set by the Laws of K. Ath^lstan.

I shall not insist much upon diverse lesser things, which K. William as a
Conqueror imposed upon the People of England, as disarming them of all
offensive Weapons, forbidding them to Hunt or Kill any Deer in his Chases or
Forests under the penalties of loss of Eyes and Members, as also keeping up
and reinforcing the Ancient Laws of Decenaries or Tythings, whereby every Ten
Families were bound with their tenth man or tything man, body for body of each
others good abearance; as also that Law forbidding all sitting up late at
Night, or Assemblies after eight of the clock, but that every one should go to
Bed, and put out both Fire and Candle at the ringing of the Coverte^ Bell;
these things I think are very sufficient to prove that K. William as a
Conqueror did very much abridge, and in some things wholly take away the
Ancient Privileges and Liberties of the L^gi^sh Nobility, Clergy and Commons,
and did also make many and great alterations, not only in the forms of
Pleadings, but also in the very (...) of our Laws, both Criminal and Civil; and
if he did not make more ^^^erations of the kind, it was wholly owing to his
free Will and Pleasure, since, a^ E^dmerus tells us, he ordered all Divine and
Secular things acccording to his pleasure.


F. That I may the better answer what you have said, I shall partly grant and
partly deny the matters of Fact you have alleged, and also further prove, that
if they had been all as you have laid them, yet would they not prove your
conclusion, that K. William by his own Arbitrary and Tyrannical Actions, could
create any Right by Conquest, either to him or to his Successors: And therefore
to begin with your first head, ( viz.) the Privileges of the English Nobility
as to Offices and Dignities, though I grant it was true, as the Authors you have
cited relate, that s^arce any Englishman was, when they Writ, either a Bishop,
Earl or Abbot, yet this is to be understood only of the latter end, and not the
beginning of his Reigns; for as to the Bishops and Abbots, I do not read of any
more than Stigand Archbishop of Canterbury, and Egelric Bishop of Durham, who
being deprived of their Bishoprics, had Successors put in their rooms in their
life times; and yet in the place of this last, not any Norman, but one Walcher
an English man was named by the K. to succeed: and as for the Earls, of all
those who had been against him and opposed his coming in, there was not one but
he received them into savor, and continued in his Dignity and Estate, as in
particular the Earls Eadwin and Morchar Brothers, together with Waltheof and
Siward, and Edgar A^^eling, whom they had named K. of England, all who kept
their Earldoms and Estates till terrified by the Kings severe and Tyrannical
proceedings, the three first of these ^led away as you have already shown, though
I confess Prince Edgar had for two or three years before this, fled into
Scotland; but yet was afterward restored to the Kings Favor and his Estate;
nor do I find any considerable alteration in the Kings manner of disposing of
his Honors or Preferments, either Ecclesiastical or Civil, till Earl Waltheo
being convicted of being in the Plot, with Ralph de Waher Earl of Norfolk, and
other Lords, as well English as Normans, to expel K. William; and from that
time (being the eighth year of his Reign) I grant he changed his whole course
of Government, and put no more Englishmen into any places of honor or profit;
though W. Malmesbury endeavors to excuse the Kings severity in these words, Inde
pr^positum regis fortassis merito excusatur, si^aliquando durior in Anglos
^u^rit, quod pen^ nullum eorum fidelem invenerit; though with this Authors good
leave, the K. had been the cause of this conspiracy, by his own Tyranny and
breach of Oaths, as I shall show you by and by.

So that either this K. was moved by just provocations thus to debar all
Englishmen from being preferred to Dignities or Offices, or he was not; if the
former, and that he had just cause so to do, it was no more than what any other
Foreign Prince who had no Hereditary Right to the Crown, would have done in the
like case; But if the latter, it was not only contrary to Justice, but also to
his own Coronation Oath, one clause of which, as Malmesbury shows us in his de
Gestis, Lib. 3. p. 271.
Pontificum was, quod se modeste erga subditos ageret, and aequo jure Anglos,
and Francos tractaret; so that this Kings Arbitrary and violent proceedings,
after he had ^or some time governed as a lawful King, though they might prove him
a Tyrant, yet they could by no means make him a Conqueror; And as for the
latter part of your Argument, whereby you would prove that in his Reign there
were no Englishmen in the great Councils of the Kingdom, that can only be
understood (in the strictest sense) of the times after the great Conspiracy I
have now mentioned; for before, it is very evident that there were many
Bishops, Earls and Barons still left, who must have been members of the great
Council. Nor can you prove that the Law I have mentioned against the King's
taking the Taillage or Taxes, without their consent, was made after that time;
but let it be made when it will, you shall never p^rsuade me it was enacted
without any Englishmen's being present, till y^u can prove to me that there
were no English Tenants in C^pite toward the end of (...) Reign, and that
there were then no Knights, Citizens or Burgesses that represented the Commons
in the great Council, and can give a better answer to those Arguments I have
given you to prove they were there; especially that remarkable clause in the
conclusion of this Kings Charter, to the Abbey of Westminster, which mentions
diverse Principal Persons, both of the Clergy and Laity, to have been summoned
to that famous Synod or great Council, when this Charter was granted.

I come now to your next head, whereby you would prove this King's Abridgment
of English Privileges as to their Estates and Properties; to begin with that
of the Legislative Power, which as you say, was then wholly in the King; admit
it were so, it will not prove that for which you urge it, viz. that it is a
sign of the Kings Absolute Conquest over the English; for if the great Council
of the Kingdom had then lost its ancient right, it was only his Normans and
Frenchmen, as well as the English, that he bereaved of their Ancient
Privilege, of giving their consent to Laws; since it is very certain that
neither the K. of France, nor the D. of Normandy could at that time make any
Laws without the consent of their Estates.

But the truth is, that your Conqueror could not do it neither; for if the
Normans he brought over with him, had, as you suppose, the greatest share of
all the Lands in England, they would have been too powerful a body of Men to be
thus made Slaves at his pleasure, but indeed his own Laws show the contrary,
for in that very Law it appears otherwise, Whereby all the Freemen of the
Kingdom were to hold their Lands and Possessions free from all unjust Exactions
and Taillage, L. L. Guil. 55.
and that nothing should be exacted of them, but their free service, which they
were bound to do according as it is appointed them by the K. and it is granted
them by an Hereditary Right for ever, by the Common Council of the whole
Kingdom; whereby you may see, that they had their Lands and Liberties granted
them, for an Hereditary Right, not only by the K. but by the Common Council of
the Kingdom, and that the K. could not alter K. Edward's Laws without their
consent; the Charter of K. Henry I. says expressly, Legem Regis Edwardi vobis
reddo cum illis emendationibus quibus Pater eam emendavit Concilio Baronum
suorum; Therefore as for that Authority you have brought out of H. Huntington,
that upon this Kings return from Normandy, he imposed a heavy Tax upon the
English, this is either to be understood of such a Tax as they gave him
voluntarily, though perhaps they durst not do otherwise, as the States of
Provence and Langu^doc are fain to do to the K. of France at this day, when he
requires it, and yet he does not claim those Countries by right of Conquest; or
if K. William imposed this Tribute without their consents, it was not only
contrary to the Law just now mentioned, but also to his own Coronation Oath;
whereby he swore to prohibit all unjust Rapines, and that he should behave
himself equitably toward his Subjects, with which certainly his taking away
their Money without their consents would by no means consist: but to answer
that part of the Coronation Oath which you think makes most for you, that
whereby he swore only to make Right Laws, which must have supposed the Power to
have been in himself, because the Parliament might have hindered him from doing
otherwise, this is but a cavil, for it is already proved that he was to make
Laws and raise Taxes by the Common Council of the Kingdom, and therefore these
words may very well bear another sense, and do only give the K. a Negative
voice of passing such Laws as the great Council should offer to him, or else
such as he might propose to them for their consent; and I suppose you* will not
deny but that it is very possible, that either the K. or the Parliament may
propose such Laws as may not seem equitable, or Just, and then certainly both
the one and the other have a negative vote, and ought not to give their
consents to them.

But to answer your last instance whereby you would prove that this King as a
Conqueror imposed what Taxes and Services he pleased, not only upon the Laity
but the Clergy too, by making the Bishoprics, and greater Abbeys liable to
Knights Service, which you suppose to have been done by his own sole Authority,
without any consent of the Common Council of the Kingdom, this is only gratis
Dict^m, and is indeed altogether improbable, for if the K had done this by his
sole Power, he would have imposed this Service upon all the Abbeys in England,
whose Lands might have been as well reduced to Knights Fees, as those that were
put under that service, and so might have been forced to find as many Soldiers
as they had Fees, as well as the Bishoprics and greater Abbeys; but indeed the
Clergy were too powerful a body to be thus Arbitrarily imposed upon, and they
would soon have complained to the Pope against the K. for this new servitude he
had imposed upon them; and therefore I think we may with much more safety
conclude with Mr. Seldom in his Titles of honor, that this imposition of
Knights Service upon the Bishoprics and Abbeys was done by the Common Council
of the Kingdom, It being too great a matter to be done without it, for it
appears by Eadmerus that the K. held a Council this very year, though the Laws;
and Proceedings of it are all lost; and this is the more likely to be so,
because this imposition was not laid upon all the Abbeys in England, but only
upon the Bishoprics, and such Abbeys as were of Royal Foundation, and held
immediately of the King before your Conquest, and were only such as enjoyed
whole Baronies, as Mat. Paris there tells us.

I shall now come to your last head, whereby you would prove that your
Conqueror by his sole power, altered the Course of Trials, and introduced the
custom of Duel or single Combat, in Civil as well as Criminal Causes; the chief
argument you have for this, is, that there is no mention made of this trial by
Duel in our English Saxon Laws before the Conquest, which is but a negative
argument at the best, and you can show me no Ancient Author that says expressly
that K. William introduced it, and though I grant it is first mentioned in his
Laws, yet does it not therefore prove that it was not here before, since it was
certainly in use among the Francs and Longobards, who were German Nations as
well as the Saxons; but admit it were first introduced by the Conqueror, this
was no badge of Conquest, for the Normans as well as the English, were subject
to this Trial, which was in use in France and Normandy long before this King's
coming in; so that admit he first established it here, it might not have been
done by his sole Power, but by some Law made in the great Council of the
Kingdom, though it be now lost; as we have very few of the Laws that were made by
this K. now left us, besides those which are called the Laws of K. Edward with
this Kings alteration of them, all which was certainly done in the Common
Council: the like I may say concerning the alteration of Punishment for Deer
stealing and other crimes, which were either Punishable by Pecuniary Mulc^s, or
else by death, before the coming in of the Normans; since those alterations
might be also made by the consent of the great Council* but that the same
Forest Laws, were in use before the Conquest as after you may see in the Forest
Laws of King Knute, as you will find in Sir H. Spelman's Glossary, Title
Foresta, only the Punishments are there Pecuniary* or else loss of liberty,
which after your Conquest was changed into the loss of Eyes and Members.

But as for other lesser matters, as his disarming the English and forbidding
Night Meetings, if these things were done, (as I do not find any express Law
for them, for there is no such thing mentioned in the Law de nocturnis
Custodiis) they were either practiced by this K. for his own security, after
the English had by their frequent insurrections made him use all the means he
could to prevent it for the future, so that at the most they were but temporary
constitutions, and did not last long; nor could this Law of the Conver^e^ Bell
be any badge of slavery on the English, since we find the same custom to have
been used in Scotland, whom you will not say are a Conquered Nation; nor do I
find the Normans after they came over, were any more exempted from this Law
than the English Natives: but I much wonder you should reckon the Laws of
Decenaries, or Tythings, among the badges of Norman slavery, since if you have
read any thing in our Saxon Laws you will find, Vid Ingulph History.
as Ingulph tells us, that K. Alfred first appointed ut omnis indigena l^galis,
in aliqua centuria and decima existerit, and si quis suspectus de aliquo
latrocinio per suam centuriam, vel decariam condimnatus, paenam demeri^am
incurreret? So that whatever other Laws you find, either of our Saxon or Danish
Kings, or else among those of K. William, concerning Triburghs, and Tything^,
It was only to confirm or reinforce this Ancient constitution: but that not
only the meanest sort of F^^emen, but the greatest and best Nobility and Gentry
were subject to this Law of Tythings, may appear by that Law I have already
quoted of King Knutes, whereby every Freeholder was to have his Family in his
Pledge, that is, was bound to answer for him to the K. and if he were accused
to have let him run away by his consent, he was to purge himself by his own
Oath, and also the Oaths of five other Thanes, that he was innocent; so
likewise the Laws of K. Edward confirmed by K. William are very particular on
this Subject; Vi. Hoveden.
that all Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, and Barons, should keep their Knights
and Servants there mentioned in their Frithborg, that is, in their Fran^ Pledge,
whereof the Lords themselves were to be the sureties, a^ appears by what
follows, viz. that if any of them offended, their Lords should be obliged to do
right in their Courts, and to the same purpose is the 49th Law in Ingulph's
Copy of these Laws, the words are these, Echascun Seniour ait sun seria^^u sun
plege, que si nile rete que ait a dreit el Hundred, that is, that every Lord
keep his Servant in his Pledge, that if he offend right may be done in the
Hundred.

So that upon the whole matter, I can see nothing considerable imposed by your
Conqueror upon the free born English Subjects, which they were not tied to
before the Conquest; or which did not reach all the Normans he brought over
with him, as well as they.


M. I do confess I did not believe there was so much to be said to prove that
William the Conqueror never altered the Laws of England, in any of its material
parts; but since you have gone thus far, pray proceed to show me, that he any
ways confirmed all the Laws of the Saxon Kings his Predecessors, since I
conceive as a Conqueror he might justly have vacated what of them he would, and
I do not see any thing in his Coronation Oath, that could have obliged him from
it.


F. I doubt not but to give you very good satisfaction in this point, for not
only your Conquerors Will was never declared, that the former La^s should be
Abrogated, and till such declaration all Laws ought to remain in force, even in
the Conquest of Christians against Christians, according to Sir Ed. Coke's
opinion in Calvin's case; P. 17.
but indeed the Ancient and Former Laws of the Kingdom, were so far from being
abrogated, that they were all confirmed by him; for in his fourth year, by the
advice of his Baronage he summoned to London, as the words are in the book of
Litch field, Omnes Nebiles, sapientes and lege sud eruditos, sut eorum leges
and Consuetudines audiret; Or as Hoveden relates it out of a Collection of Laws
written by Glanvil, Fecit, summoniri per universos Consulatus Angliae, Anglos
Nobiles, and sapientes, etc. and twelve were returned out of every County, who
showed what the Customs of the Kingdom were, which (as Mr. Seldom tells us in
his History of Tithes) being written by the hands of Aldred Archbishop of York,
and Hugo Bishop of London, were with the request of the same Barons, confirmed
in that Assembly, which was a Parliament of that time: and then in Hoveden
follow the Laws of Edward the Confessor so confirmed by K. William, among which
is that Law concerning the Office of a King, which I have now given you; and
before this at the very beginning of his Reign, he also confirmed the
Privileges of the City of London, as appears by his Charter in Saxon, which is
to be seen at this day, which is also confirmed by Ordoricus Vitalis, Id. lib.
IV. fol. 505, and 506.
Guli^lmus Rex multa Lundoniae postquam Coronatus est, prudent^r, just,
clemen^^que disposuit quaedam odipsius Civitatis commoda, vel dienitatem, alia
(...) genti proficerent Vniversae; Nonnulla quibus consuleret^r Eccles^is
terrae* ^ura quaecumquedictavit optimis rationibus, sanxit, Iu^icium Rectum
nulla persona nequicquam ab eo postulavit? So that nothing is plainer than that
at the beginning of ^wor^ ^eign he strove to oblige all sorts of People as well
of the Clergy as Laity to a good (...) of his Government.


M. But yet for all (...) self have granted, that after the time of his
Confirmation of these (...) you cannot deny, whether provoked by the frequent
(...) or else resolving to make use of his Right by Conq^est, (...) upon the
English Nobility and Gentry, and outed most of (...) and forced them to flee
into Foreign Countries; so (...) Sword, as soon as ever he came to the (...)
whatsoever English he thought might be dange^ou^ (...) notwithstanding his
Confirmation of K. Edward's Law he (...) by Conquest. And as for your (...)
C^^querors confirming these Laws the (...), B. A. A. p. 299.
whether he admitted any of the (...) consult of the weighty Affairs of the
(...) thoroughly settled himself on the English Throne, especially if it be
considered that K. William kept not all the promises which he made at all
times; Now as your self allow, this grant was made in the fourth year of his
Reign, but he had not then settled himself so well as he would, nor had he then
made an entire Conquest of the Nation; that was not done until after the great
appearance of the Natural English in Arms, and the great meeting which
Frederick Abbot of St. Albans with others headed at Berkhamslead, which was not
until above four or five years after this confirmation; so that your Testimony
from the Litchfield Chronicle and Roger Hoveden, being before he settled himself
as he could, and intended to do, signifies nothing: and that it was from
sometime after this transaction, that Mat. Paris reckons the thorough Conquest
and subduing the Nation; as appears by this note in the beginning of the Life
of Abbot Paul Successor to Frederick, Hic primus Abbas hujus Ecclesi^^suti,
postquam Anglia Normannis penitus fuit s^bjugata.


F. I will not deny the matter of Fact in great part to be as you say: but
whether the English were to blame to make these Insu^rections, or whether they
were provoked to it by the Kings unreasonable severities, I have not now time
to dispute; if it were their fault, he had no doubt very good cause to do as he
did, and to punish such as were guilty; But it was altogether unjust and
tyrannical, to punish the innocent with the guilty; Nor could he have any right
to do it as a Conqueror, since by taking his Coronation Oath to deal mercifully
with his Subjects, and to treat both English and French with equal right, he
had renounced that Title; and that he looked upon himself as a Tyrant, if he
had Governed without being Crowned or taking the same Oath as his Predecessors,
I shall prove to you from Abbot Bro^ton's Chronicle, the Author of which lived
in the time of K Richard, I. who has ( Col 962.) these words, Cumque Willelmus
Dux Normannorum Conquestor Angliae Tyranni nomen exhorresce^et and nomen
Legitimi Principis induere vellet, a Stigando Cant. Archiepiscopo in Reg^ia
petiit consecrari, etc. as

But your reply that he did not show himself a perfect Conqueror till he w^n
thoroughly settled, is very pleasant; as if being solemnly Crowned, and taking a
Oath to govern Justly and according to Law, and after four years quiet
possession and a voluntary confirmation of the Laws of his Predecessors, were
not sufficient signs of his peaceable settlement upon the Throne; unless you
will have a King to be never settled until he has by the force of a standing
Army, got sufficient power to do all he designs, that is, to take away his
Subjects Liberties and Estates at his pleasure, contrary to his own Oath, and
the Laws he has made; If those be signs of a thorough settlement, pray consider
whether the King that is gone away, was ever thoroughly settled at this Rate
though I confess he was in a very fair way to give us such a thorough settlement;
But since you date this thorough settlement from that great transaction of
Abbot Frederick, I am not afraid to appeal to Mat. Paris, Vi. Mat. Paris in
vita Frederici Abbatu.
from whom you have borrowed this relation; where he tells us thus; That after
Lanfranc was made Archbishop, the K. being now strengthened with both Swords,
began more severely and manifestly to oppress the English; who seeing it nearly
concerned their very lives, calling a great many together, they made Edgar
Atheling their Leader, in whom the English placed all their hopes; but among
all the English Frederick Abbot of St. Albans, was the chief promoter thereof,
being a generous Man, and to be seared for his Riches and Power; Therefore the
K. began to be vehemently afraid left he should lose the whole Kingdom which he
had gained by so much effusion of Blood, and also hazard of his life; and
therefore being luckily taught by the Archbishops Prudence, he began to act
more mildly with the chief men of the Kingdom, humbly proposing Terms of
Peace, and with a pleasant countenance inviting them to a Treaty (though
deceitful, as the end at last declared) therefore the said English met him at
Berkhamstead thinking no harm, under the leading of Abbot Frederick, where
after many disputes, Archbishop Lanfranc being present, the K. swore upon all
the Relics of the Church of St. Albans, as also upon the Holy Evangelists,
Inviolably to observe the good ancient approved Laws of the Kingdom, which the
Picus Kings of England his Predecessors, and chiefly K. Edward had Established
and so being pacified they all returned home very well satisfied. So that you
see this was the third time, whereby he renounced all right of Conquest (if
ever he had any) by swearing expressly to observed all the ancient Laws of the
Kingdom, since they found his Coronation Oath would not bind him, besides his
so solemn confirmation of K. Edwards Laws, in the great Council of the Kingdom
not long before.


M. But pray read a little farther, and see how he resented this force now put
upon him, and whether at all he intended to keep what he had sworn, or to
divest himself of his Right of Conquest; and therefore give me now leave to
read the rest out of this Author; But the K. cunningly hiding his designs,
within a few days after, studied how to overcome and supplant those dispersed
and asunder, whom he could not, when joined and consederate together; which he
performed by killing, disinheriting, and banishing many of them, and violating
the above mentioned Laws; and the English being thus spoiled at pleasure, and
impoverisht, without any legal Judgment, he therewith enriched his Normans, to
the great provocation of his natural English subjects, who had of their own
accord thus exalted him; So that you see he never intended to keep his Oath
that was thus forced upon him, for Conquerors do not love to be made Slaves to
their words whether they will or no; and therefore I may give you an answer
both as to his Coronation Oath, B. A. A. p. 289.
as also to this now mentioned, from an old English Proverb, that there was
never any Oath, but was either broken or kept; more Conquerors than one have
used fair pretenses, and made smooth promises, and dealt cunningly with the
People to carry on their designs, and have at first taken plausible Oaths, and
broken them afterward, nay took them when they intended not to keep them, and
knew they could not; and for Oath breaking Harold in his answer to Duke
William, when he demanded the Kingdom of him, had given him a fair example,
that Stu^tum Sacramentum est frangendum, many specious Oaths, Vows, and
Covenants were contrived, and taken by crafty and designing men in the late
times, and imposed upon the People contrary to the Oath of Allegiance, they had
before taken, for no other ends than to cheat them into Rebellion, and to make
them Authors of their own slavery which was discovered too late, when they were
under the power of an Army, and could not help themselves; as I could prove at
large would the time (...).


F. Before I give you a positive answer to what you have said, though I do
believe a great deal of the matter of Fact to be true, as Mat. Paris has
related it either from Tradition, or else from the Legier book of his own Abbey,
yet I very much doubt whether out of hatred to this Kings severe proceedings,
they did not represent K. William's cruelty and severity much greater than it
was; for though I grant after this time, he turned a great many more of the
English Nobility and Gentry out of their Estates, and put diverse of them to
death; yet whether he did this without any color of Law or Legal Process, is
very much to be doubted, since we find many forfeitures mentioned in Doomesday
book, which had been needless if the King had seized all the English Estates
without any Legal Trial; I. A. A. p. 100, 101.
as for example, in Essex, in Barnstable hundred. In Bura de istis Hidis est
una de hominibus soris sactis erga Regem; and this was the way of expression in
the Active Voice; we find in No^folk, Earl Ralf held such Lands Quando se foris
fecit; But more particularly in Cambridgeshire in Wardune, Hardwin holds of
Richard's Ancestors, but Ralf Waders held it, Die quo deliqui^ contra Regem;
all which would never have been inserted, could this King have taken away men's
Lives and Estates without any color of Law or Justice, and therefore you may
find in all the Historians of his time, that after the great Plot wherein so
many Norman as well as English Lords were concerned, and for which Roger Earl
of Hereford, and Ralph Earl of Norfolk and Suffolk both Normans, had conspired
with Earl Waltheof and other English Lords to call in the Danes, and dispossess
the King; yet they were convicted by a legal Trial of their Peers, and suffered
death for it; So that in this he distributed equal Justice to the Normans as
well as the English, who thereupon forfeited all their Estates; and yet
notwithstanding this, there were some Native Englishmen still lest, who though
they had been in Arms against the King, at the beginning of his Reign, yet were
nevertheless reconciled to him, and restored to their Estates; as for example,
Ederic Surnamed the Forester, F. 636.
who, as Florence of Worcester tells us, was reconciled to King William, and
accompanied him into Scotland soon after; as also Herward the Son of Leofric
Lord of Brunne, who having lost his Estate, and being Outlawed, (as Ingulph
tells us) Took Arms against the King William, P. 67, 68.
and joined himself with those in the Isle of Ely; and yet after diverse great
Battles, as well against the King as his Commanders, yet at length having
obtained his Inheritance by the Kings allowance, he finished his days in Peace:
and now here were two considerable English Barons which still enjoyed their
Estates, I A. A. 105.
notwithstanding all King William's severity; and yet I do believe it will
puzzle your Dr. to show me their names in Doomesday-book; so that that Book
alone is not it seems a certain Rule to discover what Englishmen were then
Barons or Tenants in Capite.

But admit all this to be true as you your self have represented it, can this
Kings perjury to his Subjects, and breach of all Laws, after so many solemn
Oaths; give him a right as a Conqueror over the Lives and Estates of his
English Subjects* and that after he had solemnly renounced his Right of
Conquest, by so many solemn transactions with his Subjects, with whom you
suppose he still made War, after he had for so many years laid down his arms,
at this rate I cannot tell when subjects may be safe; for let Kings that come
to a Crown by a mixed title, partly by force, and partly by right, take never so
many Oaths, to maintain the ancient constitution of the Government, together
with the Rights and Privileges of the People; it is but his saying afterward,
when he has sufficient power, that they were forced upon him, and that he
never designed to keep them, and his business is done, and he may then take
away his Subjects Lives and Estates by this pretended right of Conquest
whenever he pleases; nor does this only extend to himself alone, but to all his
Heirs and Successors, who claim under that Title, let them take never so many
Coronation Oaths, or make never so many Declarations to the contrary; since
they all claim under the same divine Title of the Sword, that is, as you will
have it, receive their Crowns immediately from God, and then can never forfeit
them, let them tyrannise to the utmost degree imaginable; for you have provided
them with two easy and pleasant excuses, that all promises are either broken
or kept, and Stultam Sacramentum est Frangendum; and I cannot but smile to see
what an excellent excuse you have found out, for all the breach of Oaths and
Covenants, of those engaged in the late Civil Wars, since they might very well
plead they had so many Royal Presidents for so doing, as sufficiently
authorized it; unless you will have that to be Perjury in Subjects, which must
be a Divine Prerogative in Kings.

And therefore let me tell you, I am very glad for your own sake, that there is
no body here but you and I, since all the company would have cried out, and
said, that this way of arguing were to make open War, not only upon all the
Laws and Privileges of this Nation, but also to put the King and People in a
state of War against each other; for if he once declares by such Overt Acts as
these of King William's, that he will not be tied, neither by his Coronation
Oath, nor by any Laws he has made, I doubt their Oaths of Allegiance will not
long bind them neither, and they will be very ready to reply, that whatever
power began, and is continued by force and violence, may also be cast off by
the like means; and when a King and his People are brought once into this
state, it is easy to foretell what will be the event; either he must turn out,
or they must be all Slaves: and I wish it was not owing to such Jesuitical
flattering Councils as this, that the King first lost the Affections of his
People, and then his Crown: since Father Peter's himself with the rest of the
Jesuits, and Arbitrary Ministers of the Cabal, could never have instilled worse
Principles than these; therefore I pray for the future either get better
reasons or keep those to your self.

But God be thanked both King James and K. Charles the First, had much better
thoughts of the Laws and Liberties of the Nation, since the former has
solemnly declared in a Preamble to the second Act of Parliament, in the first
year of his Reign; 1. Iacobi. Cap. 2. Fol. 1157.
That not only the Royal Prerogative, but the Peoples security of their Lands,
Livings and Privileges, were secured and maintained by the ancient fundamental
Laws, Privileges and Customs of this Realm; and that by the abolishing or
altering of them, it was impossible, but that present confusion will fall upon
the whole state and frame of this Kingdom. And his Son was of the same opinion
in his first declaration at the beginning of the late Wars. The Law (says he)
is the Inheritance of every Subject, P. 28.
and the only security he can have for his Life or Estate; and the which being
neglected, or disesteemed (under what specious show soever) a great measure of
infelicity, if not irreparable confusion must without doubt fall upon them.


M. If I had no love at all for the Government and Liberties of my Country, (as
I thank God I have a great affection for both) yet should I not have the
Impudence to contradict the sense of two Kings, and a Parliament; neither have
I so little value for those things which are the foundations of our happiness,
as to desire they should be Sacrificed to an Arbitrary Power; nor on the other
side have I so great a value for them, as to endeavor their preservation by
Rebellion, and deposing the King, which since I look upon as altogether
unlawful, we are then to follow the Apostles Rule, and not do Evil that Good
may come of it: but as for what I have urged in excuse of the Conquerors
Perjury, and breach of Laws, I confess I have said more than the matter will
well bear, but I hope you will excuse it; since I confess the argument is none
of mine, but the Doctors from whom I borrowed it, and I did not consider the
bad consequences of it; yet this much I must still freely affirm that neither
King William the Conqueror, nor his present Majesty, who is his heir by an
Hereditary Right of Succession, either could then, or can now at this day be
lawfully resisted, much less can be deposed, or can forfeit their Royal Dignity
for any Male administration or Tyranny whatsoever.


F. Pray give me your reason for that, since I think you may be very well
satisfied, that this Kings Title by Conquest from King William his Ancestors
can signify nothing, though I should grant the utmost you can demand: and
therefore though I am as much against Rebellion and Deposing of Princes as you
can be, and doing of evil that good may come of it; yet the question remains
still to be decided between us, whether that resistance I maintain be Rebellion
or not, and whether it be Treason to deny obedience to a Prince, who has done
his utmost to lose the very name of King* by not observing those conditions on
the performance of which he can only keep his Royal Dignity: now since I think
I have fully proved the two Points I undertook, ( viz.) both that of the Kings
forfeiting the Crown in the cases I have put, as also that of the matter of
Fact, whereby you would maintain that the King has an indeseasable Right to the
Crown of this Realm, ^as an Absolute Monarch by the Conquest: now since you
decline arguing this Point any farther, because you find it is not to be
maintained, pray let me know what other reasons you have why you cannot come
over to my opinion.


M. Though I am not yet satisfied, but that a great deal more may be farther
urged by those who are better versed in this controversy, to prove that his
Majesty has an unforfeitable Right to our Allegiance by the Conquest of King
William and his Predecessors; yet I shall not now insist any longer upon that
Title, which though our Kings have by so many gracious condescentions to the
People of this Nation, seemed to wave, yet have they never renounced it as I
know of; but since his Majesty was settled in the Throne as an Absolute and
Lawful King, without any Competitor, by a long series of a^, Hereditary
Succession of above six hundred years standing, and confirmed by the Oaths of
Allegiance of the People of this Nation both to him and his Ancestors, he is
not only our King by the Laws of Man, but God also; to whom, and not to the
People, he owes his Crown; and can therefore neither forfeit it, nor be
accountable to them for it; and when you can prove the contrary you may then
convince me to be of your opinion.


F. We have already partly argued this Point at our third and fourth
discourses, concerning the lawfulness of resistance, but since perhaps you may
have still somewhat farther to urge upon so important a question, I desire to
hear the utmost you can say, to prove that Kings owe their Crowns to none but
God, and therefore ought never to be resisted, neither can forfeit their Crown
upon any pretense whatsoever, and therefore pray appoint me some other time
when I may wait on you again, and fully discuss this Point, since it is now
very late.


M. I am sorry I cannot appoint you any certain time, for since I see so great
a confusion reigns every where, and that there is like to be no Term, and
consequently no business for men of my Profession, I am resolved to retire for
two or three months into the Country, till I see things a little better settled
than they are at present, and I heartily wish that the Convention (which I hear
is like to meet in some time) may endeavor the Peace and Settlement of the
Nation, by sending for the King and the Prince of Wales, out of France; since I
do not desire any more Conquests, nor the Government of a Foreign Prince, as
long as we have a lawful King of our own, who will govern us again if he might,
but as soon as I return to Town you shall be sure to know it; In the mean time
I am your Servant.


F. I am yours and wish you a good Journey.


FINIS.
Bibliotheca Politica: OR A DISCOURSE By WAY of DIALOGUE, On these following
Questions; I. In what Sense all Civil Power is derived from God, and in what
Sense may be also from the People. II. Whether His Present Majesty King
William, when Prince of Orange, had a Just Cause of War against King James the
II. III. Whether the Proceedings of His Present Majesty, before he was King, as
also of the late Convention, in respect of the said King James, is justifiable
by the Law of Nations, and the Constitution of our Government.


Collected out of the Best Authors, as well Ancient as Modern.

Dialogue the Eleventh.

LONDON, Printed for R. Baldwin in Warwick Lane, near the Oxford-Arms; where
also may be had the First, Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Seventh,
Eighth, Ninth and Tenth Dialogues. 1694.

Authors made use of in this Dialogue, and how denoted in the Margin.

The History of the Desertion, H. D. The Desertion discussed, D. D. Some
Observations upon the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of the Kings of England, O.
E. I. A Discourse of the Illegality of the Late Ecclesiastical Commission, I.
E. C.
ADVERTISEMENT.
ON tke first Day of the next Term will be published the Twelfth and Last
Dialogue, and also a large Index to the whole Work.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
BEing almost arrived at the end of my intended design, I thought fit to let
you know, that I hoped to have made this the last Discourse, that I should have
troubled the World with upon these Subjects; but when I came to reduce my Notes
into form, I found that these few sheets would not contain all that could well
be said on either side upon the foregoing questions; and therefore am forced to
refer what remains to be said concerning the Vacancy of the Throne, and Their
Present Majesty's Title thereunto till the next Dialogue, which I intend shall
be the last; And which I should not have drawn to that length, had it not been
for the benefit of those Gentlemen and others, who have not Time or Money to
buy or peruse the vast quantity of Pamphlets that have been written upon these
Subjects; as also that such as have perused them, may find together in this and
the following Discourse, all that has been urged on the one side or other upon
these important Subjects.

And since the great number of Treatises of this kind, have rather served to
confound than instruct ordinary Readers, I resolved to make use of the words of
very few of them, only to take the chiefest and strongest Arguments on either
side, and fairly to represent them at once to the Readers View, who I hope has
the discretion to judge which are best, since I declare I write for no Party
but purely for Truth; and therefore I have now, and shall still endeavor to
avoid all Personal Reflections in this as well as the ensuing Dialogue, not
only on Their Present Majesty's, but also on King James, since I remember he
was a Crowned Head, and is still the Father of our Illustrious Queen, let his
failings have been what they will.

But I hope the Reader will not be scandalized, if I have so far followed the
opinions of the ablest Divines as well as Lawyers, of this and other Nations,
in making one of the Parties in this Dialogue assert the consent of the People,
us the only just and natural means of conferring a just right to Civil Power,
since the learned Mr. Hooker in his first book of Ecclesiastical Policy lays it
down as a Principle, P. 70.
that in every Politic Society^ ^^t is impossible that any should have
complete, lawful Pow^^, bu^^y the consent of men, or the immediate appointment
of God; and Chancellor Fortescue in his Discourse de Laudibus Legum Angliae, (
12, and 13. Chapters) supposes all Kingly ^ower, as well what is Absolute, as
that which is Politic or limited by Laws, to have proceeded at first from the
Peoples consent, not that the Power it self is otherwise than from God, only he
has made use of the People as an Instrument whereby to convey it; and I hope
none of those who are still for King James's Interest will be offended at this
Doctrine, since those that have writ with the greatest Judgment for his
absolute indefeasible Title to the Crown, have placed it in his Legal Right to
it, by the Laws of the Land, which all must own, could not have been made
without the Peoples Consent.

I have but one thing more to desire of you, which is your Patience and
Attention, if some of the Speeches in this Dialogue are longer than ordinary,
since they are upon subjects that would not well bear interruption; and to tell
you farther, the Press staying for the Sheets, I had not time to make them
shorter.

THE Eleventh Dialogue BETWEEN Mr. MEANWELL a Civilian, AND Mr. FREEMAN a
Gentleman.
F. DEar Sir, you are welcome to Town, you have been absent a long time, and
indeed I wonder how you could stay away so long, when such great things, as the
King to have Abdicated, and placing his Son and Daughter in the Throne have
been transacted.


M. I thank you kindly Sir, but yet I must tell you, that I have been so little
satisfied with what your Convention has done in these matters, that the very
hearing of it has been a great affliction to me, and it would have certainly
been a much greater, had I been upon the place and seen such horrid things as
the Deposition of a King, the disinheriting of his right Heir, and the setting
up the Prince and Princess of Orange, who certainly could have no right to the
Crown as long (...) the King lives, nor yet after his death as long as the
Prince of Wales is in being.


F. I confess these are very high Charges if they would hold, but if you please
to consider the Hypothesis I proposed at our last Meeting, That the King had by
breach of the Original Contract made between his Ancestors and Predecessors,
and the People of this Nation, to observe the Fundamental Laws and
Constitutions of the Kingdom, forfeited his Right to the Crown: All that has
been done in this great Affair, I suppose may be very well maintained and
justified from the necessity of the thing, and of maintaining the Fundamental
Constitution of the Government; and therefore pray give me leave to put you in
mind how far I have proceeded in the p^oo^ of this Assertion: First, I have
made out that the King of this Real^ is not the sole Supreme Power thereof,
neither ever was so from the very Institution of Kingly Government in this
Island.

Secondly, I have also proved that the King, not having the sole Power, must
hold that share thereof which he enjoys upon this implied or tacit condition,
that if he usurp, what does not belong to him, and the People do assert their
Right by opposing his Unjust Violence and Usurpations, and that he still
obstinately persists in this Violation, he certainly thereby loses, and
forfeits not only that part of the Power which he so unjustly usurped, but also
his own too; and for this I gave you the Authority of the Learned Grotius at
our last Meeting.

Thirdly, I have also answered your main Argument of King William the
Conquerors obtaining by the Sword, and Conquest* of King Harold an Absolute
Right, and uncondition'd Power for himself and his Successor^ descended from
him, over the People of this Kingdom; for I think I have sufficiently made out,
that King William had no other Right to the Crown of England than by the
Testament of King Edward the Confessor, and the E^ection and Recognition of the
People; and this I have proved from the unexceptionable Authorities of the best
Historians of that Time; so that if he afterward acted otherwise, and contrary
to his Coronation Oath, it was not as a Lawful King, but as a Tyrant and an
Usurper on the Rights and Liberties of the People, and could not by his own
Unjust Act acquire any Lawful Power so to Govern this Kingdom; and therefore
whatever Title King William or his Successors can pretend to, it must be by
virtue of the Election of the first King of the Saxon Line, from whom all the
Kings of England since Henry Y. are descended, and consequently a^e obliged to
hold the Crown under the same Conditions on which it was first conferred: And
though I grant, that ever since the Reign of Edward I. the Crown has been no
longer claimed by Election, but by Succession of him that really was or else
was presumed to be the Right Heir; yet this different way of ac^uiring the
Crown does not at all alter the condition or manner of holding it, s^^e ou^
Kings have always after that time as before been, tied to the same, or rather
^^^cter Ter^^ in their Coronation Oaths, to observe and keep the Laws and
Customs of this Realm; and also that the Power of the Great Council of the
Kingdom or Parliament making Laws, raising Taxes, and redressing of Grievances
arising (...) the Unjust Exercise, and Illegal Encroachments of the Kings
Prerogative, has been exerted ever since the Crown became Elective, as much as
ever it was before.

Lastly; I think I have sufficiently made out that King James has violated the
Fundamental Constitution of the Kingdom, in those several Instances I have
already given, and am also ready farther to make it out if you require it; so
that this being the case, I can see no reason to the contrary, why the Crown or
Legal Authority should not become forfeited to the People who at first
conferred this Power on the first King of the West Saxons.


M. I must confess you have done your endeavor to prove those Assertions you
have now laid down, but I am not yet satisfied that you truly have done it: But
however, not to run into unneccessary disputes, and repetition of what has been
already argued, and which I see you are too obstinate to recede from, I shall
now only oppose what you last asserted concerning the Crown's being forfeited
to the People upon the King's pretended Breach of the Original Contract; for
besides the absurdity of making the Crown forfeitable to the People, who are
and ever were Subjects, and not Princes or Governors; whereas all forfeitures
still supposed a Right in the persons who are to take it as superior to the
party forfeiting; there is also a greater error and mistake in your supposing
all Civil and Legal Power to be derived from the People, and by them conferred
upon their Kings or Governors; whereas the Scriptures plainly affirm, and all
Divines so interpret them, that all Civil Power and Authority is wholly from
God, and not from the people, who even in Elective Kingdoms, though they may
name and design the Person whom they will have to be their King, yet is the
Power wholly from God, who alone has right to Govern Mankind; and therefore as
the people do not confer the Power, so neither can it be forfeitable to them
from whom it was never derived; and so much I told you at the Conclusion of our
last Meeting, though I had not then time fully to urge this Argument, as now I
have; and this will press the more upon you, because you your self have already
granted at several Meetings, that all Civil and Regal power is derived from
God, and not from the people; and therefore your notion of a Prince or Monarchs
forfeiting to them, is wholly false and precarious.


F. If this be all that you have to object against our Assertion of the King's
forfeiting his Royal Authority to the people, I think I can easily answer those
Objections; for as to the first absurdity which you lay to our charge, how an
Authority can be forfeited by a King or Superior to his Subjects or Vassals,
the absurdity lies on your side; for I do not suppose this forfeiture to be
made to the people as Subjects, but to them considered as a Community of
Masters of Families, and Freemen, who as the Descendants and Representatives of
those who made the first King upon a certain Contract, or Condition upon the
nonperformance of this Original Contract, do thereupon cease to be Subjects,
as a Servant ceases to be so, and becomes again sui furis upon his Masters
nonperformance of the bargain made between them; and so this Authority thus
forfeited, returns to the Community of Masters of Families and Freemen, who
once conferred it upon the first King; nor needs this forfeiture any more
suppose a Superiority in the persons who are to take it over the Prince that
commits it, than when by the Law of England Tenant for Life aliens in Fee, He
in reversion may immediately enter upon the Estate as forfeited to him, Vide
Cook upon Litt. p. 251.
though the person that held it was perhaps his own Father.


M. But is not this then to recede from your former concession, whereby you
grant that Civil Authority is derived from God, and not from the people at all,
whereas you now suppose them the only Original or Fountain of Civil Authority,
and from them to be derived to all Princes and Monarchs?


F. This difficulty wholly proceeds from your not rightly understanding the
manner of God's conferring Civil Power or Authority upon those that exercise
it: For the better clearing of which difficulty, pray let me ask you two or
three Questions; First, pray tell me whether you are still of the Op^^ion that
Monarchy is so much of Divine Institution, as that no Government but that may
be lawfully Instituted by Men?


M. I will not now affirm, that Monarchy is of Divine Right; but this much I
may safely over, by what we can find in Scripture, that God instituted no sort
of Government but that; and he did not make Saul or David to be only like those
Equivocal Kings, who might be deposable at the will of the Estates, but
conferred part of his own Divine Power upon them without any conditions or
limitations whatsoever; but as for those Governments called Commonwealths,
though without doubt they are not of Divine Institution, yet certainly the
power of Life and Death which they exercise, is wholly from God; since, as I
have already said, a Man not having power over his own life, cannot confer that
upon another which he had not in himself.


F. Well, I am glad we are so far agreed, that Commonwealths are endued with
real Authority or Majesty as well as Monarchs, and that from no less Author
than from God himself; so that whatever you have said concerning God's
Institution of no other Government than Monarchy, is either not true, or not to
the matter in hand; for in the first place, I have already proved at our thi^d
Meeting, that the first Government God Instituted among the Jews, was an
Aristocra^y, under Moses, Joshua, and the Judges, reserving the Kingly Power
over them to himself: And though it is likewise true, that God divested himself
of great part of this Kingly Power when he anointed Saul King, yet God's
Institution of Monarchy among the Jews, does not render it unlawful for other
Nations to institute such other sorts of Government as may best suit with the
Ge^ius of the people, and the public good and safety of the whole Community:
But as for your Argument whereby you would prove the necessity of all Civil
Powers being derived from God, because otherwise they could not be endu'd with
the power of life, and death over their Subjects; I have sufficiently taken off
that difficulty at our second Meeting, and shown you, that a Man in the state
of Nature has not only power over another Man's life, but also over his own;
not only to hazard it, but also to lay down or lose it for some greater public
benefit to Mankind, which is also acknowledged by the Apostle Paul himself, For
a good man some would even dare to die.

But further, to show you the absurdity of this Principle, let me put you this
case; suppose that a Kingdom or Commonwealth were so instituted at the first,
that no Subject, or Freeman should suffer death for any Crime how great soever,
which that I do not suppose as a thing impossible it was, for diverse Ages
exercised in the Roman Commonwealth, wherein no Civil Magistrate could lay any
greater punishment upon a Roman Citizen, Vid. Grot. Annot. in Mat. cap. p. 125.
Vid. LL. Will. 1.
than banishment or deportation: And if that Copy we have of the Laws of King
William the first, be authentic, it is by the 67th Law in his Charter
ordained, That no English or French Subject should suffer death for any Crime
whatsoever, but only be punished either by pecuniary Fines, Imprisonment, or
else by loss of Ryes Hands, Feet, or Members, which Law, though I do not say
was ever observed; yet it shows it was then supposed to be both possible and
lawful. Now if this could be so, there would be no necessity of supposing the
Authority of the Commonwealth of Rome, or of King William I. to have been
derived from God, since they had renounced and refused the great Character
thereof; viz. the inflicting capital punishments; but if for all that, they
still con^inued to be Lawful Civil Governments, then it is evident that this
power of life, and death, is not that which alone constitutes a Civil Power,
and makes it owe its Original to God.

But to return to what your notion concerning this power of life and death has
made me digress from, pray let me ^sk you another Question; After the Expulsion
of King Tarquin, and before the Commonwealth of Rome was formed, where was the
Supreme Authority lodged?


M. Why in the same Body it was afterward the people of Rome, comprehended
under the Patritions and Plebtians, that is, the Nobility and Commons, who yet
retained the power of life and death over those of their own Children and
Slaves, though they communicated a great part of their power to the Senate and
Consuls.


F. Very well; Was this Authority they so conferred on the Senate and Consuls
the same which they themselves could have exercised? or was it any new
Authority immediately derived from God, and created for that purpose?


M. I do not think it was any new created Authority, but only a part of their
former power, which they so made over to the Senate and Consuls, since they
reserved one great part of it, ( viz.) the Legislative Power wholly in
themselves; but however, this power which the Fathers of Families, and Freemen
among the Romans had over the lives of their Children, and Slaves, as also over
others who were declared public Enemies, was derived wholly from God; yet
there arose likewise a new power which these Fathers of Families were not
invested with before, ( viz.) that of making Laws, as also of War and Peace;
all which powers were derived from God for the common good, and defense of the
whole People or Community.


F. Herein I also agree with you, but then mark what follows; it then plainly
appears, that the natural Subject of Civil Authority was the Fathers of
Families, and Freemen of Rome; and that what share thereof was committed to the
Senate and Consuls, it was wholly personal, and as their Representatives; this
being so, pray answer me another Question; when the Senate and People of Rome
did afterward confer their whole power upon the Roman Emperors by that Law
(mentioned in your Institutions) Lex Regi was there then created or produced
any new Authority from God to the first Emperor? or was it the same Authority
or Majesty which the Senate and People were endued with before* for either it
must be the same, or else God must create a new parcel of this Royal Majesty or
Authority wherewith to endue this first Emperor, which if you suppose, I can
show you a great many difficulties and absurdities that will follow from this
Opinion; for then I might ask you, whether this Royal Majesty be like the
Stoics Anima mundi, whose parts are distributed among all the Kings in the
World? or whether each King has his particular Majesty to himself? or whether
the King dying, his Majesty also dies with him? or whether it exist without
him, as the Soul does when separated from the Body, and by a certain kind of
Metempsychosis is transferred to the new Monarch?


M. I shall not flick at present to affirm, that this Authority or Majesty of
the Roman Emperors was originally derived from God, though not immediately, but
by the mediation of the people of Rome as his Instruments, especially ordained
for the derivation of this Imperial power.


F. Well then, I see you and I are at last agreed; for I suppose all Civil
power to be so derived from God to the people, and by them as an Instrumental
Cause conveyed to the person whom they agree to make their King: But if this
were so in the Roman Commonwealth, why are not all the rest of the Nations of
the World endued with the like privilege; so that no man may justly make
himself King over them without their Election, or Recognition at least.


M. Perhaps in those Nations where the people have from the first Institution
of the Government retained the whole Civil power in themselves, or else by the
Extinction of the Royal Family they became possessed of it; this power ^^y
afterward by them be transferred or made over to one single person or more;
but this can by no means hold in diverse other cases, where God immediately
bestows a Civil Power or Authority without the consent of the people, as it is
in the case of Kingdoms acquired by a Conquest in a Just War, (for as to Unjust
Wars, or Conquests, I freely own they confer no Right at all) but since you
will not (I suppose) deny that such a Rightful Conquest confers an Absolute
power on the Conqueror over the Lives and Estates of the Conquered, as also an
Obligation in them to submit to, and obey the Conqueror, hence must arise a new
Civil power without any consent of the people intervening; which Authority,
since no man can confer it upon himself, must necessarily be immediately
conferred by God; since, as I said before, the people are only passive, and
have no hand at all in the conveying of it; and this is the more remarkable,
because I suppose you will not deny, but that where one Kingdom or Empire has
owed its beginning to the Election or Consent of the people, I could name ten
that have begun from Conquest: So that it is evident, the people are very
rarely the Efficient Causes of Civil power.


F. Though this Question concerning Conquest does not immediately concern our
Kings, who, as I have already proved, do not owe their Regal Authority to
Conquest, but to the consent of the People: Yet since the Title to a great part
of our Kings Dominions begun at first from Conquest, I shall now say something
of it: First, then you grant that only Conquest in a just War can confer a
Right to the Peoples obedience. And therefore since the greatest part of the
Governments have commenced from unjust Conquests; it will therefore follow that
the Right of such Princes to those Kingdoms Territories so unjustly acquired,
could not owe its Original to Conquest; but either to a long possession, the
Extinction, or at least Dereliction of the right Heirs; together with the
consent of the People to confirm their Titles. So that it is not only my
Opinion, but that of the most Learned Writers in your own faculty, such as
Grotius and Pufendo^f; that Conquest alone, though in the justest War can
confer no Right over a Free People without their recognition or consent; I have
added, of a Free People because I much doubt, upon the Conquest of a Kingdom or
Territory (as for example) where the People do own themselves mere slaves to
their Sultan: Whether their consents be at all necessary or not, since they
fall to the Victor as the movable goods of the Prince Conquered; But then the
Power he has over them is not properly a Civil Authority, but that of a Lord
over his Slaves. And hence it is that in all Kingdoms and Territories obtained
by Conquest among us in Europe, Princes do not think themselves to have any
Title to their Subjects Allegiance before they have acknowledged them for their
Lawful Soveraign^, by some public Act either of the Estates or Representatives
of the Kingdom; or else by the particular Oaths of all the chief Subjects or
Inhabitants of those places.


M. I shall not at present dispute this point any farther with you, but yet
there remains one great difficulty behind concerning the manner of Gods
conferring this Supreme Power upon Princes, and States: For you your self have
already granted that the Power of Fathers and Masters of Families is not of the
kind, but somewhat specifically different from Civil Power or Authority: And if
so, since they had not this Civil Power in themselves, I cannot see how they
could confer it upon another; since nemo dat quod non habet. And therefore
there still seems a necessity of Gods conferring a new Power upon that Prince,
or upon those Persons whom they shall pitch upon to Rule over them.


F. I hope I shall as easily remove this difficulty if you will please to
consider the manner how God confers this Civil Authority upon men, which is
certainly by Natural Means, and is to be found out by Natural Reason without
any Divine Revelation; since Civil Government was instituted, and men were
obliged to obey it long before the old Testament was written: Vi. Pufendorf de
Iure Gentium. l. 3. c. 7.
But the true Original of it is thus to be traced. First, It is without doubt
that right Reason sufficiently taught Mankind when it began to multiply, and
that they were sensible from the great wickedness and corruptions of men's
Natures that their common peace and safety could not be well maintained unless
Commonwealths were instituted, which could not subsist without a Supreme
Authority placed in some one, or more persons. This being a dictate of the Law
of Nature or Right Reason, and so highly conducing to the good of Mankind; it
must needs owe its Original to God the Author of all Truth, and the Giver of
every good and perfect Gift: From whence it follows, that not only the
Institution of Commonwealths themselves, but also the Supreme Power with which
they are endued, does not proceed merely from men, but from Gods command
expressed by the Law of Nature or Right Reason. So that the same Legislator who
first prescribed Civil Society, also prescribed the order of that Society; but
a Supreme Civil Authority either in one or more persons, is the Life and Soul
thereof; without which it cannot Live or Subsist.

Now it is certain that those things are not only said to proceed from God,
which he immediately Institutes without any human act intervening; but those
also which men by the conduct of Right Reason, and according to their present
occasions and necessities have introduced to fulfill that Obligation that lay
upon them to promote the common good and safety of Mankind; and since in a
promiscuous ungoverned multitude, that great Law of Nature which prescribes the
public Peace and Concord of Mankind cannot well be exercised, (the unruliness
of men's passions considered) nor be well maintained without some Supreme Civil
Authority to keep men in order; it is plain, that God who enjoined men this,
does also command that Civil Societies should not be only Instituted, but their
Authority also obeyed, as derived from himself, and as the necessary means of
obtaining this great end of all the Laws of Nature, the common good and safety
of Mankind; and hence it is that he has not any where prescribed or instituted
any particular Form of Government, but leaves the choice of it to the
particular Genius and Temper of each Nation and People.

This being settled, your Objection is easily answered, how Civil power can be
conferred without an immediate conferring of it from God, since the people in
the state of Nature had it not before; which proceeds from your not
considering, that this Supreme Authority is not like the Soul of Man, an
immaterial form, that gives knowledge and understanding to the Body, and may be
separated from it; but is only a moral quality which may be produced by the
mutual consent of those that institute it, as the productive cause thereof,
though they had it not formally in themselves before, just as from many Voices
singing in Consort, though in different Tones there arises a Harmony, which was
not in any single Voloe alone: Therefore since Civil Authority proceeds from
the non-resistance of the Subjects, and their Concession that the Supreme
Powers should freely dispose of their Bodies and Goods for the public safet^,
it plainly appears, that in each particular Master of a Family and Freeman
there lay (though hidden and dispersed) the seeds or rudiments of Supreme Power,
which by mutual Compacts did afterward grow into a perfect Civil Authority;
And thus not only many Masters of Families and Freemen may combine together for
their mutual safety to er^ct a Commonwealth by appointing one or many men to
rule over them for their mutual safety; but it is not impossible, but that from
the Government of a Master of a Family, having many Villages and Slaves under
his power, there may ^ise ^ perfect Kingdom; for though Paternal power does
chiefly respect the Education of Children, and that of a Master, the Government
of Servan^^, for his own advan^^g^; yet is there not so great a distance
between the power of a Master of a Family and Civil Authority, that there can
be no passing from one to the other, without a new Authority immediately
created by God for that purpose; for suppose a Master of a Family, having a
numerous train of Children and Servants, should permit both of them by way of
emancipation, or manumission, to enjoy such a portion of Lands, or other Goods
to their own use, as also to Govern their own private Families and Affairs as
they shall think fit, provided they will still obey him, and contribute the
utmost assistance of their Lives and Fortunes for the public safety, I cannot
see any thing that would be wanting to the making such a Master of a Family a
lawful and absolute Prince, provided he was endued with such power as to be
able to protect them; yet all this while, without supposing any new Divine
Authority to be infused by God upon his accession to this Dignity.


M. I confess you have given me a more exact account concerning your sense of
this matter than ever I had before, and therefore I shall not further dispute
this point with you; only let me tell you, that upon this Hypothesis of yours
is founded that desperate Opinion concerning the real Authority or Majesty of
the People; which the Commonwealths men suppose still to reside in the
diffusive body thereof after the Government is Instituted; And by virtue of
which they suppose there still remains a power in them to call their Kings or
Governors to an Account, and punishing them for Tyranny or any other supposed
Faults against the fundamental constitution of the Government, or the Original
Contract, as those of your party are pleased to term it.


F. Well then, to let you see I am none of those Commonwealths men who
maintain any such desperate Doctrine*

Here I do freely own, that where the People have parted with their whole Power
either to a Monarch or else to a Supreme Council or Senate, from thenceforth
they have nothing at all to do to call such Governors to an Account, or to
punish them for the highest Tyranny or Oppression they can commit: The utmost I
have allowed as lawful to be done in this case in all the Conversations we have
had, is no more than this* That the People, in case they see themselves like to
be destroyed and ruined both in their Perso^^, Consciences and Estates, may
even under the most Absolute Governments stand upon their own defense, and
prevent their being thus totally ruined; and may also cast off all Allegiance
to such Powers, in case they refuse to treat them with greater justice and
moderation for the future^ But as for such limited or mixed Governments as ours
are, where the People have still retained a share in the Legislature, and also
in the raising of public Taxes, yet since the King is by Law exempted from
punishment or rendering any account of his Actions either to the People or their
Representatives; the utmost that I contend for, is, that since the King
receives only a Limited Power of ruling according to such and such Laws, and
will Usurp that share of the Government that does not belong to him; In such
cases if he refuse to amend, then they may resist his Officers and Ministers,
nay himself in Person in the executions of such Violent and Illegal Actions:
And if he still prsist, and rce^use to amend; that then at last they may
proceed to Declare that he has forfeited his Crown or Regal Right of Ruling
over them: And then in such Case, I hold that it again devolves to the People
from whom it first proceeded; and that this is no new Doctrine; I have the
Authority of Fortescut on my side; Cap. (...).
who in his Treatise De Laudibus^ Legum Angliae, Where after having shown that
all Political or Limited Governments proceeded at first from the consent of the
People, proceeds thus; Addressing himself to Prince Henry, Son of King Henry
the VI. (For whom he composed this work) Hab^s ex h^c (...) Princ^^s,
institutionis Politici Regni formam, ex q^^ metiri poteris potestatem, quam Rex
eju^ (...) legis ipsius aut subditos, valeat exercire. Ad Tutelam ^amous legis,
ac subdit orum, ^^rum Corporum, and ^onorum Rex huju^modi erectus est, and ad
hanc Potestatem a Populo affluxam ipsi habet, quo ei^no^ lic^t potestate alia
su^ Popul^ D^minar^. From whence we may observe, that he calls the Government
of this Kingdom not Regnum Simply, but Regnum Politicum, that is, a Politic or
Limited Kingdom; (in opposition to Regnum Absolutum) made up of diverse parts:
This he calls a ^ower flowing or proceeding from the People, and if it thus
proceeds from the People, it must certainly return to them again upon the
failure of the conditions to be performed on his part. No^ does this suppose
any real Majesty or Authority in them who take this forfeiture, any more than
is ^o's suppose it in the People according to your own Hypothesis; when the
Civil Authority does again devolve to them upon the Death of a King without
Lawful Heirs.


M. I do now very well understand your Hypothesis, but I think Princes are not
thereby in a better condition by being thus unaccountable to, and unpunishable
by the people? But that they are father in a much worse; since you say they may
resist, nay kill them when they are once entered into a state of War against
them: For whereas where Princes are accountable to their People or Senate, they
may then be admitted to be heard to make their defense in case of any
Oppression or Misgovernment laid to their charge: As the King of Poland may at
this day, to the great Assembly of Estates or Dye^ of the Nation. Whereas in
the case of the King, as you have put it, though he is not accountable to the
Parliament, yet he is still liable to that which is more dangerous, ( viz.) To
be Judged, Censured and Declared forfeit by every ^onsiderable fellow of the
Rabble, on pretense of violating this Original Contract, and having broken the
fundamental constitution of the Government; and so shall be condemned unheard,
and perhaps without any just cause. So that I think a man had as good be a
B^^ward, as a King upon such Term.


F. The men of your Principles I see are not to be pleased, unless Princes may
do whatever they have a mind to without control; or any man's judging or
opposing the Illegality of their Actions. For if a Parliament takes upon its
self to judge of the Kings Actions, this is calling their Princes to an
Account, and a thing against the Laws of the Land* as also that of Nations. If
the whole Body of the People take upon them to judge when he has violated the
fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, and broken the Original Contract, and
thereupon resist him: This is making the King liable to be Judged and Censured
by every mean fellow of the Rabble. But to let you see that both Judging and
Disobeying the Kings commands, if contrary to Law, is not a thing of such
dangerous consequence as you would make it, appears by the late Petition of the
Seven Bishops, wherein they take upon them to Judge that the Kings (...),
Declaration of Liberty of Conscience being against several Acts of Parliament,
they cannot with a safe Conscience Publish it, or agree to the Re^ding of ^t in
the Churches. Now I desire to know whether this be (...) a making the Kings
Actions liable to be Judged and Censured by every one of the Rabble, since
these Bishops acted thus, neither as Privy Counselors, no^ as Peers in
Parliament^ for by the same right by which they took upon them to make this
Declaration, by the same right not only every Curate of a Parish, but also
every Layman in England was free to Judge of the Kings breach of this Law, and
consequently of denying obedience thereunto; which disobedience, if it once
prove general, will quickly make the Kings personal commands wholly
insignificant. So that it seems it is not the People^ Judging of the Illegality
of the King^ Actions and Commands which is the thing you (...) fault with since
when these Bishops acted thus, all the high men of the Church of England
praised it to the Sky. So that it seems it is now the bare Censuring and
Disobedience that makes it a crime, but it is the i^sisting such Violent and
Illegal orders and commands, and at last Declaring that Power void and
forfeited by which they were made. That sticks in your stomach, which is as
much as to say, that this Judging and Disobedience in its self is no Crime; but
the pushing it home, and doing it in such a way as that it may be mended for
the future; though this is never lawful to be done, but when things come to
that extremity that all milder remedies are become ineffectual.

But to answer your Objections a little more closely, the consequences of my
Opinion are not so dangerous as you suppose them, if you will please to
consider what I have already laid down at our last Meeting; As first, That this
Resistance is never to be made but when this violent breach of the Laws becomes
evident and undeniable not to the Rabble alone, but to the whole Nation, that
is, all sorts and degrees or men; and as long as there is any question about
it, I acknowledge it is by no means to be used: And lastly; As to declare the
Regal Power forfeited, this likewise is never to be done, but when the King
becomes so obstinately resolved to pursue those evil and illegal co^^es, as
that he is utterly irreclaimable, and refuses all propositions and terms of
amending or redressing them: And as to what you say, that the King is hereby
deprived of all means of justifying himself, or vindicating his Actions; that
is not so, since if a War be once begun, he may do this either by Declaration
or Treaties, as King Charles the First did in his War with the Parliament, by
which means he gained a great many both of the Nobility, Gentry and Commonalty
to his Party, who were before absolutely set against him: But if you will needs
have a Parliament to Judge and examine the reality of this forfeiture, I so far
join with you, that though every private man may first judge thereof, yet is it
not become absolute, and an Act of the whole People, till the Estates of the
Kingdom have by some solemn Vote or Declaration made it so.


M. Well, I see you do all you can to make the best of a bad Cause; but though
I think nothing of what you have said can give Subject^ any right to resist
much less to cast off all Allegiance to their Natural Prince, yet I shall not
now dispute this point any longer with you, but will proceed to the merits of
the Cause, and shall l^^ you see, that even upon your own principles, the King
has not been dealt (...) in all this whole transaction, either like an Ally by
the States General of the United Provinces, or like a near Relation or a Son
in-law by the Prince of Orange, or like a King by his own Subjects. To begin
with the Estates in the first place, it is apparent that they have acted
treacherously with the King, and contrary to the last Treaty of Peace and
Alliance, in furnishing the Prince (...) their Captain General and (...)-holder
both with Ships, Men and Money, and make this late Expedition against England,
without so much as ever declaring the cause of their Quarrel, or demanding any
satisfaction, if any occasion of difference had been given.

But the Prince of Orange his dealing with the King his Father-in law, has been
much less justifiable; for in the first place, he is not only guilty of the
same fault with his Masters the Dutch, in beginning a War without ever
declaring the causes of it, or demanding any satisfaction, or ^eparation if he
had been injured, till it was too late to go back, and that his Fleet was
ready, and the Army shipped for the Expedition; but which was more unkind from a
Nephew, and a Son-in-law who had reason to expect all the satisfaction which a
King, an Uncle and a Father-in-law could give; though indeed to speak the
truth, the whole War was, in my Opinion, altogether unjust on the P^^nces side,
since his chief pretenses were* to redress Grievances, and to re-establish the
Bishops and Church of England with the Colleges in their just Rights, and also
restore the whole Nation to the just Execution of the Laws by a Free Parliament
and Privileges: Now I desire to know what the Prince of Orange* had to do
either as a Neighbor, or a Son-in-law* to concern himself with the
Mis-government of the Affairs of England, much less to countenance and take the
part of those many Male contents and Traitors, who have ever since the Duke of
Manmouth's Rebellion gone over into Holland* So that upon the whole matter I
can find but one thing which he had, so much as a pretense of making War about,
if it had been real, ( viz.) the pretended suppo^^^tio^s Birth of the Prince of
Wales; and yet even for this, he ought not to have made War till such time as
all reasonable satisfaction in this matter had been demanded and denied him;
and that the next Parliament, which the King had before declared should meet in
November last, had been either hindered from meddling in it, or that they had
fa^^'d to make a due enquiry into it. But if we look home --


F. Pray Sir, before you come to consider what has been done here, give me
leave to justify the late proceedings of the States General, and the Prince of
Orange in this matter; First, as to the Estates; it is a very great mistake;
for you affirm that they made this War upon the King in their own names, or
furnished the Prince of Orange with Ships or Men as their S^adt-holder or
General, but, only as a free Independent Prince, whom they looked upon to have
a good Cause of making War against the King, of England, as one they had great
cause to believe was so far engaged in the France interes^ as instead of
standing (...) in this War with the Empire, which they every day expected when
he would join with France* and declare War against them, as they had reason to
^ear by several angry Memorials which the French King's E^voy in Holland had
not long before given them; so that indeed it was but according to the Rules of
Self-preservation to begin first, especially when it might be done without
their appearing in it at all^ but granting this War had been made in their own
names, it had been but a just Return for what had been done to them before by
the Late King who made actual War upon them without ever giving them the least
notice, or demanding satisfaction for any wrongs or damages received; and this
was the more justifiable, because his present Majesty* when Duke of York, was
looked upon to have a very great hand in those Councils, which begun that
unhappy War, in which he himself served as Admiral: But as to the Prince of
Orange, there is much more to be said in his justification; for in the first
place, though in some respects he was a Subject, by living under, and enjoying
diverse Lands and Territories, and Commands within the Dominions of the United
Provinces; yet as he is Prince of Orange, he is a free independent Prince, and,
as such, has a right of making War and Peace; and if so, all that is to be
further enquired into, is, whether the Prince had any just cause of making War
upon the King or ^ot; therefore to answer your first Objection against the
Prince's making War upon an Uncle and a Father-in-law, without first demanding
satisfaction, and then denouncing War if he could not obtain it, I confess this
were a good Objection, if you could once prove to me, that the Prince could
have been sure to have had granted him whatever he could in reason demand, both
in respect of the Church of England, the security of the Protestant Religion,
the Rights and Liberties of the Subjects of England, and his own particular
concerns in respect of the Prince of Wales; but whoever will impartially
consider the Terms that the Prince and King were upon just before his coming
over, will find that he was not obliged to give the King notice of his
intentions, by first demanding satisfaction, and then denouncing War if it had
been denied, since the King might then have joined his own with the French
Fleet, and sent for French Forces into England; and then all that the Prince
could have done in behalf of himself and the Nation, had been altogether in
vain. And then though I grant that such satisfaction ought to be demanded in
most cases, yet will it not hold in this; where if the Prince had sooner
discovered his designs, the King might have easily prevented them. And how near
this was to have been put in Execution may appear by this, That Succors were
actually offered by the French King; and if they were refused by ours, it was
partly, because it was too late for the French Fleet to be then put out, and
partly out of a Politic consideration, that besides the losing of the Hearts
of his English Subjects, it might give the French such a footing here, that
they would not be easily gotten out again. But indeed it seems as if the old
formal way of making War was quite out of fashion; since Charles the Second
made War against the Dutch; and the King of France so lately against Spain, the
Elector Palatine and the Emperor without any Observation of those formalities.

But if we consider the Grounds and Causes of this War as they are set forth in
the Princes late Declaration; they may be reduced to these three Heads.

First, The Restoration of the Church of England, with the Bishops and
Colleges to their just Privileges.

Secondly, The securing of the Rights and Liberties of the Subject from the
Dispensing Power, and those other Encroachments that had been made upon them by
the partial Judgments of Popish, Ignorant, or Corrupt Judges.

And Lastly, The Enquiry into the Birth of the Prince of Wales. In all which
the Prince was so reasonable, as to refer the decision of these differences to
the Judgment of a Free Parliament.

Now as for the first of these. That the Prince as a Neighbor, and of the same
Religion with us, might justly secure the interest of the Protestant Religion
here, and also redeem the Clergy from the persecution they lay under, is very
evident: Since it has always been held lawful for Princes to take the part and
espouse the interest of those of the same Religion with themselves, though
Subjects to another Prince: Thus Eusibius makes it a good cause of War by the
Emperor Constantine against Licinius, because he persecuted the Christians
living under his Dominions: So likewise of later Ages Queen Elizabeth assisted
the Dutch Protestants of the united Provinces, and those of France against the
Persecutions and Oppressions they suffered from their own Princes: As to the
French Protestants, King Charles the I. sent a Fleet and an Army to their
Assistance in 1627.

But as to the next Head, the Oppressions we lay under in respect of our Civil
Liberties, the Prince had as great, or rather greater right to vindicate these
than the former. For Bodin and Barclay, though they suppose it unlawful for
Subjects to take up Arms against their Prince, though never so highly Oppressed;
yet they count it not only lawful, but Generous and Heroic for a Neighboring
Prince to rescue injured and oppressed Subjects from the Tyranny of their Kings.
So that if the King had by his Dispensing Power, his Levying of Taxes without
Law, and taking away the freedom of Elections for Parliament men, almost
totally dissolved the Government, and brought it to the condition of an
absolute Monarchy, it was high time for the Prince to put a stop to those
Encroachments both in respect of his own particular interest, and also of the
States whose General and Stad^holder he is. Of the former, since if this
Kingdom should once become of the Popish Religion by the means of a standing
Army, and those other methods that have been taken to make it so (granting the
Prince of Wales to be truly born of the Queen) yet should he happen to die, the
Popish faction here in England would in all likelihood debar the Prince and
Princess of Orange from their lawful Succession to the Crown; or at least would
never admit them but upon conditions of establishing of Popery and Arbitrary
Government in England; the former of which is as contrary to their consciences,
as the latter is to their principles and inclinations.

So on the other side, if the Prince of Wales be not the Queens true Son, he
had certainly a much greater interest as the presumptive Heir of the Crown to
demand satisfaction in that great point, which so nearly concerned their right
of Succession: For then certainly they might justly demand satisfaction,
especially when they desired no more but to have this business left to the
inspection of the Estates of the Kingdom, as the only proper Judges of the
same. For as to the Privy Council, who by the Kings command (though without any
president) had taken upon them to hear and determine this matter; their
Highnesses certainly had no reason to be satisfied with it, since, besides the
incompetency of the Judges, the King himself appeared too partial and
interested in the affair for them, to set down by their Judgments. And as for
what you say, that the Prince ought first to have tried whether the King and
Parliament would give him that satisfaction he demanded: This was very
dangerous for him to hazard; for supppose the King would never have permitted
this affair to have been impartially inquired into by them, or that the
Parliament had been (as it was very likely to be) packt and made up of Papists,
Fanatics, and Time-servers, who either would not, or else durst not have
examined this matter as they ought: His Highness had been then to play an
after-game the next year* and what might have happened in the mean time God
knows. And therefore he had all the reason in the World whilst the French Kings
Arms were employed in Germany to demand satisfaction with the Sword in his
hand. This is what I have to say in justification of His Highnesses Arms, which
if they are just on his side, I think I can as easily prove what has been done
for his Assistance by the Nobility, Gentry and Commons of this Nation to have
been so too.


M. I shall not any longer dispute, whether the Dutch and the Prince of Orange
may not make some fair pretenses for what they have done; since making War for
security, by way of Prevention, is no new thing in the World; though I confess
what you say in respect of the Prince of Wales, had been a sufficient cause of
War, had there been any true grounds for that suspicion; but since there was no
just cause given why his Highness should suspect his Birth not to be Genuine;
and that even in the present Convention it self, there could be no proof made
to the contrary: I think it is now evident, that it was a wicked and unjust
Calumny upon his Majesty and the Queen, since he himself in the last Paper he
left behind him at his going away, Appeals to all that know him, nay, even to
the Prince of Orange himself, that in their Consciences, neither he nor they
can believe him in the least capable of so unnatural a Villainy, nor of so
little common Sense, to be imposed on in a thing of such a nature as that.

But as for those noble Men and Gentlemen, who have declared for the Prince of
Orange since his expedition, I think that they are no way to be justified,
since granting them to have been satisfied, that the Princes demands were
lawful and reasonable, yet sure they ought not to have taken up Arms on behalf
of a Foreign Prince, against their Natural Sovereign; but if in their
Consciences they had believed his quarrel to have been just, the utmost they
could have done, had been to have stood Neuters, without concerning themselves
either with the one or the other party; and then if the Prince had gained his
point either by Arms or Treaty, they might have enjoyed the good effects of it,
without breaking in upon the Church of Englands Principles of Passive Obedience
and Non-resistance, and so many Acts of Parliament made; but as for those
Officers and Soldiers, who so basely and perfidiously Deserted the King at
Salisbury, and ran over to the Princes Army with their Commissions in their
pockets, they cannot possibly be justified either by the Law of the Land, or
that of Nations, since certainly they acted contrary to both.


F. Before I speak any thing concerning the business of the Prince of Wales,
give me leave to say something in Justification of those Noblemen and Gentlemen
you so highly accuse; and though we Discoursed something of this matter at our
last meeting, yet since you have again renewed the charge against them, I
cannot but again vindicate them in what they have done; in the first place pray
call to mind, that it has sufficiently appeared by the small Forces his
Highness brought over with him, that he never intended to Conquer this Kingdom,
or impose any thing upon it, contrary to the known Laws and Customs thereof;
and therefore as appears by his Declaration, his chief hopes of Success against
so Numerous an Army, made up of the flower of three Nations, depended on that
assurance he had of some Considerable Assistance from the Nobility and Gentry
of Eng. and perhaps from some of the Officers of the Kings own Army, and that
this was lawful in both of them, I thus prove, you may remember I made out at
our last meeting but one* that when the Nation lay under any great intolerable
Oppression, by reason of the violation of their Just Rights and Liberties, the
Clergy Nobility, and Gentry thereof, did always look upon it as their Right and
Duty, to vindicate the same by a vigorous Resistance, when no gentler means
could suffice: Secondly, I have proved that it neither was, nor could be the
intent of those Oaths and Declarations made in the two first Parliamen^s of
King Charles the Second, to deliver up their Lives, Liberties and Estates
wholly to the Kings Mercy, let him use them as he pleased; and if they did not,
it must necessarily follow, that upon the Kings Violation of their Religion,
Liberties and Properties, they had still a Right left them to defend themselves
from such Oppression and Tyranny: Lastly, I have also proved (as the Convention
also lately declared) that the King by his exercising his Dispensing Power, by
Committing and Prosecuting the Six Bishops, by setting up an Ecclesiastical
Commission contrary to Law, by Levying Money by his Prerogative, without, or
contrary to express Acts of Parliament, and by Raising and keeping up a
standing Army in time of Peace, Commanded by Officers, who had never taken the
Test appointed by the Statutes for that purpose, and consisting of so many
Popish Soldiers, who having never taken the Oath^ of Supremacy and Allegiance,
were altogether incapable of serving in his Majesty's Army, and by doing diverse
other things contrary to the known Laws, Statutes, and Freedom of this Realm,
too long now to particularize, had broken the Fundamental Constitution of the
Kingdom. This being the Case, I desire to know of you, how it was possible for
the Nation to have a firm and settled Redress of these Grievances, without a
Free Parliament? Or how it was possible to obtain this Parliament (the late
taking away of Charters and Regulation of Corporations considered) unless those
Obstacles had been first removed? And how could they be removed, without some
force proportionable to what the King had raised to hinder it I cannot tell?
And therefore it is a very vain Project of yours, to suppose that those
Noblemen and Gentlemen, should have stood Neuters, and not have declared
themselves some way or other in this quarrel, which is all one, as to say, they
ought to sit still, and see a Generous Prince ruined, who had come in for their
Redemption, and to have then expected a remedy for all these illegal Violations
and Oppressions, when the King had killed or destroyed the Prince of Orange,
and his Army, or that the King would then have yielded to all the same
Conditions that the Prince, had demanded. This would have been not to have been
parralel'd any where but in a Romance.

But as for those Officers and Soldiers who you say Deserted the King, and
went over to the Prince from Salisbury; though I grant they make a great noise,
yet were they not a Thousand Men, Soldiers, Officers, and all, (as I am
Credibly informed) which was but a small number, in comparison with the Kings
whole Army; and yet these may very well be defended upon the same principles
with the former; for if the Violations of our Liberties were so great and
dangerous, as I have now set forth, those Gentlemen were certainly obliged to
prefer the common Good, and Preservation of their Religion and Liberties,
before any private interests or Obligations, whatsoever, though it were to the
King himself; therefore it was more his than their fault, if they Diserted him;
and as for their going away whilst they were his Soldiers, and with their
Commissions in their pockets; I suppose you cannot expect that the King should
have ever given them leave to have quitted his Service, or have accepted of
their Commissions, if they would have surrendered them, unless at the same time
he had clapped them up in prison for offering of it, and if then they were
persuaded that it was their Duty so to do, it is but a Punctilio of Honor,
whether they went away with their Commissions in their pockets, or had left
them behind them, since their going off, was a Surrender of their Commissions,
and a sufficient Declaration, ^^at they could not with a safe Conscience, serve
the King any longer in this quarrel; and you see that the going off of these
few, had such a fatal effect, that it cast such a panick Terror upon the King,
and the whole Popish Faction about him, as to make him run away to London,
without striking a stroke: But that the Prince of D. with the Dukes of Grafton
and Ormond, Lord Churchill were convinced of the danger this Kingdom was in,
both in respect of their Religion and Liberties, appears by their leaving the
King, and going over to the Prince, where they could never expect to be put
into higher places of Honor or Trust, than what they enjoyed already under the
King; and therefore that expression of the Lord Churchill's, in his Letter to
the King is very remarkable: That he could no longer join with self-interested
men, who had framed designs against His Majesty's true Interest and the
Protestant Religion, to give a pretense to Conquest to bring them to Effect.
And one would be very much inclined to believe so, considering the great number
of Irish, Papists which have been brought over and listed here; though with the
turning out and disbanding of a great many English Officers and Soldiers out
of several Companies,

But to come to the business of the Prince of Wales, which you say was a mere
calumny, and an unjust suspicion on the Princess side; though I will not affirm
any thing positively in so nice a matter, since the Convention has not thought
fit to meddle with it. I shall only say this much, that if there have been any
jealousies and suspicions raised about it, the King may thank those of his own
Religion, who were entrusted with the management of the Queens Lying-Inn: For
in the first place it looked very suspicious to us Protestants, who do not put
much faith in the Miracles of the Romish Church; that immediately after the
presenting of the Golden Angel to the Lady of Loretto, and the Kings Pilgrimage
to St. Winifreds Well, the Queen after several years intermission, should again
be with Child; and when she was so, should have two different Reckonings; Which
though it may be forgiven Young Women of their first Children, yet those who
have born so many Children as Her Majesty, are commonly more experienced in
these matters.


M. What is all this to the purpose? Was it not proved by many credible
Witnesses, and those of the Protestant Religion before the Privy Council, that
they were not only present in the Room when the Queen was Delivered; but that
they had seen Milk upon Her Linen before Her Delivery; and that they had also
felt Her Belly immediately before it, and found that Her Majesty was Big with
Child, and ready to be Delivered: And the Midwife Swears that she actually
Delivered Her. So that since every person is to be presumed to be the true Son
of those Parents that own him for theirs; So nothing but a direct proof to the
contray, and that by undeniable Evividence ought to make any Man believe
otherwise; much more in the concern of the Heir apparent to the Crown, and
therefore I know not what you would have to been done, which has not been
observed, in this nice matter.


F. And Sir, let me tell you, because it was so nice a matter, and concerned no
less than the Succession of Three Kingdoms: therefore the whole Nation as well
as the Prince and Princess of Orange were to be fully satisfied of the reality
of the Princes Birth; since they were all suffi^iently sensible that there
wanted nothing but a Male Heir to entail Popery on us and our Posterity: And
therefore there ought to have been present such Persons as had no dependence
upon the Court, and who ought to have been deligated by the Prince and Princess
of Orange, since the Princess of Denmark could not be there in Person, but
instead of this, the only two Ladies (who as I am informed) were trusted by the
Princess to be present at the Queens Labor, were never sent for till she was
brought to Bed and the Child Dressed: And as for the rest of the Witnesses they
were either Lords, or other Persons who only Swear they stood in the Room at a
distance, and heard the Queen cry out; and immmediately after the Child cry,
sometime before they saw it. And as for the Ladies, the greatest part of them
Swore no further than the Lords: So that notwithstanding all that they have
Sworn in this matter, there might have been a trick put upon them and they
never the wiser: Siderfin's Reports. Temp. Car. 2. Fol. 377, 378. The King
against Buckworth, Tuckee, Gill, etc.
Since you may Read in Siderfin's Reports, of a Woman who pretended to have
been delivered of a Child by a Midwife within the Bed; and yet many years
after, this was proved to be a suposititious Birth by the Deposition of the
Midwife and the poor Woman who was the real Mother of the Child, and others
that had been of the Conspiracy. And what has been done once, may be done
again. It Is true, the King himself with one or two Ladies Deposed something
further as to Milk, and the feeling of the Child immediately before the Birth;
but his Majesty, if it be an Imposture, is too deeply concerned in it, to be
admitted as a competent Witness: And as for the rest of the Ladies, they are
likewise, being as the Queens Servants, and having an immediate dependence upon
her to be excepted against, and under too much awe, to speak the whole Truth:
But it is very strange to me, that none of them deposed any thing concerning
their seeing any Milk come from Her Majesty's Breasts after she was Delivered.
And perhaps there was good reason for it, for I have had it from good hands,
that she had none afterward whatever she had before; the reason of which
deserves to be enquired into, since it is very rare. But as for the Midwife,
her deposition is equivocal; That she took a Child from the Body of the Queen;
She is also a Papist, and consequently a suspected witness in this cause:
Whereas all this might have been prevented, had the Queen (were she really with
Child) been persuaded to be Delivered not within the Bed, but upon a Palate;
where all the persons whose business and concern it was to be present, might
have seen the Child actually born; nor needed there to have any men been by,
though I have heard that the late Queen of France was Delivered of the present
King, the Dake of Orleans not being only present in the Room, but an
Eyewitness of the Birth: And so, sure if somewhat of this nature had been
done, it might have saved a great deal of dispute and bloodshed which has
already, or may hereafter happen about it. And therefore I do not at all wonder
that the Prince of Orange should not take this partial Evidence that has been
given for sufficient satisfaction; so that whether this Birth of the Queens was
real or not, I shall not now farther dispute. It is sufficient that if His
Highness and His Princess had just and reasonable suspicions of an Imposture,
whilst they remain under them; they had also a just cause of procuring a Free
Parliament to examine this great affair, and also to obtain it by force, since
it was to be got no other way.


M. I need not further dispute this business of the Prince of Wales with you,
since I durst appeal to your own Conscience, whether you are not satisfied,
notwithstanding these supposed indiscretions in the management of the Queens
Delivery; that he is really Son to the Queen: and I think it would puzzle you
or I to prove the Legitimacy of our own Children by better evidence than this
has been; and I think all those of your party may very well despair of
producing any thing against it; since the Prince of Orange himself has thought
it best to let it alone, as knowing very well there was nothing material could
be brought in evidence against him. But I shall defer speaking further to this
Head, till I come to consider of the Conventions settling the Crown upon the
Prince and Princess of Orange. But before I come to this, I have many things
further to observe upon the Princes harsh and unjust proceedings with his
Majesty, and refusing all terms of Accommodation with him, upon his last return
to London.

In the first place therefore, I must appeal to your self, whether It were done
like a Nephew and a Son-in-Law, after the King was voluntarily returned to
White Hall, at the persuasion of those Lords who went down to attend him at
Feversham, when he had had scarce time to rest him after his journey, and the
many hardships he had endured since his being seized in that Port; and when he
had but newly sent my Lord Feversham with a kind Message and Complement to the
Prince; inviting him to St. James's, together with some overtures of
Reconciliation, as I am informed, the Prince should make no better a return to
all this kindness, than to clap up the Messenger contrary to the Law of
Nations; as his Majesty observes in his Late Paper I now mentioned. And should
without any notice given to the King of it, order his men to march, and
displacing his Majesty's Guards to seize upon all the Posts about White Hall;
whereby his Majesty's Person became wholly in his Power: And not content with
this, he likewise dispatched three Lords (whose names I need not mention) to
carry the King a very Rude and Undutiful Message, desiring him no less than to
depart the next Morning from his Palace to a private House in the Country,
altogether unfit for the reception of his Majesty, and those Guards and
attendance that were necessary for his security: Nor would these Lords stay
till the Morning, but disturbing his rest delivered their Message at Twelve a
Clock at Night; nor did they give him any longer time than till the next
Morning to prepare himself to be gone; and then the King was carried away to
Rochester under the conduct, not of his own, but of the Princes Dutch Guards;
in whose custody his Majesty continued for those few days he thought fit to
stay there, till his departure from thence in order to his passage into France,
by which means the Prince has rendered the breach irreconcilable between his
Majesty and himself; for whereas if he had come to St. James's in pursuance of
the Kings Invitation, and had renewed the Treaty, which was unhappily broke off
by the Kings first going away, there might have been in great probability, a
happy and lasting reconciliation made between them, upon such terms as might
have been a sufficient security for the Church of England, as also for the
Rights and Liberties of the Subject, which you so earnestly contend for;
whereas by the Conventions declaring the Throne vacant, and placing the Prince
and Princess of Orange therein, they have entailed a lasting War, not only upon
us, but our Posterity, as long as his Majesty lives, and the Prince of Wales
and his Issue (if he live to have any) are in Being.


F. I confess you have made a very Tragical relation of this affair, and any
one that did not understand the grounds of it, would believe that King James
being quietly settled in his Throne, and the Prince of Orange refusing all terms
of reconciliation, had seized upon his Palace, and carried him away Captive
into a Prison; whereas indeed there was nothing transacted in all this affair,
which may not be justified by the strictest Rules of Honor, and the Law of
Nations: for the doing of which, it is necessary to look back, and consider the
state of affairs immediately after the Kings leaving Salisbury and coming to
White Hall, where one of the first things he did after he was arrived, was to
issue out a Proclamation for the calling a new Parliament, which was so
received with great satisfaction by the whole Nation; and immediately upon
this, the King sent the Lords Hallifax, Nottingham, and Godolphin, to treat
with his Highness upon those Proposals of Peace which he then sent by them, and
to which the Prince returned his answer, the heads of which are very reasonable
without demanding any other security for himself, and his Army, than the
putting of the Tower and Forts about London into the Custody of that City: now
pray observe the issue of all those fair hopes, before ever the terms proposed
by the Prince could be brought to Town, the King following the ill advice of
the Popish Faction, instead of suffering the Elections for Parliament Men to
proceed, as he had promised, and as was hoped for by us, all on a sudden he
ordered the rest of the Writs for Elections that were not sent down, to be
burnt, and a Caveat to be entered against the making use of those that were sent
already into the Country; and at the same time he sent Order to the Earl of
Feversham, to disband the Army, and dismiss all the Soldiers with their Arms.
But I had forgot to put you in mind, that just before this, the King had sent
away the Queen with the Prince into France, and that she carried the Great Seal
of England along with her; whereby it was plain the King intended to put it
wholly out of his power, to Issue out any Writs, or Pass any public Act
wherein the Great Seal should be used; and that this Seal was carried away
appears by its being not long since drawn up out of the Thames by a Fisherman's
Net near Lambeth Bridge, where it is supposed to have been thrown in by the
Queen, or some of Her Attendance, in Her passage over the Water; and farther,
that the King was resolved wholly to quit the Government of this Kingdom, (at
least for the present) appears by his so speedy following of the Queen, within
three days after, stealing from his Palace by Night in a Boat to Gravesend,
and from thence in a small Vessel to Feversham, where how he was seized by the
Mob of that Town, and afterward returned to London, as you have set forth, I
need take no further notice.

Now this being a true and fair Narrative of the whole Matter, I shall only
offer two or three questions to your consideration, and desire you would give
me a fair and satisfactory answer to them. First, pray tell me whether it was
not the Kings fault that it was rendered impossible for Parliament Men to be
elected, by burning of the Writs, and sending away the Great Seal? Secondly,
whether the King by first stealing away, did not plainly confess himself
conquered by the Prince, and did thereby Abdicate the Government? also by his
obstinate refusal to redress the Grievances of the Nation, has forfeited his
Crown and all Allegiance from his Subjects, and was not after this to be owned
as King of England, either by the Prince of Orange, or any body else; and
therefore whatever treatment he after this received from the Prince, it was not
to be looked upon as done to a Lawful King, but a Conquered Prince; and his
Highness might not only justly refuse to treat with him any more as a Crowned
Head, but might also have justified not only the taking him Prisoner, but
sending him into Holland, if he had pleased; but instead of this, the Prince
only desired his removal out of Town from that conflux of Papists that flocked
to him, and by securing his Person to put it out of their power to play an
after-Game, and rally the late disbanded Army, of whom there was at least
twenty thousand of the Scotch, Irish, and English, who would have stood by the
King till the last; and therefore the English as well as the Dutch Counsel
about the Prince, did not think it safe for him to come to Town as long as the
King had his Guards about him at White Hall, since they might have been
increased to an Army whenever he pleased.

And though I grant good breeding and manners, especially to Kings, as also
respect from a Son-in-law to a Father, are duties incumbent upon Princes, as
well as private Men, yet when these lesser things stand in competition with
their own welfare and safety, as also of the whole Nation, for which the Prince
was now engaged; if he might for these ends justly require the removing and
securing the Kings Person, it was no great matter what time of night he had
notice to remove, though this was not done neither with any design to affront
or surprise him, but happened indeed through pure accident; for when it was
resolved that the Princes Guards should March to London and secure White Hall,
it was also resolved that the King should have notice to remove* and since it
was not thought fit to let him know it till the Posts were all secured; the
ways being very deep and dirty between Windsor and London, the Dutch Guards
commanded by Count Solms could not reach the Town till past ten at night, and
after that it was near twelve before the English Guards about White Hall could
be drawn off without fighting, and till that was done it was not thought at all
proper, or safe to deliver to the King the Princes message for his departure:
so that indeed it was not of any design that either the Prince and his Counsel
who ordered it, or of these Lords (who very well understand good breeding) thus
to deliver their message to him at that time of Night.

But tho he was in Bed, yet that he was not a sleep is very probable, since he
had not been above half an hour in Bed, and it is not very likely he should be
a sleep, when he very well knew before of the arrival of the Princes Troops
about White Hall, and therefore could not be without too much concern about it,
presently to compose himself to sleep.

But as for his removal from London, it is plain that his Highness was so far
from owning, or receiving the King in the same capacity he was in before his
departure, that as soon as ever he heard he was at the Earl of Winchelsea's,
and about to return to London, he sent away Monsieur Zulestein with a Letter to
let him know, that he desired him not as yet to come to London, but to stay at
Rochester till he himself should come to Town; but Monsieur Zulestein missing
of the King by the way, he came to White Hall: yet could not but know that his
being there was not with the Princes consent, since the same Gentleman followed
him thither, and there delivered him the Princes Letters; so that this second
Message by these Lords could be no new thing, or surprise to him; yet that his
Highness never intended, or acted the least violence toward the Kings Person,
may appear by this, that he left it to the Kings choice what place he would go
to, as also what Guards or other Attendance he would take with him, and the
King refused to take his English Guards with him, though they were offered him:
and indeed these Dutch Guards that attended him, might in his Majesty's
judgment be very well trusted, they being (as well as their Officers) for the
most part Papists; but that the Prince did not intend either to detain his
Majesty's Person as a Prisoner, may appear in this, that whilst he remained at
Rochester, none that would were debarred from access to him, and that the
Officers and Soldiers of the Guards were ordered to be under his command, and
every Night to take the Word from him; and had it not been for the Kings
commanding a Centry to be drawn off from his usual Post, he could never have
gone away without being discovered; and if he would have gone away at Noon Day,
I know not who unless the Rabble would have hindered him; so that I think it is
evident that this was the civilest, and mildest usage that a vanquished Prince
could expect from him that had so much the better of him, and in whose power he
now was; and I doubt more than the King would have allowed the Prince, had it
been his Fortune to have got him as much in his power; nay the King was so far
from being confined, that it is plain he had the liberty given him to go
whither he pleased; nor were these Guards placed so much about him for his
confinement as to secure him from the insults of the Rabble, who otherwise
there, as well as they did at Feversham, might have expressed too violent a
resentment against his Person.


M. I cannot deny but you have given a very-fair, and as far as I know, a true
account of this transaction, and have told me some things which I never heard
before; but however, I cannot depart from my first opinion, that it was
neither, honestly nor wisely done of those who took upon them to advise the
Prince to push things to extremities in this conjuncture, and therefore I
impute it chiefly to those English, who supposing they had by taking Arms and
joining themselves to the Princes party, provoked the King beyond all
possibility of Pardon, were resolved to do their utmost to put it out of the
Kings Power ever to call him to an account for it: and though perhaps his first
sending away the Queen and Prince, and then going away himself, in the middle
of a Treaty with the Prince, and thereby leaving his Affairs in such confusion,
may seem to deserve blame, yet certainly his Majesty is to be excused in a
great measure for what he then did; for as he tells the Earl of Feversham in
his Letter to him to Disband the Army; H.D. p. 92.
That things being come to that extremity, that he was forced to send away the
Queen, and the Prince his Son, that they might not fall into the Enemies hands,
and was also constrained to do the same thing himself, and follow them, since
the Troops of his Army were not to be relied on, that it was not advisable for
him to Fight the Prince of Orange in the Head of them; for it was but
reasonable that Princes as well as other men, should provide for their own
security, as well as they can.

But yet I can never believe that his Majesty's first going away was any
Abdication of the Government, much less a forfeiture of his Crown or Royal
Dignity any more than the second; for in the first place it could be no
forfeiture according to your own Principles, because he had already Dissolved
the Ecclesiastical Court, and restored the Cities and Corporations to their
former Charters and Freedom in Elections of Parliament Men, and putting again
in Commission, all Lords, Lieutenants, and Justices of the Peace, who had been
before turned out; and if he could not give an entire redress to all our
grievances by a free Parliament, it was only because he durst not stay to hold
it, since he thought he could have no security for his Person, the whole Nation
being in a manner poisoned and prepossessed against him by those malicious
Artifices of a French League, I. D. D.
and a suppositious Prince, and that his Majesty had so many unfortunate
disappointments, and so surprising and unparalleled accidents; part of his
Army deserting him, and the rest too apparently unserviceable, when there were
such terrible disorders in the Kingdom, and all places were either flaming, or
about to take fire.

So likewise could it not be properly any wilful desertion or Abdication of the
Government, since he was forced to quit it, like the master of a Ship, who when
the Vessel is like to sink is forced to leave her, and escape in a Cock-boat;
and that his Majesty did not act thus without an intention to return, and again
to vindicate his right, when opportunity served, appears likewise in that
passage in the above mentioned Letter, wherein he desires both the Officers and
Soldiers of his Army then to be disbanded, To continue their Fidelity to him,
and to keep themselves from Associations, and such pernicious things; from
whence it plainly appears, he went not away without a prospect of returning to
his Throne when Time should serve: and if he left no orders at all for the
Government of the Kingdom in his absence, nor named any Commissioners or
Lieutenants to represent him, it was because he thought it to no purpose; since
besides that, he could find no body, who durst undertake so difficult an
employment; so they that had taken it would have found no body who would obey
them, the generality of the People, and also of the Kings Army, being more
inclinable to the Prince of Orange, than to himself.

Yet however you see upon his return to Town, the King was so well persuaded of
the Prince of Oranges kind intentions toward himself and the Nation, that I
verily believe that his Majesty would have yielded to any thing that could in
reason have been desired of him; and upon this ground I suppose he writ so
kindly to the Prince, and invited him to come to St. James's with what Troops
he should think fit for his security; therefore I must needs tell you again, I
think it was a great oversight of the Prince of Orange, thus to let slip this
opportunity, by refusing all terms of accommodation with the King his Father,
and by clapping up my Lord Feversham, then seizing the Kings Person, and
sending him out of Town, to let all the World see he was resolved to treat no
more with him: and this being the true state of the case, it is not your saying
that he had forfeited his Crown by going away, and consulting his own safety,
that will convince any unprejudiced man: for as to your notion of a forfeiture,
that they were not then entered into the Thoughts of the Peers, and others of
the Privy Council, appears by the Order they made for sending the Lords
Feversham, Alesbury, ^armouth, and Middleton, most humbly to entreat the King
to return to White Hall, so that he was received very joyfully and with great
Acclamations of the Common People as he passed through the City; and when he
came to White Hall he called a Council, where he made an Order to stop the
demolishing and plundering of Houses by the Rabble: so that he was not only
received, but also acted as a King after his return to Town. This being the
true state of the case, I shall not dispute the point whether his Majesty and
the Prince were in a state of War or Peace, after his return to Town, or what
the Prince might have done as an Enemy and a stranger to the Kings Person, but
what might be expected from him as a generous Prince, a Nephew, and a
Son-in-law, and one who was bound in Conscience and Honor, to consult the
lasting Peace and Happiness of the Nation, more than his own private interest,
or the ambition of wearing a Crown.


F. You have made the utmost defense that I suppose can be brought for the
King's first going away; yet if it be better considered, I doubt it will not
serve the turn: I see you are forced to lay the whole fault of the Kings
departure in the midst of the Treaty with the Prince, and his refusing to call
a Parliament according to his own Promise and Proclamation, upon his want of
security for himself, the Queen, and Prince, if he had stayed, by reason of the
want of fidelity in his Army, the general prejudice of the Nation against him,
and the great firmness and resolution there was in the Princes Army to adhere
to him. Now I shall show you that every one of these were but pretenses, and
that the real cause of his departure was, because he feared to leave the
inquiry into the Birth of the Prince of Wales, and the free examination and
redress of our grievances, and those violations he had committed upon the
fundamental constitution of the Government, to the impartial judgment of a free
Parliament. For in the first place, as to want of fidelity in his Army, that
can be no just excuse for his deserting, and disbanding them as he did, without
any pay; since he himself in his said Letter to the Earl of Feversham, expressly
owns, that there were a great many brave men, both Officers and Soldiers among
them; and therefore if he was satisfied of this, he ought to have first sent
for all his Officers, both Colonels and Captains, and have examined them how
far they would stand by him, in the Defense of his Person and Cause, against
the Prince of Orange; and he might have also ordered those Officers to have
examined every Regiment, Troop and Company in his whole Army, how far they
would engage in his defense; and if he had proceeded thus at Salisbury, before
he fled away in that confusion to London, I have been credibly informed by
diverse Officers of that Army, that the King might have found above* Twenty
Thousand men, that would have stood by him to the last man, in his Quarrel
against the Prince, and therefore I impute his going away as he did from
Salisbury, to some strange pannick fear that God had cast upon him, and all the
Popish Faction about him, since he has been known not to want sufficient
courage upon other occasions; but though he had omitted it there, yet he
certainly ought to have tried this last experiment after he came to London,
rather than have quitted the Kingdom so dishonourably as he then did, and
thereby giving the P. of Orange's Friends an opportunity of seizing or getting
delivered into their power, all the Garrisons and strong places in England,
besides Portsmouth, in those three or four days time, that he was not heard of,
besides great part of the Army that was not disbanded, had in that time gone in
to the Prince, in hopes of their pay, and future preferment: now that the King
might with safety have resided with his Army somewhere about London, he himself
grants, H. D. p. 90.
in his Proposals to the Prince, to this effect, That in the mean time, till
all matters were adjusted concerning the freedom of Elections, and a security
of their sitting; the respective Armies may be retained within such Limits, and
at such distance from London, as may prevent all apprehensions that the
Parliament may be in any kind disturbed; which Proposals being made not long
after the Kings arrival at London, we may reasonably suppose that he was then
well enough satisfied with the fidelity of the greatest part, at least of his
own Army, to him; and if he were not, he might have been better satisfied if he
pleased: but as for the next difficulty, the Nations being poisoned and
prepossessed against him; admit it were so, as long as he had a sufficient Army
about him (as I suppose he might have had) he need not have feared any thing
the People could do; but indeed this was a needless fear; for before the
Parliament could sit, it was not the Peoples Interest to hinder it, or to fall
upon the King or his Army when matters were in a fair way of accommodation; so
after the Parliament sat, there would have been less cause of fear, since the
reverence of that Court would have kept them in awe; but as to the firmness and
resolution of the Princes Army, the fear of that was also as needless, as long
as the Kings Army continued as firm to him, and if the Princes Army had been
the first Agressors, I doubt not but the People would have taken part with the
King against them: but after all it was certainly (and you must grant it so)
much more safe and honorable for the King to have treated with the Prince, and
held a Parliament with an Army about him, than to have yielded the same things
(as you suppose him willing to have done) after his return to Town, when his
Army was disbanded, and London had received the Prince, and had joined with him
and when almost all the strong places of England were in the Princes power; so
that upon the whole matter it evidently appears that the King chose to trust
his own Person together with that of the Queen and Prince, to a Foreign Monarch
rather than he would rely upon the justice or fidelity of his own Nation.

You say in the next place, that nothing the King has done in all these
exorbitances he committed that can in any wise amount to a Forfeiture, or
Abdication of the Government; not to the former because the King redressed all
our Grievances before he went away; it is true, I grant he redressed some of
them, by putting diverse things in the same State they were before; yet for all
this, the greatest still remained unredressed, ( viz.) the Raising of Money
contrary to Law, and the Dispensing Power, both which (as I have already showed
you) at our last meeting he never Disclaimed, neither took any sufficient
course, by Calling a Parliament to prevent its being exercised for the future;
besides his going away, without giving the Prince and Nation any further
Satisfaction about the Birth of the Prince of Wales, all which not being done,
I must still affirm, that this wrought a forfeiture of the Crown, or an
Abdication of it, at least by his refusal to Hold and Govern it according to
the Fundamental Laws thereof; for he that destroys the Law or Conditions by
which he holds an Estate, does Tacitly Renounce his Title to it: As I showed
you in the Case of Tenant for Life, altering in Fee: So that this being
considered, as also that the City of London and the whole Nation, had
Surrendered themselves to the Prince of Orange; H. D. p. 92.94.
and that even the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, together with the
Bishops of Winchester and Ely, with diverse other Earls, Bishops and Lords then
in Town, had sent an Address to the Prince, immediately upon the Kings
departure, and sent three Lords and one Bishop with it, desiring his Highness
to come speedily to London, and to take the Government upon him; and having
before declared, that they would with their utmost endeavors, Assist his
Highness for the obtaining of a Free Parliament; so that the Prince had no
reason upon the Kings return, to Surrender that Power which the Nation as far
as it was able to do without a Parliament, had put into his Hands; and that to
a King, whom he had very little reason to believe, would use it any better than
he had done before.

But I see you wilfully decline entering into the Merits of the Cause, and
arguing the main point in the Controversy, ( viz.) whether the King was in a
State of War or Peace with the Prince upon his return; for if he were still in
a State of War, the Prince might certainly very well justify his clapping up
the Earl of Feversham (his Late Majesty's General) for offering to come within
the Limits of the Princes Quarters, without his leave; especially, since he was
still answerable for doing his endeavor to Disband an Army (a great part of
which, consisted of Papists and Foreigners, with their Arms in their hands)
whereby they might have robbed and spoiled the Countries, or at least have kept
those Arms, to renew the War again with the first Opportunity; so that
certainly it could not be so slight a thing, as a bare Invitation to St.
James's, whither the Prince could have gone without his leave, (being now
Master of the City) which could so far ef^ace all the Princes just Resentments,
and make him so far confide in the Kings Word, as to come to London, whilst he
remained there with his Guards, and all those Papists and Tories in and about
London, ready to take his part, and Rallie again into a new Army, upon the
first Signal.

But as for any Proposals of Peace or Accommodation, which you say the Lord
Feversham brought with him, I neither know, nor have heard of any such thing:
it is true, the King says in the said Paper he left behind him, that he had writ
to the Prince of Orange by the Lord Feversham, and also mentions some
Instructions he had given him; but what they were, he does not tell us; but
sure they were not Propositions of Peace, since it is to be supposed, that the
King would not have sent any thing of that Consequence, without first
acquainting the Privy Council with it, before it was sent: But since we hear of
nothing concerning them, we may very well suppose there was no such thing, or
if there were, his Highness was the fittest judge, whether they were reasonable
or not; and if the King had any desire to propose any Just or Reasonable Terms,
whereupon he might have hoped to have been restored again to his Royal Dignity,
he had a very ^air Opportunity for it, when a great Council of the Nobility
were met at St. James's, in Order to Sign an Association to stand by the Prince
in the Calling of a Free Parliament, for the King might then* if he had
pleased, have made his Proposals by such of the Lords and Bishops, as he could
most confide in, and have Conjured all the Peers there Assembled, to have
interceeded with the Prince of Orange, to renew their Treaty with the King,
which had been before unhappily broken off; and then if either the Peers had
refused to do this, or the Prince had refused to hear them, the King might then
(I grant) have had sufficient reason to declare to all the World, that he was
not fairly dealt with; but for him again to go away only upon pretense, that
his Person was under restraint, when really it was not, plainly showed, that he
had no real design, of making an amicable end of those differences, or really
desired to be restored to his Throne, by the general consent of the Nation; but
either hoped for it from those Civil Dissentions he expected we should fall
into upon his departure, or else to the Arms of France; and this being the
Case, I think nothing is plainer, than that the King both by his first and
second departure, has obstinately refused all those means, whereby the Nation
might have been settled with a due consideration of his Person, and Authority
whilst he lived, and of the Prince, when his Legitimacy shall be sufficiently
proved, and made out before a Free Parliament. So that since I have already
proved that the King had before the Princes Arrival, committed so many
Violations upon the whole Constitution of the Government, and that these
Violations, if wilfully and obstinately persisted in, do at last produce an
absolute loss and forfeiture of the Crown it self; I think the late King has
done all that could be required to make it so.

But I have forgot to answer one Objection you made, ( viz.) that the Peers and
Bishops, when they invited the King to return to White Hall, had no Notion of
this forfeiture, nor the people of London, who you say, received him with great
Joy and Acclamations, and that therefore it is wholly a new invention. To this
I Answer; that if the Lords you mention, did send this message to the King, it
might be, because they were surprised with his unexpected return, and had not
well considered all the Circumstances of the Case, and thereby did more then
they could well justify, having before declaed, they would stand by his
Highness, in procuring a Free Parliament, which must certainly be without the
King, since he was then gone away; and they had also invited him to come to
London, as well as the City; and how that could consist with their inviting the
King thither, without the Princes consent, I do not well understand; but it
seems they quickly, altered their Sentiments as appears by their presently
after Subscribing a paper in the nature of an Association, to stand by the
Prince, without taking any notice at all of the King, and the very day of the
Kings departure, they met to consider upon the Princes Speech, he had a day or
two before made to them, desiring them to advise on the best means, how to
pursue the ends of his Declaration, in Calling a Free Parliament; and within
two days after, they presented the Prince with their Advice, to call a
Convention on the 22th. of January, which was also the next day agreed to, by
one hundred and sixty Persons, who had served as Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses, in any of the last Parliaments, in the time of King Charles the
Second, without taking any notice at all of the King; for though it is true, he
was then gone away, when the Commons and City, two or three days after, made
their Addresses to the Prince: Yet, when the Peers met both the first and
second time, on the 21st. and 22d. of December, he was still here; for the King
did not leave Rochester, until the 23d. in the morning; so it is plain, it was
not their design to own, or take notice of him any more as King, and that which
makes it more remarkable, is, that several of the Bishops ( viz.) the
Archbishop of York, together with the Bishop of St. Asaph, and others joined
with the rest of the Peers in these Addresses, which was a plain sign, they all
looked upon the Kings Power to be now at an end: But as for the Acclamations of
the people, or any great joy the City expressed upon the Kings return to Town,
I doubt you have had a false account of that matter, for I cannot hear that any
of the Citizens went out to meet him, or set any Lights in their Windows,
though he came into London after it was dark, or that any of the better sort,
bid him God Speed: I grant indeed, there was a great many of what you call the
Mob; but more Boys than Men, who followed his Coach, making Huzza's, whilst the
rest of the people silently looked on.


M. I cannot deny, but you may have given a true account of these matters,
since you may have observed them better than I; yet as you your self have
Related them, sure the King had sufficient cause to Consult his own Safety, and
make his escape as soon as he could; for what could he expect, when once the
Prince had secured his Person under a Guard, and had refused to Treat with him
as King; and that also the Peers, and diverse of the Bishops had made an
Association to stand by the Prince of Orange, and had made a fresh Address to
him, without taking the least notice of him, as if there had been no such thing
as a King in being? I say, what could his Majesty now expect, but either a more
close Confinement, or else, being taken off privately by poison, or some other
ways, since he could not be forgetful of the King his Fathers saying, that
there is no great distance between the Prisons and the Graves of Princes; or
admit he had lived till this Convention Sa^e, what could he have expected more,
than the retaining the bare Title of King, whilst the Prince of Orange, or some
others appointed by Him, had wholly managed the Government at their pleasure?
or else they might according to your Doctrine, have either declared the Crown
forfeited, or else, that he had Abdicated it by his going away; or who can
tell, but they might have again renewed the Villainy of 48. and have made him
undergone the same Fate with his Father?


F. I grant you have urged the utmost that can be, to justify the Kings second
Departure; and as I would not deny, but that he was the best Judge of his own
Danger, so were the Prince, Peers and Common, together with the City, the best
and only Judges, we could then have of the true means of our settlement and
safety, since after so many breaches that the King had made upon his first
Declaration, and Coronation Oath, as also his going from his late Promise of
calling a Free Parliament; I cannot see what farther security he could have
given us, that he would not repeat the same things over again; H.D. p. 110.
or admit the Prince had suffered him to continue at White Hall, and to call a
third Parliament, what assurance could he have given, that in the end of
another forty days, we should not have the same trick played us? and then in
March or April, have been left in the same state of Confusion we were in, in
December, to the certain ruin of these three Kingdoms, and Holland into the
bargain? And then by that time, the French King might have got ready an Army
and a Fleet, and under a pretense of redeeming his Majesty from the constraint
he lay under, and of restoring him to the free exercise of his Regal Power,
have Invaded this Kingdom; and I suppose you cannot deny but the King would
then have sound Papists and High Tories enough, to have joined with him in this
pious design; for certainly the scruples of the high Churchmen would have been
the same they are now, the obligations of the Oath of Allegiance the same, and
the supposed Sin of deposing a Lawful K. the same, though he had utterly
refused to give the Prince and Nation any satisfaction: so that then if we had
been forced to take Arms, and to declare he had forfeited his Right to the
Crown, all these things would have given as great, Ibid. p. 111.
or rather greater scandal, than for the Nation to take him at his first offer;
and since he had thus rashly deserted the Throne by a needless departure, to
resolve he should Ascend it no more.

But suppose (what might also as well have happened) that the Prince and his
Party had been killed, or expelled the Kingdom by the King, do you think he
would have granted us then, what he would not grant us now? Would he not think
you, have disbanded his Protestant Army, and have kept only Irish, Scotch, and
French Forces in pay, and have every day increased them? What respect can we
hope he would ever after this have shown to our Laws, Religion, or Liberties,
when he had now no longer any thing to fear? The memory of what happened after
the Duke of Monmouth's defeat, (though effected only by those of the Church of
England) will certainly never be forgotten by others, whatever you Bigots of
Loyalty may pretend, or say.

So that for my part I stand amazed to see you, and so many others scruple the
submitting to the present King; for if ever man had a just cause of War, he
had, and that creates a right to the thing gained by it, the King by
withdrawing and disbanding his Army, yielded him the Throne; and is he had
without any more Ceremony ascended it, he had done no more than several Princes
formerly have done on the like occasions; for the Prince was no longer then
bound to consider him as one that was, but as one that had been King of
England, yet in that capacity he treated him with great respect and civility,
how much soever the King complained of it, who did not enough consider what he
had done to draw upon himself that usage: but as for your insinuation, that if
he had stayed he might have run the same fate with his Father; I think it is
fuller of Passion than Truth; for besides that, the Lords and Commons would
never had the Impudence to have committed such a Villainy; and the Prince
himself as a Nephew, and a Son-in-Law would never have suffered it.


M. Well, God only knows the event of things, and we ought to judge charitably,
and still to hope, that if the King might have been restored upon terms, that
he would have been the better for his Affliction, and have amended all those
errors he committed, since he had seen that neither the Nation, nor yet his
Neighbors the Dutch would permit him to make himself an Absolute Monarch; I
believe he would have been too much afraid of the King of France, ever to have
made use of his Forces, to have settled Popery and Arbitrary Government; and
without his assistance, I suppose you will grant it never could have been done,
since he plainly found that a Protestant Army would never have joined with him
to act in such pernicious designs; but however, let the worst have happened
that could be, I think it had been much better for the Nation to have endured
it with Patience, than to have done that which was Evil, though for the
procuring of the greatest seeming Good, though for the advantage of our Religion,
and civil Liberties: and therefore it had been better for us in this extremity,
to have trusted God than Men, since he always promises to protect those that
rely upon him, and strictly perform his Will; and admit the worst that could
have happened, God would either have removed those afflictions from us in due
time, or have given us Patience to have born them; since I suppose you will not
deny, that God oftentimes brings Persecutions and Afflictions upon a Sinful
Church and Nation, either for a punishment for their Sins, or else to give an
occasion for those that are truly Pious and Sincere, to show their Courage and
Constancy in Suffering for the Truth, and by withstanding, not by force, but
Passive Obedience, all the Kings Illegal and Arbitrary Commands, if he should
after his re-establishment in the Throne, have again renewed his former
courses; these are the only remedies which we of the Church of England, as
obedient Subjects to the King and his Laws, must think could have been Lawfully
taken in this case.


F. I do not deny, but what you say is in the main very pious and honest, were
the case as you have put it; but the greatest part of your discourse depends
wholly upon those old principles and prejudices, of the unlawfulness of all
resistance of the Supreme Powers, and that the King is the only Supreme Power
in this Kingdom; both which propositions I have sufficiently confuted at our
third, fourth, and fifth meetings, and also at our last save one, in which I
gave you a true account of the Legal sense of those Oaths and Statutes of King
Charles II. concerning Resistance; as was also given by the best Lawyers, and
most considering Men of the then House of Lords and Commons; so that if the
means we have used are lawful, both by the Laws of God and Man, I think we are
not bound to bring Afflictions upon our selves, but to avoid them all we can,
especially when they come evidently attended with the utter loss and ruin of
what ought to be most dear to us, our Religion, Civil Liberties, and
Properties, and that not only for our selves, but our Posterity; who perhaps
would never have regained them when they were once lost; of which the French
Nation is an evident example before our Eyes, who by not opposing the Arbitrary
Power of their Kings in due time, have fallen into a Government almost as
Despotick as that of Turkey; for when once the common good of the Subjects
ceases to be the main end of the Governors, the Government then ceasing to be
Gods Ordinance, degenerates into Tyranny: which I think may be always Lawfully
opposed by a freeborn People, who at first agreed to be Governed, not as
Slaves but Subjects.

But as for the first part of your Speech, it needs not any long answer; it
first supposes the King might have been again restored upon terms; now since it
is plain, these Terms must have been imposed upon him against his Will, and as
necessary Conditions of his Restoration, I would be glad to know who it was
should undertake to impose them upon him, and to see them kept, when they had
been made, whether the Prince of Orange or the Parliament? if the former, I
grant indeed he might have made such Conditions with the King, that the Church
of England, as well as the whole Nation, should for the future enjoy their Just
Rights and Liberties; but then the Prince must either have trusted wholly to the
Kings Honor, or else he must have had some strong places put into his Hands
for a Security, that the King would not again make the same Violations upon our
Laws, Religion and Liberties, as he had done before; if the former, I suppose
you will not deny, but that the King might, if he had pleased, have broken them
all again, as soon as ever the Princes back had been turned, and that he had
been once engaged in a War with France, which could not have been long avoided,
considering the necessity there is at this juncture of time for the States of
Holland (and Consequently the Prince as their General) to engage with the
Emperor and King of Spain, to drive the French out of the Empire, and to hinder
him from making himself Universal Monarch of Europe; which it is plain, is the
thing he now drives at.

But if the Prince should have kept any strong places here as cautionary Towns,
for the Kings performance of the Terms agreed upon, this must have been done
either by English or Foreign Forces; if by the former, this would have been
looked upon as inconsistent with their Duty, and Allegiance to the King, if he
should have commanded them to be delivered up into his Hands; since you tell
us, the King has the sole Command of the Militia, and consequently of all
Garrisons manned by his Subjects, within his Dominions: But if the Forces that
should have held these places, had been Dutchmen, or other Foreigners, it
would never have been endured, either by the King or the Nation, that
Foreigners should possess the strong Holds and Keys of the Kingdom, and the
King might soon have wrought (by some jealousies and suspicions, which he would
not have failed to have raised) that the Nation it self, should have joined
with him to drive them out; and then the King might have done what he pleased
without Control; but if you will place this power into the whole People or
Nation, or else their Representatives the Parliament, of holding the King to
these Terms agreed upon, this could not have been done without their constant
Siting, and a power of Resisting him, in case he infringed them; and then
either they must have given up all their Liberties to the Kings Will, or else
farewell to the Darling Doctrines of Passive Obedience, and Non-resistance; so
that take it which way you will, all imposing of Terms upon the King, either by
the Prince of Orange, or the Nation, would in a short time have become either
Unpracticable or Insignificant. Nor is your other Supposition any whit truer,
that the King would never have made use of the Forces of France, to subdue and
keep under the people of England, for fear he should not be able to get the
French out again. It Is true, this would be a very good Argument to a Prince,
who were no Bigot, and was not resolved to introduce his Religion, by all the
ways and means he could; but how near the French Forces were to be brought over
into this Kingdom the last Summer, is very well known to those who were then in
France, and saw them upon the Sea Coast, ready to Imbark; nor was their coming
over put off by any other motives, than that two of the Cabinet-Council
represented to the King, that it would be the only means to make the whole
Nation rise up against him, and join with the Prince of Orange, as soon as he
Landed; which I suppose was the only reason that hindered it; for that the
French King offered to send them, is very certain. Yet it does not follow for
all that, but the King might take an opportunity of doing it another time, and
bringing them over in their own Ships, if ours would not do the business.

And though I will not affirm, that there is any private League with France,
for the Extirpation of the Protestant Religion; yet this much I think may be
sufficiently made out, that long ago, the King was wholly in the power and
interest of France, as appears by Coleman's Letters (whilst he was his
Secretary) when Duke of York. The first passage, is to Sir William Throgmorton
Feb. 1. 1673/4. You well know, that when the Duke comes to be Master of our
Affairs, the King of France will have reason to promise himself all things that
he can desire. The next is to Father La Chaise, the French Kings Confessor, in
these words; That his Royal Highness was Convinced, that his interest and the
King of France's, were the same; and whether the Duke by his Accession to the
Crown, has showed any alteration in his Inclinations to France, either in
respect of Religion or Interest, I appeal to the World.

Nor is your next Supposition less out of the way, that the King could have
made use of no Forces but French, to settle Popery and Arbitrary Government
here, as if He had not Scotch and Irish Papists enough in his Dominions for
this occasion; and as for Arbitrary Government, we have found to our grief,
that there are too many Mercenary Soldiers in the Kings Army, who fought only
for pay, and would have Assisted the King to have Raised Money without the
Parliament, nay, to pull the very Parliament out of Doors, if he had bid them;
and if some of them were Discontented, when the Prince came over, I do not so
much impute it to their Honest Principles, as fear, lest they themselves should
be Cashierd, and Scotch and Irish, to be listed in their rooms; so that upon
the whole matter, considering the temper the King was in ever since his last
coming to Town, and that as soon as he Arrived, the Priests and Jesuits flocked
about him as thick as ever, that they and the French Envoy were his chief (if
not his only Cabinet Counselors) I cannot see (unless he had taken new
measures) how we could have been secure, or could have relied on any thing he
could have farther promised; nay, swore to perform; since no Oath could be more
Sacred than that at his Coronation, when he Swore to maintain the Church (that
is, the Doctrine of the Church) of England, and the Laws of the Kingdom, if
that be a true account of the form of it, which we have in print.


M. At this rate of Arguing, I know not what to say to you, since this Argument
amounts to no more than this; that the King could upon no account be trusted,
and therefore was not any more to be Treated with; if this were so, to what
purpose did the Prince of Orange declare, that he came not to Conquer the
Kingdom; but only to procure a Free and Legal Parliament, which could not be
called, without the Kings Consent, and owning his Authority? neither could they
have done the least Act for the Amendment of our Grievances, without his
Majesty's Consent; or to what purpose did the Prince enter into a Treaty with
the Kings Commissioners at Hungerford, if his Royal Word and Promises, were not
to be believed? But if his Majesty could ever be trusted, I see no reason why
he could not have been so, as well since his last coming to Town, as before,
since he came voluntarily? and as I have great reason to believe with Real
Intentions, to grant and perform what ever the Nation could reasonably expect
for the Redress of their Grievances, and would have given any reasonable
Security of his performance for the future, without Devesting himself of his
Royal Power of making Laws, and Protecting his Subjects?

But as for the former part of your Speech, whereby you would prove it lawful
to Resist the King, because you say it conduced to the Common good and Interest
of the Nation, both as to the Protestant Religion, and Civil Liberties, this is
no more than the Old Commonwealths Maxim in other words, which I grant is so
far true, as when the safety and preservation of the King or other Supreme
Powers of a Commonwealth (who according to your own principles, are the
Representatives of the people, and consequently part of it) are likewise
comprehended and maintained (as they ought to be) in their due power and
authority: for Bishop Sanderson in his Learned Lectures, has very well proved,
that those cannot be separated from each other, without destroying the Civil
Government, which is all the Security we have for our Civil Properties and
Liberties; and we see in those few days in which his Majesty's Person was
withdrawn, when that there was no Civil Government exercised, that there was
greater infringment of them, both by plundering and destroying of Houses, and
spoiling of Parks and Forests in three or four days time, by the violence and
fury of the Mob, than have been committed by the most Arbitrary Kings, from the
Conquest to this day.


F. You very much mistake me, if you think I maintain, that there was never any
time after the Princes Landing, that the King might not have been Treated
withal; and likewise trusted with the Administration of the Government; but
then it must have been upon such Terms, as should have secured us for the
future, from his Acting the like, or worse things over again; as in the first
place, he should have renounced his Dispensing Power, and that of Levying
Chimny money upon small Cottages and Ovens, directly contrary to Law. Next he
should have Disbanded his standing Army, and kept up no Forces in time of
Peace, besides the necessary Guard^ of his Person, the Number of which, should
have been agreed upon by Parliament; which should also have S^te once every
year, or two years at least; and lastly, that in respect of the Church, as long
as he or his Successors continued of the Roman Catholic Religion, the
Nomination of all Bishops, Archbishops, Deans, with other Ecclesiastical
preferments, which are not in the immediate Disposal of the Lord Chancellor,
should have been in the Archbishops, and Bishops of each Province, they
choosing two, out of which his Majesty should have chosen one, for to supply
each Bishopric, etc. as they became vacant.

And therefore for my own part, I was so far from believing all agreements with
the King to be unpracticable, that there was no body rejoiced more than I, when
upon his Majesty's first return to London, he so far Complied with the Desires
of the whole Nation, as to issue out his Proclamation for a Free Parliament,
and that he sent down his Commissioners to Treat with the Prince, and I had
then great hopes of an Accommodation; but when instead of this, the King had
burnt the Writs for the Election of Parliament Men, and had sent away the Queen
and Prince, together with the Great Seal, that no more Writs might be issued,
and that before ever the Commissioners could return to London, or before any
Answer to the Princes Proposals was given by the King, he had withdrawn
himself, and done all he could to get away into a Foreign Kingdom; it was then,
and not till then, that I saw all hopes of Agreement absolutely desperate: and
though you put a great stress upon the Kings last return to Town, which you
suppose, was with a Design to agree with the Prince in every thing, that could
be in Reason demanded: I can see no cause for your drawing such a Consequence
from it; for if he did not look upon himself as safe here before his Army was
Disbanded, he could not think himself more so, when it was either wholly
Dissolved, or else was gone over to the Prince; and therefore I have much
greater reason to believe, that his return again to Town, was only to comply
with the present necessity, and to wait for a fitter opportunity to get away,
there being never a Vessel then ready to Transport him; especially if that be
true which I have heard, that the King declared to a Person of Credit: That the
Queen had obtained from him a Solemn Oath on the Sacrament, on the Sunday, that
if she went for France on Monday, he would not fail to follow her on Tuesday;
and if this were so, though he was disappointed in his intended passage; yet
still was he under the same obligation to the Queen; nor do I see any
Transaction of his with the Prince of Orange, or with these of the Church of
England, that can persuade me to believe otherwise; sin^e his long Consultation
with the French Envoy, and the Priests and Jesuits could only tend to the
taking new measures for his Departure, or else how he might Imbroil us further
while he stayed, by some faint hopes of new Treaties and Agreements.

But as for the other part of your Answer, whereby you would confute my Notion,
of the lawfulness of Resistance for the defense and preservation of our
Religion Established by Law, as also of our Liberties and Properties; I hope I
shall let you see, that it is not I, but your self, who are mistaken in this
matter: Vi. Sand. de oblig. conscien. pralect. V.. 11. pralect. VII.. 4.
For 1st. All Writers on this Subject, and even Dr. Sanderson himself, in his
Lectures of the Obligation of Conscience, do acknowledge that all Civil
Government is principally ordained for the good and preservation of the People;
and that the good of the Governors, is only to be considered, secondarily; and
in order to that; which if so; I pray tell me whether the good and preservation
of the people, ought not to be considered in the first place; since the end for
which a thing is ordained, is always more worthy than the means, by which it is
procured; and therefore I shall freely grant, that as long as the safety, and
interest of the Supreme Power, and that of the People are all one, and can any
ways consist together; and that they make the happiness and preservation of the
People to be the main end of their Government; I so far agree with you, that
the good, or preservation of the Prince or Supreme Powers, cannot, (nay ought
not) to be separated from that of the People; but when they once set up a
separate interest quite different from that of the People; (as all Princes do,
who turning Tyrants go about to inslave them) they then cease to be the true
heads of that Political Body the Common Wealth, and thereupon the Community or
People become free, and at liberty, either to oppose or remove these Artificial
heads, and to set up new ones in their rooms; so that since similies are not
Arguments, your comparison between a Natural and Political Body, has only
served to impose upon your Judgment in this matter; and therefore I affirm that
a Natural and Political Body do wholly differ in this matter; for in a Natural
Body, the real good of the head cannot be separated from that of the Body, nor
the good of the Body from that of the Head, nor yet can the Body alone Judge of
the proper means of it is own preservation, nor when it is hurt or assaulted,
but by the head, which is the principle of sense and motion; but in a Political
Body it is quite otherwise; for first, the Supreme Powers of a Commonwealth,
which you suppose to be Head of this Political Body, do often pursue and set up
an interest quite different from, (nay contrary to) that of the Body or People,
and that not only to their prejudice, but also sometimes to their destruction;
and that when they do this, the Politcal Body, or the People will in evident
and apparent cases Judge for themselves, let this Political Head say or declare
what it will against it, and will when they are thus destroyed, oppressed, and
enslaved, by those that they have submitted to as their Political Heads, and in
such cases of extremity, endeavor to free themselves from the severity of
their Yoke.


M. Notwithstanding what you have now said, I am not yet convinced, that the
King had no real design to redress our grievances, and to make a final
agreement with the Prince; for though I do not deny but his Majesty did
converse with some Priests, and others of his own persuasion, as also with the
French Envoy after his coming to Town, yet might this be for no ill intent, and
he did also converse with diverse reverend Bishops and Lords of our own
Religion, to whom he still expressed a great desire of making an end of all
differences between himself, the Prince, and the whole Nation; and this I
suppose is the true reason why the Archbishop of Canterbury, though it is true
he signed the first and second Addresses to the Prince, upon his Majesty's
first wth-drawing himself, yet has been ever since so sensible of that mistake
he then committed, that he has never appeared or acted in any meeting of the
Peers, nor yet in the Convention; and that his Majesty, even at Rochester, did
not lay aside all thoughts of Agreement, and making up all breaches between
himself and his People; I could give you another demonstration, which is not
commonly known, and which I had from a particular Friend, ( viz.) that the King
during his confinement there, sent a Lady I could name, on a message to two
reverend Prelates of our Church, (together with an Emrauld Ring from his
Finger, as a Testimony of the Truth of her Commission) to this effect, That his
Majesty being sensible of the sad condition the Church of England as well as he
himself was in, and that there was no way so likely for him to get out of it,
as by granting his Subjects, and particularly the Church of England, such
securities for the enjoyment of their just Rights and Liberties, as they could
in reason demand; therefore he wholly left it to the discretion of those
Bishops, to make to the Peers and Bishops that were then to meet suddenly,
whatever proposals they should think reasonable on his behalf, for the
satisfaction of the Church, and safety of the Nation, and that he would be
ready to grant and ratify them whenever he should be required.


F. This is indeed more than ever I heard before, and can scarce believe; but
did the Lady go and deliver her message? And pray what answer did those Bishop
give to this fair proposal?


M. Yes, the Lady did deliver her message, and these Bishops answered both to
the same effect, that they had a real duty and affection for his Majesty, and a
great desire to serve him; but that considering the great Power of the Prince
of Orange, and his present aversion to any agreement with his Majesty, they
very much feared that the Peers would not venture to give the Prince any such
advice, or to interpose with him on his Majesty's behalf, which in my opinion
was very meanly, and cowardly done of them; who considering their duty to him
as King, and also those particular obligations they owed him as their
Benefactor, and who had been the greatest means of their being raised to those
dignities in his Brothers Reign; now I desire to know if this message had
received its intended effect, what greater demonstration his Majesty could have
given to satisfy the World that he really intended to set all things right
again, had he been permitted to do it.


F. I will not farther question the Truth of this Relation, though perhaps I
might have sufficient reason for it, since you say you had it from a person of
good credit, and who was privy to this transaction; nor yet will I be so
inquisitive as to know the names either of the Bishops, or of the Lady, since
you make it a secret; but yet notwithstanding, I do still very much question,
whether the King did ever really design to do what he then offered, and did not
intend to put a sham upon their Lordships, to serve his present occasion, and
to see if he could divide the Bishops and Peers of the Church of England, from
the Prince of Oranges Interest: and so by making them offer such Proposals as
the Prince should not think fit to agree to, might make them declare against
his proceedings, which would have created great divisions, and heart-burnings
between those of the high Church of England party, and the Prince: and thereby
have involved us again in fresh disturbances, of which no doubt the King and
the Popish Faction were like to receive the greatest advantage; for you know
the old saying, divide, and impera.

But to let you see that I do not speak without just grounds for my opinion,
let us examine every circumstance of this matter; first, if the King had meant
really, is it likely that he would have trusted a business of that high moment
to a Woman? When he had then the Lords of Alesbury and Arron, besides other
Protestant Gentlemen then waiting on him, and they were much fitter to be
trusted than this Lady, let her be whom she will? Or can any one believe if the
King had meant really, that he would not have sent his Proposals in Writing,
since he very well knew from the Princes Declaration, as well as the Bishops
Petition and Addresses to him, what the whole Nation, and the Church of England
in particular required, at his hands: But that he must send a loose and
uncertain Message, which it was in his power to disown whenever he pleased, by
saying, the foolish Woman mistook his meaning; and she also might be so much
his Creature, as to take the fault wholly upon her self, whenever it should
serve the Kings turn so to do; and therefore I think it was very wisely and
honestly done of those reverend Prelets to refuse meddling in such a ticklish
affair, since it is plain by his not making any such proposals to the Prince of
Orange himself, or the Lords about him, that he was not to be made privy to it,
but rather it should be carried on, whether he would or no, and without giving
him any satisfaction in his particular concern as to the Prince of Wales: and
lastly, I desire you farther to consider, whether the King might not hereafter,
when ever he had power, have made void whatever agreements or concessions he
should have then granted either to the Church of England, or to the Nation, by
pleading afterward, that they were obtained by decrees whilst he was not sui
juris, but under the Power of the Prince of Orange?

I have but one thing more to add, which I before omitted, which is to make
some reply to what you said concerning the mischief that the Mob has done upon
Houses, Forests, and Praks, since his Majesty's first departure; and therefore
granting the matter of Fact, that much mischief and spoil has been committed;
yet I deny that it is more than has been done by the most Arbitrary Kings,
since the Conquest to this day, as you are pleased to affirm; for I believe you
forget the Thirty Parish Churches, and Towns, which our Historian tell us, your
William the Conqueror, and his Son Ru^us destroyed, when they enlarged new
Forests, and therein acted contrary to their Oaths, like true despotick
Tyrants; you likewise forget the miserable spoil and waste which King John and
Henry the III. made upon the Houses, Castles and Estates of the Barons, and
Gentry of England, who opposed them in their unjust and illegal violations of
Magna Charta, besides other Tyrannical actions of the same kind committed by
King Edward and Richard the II. too long here to relate; but if these mischiefs
were done you speak of, who have we to thank for it, but the King, who stealing
away on the sudden, without leaving any orders for the Government of the
Kingdom; all persons in Commission either Civil or Military, doubted whether
their Commissions were no^ at an end by the Kings deserting the Government as
he did? besides, you very well know that the Common People were so enraged
against the Popish Faction, for so many insolent actions they had committed in
King James's Reign, and so many apparent breaches, and contempts of all the
Laws made against them, that you cannot wonder if when they were rid of the
fear of the Irish, and of King James's Army, they kept their Arms in their
hands, and took that opportunity of revenging themselves upon those, that they
looked upon as the Authors of all this confusion; so that except the rifling of
the House and Chapel of the Spanish Ambassador, which I grant was contrary to
the Law of Nations, there were very few Popish Houses plundered or spoiled; but
such as had before rendered themselves some ways or other obnoxious to the
Laws, by their Apostasy and accepting of Commissions, which they were utterly
disabled by Law, to take; and though to my knowledge the Deputy Lieutenants,
and Justices of the Peace, did their utmost in most Counties of England, to
quell those Riots and Disorders, yet the Mobbile were too much enraged, and too
numerous to be commanded, when like a vicious Horse, whose Rider is cast off,
they run away with the Bridle in their Teeth.


M. I confess you have made the best Apology for the Mob that the matter will
bear; and I cannot deny in comparison of what has been done in other Nations on
the like occasions; it was a very civil Mob, but yet this may serve to let us
see the danger of your doctrine of Resistance, since by the same Law by, which
they then pulled down, and plundered the Popish Chapels, and Roman Catholic
Houses, by the like right they might have done the same violences upon any
other Noblemans or Gentleman's House in England, whether a Papist or Protestant,
that they had a spleen to, since it was but their crying out, that he was a
Papist, or at least a favourer of them, and then it had been enough to make
them suffer, as if they really had been so; as I could tell you of my own
knowledge, of a very honest Gentleman of my acquaintance, who because he was a
true Son of the Church, and had been always a Loyal Subject to his Majesty, and
a great Enemy to the Whig Faction in the Country, and had also put the Laws
severely in execution against the Dissenters, was like to have had his House
plundered by the Phanatick Mob of a certain Town, from which this Gentleman's
House was not far distant.


F. If you please to consider it, this is a very unjust inference from our
Doctrine; for these actions were not any resistance of the Supreme Powers of
the Nation, but certain violent actions or revenges, which the Rabble thought
they might take upon those whom they looked upon as public Enemies, when there
was no civil or military Power in being, that was of sufficient strength to
keep them in order; but if you please to call to mind my positions; I do by no
means allow the Rabble or Mob of any Nation to take Arms against a Civil
Government, but only the whole Community of the People of all Degrees and
Orders, commanded by the Nobility and Gentry thereof: and though I grant the
People may be sometimes mistaken in the exercise of this Right (as what is
there, though never so lawful, that may not be abused,) yet I think you will
grant that the bare abuse of a lawful thing, is no sufficient ground for the
taking away the liberty of exercising it; and I think I have sufficiently
proved, that the total denial of this Liberty, would be of far worse
consequence to whole Nations and Kingdoms, nay to all mankind, than the
allowing of it, (as those of my opinion do) only in cases of Extreme necessity,
and when no other remedy will serve.


M. I will not renew this old dispute again, about Resistance, we sufficiently
know one another minds about it, and are not, as I can see, like to bring over
either of us to the others opinion; but since I know you have studied the
Common Laws, and Histories of this Kingdom better than I, I cannot forbear
making diverse just reflections upon the late proceedings of the Convention; for
though indeed they had no Legal Authority to assemble upon the circular Letters
of a Foreign Prince, yet since this was the greatest (if not the only liberty
we had left us) I will not quarrel or dispute the legality of their meeting,
but then they must use it only for lawful ends, and such as in their private
capacities they were obliged to pursue if they were able; therefore when they
assembled, if they would have maintained the due Rights of Monarchy and
Succession in this Kingdom, sure they ought in the first place, to have
inquired what was become of the King, where he was, and who forced him to go
away? and when they had known that, they ought then to have joined in
Addressing to the Prince, that since he had declared that he came not to
Conquer this Nation, but only to free it from Arbitrary Government, and restore
it to its just Laws, that there could be no sure enjoyment of these without the
King, therefore he would join with them in sending to him, to desire him to
return to the Government of these Kingdoms, and to Govern them according to
Law; but instead of this they not only neglected taking any notice of the King,
as if he were not at all in Being, but have also refused to receive those
gracious Letters he sent them, in which he promised To amend all former
Errors, and to Govern according to Law; which certainly deserved to be taken
notice of, since coming from their Lawful Prince, they ought at least to have
proposed some terms to him, before they had proceeded to that rash and
unparalleled Vote, which I desire I may read to you, word for word, because I
intend to examine every clause of it. Resolved,

That King James the II. having endeavored to Subvere the Constitution of this
Kingdom, by breaking the Original Contract, between King and People; and by the
Advice of Jesuits and other wicked persons, having violated the Fundamental
Laws, and having withdrawn himself out of this Kingdom, has Abdicated the
Government, and that the Throne is thereby vacant. I shall make bold to
consider each of these Clauses, one alter another; and therefore first pray
take notice, that this Vote of the two Houses, cost above a weeks Debate in the
House of Lords, which past in the House of Commons in two or three days;
because diverse of the Lords, as well Temporal, as Spiritual, did with great
Honor, Reason and Resolution, oppose and protested against it to the last; and
it was carried at last by a very small Majority: but that we may examine each
Clause in this Vote; first, it is here only said, That King James II.
endeavored to Subvert the Constitution of this Kingdom, not that he really did
it, which is as much lower, than you are pleased to put it as endeavoring, a
thing falls short of actually doing it; and therefore it is very hard to
Declare a Prince to have forfeited, or Abdicated his Kingdom, for bare
Designing and Endeavoring, since those things that you bring to prove it, may
bear a much more favorable Interpretation, especially with Subjects, who are
no fit Judges of the private Designs of Princes, which may oftentimes tend to
quite other purposes, than what we suppose.

As for the next Clause, by breaking the Original Contract; I have heard that
diverse of the Lords and Bishops, who were for the King against this new
Invention of an Abdication, put the other side very hard to it, to make out
this Original Contract, and desired them to show in what part, either of our
Common or Statute Law it was to be found; for they knew no such Maxim in the
Common Law, nor no such Clause in any Statute, Aucient or Modern.

And though I confess, you have undertaken to prove to me, that there is such a
thing; yet it has been only by Far-fetch't Consequences, and from the Old Form
of Government among the Saxons, of above 600 years standing; which i^ there
were any such thing, it is now become so Antiquated, and out of Date, that
neither the King himself, nor yet our Lords, Bishops or Judges, except some few
Lawyers of your Kidney, ever before now, thought of any such thing. I pass by
the next Clause, by the Advice of Jesuits, etc because I cannot say, by whose
Advice those things which you call Breaches of the Fundamental Laws were acted;
but as for the next, wherein the Violation of these Fundamental Laws is laid
to his Charge, I confess you have given me a pretty large Catalogue of these
Fundamentals, at our 9th meeting, which yet you cannot say, are to be found
together in any one Law; but are to be picked up here and there, out of Magna
Charta, and diverse other old Statutes; but since the King and Parliament have
declared in the first year of King James I* that there are such things as
Fundamental Laws and Privileges; I will not deny there are none; yet certainly
any Breach of them by the King, was never intended to Create a Forfeiture of
the Crown; for if it had, I think there would have been but few Kings or Queens
of England, which would not have forfeited, who for some one or more of these
Breaches committed in their Reigns, by the Advice of their Judges and
Counselors, as these were lately by the King; For I suppose, you cannot expect
that Princes should see any otherwise in matters of Government, than by other
Men's Eyes, nor hear, but by other Peoples Ears: And therefore if the wilful
Breach of these Fundamentals, must cause a Forfeiture or Abdication of
Government (call it which you please) methinks it had been reasonable for the
Parliament to have given a list of these Fundamentals in some one Law, that the
King might have been sure to have avoided the Transgressing of them; and fear
of losing both his Royal Dignity, and his penalty ought also to have been
declared.

But the next Clause deserves more particular consideration, ( viz.) and having
withdrawn himself out of the Kingdom, has Abdicated the Government; now I must
confess, it is the first time that ever the Kings going away, for fear of
losing both his Royal Dignity, and his Life, and that with a declared design
and intention, to return again to the exercise of the Government, when ever he
might do it with safety, D.D. p. 147.
should be judged a wilful Dessertion or Abdication. I am sure, there is
nothing in our Common or Statute Laws, that can at all warrant this Notion; for
Common Law, is nothing but Ancient usage, and immemorial Custom. Now Custom
supposes presidents, and parallel Cases: But it is granted of all Hands, that
the Crown of England was never judged to be Abdicated, by the withdrawing of
the Prince, before now: And therefore it follows, by undeniable consequence,
that this Opinion can have no Foundation in the Common Law; because there is
not so much as one ruled Case to prove it by.

But if we come to those presidents we have in our English History, I shall
give you such of them as I can remember: we read in the Reign of Edward the 2d.
that when he fled from the Forces of his Wife and Son, who had seized the
Kingdom by Force, the King being deserted by his Soldiers and Followers,
endeavored to get into the Isle of Lundy for safety; but not being able to
make it, was driven back, and taken in Disguise at the Abbey of Neath in Wales;
(as the King was lately at Feversham) now it is certain, that King Edward went
away, without appointing any Governor of the Realm in his absence, and if this
Notion of an Abdication, had been then taken for Law, the Parliament needed not
to have been put their to Shifts, to find out so many other matters for which
to depose him. The next is the like case, of King Edward the 4th. who when the
Earl of Warwick had Raised a great Army against him on a sudden, and forced
him to fly, with a few followers to the Duke of Burgundy his Brother in Law,
though Henry the 6th. was again put into the Throne; yet was it not objected
against King Edward, that he had lost his Title to it, or that it was become
vacant, by his Deserting it; and if these two are not parallel Cases, and do
not reach the matter in hand, I desire you to show me, wherein they differ from
the present Case of the King.

But I am come now to the last clause of all, that the Throne is thereby become
vacant, which seeming only to refer to the clause of Abdication: I think I have
said enough already against that Notion: Therefore we will admit at present,
for Discourse sake, that the King had really Abdicated the Government, by
Deserting the Kingdom, and thereby wholly lost his Regal Power. Now according
to the Fundamental Laws and Customs of this Realm, which is (you know) an
Hereditary Monarchy, the eldest Son, or other next Heir, either Male or Female,
immediately Succeeds the King his Father, or other Predecessor, and that
without any inter-regnum at all, so that the Reign of the Successor,
immediately begins from the very moment the Last King or Queen Deceases; this
being the settled Law, I cannot see any one step the Convention has made in
their whole proceeding that can be justified by the Fundamental Laws of the
Land, D. D. 149.
or the Laws of Equity and Justice; for Equity has no quirks in it, nor ever
lies at a catch. Reason is always just and generous, it never makes men's
misfortunes an accusation, nor judges in favor of violence; for indeed what
can be more unrighteous (though in the Case of a private person) than that any
one should suffer, yet worse for being injured, and be barred his rights for
the injuries of others? If a man should forfeit his House to those who set it
on Fire, only because he quitted it without giving some formal directions to
the Servants; or be obliged to lose his Estate for endeavoring to preserve his
life; I believe it would be thought a strange piece of Justice in any Law
whatever; and if this be proved illegal, the Title of your Present King and
Queen being wholly founded upon the validity of this Vote, will prove so
likewise.


F. Well, you have made a pretty long discourse in Defense of King James's
Actions, as well as his late Desertion, and I have heard you patiently, because
I grant you have collected together a great deal of matter in few words; and I
think all that can be justly urged in your Kings defense; I shall therefore
begin with the first false step that you say the Convention made, in not
inquiring after the Causes of the Kings departure, whither he was gone, and
their not voting of an Address to the Prince, to desire his return; as for the
first of these, they were not at all obliged to do it, since a great many of
the Peers and Bishops, who were then in Town, very well knew the Causes of the
Kings Departure, and that he either went a way voluntarily, or at least without
any other necessity than what he had brought upon himself, by his own evil
Government, or the ill Council of others, which may be easily proved by several
Circumstances; for it is very well known, that above a formight before the King
went away, the Lord D -- and Mr. Brent did not stick to declare that it was
necessary that the King should withdraw himself; so that it is plain the Popish
Faction knew of it long before it was done, and that it proceeded wholly from
their advice appears further, by a Letter to the King, when he was at
Salisbury, which can be yet produced; he was there told that it was the
unanimous advice of all the Catholics at London, that he should come back from
thence, and withdraw himself out of the Kingdom, and leave us in confusion,
assuring him, that within two years or less, we should be in such confusions,
that he might return and have his ends of us. Now if the King was pleased to
take such a desperate Counselors Advice, and thereupon to do all he could to
quit the Kingdom, the cause of his going is too evident, as well as his design
of returning, to have his ends of us (as they phrase it) that is in plain
English, to have both our Religion, Liberties, and Properties wholly at his
disposal; nor in the next place needed they inquire where he was, for every one
knew he was gone into France, to the greatest Enemy of our Religion and Nation,
as well as the Princes; and therefore it had been altogether unsafe and
indiscreet for them to have joined in any Address to the Prince for his return;
for whilst he was in such hands, what hopes could we have of his returning to
us with better (but rather worse) affections toward the Church of England and
this Nation, than what he carried with him?

But you say they refused to receive his Letters* for my part I do not know
that he ever sent any, at least to the House of Commons. I heard indeed, that
one of the Kings Ordinary Servants, was at the Door of the House with such a
Letter, but that he was so inconsiderable, that no body would receive the
Letter, or make any mention of it in the House: and it was very strange, that
the King should have never a Friend there, who had so much courage and kindness
for him, as would take the Letter and move for the reading of it, though he had
run the risque of being committed for his pains; so that the House of Commons
is not to be blamed for not receiving a Letter which was never offered them;
but as for the House of Lord, I have been told it was moved to be read there,
but it was carried in the Negative, because it was not brought by a person of
sufficient quality and credit; and therefore it was the Kings fault if he would
employ such mean persons in a matter of that great moment, and indeed if we may
give credit to those Copies of these Letters which I have seen, they retained
rather a Justification of his past actions, than an acknowledgement of those
violations he had committed upon our Laws, for as to his promising to Govern by
Law, there is nothing in that, for he never yet owned that he Governed
otherwise; it is true, there is in one of those Letters, an expression of his
amending past Errors; but those are general words, and may mean such Errors,
as he had committed in the ill management of his Designs, which he would have
mended, when ever he was to do the like things again; this may very well be the
true Sense of a Letter, it i^ very likely written, with the Equivocation of the
Jesuits and French advice of a Cabal.

But you would have him sent for to return upon certain Terms; I wonder you
should be so undutiful, as to urge it, since if he is an absolute King, without
any Conditions what ever, he ought certainly to be restored, as King Charles,
the Second was, without any Terms or Conditions at all; and rather so, than
with them, since he cannot give us greater assurances for his keeping them,
than he has already broke, unless you can suppose, he would give us the
Guarranty of the Pope and the King of France for their performance; the former
of whom believes, that there is no Faith to be kept with Heretics; and for the
latter, supposing the King and him to pass his word, for the performance of
these Conditions, pray consider whether the bond of two Bankrupts, can ever
pass for a good Security; and so much for the Letters and Address.

I come now in the next place, to consider your exceptions against that
Fundamental Vote of the House of Commons, concerning King James's Abdication of
the Government, and thereupon declaring the Throne Vacant: To begin with your
first exception, I think it is a very small one, that because this Vote
declares the King to have endeavored to Subvert the Constitution of this
Kingdom; that it was very unjust, to declare him to have Abdicated the
Government for a bare endeavor, because we are ignorant of the true ends of
the Actions of Princes; to which I answer, that in this Case, a bare endeavor
ought to be sufficient; if it be so evident, that there can be no dispute about
it; for if he had once actually subverted it, the two Houses could never have
met to have made this Vote; and if in the case of Kings, the very bar^ design
or endeavor to destroy them be sufficient, though it be never reduced into
act; I cannot see why by the same rule the endeavors of Kings to destroy the
fundamental constitution of a mixed or limited Kingdom should not have the like
construction in respect of them; since according to the maxim you but now
cited, (and which I have sufficiently justified) that in all such Governments,
the safety and preservation of the People (that is, of the Government they have
established) is to be preferred before that of the King alone, when acting in a
direct opposition thereunto, or otherwise, it would be in the Kings Power to
destroy the constitution whenever he pleased, since according to your doctrine,
the bare endeavoring it would be nothing; and after he had once brought it to
pass, it would be then too late to retrieve it.

But that the King did really endeavor thus to subvert the fundamental
constitution, appears not only by his closeting and threatening Members to turn
them out of their places, if they would not submit to his Will in taking off
the Penal Laws about Religion, whereby all freedom of Voting would have been
quite taken away; But when the King saw this would not do, he then fell a new
modelling of Corporations, and by bringing Quo Warranto's against their
Charters, to get it into his own power to nominate, or approve of all Mayors,
Aldermen, and Common Council men, who in those Corporations having the sole
Elections of Parliament men, he would thereby have had the naming of them also
in his power: your next exception is against their declaring him to have broke
the Original Contract between the King and the People, for that you are not yet
persuaded there was any such thing, because we cannot show it you in any Common
Law or Statute Book, written in express words, as for the Statute Law, I grant
that there is no such express Contract to be found in any Statute; yet does it
not therefore follow, that there is no such Contract by the Ancient Common Law
of the Kingdom. Now that our Fundamental Laws are not all to be found in
writing is no wonder; since it is a maxim of our Common Law, that it was not a
Law, because it was Written, but it was Written because it was a Law, for it
was a Law when it was only in the Breast and Heads of the King and People of
this Nation, without any writing at all; and you your self must grant, that if
the Hereditary Succession to the Crown, be a Fundamental Constitution, it is
notwithstanding no where to be found in Writings as I know of, but the contrary
asserted by diverse Acts of Parliament; but that there is such a thing as an
Original Contract, I shall prove from such a necessary consequence as I think
cannot be denied; for as that Statute of King James. I. sets forth (which I
have now cited) and your self have already acknowledged, there are such things
as Fundamental Laws, (that is, Laws that are as ancient as the constitution of
the Government) there must have been also an implicit Fundamental Covenant or
Contract on the Kings part, that he would maintain them, without any violation,
and this is that we mean by an Original Contract; and if it were not so, it had
been the most foolish and unreasonable thing in the World to require every King
to swear before he was Crowned, that he would maintain the Rights of the
Church, and the Ancient Laws and Customs of the Kingdom; and that this was
Anciently looked upon as a renewal of this Original Contract appears by all our
ancient Historians, who till the Reign of King Ed. I. never give the next Heir
the Title of King, but of Duke of Normandy, till he was actually Crowned, and
had taken his Coronation Oath: and for this I desire you would consult all our
ancient Histo^ians since your Conquest, beginning with Ingu^^ and Eadmerus,
ending with Thom. Walsingham.

But as for your exception against his violating of the Fundamental Laws is yet
more trivial, for you cannot deny that there are such things, and if so, surely
a King may violate them, if he pleases; and therefore your excuse for the Kings
breach of them, because they are not to be found together in any one place, but
are to be picked up here and there from Magna Charta, and other Statutes, makes
nothing against the validity or the possibility of his knowing them; for as
before they were reduced to Writing by those Statutes (which only declare and
confirm the Ancient Common Laws, and Liberties of England) they existed (as I
said but now) in the Heads and Hearts of the King and People: so when diverse
Kings of England by their Tyrannical and Illegal practices had made diverse
violations of these Fundamental Rights and Privileges there then grew a
necessity of new granting and confirming those Liberties, and consequently of
reducing them into Writing, which there was not before, and that is the true
reason why Magna Charta, and other Statutes, made in the time of Henry the III.
Ed. the I. and diverse others of their Successors were made, either for their
explanation, or ratification, according as occasion required; and as several
Princes, had more or less violated these fundamental Laws of the Government,
for before they had so done, there was no need of the Parliaments making, or
declaring any law about it. But if the King would have but read and considered
the Articles exhibited in Parliament against Edward and Richard the II. he
might easily have seen the Laws altogether, that will make a Prince to be
declared by his Subjects to have forfeited his Crown.

But that King James had before his desertion endeavored to extirpate the
Protestant Religion, the Laws, and Liberties of the Nation, appears by those
several Articles, the Convention has given us in their late Declaration, which
they presented to King William upon their declaring him and his Princess, K.
and Queen of England, to which I shall refer you, since it is commonly to be
had; you know it consists in the recital of diverse things, the violation of
which has been always counted in all Kings Reigns a breach of the Original
Contract.

I come now to the last Clause save one you except against, viz. That having
withdrawn himself out of the Kingdom, has Abdicated the Government. Now your
main argument against it is, that the Kings desertion of the Government being
only for fear of his life, or of being deposed from his Royal Dignity, could
not by his going away be said to Abdicate, or renounce the Crown, since he went
away with an intention to return, and repossess it as soon as with safety he
might; to which before I make any answer, I must freely own, that were this the
case as you have put it, I think there would be no great dispute in it; since I
grant that a King who is thus forced to fly for fear of his life ought not to
have any such injustice put upon him; but if you please better to consider it,
the case was quite otherwise; for I have already proved that when King James I.
went away, he had then an Army about him, was free, and in his own Palace, and
was at that time in actual Treaty with the Prince; nor had London, nor any
considerable strong place in England then surrendered it self to the Prince; so
that if there was any necessity for his departure, but what he had brought upon
himself by his refusing to call a Parliament, burning the Writs, and sending
away the Queen and Child, together with the main instrument of Government, the
Great Seal of England; this must certainly be looked upon as a wilful
Forfeiture or Abdication of the Government; and it is from this first going
away, that I suppose that the Convention dates his Abdication, since though it
is true, after his return to London he took upon him to make an Order in
Council to stop the further pulling down and plundering Popish Chapels, and
Papists Houses; yet was it signed by very few of the Council, and almost only
by those who had been in some Office or Place of Trust; so that though he was
then owned by them; yet since that Order did only serve to show his Zeal for
the Popish Party, and was never obeyed or taken notice of by those to whom it
was directed; and that neither the Prince nor the City of London owned him
afterward; since it had already delivered it self up to the Prince, and had as
well as the Peers invited him to repair to that City; I cannot see that so
slight an act as this Order of Council, should be counted a return to, or a
re-establishment in the Throne; since the King had not only lost the Crown by
his wilful departure, without calling a Parliament, or giving the P. any
satisfaction in the great business of the pretended Prince of Wales, or the
Nation by repairing up those desperate breaches he had made upon our
Fundamental Laws, but had also lost his Title to the Crown, by being Conquered
by the Prince in open War, as I shall prove more at large another time; so that
if you please better to consider this Vote of the Convention, you will find,
that these words had Abdicated the Government, do not only refer to the last
clause of his having withdrawn himself out of the Kingdom, but to everyone of
the foregoing Clauses, ( viz.) His having endeavored to subvert the
Constitution of this Kingdom; his breaking the Original Contract, and his
having violated the Fundamental Laws; so that it is plain their notion of
Abdication was not fixed only in the Kings Desertion, or bare withdrawing
himself out of the Kingdom, but from his renouncing the Legal Title, by which
he held the Crown; and setting himself up as a Despotick Sovereign, and ruling
by a mercenary Army; and therefore all that you have said about the Kings
quitting the Government with a design to return to it again, as soon as with
safety he might, is altogether vain; for as he went away, because he would not
Govern any longer as a King by Law; so has he yet given us no satisfaction
that he would not return again to Govern otherwise, or rather worse than he did
before, had he an opportunity so to do, that is (as the Letter I cited but now,
phrases i^) to return, and have his ends of us; so that this being indeed the
case, I think I can very well justify the last clause in this Vote, that the
Throne was thereby vacant.


M. Sir, you have spoke a considerable time, and I doubt more than I can
distinctly remember to answer as I should; therefore before you proceed to this
last Clause of the Vacancy of the Throne, the dispute about which I foresee may
hold longer than upon any of the former; pray give me leave to reply to what
you have already said in Justification of all the other parts of this Vote; in
the first place I will not deny, but that if the King had once got the power of
making what Mayors, Aldermen, and other Officers in Corporations at his
pleasure, it would have gone a great way toward the making the Majority of the
Parliament Men; nay, I likewise grant that by his dispensing Power, he might
have made what Papists or other person he pleased Sheriffs in any County, who
would have made such return of Knights of Shires as he should have thought fit:
yet I suppose this would not have been to the subversion of the Constitution of
the Kingdom, which I think I have proved to consist originally in the K. alone,
before any great Councils or Parliaments were instituted.

And as for those violations of the Fundamental Laws and Liberties of this
Kingdom, the Declaration instances in; I think several of them may very well be
justified by ancient Presidents, and ad judged cases in Law; and therefore were
so far from being violations, that they are no more than the Kings exercising
of his due Prerogative; and though at our ninth meeting, I had not time so well
to consider these matters, as also because I was not then prepared to defend
the Kings Proceedings; I shall therefore make bold to examine the most
considerable of those Articles, which the Late Declaration supposes did so
highly tend to subvert the Protestant Religion, and the Laws and Liberties of
this Kingdom. I shall begin with the first, ( viz.) His assuming and exercising
a power of Dispensing with, and Suspending of Laws, and the Execution of Laws,
without consent of Parliament; which Power, let me tell you by the way, was not
asserted to Dispense with all Laws or Statutes whatsoever, but only such as the
Subject has no particular cause of action in; and where the damage that may
arise by it does not concerns, the public safety of which the K. is sole
Judge, and not any particular man's interest. I suppose you cannot but have
read, that learned and short account of the Authorities in Law, upon which
Judgment was given in Sir Edw. Hales his Case written by Sir Edward Herbert,
Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, in vindication of himself, wherein I
think he proves beyond any possibility of a just answer, that the dispensation
granted to Sir Edward Hales to receive a commission, P. 6, 7.
and act as a Colonel of Foot was good, notwithstanding his not having
received the Sacrament, and taken the Oaths and Test, Chap. 2.
appointed by the Act of the Statute of the 25 of Charles II. where he first
proves from my L. Cock's Authority, that it belongs to the Kings Prerogative to
Dispense with all Positive, or Penal Laws; the penalty thereof is only popular
and given to the King; and to show you that my Lord Cook (who was never counted
any great friend to the Kings Prerogative) was not single in this opinion; Fol.
11, 12.
he gives you also the authority of the year Book of Henry the VII. where it
was owned by all the Judges, That the King can Dispense with all things which
are only Mala Prohibita, and not Mala ^n se, though expressly forbid by Act of
Parliament, for though (says the Year Book) before the Statute, Coining of
Money was Lawful, but now it is not so, yet the King can Dispense with it; so
that, say I, if he can dispense with that which is now made Treason by Ea. the
III. he may certainly dispense with all other Penal Statutes of a less nature.

But because I grant there is some difference between Common Penal Laws, which
barely prohibit the doing of some things, under a penalty; and this Act, in
which there is also an express Clause of Non-obstante, that all Licenses or
Dispensations contrary to this Act, are declared absolutely void, yet the said
Lord Chief Justice likewise proves, that this Clause of Non-obstante is void,
and he makes this out not only from constant practice in other Statutes of like
nature, but also from the opinions of Plowden, and the said Lord Cook; Chap. 8.
first as to the Statutes, there is a Statute of the 23. of Henry the VI. that
no man shall be Sheriff for above a year. 2. That all Letters Patents, made for
Years or Lives shall be void, 3. That no Non-obstante shall make them good,
(which shows that the Parliament thought the King could otherwise have
dispensed with this act by a Non obstante) there is likewise in this Act a
Penalty of 200 l. and the party is also disabled from bearing the Office of
Sheriff in any County of England; and also every Pardon for such Offense shall
be void; so that in all respects this Statute answers that of King Charles the
II. now in dispute, only in this the Penalty to the Prosecutor is higher, viz.
500 l. and the disability is not only from holding that Office, but any other
whatsoever for the future.

And yet it was resolved by all the Judges of England in the second of Henry
the VII. in the Exchequer Chamber, VI. The Year Book. 2. H. 7. T. M.
upon the Kings Power of Dispensing with this Statute of the 23. of Henry the
VI. that the Kings Dispensation with that Statute was good: and so it has been
held ever since, for it is very well known that the King has not only
exercised this Prerogative of Dispensing with this Statute, for diverse Sheriffs
holding more than a year, but has also granted this Office for Life, a^
appears by the same case cited by Plowden (in his Commentaries) between
Grendon, P. 502.
and the Bishop of Lincoln, where he expressly says, That notwithstanding this
Statute of Henry the VI. the Kings Grant to the Earl of Northumberland, to be
Sheriff during Life, ought to have a Clause of Non-obstante, because of the
precise words of the Statute before mentioned: and with such a Clause of
Non-obstante the Patent to the Earl was good.

But yet my Lord Cook is more express in his opinion concerning these
Dispensations, Page 18.
for in his twelfth Report he has these words; No act can bind the King from
any Prerogative, which is sole and inseparable to his Person, but that he may
Dispense with it by a Non-obstante, as a Sovereign Power to command any of his
Subjects to serve him for the public Weal; and this solely and inseparably is
annexed to his person; and this Royal Power cannot be restrained by any Act of
Parliament, neither in These, nor in Hypothesi, but that the King by his Royal
Prerogative may Dispense with it; for upon the commandment of the King, and
obedience of the Subject does his Government consist; and therefore for this
reason he allows this Judgment of all the Justices in England, in the second of
Henry the VII. to have been according to Law, that Judged the Kings
Dispensation with this Statute of Henry the VI. to be good; and he also
instances in another Statute, Chap. 31.
in the fourth of Henry IV. in which it is ordained, That no Welshman should be
Justice, Chamberlain, etc. nor any other Officer whatsoever, in any part of
Walts, notwithstanding any Patent made to the contrary, with Clause of
Non-obstante licet sit Wallicus natus, and yet without question the King may
grant those now Offices to Welshmen with a Non obstante, and the said Lord Cook
in Calvin's case tells us, Rep. 7. P. 14.
That the same was resolved by all the Judges of England, ( viz. in 2. of Hen.
VII.) that every Subject is by his natural Allegiance bound to serve and obey
his sovereign, etc. and he then proceeds to recite the Statute of the 23. of
Henry the VI. and the opinion of the Judges above mentioned, and gives us this
reason for it, for that the act could not bar the King of the service of his
Subject which the Law of Nature did give unto him; This is there reported as
the sense of all the Judges of England in King James his time; and therefore
since this has been ever the opinion of the Judges, and a constant Prerogative
exercised by the King ever since; I desire you would show me any difference why
the Kings Dispensation to a Sheriff should be good for the holding of his
Office for above a year, norwithstanding the Statute of Henry the VI. and yet a
Dispensation for the taking or holding any Office or Command Civil or Military,
without taking the Oaths and Tests, appointed by the 25. of Charles the II.
should be declared a breach of our Fundamental Laws; for I can see no manner of
difference between them; since their preambles set forth the designs of the
Law, much to the same purpose, ( viz.) That of making the Statute of Henry the
VI. is the insupportable damage of the King and his People, Perjury,
Manslaughter, and great Oppression; and in the Statute of King Charles the II.
the mischiefs recited are of a much less nature, ( viz.) for preventing dangers
which may happen from Popish Recusants, and quieting the minds of his Majesty's
good Subjects. So that the Subject of neither of these Acts being Mala in se,
but only Mala prohibita, if the King might Dispense with the one, he may
certainly do as much with the other for the same reasons.

Therefore if this be so, I need not say much against the second Article in the
Declaration of the Convention against the Kings proceedings, ( viz.) His
committing and prosecuting diverse worthy Prelates, for humbly Petitioning to be
excused from concurring to the said assumed Power; for if by the opinion of all
or most part of the then Judges, the Kings Power of Dispensing with this
Statute of King Charles the II. was good, it was certainly much more lawful in
Dispensing with all other Statutes against Papists and Non-conformists, since
they are no more than bire Penal Statutes, without any Clauses of Non-obstante;
and though I grant that King Charles's Declaration giving a Toleration to
Papists and Dissenters, by Dispensing with all the Acts against Masses and
Conventicles were declared Illegal by the House of Commons, in the year 1672.
and that the King, to get a good lump of Money, did recall that Declaration, yet
was it never declared by him to be Illegal; only that it should not be drawn
into consequence for the future; and you know an Address or Declaration of the
House of Commons alone, was never looked upon as a Declaration of Parliament;
and the opinion of the Judges has ever been, that no Statute or Judgment of
Parliament can bar the King of his Lawful Prerogatives, (of which this of
Dispensing with such Penal Laws is one) so that it was certainly very
undutifully done of the Bishops not only to deny distributing his Majesty's
Late Declaration for Liberty of Conscience in their several Diocesses, but also
to have the confidence to give him a Petition, wherein they desired him not to
insist upon the distribution and reading of it, because it was against Law;
though admit it were, being no way contrary to the Law of God, they ought to have
obeyed it, since their bare distributing of it had not rendered it the more
Lawful; so that it being a great misdemeanour in these Bishops to deliver this
Petition; their Commitment and Prosecution at Law for the same was also Legal,
and what the Privy Council told his Majesty he might well justify; so that if
the King was too severe in this matter, they were to bear the blame, and not he.


F. I cannot deny but you have given a just account of the main Arguments made
use of by the late Lord Chief Justice Merbert in defense of the Kings
dispensing Power, and of giving his own opinion for it; but I think
notwithstanding all that Gentleman has Written in defense of it, that the Kings
Declaration of Indulgence, and his Dispensation grounded thereupon, to be both
of them void and contrary to Law; and for proof of this I shall first give you
the opinion both of those Divines and Civilians, I.E.C. p. 33. L. 6. C. 14.
concerning this matter, as first Sware^ in his learned Book de Legibus, says,
That he has the Power of Dispensing, qui legem tulit, Disp. 1, 2. c. 2.
quia ab ijus volontate and potentia pendat; but Vasques another Learned
Spanish Casuist holds, that no Prince whatever has a Power to Dispense with
his Laws according to his pleasure, or because that they are his Laws; nay, he
also denies such an unlawful Dispensation to be valid; De aequit. Ind. c. 2. De
Iure Not. and Gentium. l. 1. c. 6.
but to come to those of your own faculty, H. Grotiu^ says expressly,
Dispensare, hoc est, lege solvere, le solus potest qui serendae abrogand^^que
legis potestatem habet. Pusendors affirms, That none can Dispense with a Law,
but such as have the Power of making it; and the very reason of the thing
sufficiently shows it, for to dispense is to take away the Obligation of the
Law in respect of them to whom it is granted, and whoever takes it away, must
have the power of laying it on; and there is no difference between the
dispensation of a Law, and the Abrogation of it; but that a dispensation is an
abrogation of it to particular persons, while others are under the force of it;
and an abrogation is a general dispensation, that being no more than a
relaxation of the whole Law to those persons who were bound by it before;
therefore if the King have not the whole legislative power of this Kingdom (as
I think I have already proved he has not) he neither can have the sole power of
dispensing with Laws.

But to answer your main argument, that the constant practice has been
otherwise for the space of above 200 years, and that confirmed by the Judgment
and Opinions of all the Judges and most considerable Lawyers in England ever
since that time; to answer this I say, it is necessary, that I give you a short
History of this Dispensing Power, and the Original of Dispensations, with Non
obstantes, which are so far from being as old as your Conquest, that the first
news we hear of them, is from Mat. Paris, who expressly tells us, O. E. I. p.
66. and dein. Vi. Mat. Par. P. 810, 811. Ibid. P. 817, 818. P. 854. P. 875.
they were first introduced by the Pope, and were afterward inserted into the
Kings Patents and Protections, in imitation of them by King Henry III. so they
were never made use of by any of our Kings to ellude Acts of Parliament, till
after the Statute of Mortmain, which was made in the seventh of Edward I. which
first attempt, must needs be Illegal, because contrary to Magna Charta, chapter 36.
which is the first Law which prohibits Alienations in Mortmain, and was not
only sworn to when enacted, but is also confirmed by many after Acts of
Parliament, and ordered to be observed in all points, insomuch that when the
Clergy petitioned King Edward I. for a relaxation of this Statute of Mortmain,
his answer was, that he could not do it, because it was Enacted, Communi
Consilio Magnatum suorum, Hen. Knighton, p. 2502. In Dec. Scrip.
and sine eorum consilio non erat revocandum; and I grant that such was the
misguided devotion of those times, that such Non-obstantes were often obtained,
as appears by the Patent and Charter Rolls in the Tower, from the eighth of
Edward the I. downwards, abounding with special Licenses to purchase and hold
Lands, etc. Statuto de terris and tenementis in manum mortuum non ponendis non
Obstante. And yet were not these Licenses accounted Legal, or the Clergy safe
in purchasing such Lands, Rents, Advowsons, etc. by virtue of them, till it was
enacted and Ordained in Parliament, Chap. 3.
in the eighth of Ed. III. to this effect, That if Prelates or other Religious
People have purchased Lands, and the same have put to Mortmain, and be
Impeached upon the same before our Justices, and they show our Charter of
License, and Process thereupon, by an Inquest of ad quod damnum, or of our
Grace, or by Fine, they shall be freely lest in peace, without being further
Impeached for the same purchase, etc. But Non-obstantes with the Statute of
Mortmain having been introduced, as aforesaid, though undeniably Illegal at
first, and gaining afterward a countenance from this Act of Parliament, have I
suppose given occasion to the dispensing with other Acts of Parliament also,
though at first they were very rare, and seldom occur in the old Books, but are
more frequent in the new; and that our Judges and Courts of Justice have
invented little distinctions betwixt malum in se, and malum prohibitum, betwixt
Laws made pro bono publico, and Laws of more private regard; betwixt Laws in
which the King's Profit and Interest is concerned only, and Laws in which the
Subjects have an interest, and are entitled to an action, as the party
grieved; yet the cases that have hitherto come before them judicially, have
been questions upon Dispensations granted to particular persons, to exempt them
pro hic and nunc, from incurring the penalty of such and such a Law; but a
Dispensation and Suspension of so many Laws at a lump (as the late Declaration
of Indulgence did take upon it to do) has been so far from receiving any
countenance from Courts of Justice hitherto, that it has always been a fatal
Objection against any particular Dispensation of it; it was such as
consequently eluded and frustrated the whole Law, for that such a Dispensation
is in effect a repeal of the Law it self. And therefore in that great Case of
Thomas and Sorrel, in the Lord Vaughan's Reports, where Dispensations with
Penal Statutes are in some Cases allowed: yet it was then agreed by all the
Judges, that the King had no power to Suspend a Law.

But to let you see how jealous the Parliament, and in particular the House of
Commons have ever been of trusting the King with an unlimited power of
Dispensing with Penal Statutes, with Non-obstantes appears also by several
other Laws of great moment, and in particular from the Statutes of Provisors
and Praemunire; and I could show you from diverse Records of Parliament, in the
Reign of Richard II. Henry IV. and Henry V. that they never intru^ed the Crown
with an absolute power of Dispensing with those Statutes but only for a time,
as till the next Parliament or longer, as they thought fit. But since I have
not now so much time to give you so many Presidents at length, I shall only
tell you, that as to the main instance you rely upon, ( viz.) the Kings
Dispensing with the Statute of Sheriffs, that at first it was not taken for Law
appears by several Acts of Parliament, as in 28. of Henry the VI. whereby those
Sheriffs that had held their Offices for more than a year are pardoned;
likewise in the Act of Edw. IV. there is a like Statute pardoning those
Sheriffs, Who by reason of the late troubles in the Realm, had held for above a
year, yet nevertheless confirms all former acts concerning Sheriffs for the
time to come; and this held as far as the sixth of Henry VIII. which is long
after the Judgment you mention in the Exchequer. Chamber, of all the Justices
in England to the contrary; for there was then an Act made, which reciting all
the former Statutes about Sheriffs as then in full force; it Enacts that the
Sheriffs, and under Sheriffs of the City of Bristol may continue to occupy
their Offices; in like manner as the under Sheriffs and other Sheriffs Officers
in London do, without any Penalty or Forfeiture for the same, the said Acts or
any other Acts to the contrary notwithstanding. From all which Statutes I think
it sufficiently appears, that neither the Sheriffs of those times, nor the City
of Bristol, nor the whole Parliament when that Act was made, did believe the
King had Power to Dispense with the Act of the 25* of Henry the VI. concerning
Sheriffs, for if they had, certainly it had been much easier and cheaper for
them to have obtained the Kings Dispensation, than to have got an Act of
Parliament for it.


M. I believe you may have cited these Statutes right enough, but yet I think
they are not sufficient proof against so solemn an Opinion, as that of all the
Judges in the Exchequer Chamber 2 d of Henry the 7 th. and whatever the
Parliament might have declared in the Case of this, or that Particular Statute,
I confess carries some Authority with it, yet ought it not to be counterval'd
by so solemn a Judgment as that of all the Judges and Lawyers of England,
together with the King's constant Exercise of this Prerogative, not only since,
but before that time, and that without any question or dispute with the
Parliament about it, as in the Case I have already put of the Statute that
forbids any Welchman, being an Officer in Wales; to which I may add diverse
other Cases of like nature; such as the Statute against a Judges going the
Circuit in his own Country; as also those Statutes that prohibit the King from
granting Pardons to Persons convict, nay, condemned for Murder, with several
other Penal Statutes I could name, were, though the King's hands are tied up by
particular Clauses of Non-obstante, yet has His Majesty, and his Predecessors
at all times exercised their Prerogative of dispensing in all those Cases,
notwithstanding those Acts of Parliament, with Non-obstantes to the contrary:
And though I grant you have given me several Presidents of the Parliaments
sometimes restraining the King in this Exercise of the Dispensing Power, yet
they are all, or the greatest part of them, before the beginning of Henry the
VII th's Reign, when I grant the Law first began to be settled in this matter;
and since the Judgment of all the Judges in the Exchequer Chamber, is the only
Rule of Law we can have in the Intervals of Parliament; and that this case of
Dispensations being by them adjudged, and ever since settled and owned for Law,
without the least dispute, I can see no reason we have to question it now.

But as for the Statute of the 6 th of Henry the VIII., which you urge as a
President to the contrary, since the Reign of Henry the VII. I think it will
not reach the Point in question; for the Act you now cited, seems to me no more
than a private Act for the Sheriffs of Brestol alone, who being it seems afraid
to rely upon the King's Dispensations, because they thought them too chargeable
to be taken out as often as they should have need of them, did think it a great
deal less charge and trouble to pass an Act of Parliament to indemnify
themselves; which I grant, put that matter beyond all dispute: But since this
Act of Henry the VIII. I find no contest between the Parliament and the King
about his Power of dispensing with Penal Laws, till the Reign of King Charles
the II. when I grant the House of Commons did address to His Majesty, That
Penal Statutes in matters Ecclesiastical, cannot be suspended but by Act of
Parliament; as also the last Address of the House of Commons in 1685. against
the King's dispensing with the Officers of the Army, their holding Employments
without taking the Oaths and Test according to the Act, whereby they were
appointed: But these being only against the King's Power of dispensing with
Laws Ecclesiastical, as concerning Liberty of Conscience, can no ways be
extended to their excepting against the King's Power of dispensing with diverse
other Penal Laws (I will not say all) which have Non obstantes in them.


F. Since I see not only your Opinion, but also that of most of the Judges and
Lawyers of England, concerning this matter of the King's Dispensations with
Penal Laws has been chiefly (if not only) founded upon that Opinion of all the
Judges in King Henry VII. i am, give me leave to examine the validity of that
Judgment; for if that can be proved not to have been according to Law, or el^e
never given at all, I suppose you must grant that my Lord Coke, and all others
who have founded their Opinions upon this adjudged Cause of Hen. the VII. were
mistaken.

Now pray give me leave to argue a little with you in point of Reason; I. E. C.
p. 43.
If a Non obstante from the King, be good, when by Act of Parliament, a
Non-obstante is declared void, what does an Act of Parliament signify in such
a case? must we say it is a void Clause? But then to what purpose was it put
in? Did the Lords and Commons, who drew this Act of the 23 d of Henry the VI.
as also those Acts concerning Sheriffs understand this Clause of Non-obstante
to be void when they put it in? If it were so, and contrary to the King's
Prerogative, why did the King pass this Act without any refusal or protestation
against it? certainly it was then thought otherwise; and if so, we have the
Authority of the two Houses of Parliament against the Opinion of the Judges.
But if it were not a void Clause then, how came it to be so afterward? pray
say what alteration has been made in the Laws of England by Act of Parliament,
as to this point, since the time that these Acts have been made; for if not,
how comes a clause that had force in 23 Henry VI. to have none in a Henry VII.
could the Twelve Judges in the Exchequer Chamber, by giving their Opinions,
destroy the force of an Act of Parliament?


M. I do not say they can, only I affirm with my Lord Coke, and all the Judges,
That no Act can bind the King from any Prerogative which is inseparable from
his Royal Person; but he may dispense with it by a new Obstante, as a Sovereign
power to command any of his Subjects to serve him for the publick-weal. Nor can
this Royal Power be restrained by any Act of Parliament: And upon this ground
it is, that my Lord Coke in the 12th Report (from whence I have taken this
Conclusion) maintains that such Dispensations made by Sheriffs, are good; and
upon the same ground, the Dispensation lately granted by the King to Sir Edward
Hales, and all other Popish Officers and Ministers, as well Civil as Military
must be also good.


F. But admit I show you that there was never any such Judgment in the
Exchequer Chamber, in the 2 of Henry the VII. as my Lord Coke, and late Lord
Chief Justice Herbert supposes, will it not then follow, that all their
Arguments that are wholly founded upon this Statute will fall to the ground?


M. Yes, indeed that will be something; but how will you prove that? can you
believe so many learned Judges should be mistaken in this matter, and those of
your opinion only should make this discovery?


F. I do not desire you should believe me, but your own eyes; and therefore
look upon the Year Book it self; here you see that it is indeed so far true,
Vi. 2 H. VII. Ter. M. Case 20. fol. 66.
that all the Justices were of opinion, that the Grant of the Sheriffdom of the
County of Northumberland to the E. of that County for Life was good, but do not
tell us all the reasons whereon their judgment was grounded, tho it seems to
have been because the Sheriffdom of that County had been commonly granted for
life, before this Statute of Henry the VI. was made; as appears by these Words
in the Year Book Judgment; for it is such a thing as may be well granted for
Term of Life, or Inheritance, as diverse Counties have Sheriffs by Inheritance,
which began by the King's Grant; then was shown a Resumption, (I suppose it
meant an Act of Resumption of the Sheriffalty,) as appears by the following
Words; and then was shown a Proviso for it: Count. de N. and if so, the King
had a right to grant it only for Life again: but none save Radcliff (one of the
Barons of the Exchequer) cites the Statutes of the 28 th. and 42 d. of Edw. the
III. against Sheriffs holding for above a year, but does not cite this Statute
of the 23 d of Hen. the VI. at all; nor does he, or any other of the Judges,
nor the Court ground their Opinion upon any Non-obstantes expressed in the said
Acts; for if you please to consult them, you will find there is no Clause of
Non obstante in any of them, before the 23 d of Henry the VI. which is not at
all mentioned here; therefore I wonder how Fitz Herbert in his Abridgment comes
to vary so far from the Year Book, from whence he must have took it, as to make
the Judgment to have been grounded upon the Non obstante in that Statute of
Henry VI. for none but Radcliff speaks any thing of the Patents being good with
a Non-obstante to those Statutes; and the Court in all the rest of the Case,
agree the Patent to be good, by reason of the said Proviso in an Act of
Resumption, and then fall into debates concerning the other point, how this
Patent was to be understood.


M. I must confess if this be so as it seems to be, prima facie, I wonder my
Lord Coke, and other Learned Lawyers have laid so great a stress upon, and
drawn so many Arguments from this Judgment of the Judges; tho I must needs also
tell you, that tho only Radcliff insists upon the Non-obstante; yet since the
rest of the Judges did not contradict him, it seems to me that they all
concurred with him; since according to the Proverb; Silence often gives consent.

But this much I suppose you cannot deny, but that ever since Henry VIII. time
at least, Sheriffs have been frequently continued for above a year, and the
Judges have been also dispensed with to go the Circuit in their own County; and
Welchmen have been commonly made Judges and other Officers in Wales, by virtue
of the King's Dispensations, notwithstanding the particular Clauses of
Non-obstante, in the Statutes of Richard the II. Henry the IV. and Hen. the VI.
by which they are expressly prohibited.


F. I do not deny what you have now said, as to matter of Fact; only let me
tell you I conceive, that the Reason why the King has taken upon him to
dispense with those Statutes you mention; was because that the Causes for which
they were first made, have long since ceased: For when those Statutes against
Judges going the Circuit in their own Counties, and Sheriffs holding for above
a year were made, both the Judges and Sheriffs were found (the one by going
their Circuits in their own Counties, where they had great Interest and
Acquaintance) to have too much awed the Common-juries; and the other, (by their
great Estates and Commands in the Country) to have made partial returns of
Jurys, and also by their long continuance in their Office, to have learnt a
trade of oppressing the people; so when by the stop that was put to those
Abuses, by these Statutes (you have mentioned) there was no need of a strict
observation of these Laws; and also when after the Civil Wars between York and
Lancaster, and all things became settled under King Henry the VII. (who was of a
Welc^^ Family, there was then no more need of observing the Statute of Henry
the IV. against Welchmens beating Offices, especially after the Stat. of the
27th of Henry the VIII. when Wal^s became incorporated with England, and had by
that Statute a right conferred upon it, of sending Members to Parliament, tho
the Parliament might not think fit, or at least forgot to repeal them; and yet
finding that the Kingdom received no prejudice, but rather benefit by such
Dispensations; and not caring to quarrel with their Kings, for sometimes using
a Prerogative by which they were rather benefited, than grieved; those
Dispensations have ever since passed, without any complaint in Parliament,
which would certainly have been before this time, had they sound the same
Grievances and Reasons to have still continued for the strict observance of
those Laws, as there were at first for the making of them; tho if they will
have my private Opinion, I think it had been much better for avoiding all
Disputes between the King and Parliament; as also for preventing the evil use
that has been made of those Presidents, to advance the King's Prerogative to
what height he pleased, rather to have repealed all those obsolete Statutes,
than to have suffered them still to continue.

But to let you see that the distinction of mala in se, and mala prohibita
often fails, I think I can prove it to you by diverse undeniable Instances; for
there are diverse things which are neither mala in se; that is, neither Natural,
nor Moral Evils, either by Common or Statute Law, and yet being declared Common
Nusances, are only mala Politica and introducta, and are no ways mala in se,
which the King cannot dispense with at all, only because they are prohibited:
Thus the King cannot dispense with the least Nuisance to the Highways, as by
laying Dung in them, or the like; tho men may very well pass through them: So
likewise by the Statute of the 18 th of King Charles the II. the bringing over
of Irish Cattle, is declared a public Nuisance, and therefore the King cannot
dispense with it; yet no man will say it was so before that Statute was made;
and therefore it is very well observed by the late Chief Justice Vaughan,
Vaughan's Rep. f. 358.
in that Case of Thomas and Surrel I now mentioned, that public Nusances, are
not mala in se, but mala Politica and introducta; and when a thing is said to
be prohibited by the Common Law, the meaning is no more, but that the Ancient
Record of such a Prohibition is not to be found.


M. I grant indeed the Author you have now cited in that Case, very well
restrains the Kings Prerogative, as to things that concern the Right or
Property of others, and therefore the King cannot pardon the damage done to
particular persons, F. 333. F. 334.
where the Suit is only the King's; but for the benefit and safety of a third
person, the King cannot dispense with the Suit, but by consent and agreement of
the party concerned. And again, Penal Laws, the breach whereof are to any man's
particular damage, cannot be dispensed with; and the Chief Justice Herbert
himself owns, F. 29.
that the King cannot dispense with Laws which vest the least right of property
in any of his Subjects.


F. Very well then, we see the Prerogative is bounded where the interest of
particular persons is concerned; But does the Law take more care of them, than
of the public Interest, and the concernment of the whole Nation? and this Act
against Papists holding of Employments was certainly made pro bono publico, to
prevent the danger that may happen from Popish Recusants, who were before
prohibited by diverse Statutes, to hold any Offices or Employments, before they
had taken the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance: Therefore I cannot see how
such a Dispensation can be good, the breach whereof must tend so much to the
danger of the Commonwealth; and if according to the Rule you have laid down
but now, That no Law can be dispensed withal, that is for the benefit and
safety of a third person, or where the breach thereof are to other men's
particular damage. Now whatsoever is prejudicial to the public safety of the
Common wealth. must be also prejudicial to the safety of every private person,
and the breach thereof does tend to each man's particular damage in the Nation,
if they are once generally dispensed with.


M. I grant this is the most natural Objection you have made, against the
King's power of dispensing in this Case; but my Lord Chief Justice Vaughan in
the Case already cited, P. 341, 342.
answers this Objection very well; No offense, says he, against a Penal Law
could be dispensed with, if the reason of not dispensing were because the
Offense is contra bonum publicum; for all Offenses against Penal Laws, are
such; and tho such Laws are pro bono publico, they are not Laws pro bono
Singulorum populi (which are the Laws which the King cannot dispense with) but
pro bono populi complicati, as the King in his discretion shall think fit to
order them for the good of the whole. In this Nation the Estate of every
Pater-^amilius may be said to be pro bono Communi of his Family, which yet is
but at his discretion and management of it, and they have no interest in it,
tho they have benefit by it. And therefore it is but reasonable, that as to the
bonum publicum singulorum the King should not dispense, because every man has
a particular interest in, and they are Judges of it themselves: whereas in
those Acts that are pro bono populi complicati, as these Acts of Sheriffs, and
for taking the Oaths and Tell are, the King is the sole Judge in what cases
they concern the public good of the Commonwealth, and where they do not.


F. I confess this is a subtle piece of learning; but pray let us take it a
little out of these Latin terms, I.E.C. p. 41.
and then the meaning of it is no more than this, that the King can do nothing
to the prejudice of the People in their private Capacities, but he can do what
he will with the public. I thought indeed a Prince had been, in the first
place bound to regard the good of the public, and to take care of the sa^us
populi complicati, (as you call it) that is, (as they are imbodied together)
above the private good or interest of particular men, which you call bonum
singulorum populi, which can never be preserved but where the Laws and Statutes
ordained for the public benefit and security of the Common Wealth, have been
generally broken and violated by common and easy Dispensations, and have been
abused to that degree, that we lately saw every Popish Lawyer that was thought
any thing fit to be a Judge, might sit upon the Bench, upon the Lives and
Estates of Protestants; every Deputy Lieutenant, Justice of Peace, or other
Officers, either Civil or Military, might be sure of being preferred, if he
either was a Papist or Fanatic; every Minister or Parson of a Parish, who
would renounce the Orders of the Church of England, might hold his Living
without doing any of the Spiritual Functions, and all this by virtue of these
dispensations, grounded upon the distinction of the public good of the whole
People taken together, as different from that of the public good of each
particular person.

But it seems strange to me that our Ancestors should take such care of the
Laws concerning the measures of Bread, I.E.C. p. 42.
Drink, and Flesh, as that the King cannot dispense with them, because they
respect the common good of the whole People, and of every particular person;
but yet as to the Laws which concern the public good of the whole Nation in
general, they were content to leave them to the sole will and pleasure of their
Prince. No one that reads the History of our Ancestors, and the contest they
had with their Kings to obtain these public liberties, could ever entertain
such a thought concerning them; but to let you see, that the Law concerning the
Oaths and Tests, are not only for the public good of the Common Wealth; and
that the King is not the sole Judge when they may be dispensed with, appears
plainly by this, that the Law for taking of the Oaths and Test, has given every
particular person a right to prosecute any one that has acted contrary to it,
and the penalty of 500 l. is given wholly to the Prosecutor, which shows
plainly, that the intent of the Law, was to make it every man's particular care
as well as benefit to see it observed.


M. Since it grows late, I shall not further dispute this point with you, of
the Kings dispensing power, though I had a great deal more to urge in defense
of it; for notwithstanding all you have said against it, it is now counted so
inherent a Prerogative, and in many cases so necessary for the benefit of the
Subject, that the Convention it self, after a great deal of dispute about it,
though they had condemned the King for assuming and exercising a power of
dispensing with, and suspending of Laws without consent of Parliament: yet in
this very Declaration, when they assert their Ancient Rights and Liberties,
they only declare, That the pretended power of dispensing with Laws, or the
execution of Laws, by Regal authority, as it has been assumed and exercised of
late is Illegal; which shows that they do not go so high as you, who seem to be
absolutely against any such thing.


F. You very much mistake me if you say so; for though I maintain that
anciently, till about the middle of the Reign of King Henry the III. there were
no dispensations at all, either because they were not thought necessary, or
else that Penal Laws were not then multiplied to that degree they have been
since; yet since they have been now so long in use, and do (I grant) often tend
not only for the benefit of the King, but also of the Subject, I do no way's
condemn them, provided they are restrained within those due limits prescribed
by the lite Chief Justice Vaughan in the case above mentioned; and when they do
not tend to the common mischief and ruin of the Protestant Religion establish^
by Law, and the Rights and Liberties of the Subject; nay, I grant in times of
necessity, as in the coming over of the Duke of Monmouth, (for example) the
King might Justify the granting Commissions to Popish Officers, and therefore
the Parliament did very well to offer the King to prepare an Act to indemnifie
them from the penalties they had incurred by acting without taking the Test; so
that when the King utterly refused this reasonable proposition, and chose to
dissolve the Parliament rather than he would permit them in the least to
question on this usurpt power, what could be farther expected, than that He was
resolved to execute it whether the Parliament would or not, as we afterward
sound he did.

But admitting he really had been endued with this Prerogative, yet was it
still under a trust, not to abuse it, so notoriously as he did, by granting it
to every Apostate Person, Officer, or Judge that required it; and I doubt not
but if he had governed a little longer, but we might have found it granted to
Bishops, likewise, as soon as he had thought fit to make them of his own
Religion; for though the King (for example) has an undoubted prerogative of
pardoning Robbers, and Highway-men, yet if he should so far abuse his
Prerogative as to pardon every Robber that was taken, I leave it to you to
consider, whether such a Government could long subsist; I shall not apply this
case to these dispensations, because they say comparisons are odious.

These things being apparent, I think it would be very easy to vindicate that
clause in the Declaration concerning the Bishops; for if the Kings Declaration
was unlawful (as certainly it was) not only by reason of the Dispensing Power,
(we have been now disputing about) but also for one main clause in it, which I
have yet but lightly touched, which is this; We do likewise declare, it is our
Royal Will and Pleasure, that from henceforth the execution of all and all
manner of Penal Laws in matters Ecclesiastical, for not coming to Church, or
not Receiving the Sacrament, or for any other Nonconformity to the Religion
established, or for, or by reason of the Exercise of Religion, in any manner
whatsoever, be immediately suspended, and the farther execution of the said
Penal Laws, and every of them is hereby suspended. So that by this Clause in
the Declaration, not only the Laws of our Reformation, but all the Laws for the
preservation of the Christian Religion in general were suspended, and become of
no force, since every man might not only choose whether he would come to Church
or not, but also all Priests and Ministers were hereby indemnified from either
Praying or Preaching in the Churches, as well as their Parishioners freed from
Hearing them; so that not only all the Laws of our Reformation were at once
suspended, but those of Christianity it self by these words (or for, or by
reason of the exercise of Religion in any manner whatsoever) nor is it confined
to the Christian Religion, but all other Religions (even Mahometanism it self)
were thereby permitted.

But perhaps it may be urged, that the execution of the Law is only hereby
suspended, and not the Law it self, which is a mere evasion; for what is the
external obligation of any Law but it is execution in order to obedience? which
if it be once taken off there can only then remain the naked internal
obligation in foro conscientiae, and with how sew this is of any weight you
understand so well, I need not tell you.

So that by this Declaration ^he King took upon him to suspend above forty
Statutes at once concerning our Religion; and if he could do so, I desire to
know whether he might not the next week have suspended forty more, even
concerning our Civil Properties likewise; and so might have proceeded till he
had suspended all the Laws in the Statute Book; nor are those Laws suspended
for any limited time, but during the Kihgs Pleasure; and this not only a bare
suspension for a time, but in effect a down right abrogation of them; for what
is an abrogation of a Law, but the taking away the force of these Statutes,
without any time limited? And if this be not to usurp the Sole Legislative
Power, I know not what is; and if this were once commonly put in practice,
Parliaments would signify nothing, and the Legislature would be wholly in the
King; Mr. Justice Powil.
this was so evident, that it was granted by one of the Judges at the trial of
these Bishops.

If therefore this were the truth of the case, I cannot see wherein the Bishops
that presented this Petition to His Majesty acted at all undutifully toward
him, as you suppose: For being by the King's Order in Council, commanded to
distribute this Declaration to their inferior Clergy, which they knew in it
self to be unlawful, their distribution of it would not only have been looked
upon as the owning of an unlawful thing, but would also have drawn the Inferior
Clergy into the same Snare; who if it were unlawful, ought not to have
published to their Parishioners a License to act directly contrary to Law; and
therefore the Bishops were not only under an Obligation of that dreadful Charge
and Imprecation expressed in the Statute of Uniformity, in the first of Q.
Elizabeth, Chap. 2.
if they did not endeavor the utmost execution thereof, through all their
Diocesses and Charges; but being also pressed upon to distribute it contrary to
their Consciences, what could they do less in order to excuse themselves from
this unlawful Command, than privately to tell the K. the reason of their
disobedience? and also humbly to petition him not farther to insist upon it,
either in respect of themselves, or their Inferior Clergy? and you know that it
was allowed by your Civil-Law, for any Judge, or Prator, rescribere Principi,
if he were by him commanded to act contrary to any former Law or Edict of the
Emperor.


M. I will not deny that, but yet methinks the Bishops in this case would have
acted more respectively and discreetly, if they had forbore petitioning; and
though they had refused to obey the Kings Declaration, yet needed they not to
have declared against it till the Parliament met; when I grant they might have
freely and safely done it: or else if they would have petitioned at all, it
should have been in more dutiful and respectful terms, than by telling the
King, that his Declaration was Illegal, and that they could not in Prudence,
Honor or Conscience, so far make themselves parties to it, as to distribute
it; and it was this alone which was looked upon as seditious, and for which his
Majesty thought fit to have them Indicted in the Kings Bench, as a matter of
high Misdemeanour.


F. I confess you have said in short the sum of what was urged against them by
the Kings Council at their trial, but all this was very well answered by one of
the Judges themselves; first, That it would have been too late to have stayed
for a Parliament, because the Declaration was to have been distributed by such
a time, neither could they have acquies^d under it and submitted, for that
would have been to run into contempt of the Kings Command, unless they had also
shown the reasons why they could not obey him; and since this could be done no
other way than by Address or Petition, what other reasons could they give, but
that they thought it had been more than once declared Illegal in Parliament;
and therefore that they could not in Prudence, Honor, and Conscience obey it;
not in prudence, because they were liable to answer it in Parliament, if they
did; not in Honor, because it is unworthy the Character of Bishops and Peers
to act any thing that may make them look like flatterers, or time servers; not
in conscience, because of the Imprecation they lay under by the Act of Queen
Elizabeth; as also because no man can with a safe conscience give his
approbation to that which is contrary to Law.

And therefore I must needs tell you, that it was very severely and unjustly
done in the King to give up this Petition (which was delivered him with all the
privacy imaginable) to the Privy Council, in order to have the Bishops
prosecuted for it; but which made a great deal more noise and heart-burning
against his Government, to commit them Prisoners to the Tower, and then to
bring them to their Trial, and prosecute them with the utmost rigor; where tho
they escaped punishment, yet was it no thanks to the Prosecutors, but to the
Directions of the Judges, two of whom (for their Honor) differed from the late
Lord Chief Justice, and his Popish Companion, as also to the honesty of the
Jury, who found them not guilty.


M. I cannot deny but you have given a pretty fair Account of this matter, and
I cannot but own, that it was one of the worst advised things that happened
under the King's Government; but I cannot impute this to His Majesty's innate
disposition, which was wont to act with greater temper and moderation toward
those who differed from him in Judgment, and therefore must impute it wholly to
the wicked Instigations of Father Peter's, and the other Popish Ministers.

But as for diverse other Articles mentioned in the Conventions Declaration;
Such as the issuing out, and causing to be executed a Commission under the
Great Seal, for erecting a Court called, The Court of Commission for
Ecclesiastical Affairs, and levying Money for, and to the use of the Crown by
pretense of Prerogative, for other time; and in other manner than the same was
granted by Parliament, with all the rest of the Articles in that Declaration,
relating to civil Affairs; Since they are to be looked upon as the sole Acts of
the Judges, and not of the King, they, and not he ought to suffer for the
illegality of them; since as you your self have owned, the King in his judicial
capacity can do no wrong, that power being wholly committed to his Judges; and
therefore it was very hardly, nay unjustly done, to lay this to his charge,
which he is not to answer for; so that if any thing have been done amiss in
this kind, they and not he are to answer for it, and not to run such things up
to a Forfeiture or an Abdication, as you and your Covention have done.


F. I need not say much more to this Objection, because I have in great part
answered it already, and proved that most of the things found fault withal,
were the King's own Acts, as well as those of his Ministers and Judges; for as
to the Commission for Ecclesiastical Affairs, which is directly contrary to the
Statute of King Charles the I. Chap. 11.
which took away the Court of High Commission, as also to a clause inserted in
the Act of the 13 th of Charles the II. Chap. 12.
Wherein the Act for taking away that Court, is not only confirmed, but also
the erecting any other like Court by commission, is expressly forbid; This being
the case, the fault of the issuing out of this Commission cannot be laid upon
the Judges; who though some of them acted in it, yet was it never formally
brought before them to determine whether it was illegal, or not; and no man can
imagine, that unless the King had a passionate desire for this power, that he
might thereby be able to suspend, deprive, and turn out whom he pleased of the
Bishops, and inferior Clergy, with the Heads and Fellows of Colleges, whom he
should find irreconcil^able Enemies to his Religion, or obstinate in refusing
to obey his illegal commands, as too plainly appeared by the suspension of the
Bishop of London, the turning out of the President and Fellows of Magdalen
College, and that Prosecution that was lately ordered against all those
Bishops, and inferior Clergy, who had refused to distribute, or read the King's
Declaration; though I confess there was a stop put to this, upon re-calling
this Commission: Immediately before the Princes Arrival.

So likewise for the other Article of levying Money contrary to Law, that was
also without any opinion of the Judges at all demanded about it, for the
illegal collection of Chimny Money, by making Cottages and Ovens pay, that were
exempted by the Acts concerning it; and also the illegal levying of Excise, by
making Small-Beer pay the Duties of Strong, were all of them acted and done by
particular directions from the Treasury, or by the private abuse of the Farmers
of the Excise, without any opinion of the Judges; and of these Orders his
Majesty could not choose but be the Author, or approver at least; since it is
very well known he constantly sat^ there when any great Business was to b^
transacted, and the Lord Treasurer, or Commissioners of the Treasury, would
certainly never have presumed to have issued out their Orders in a Case of so
great moment, if they had not been very well satisfied that it was his
Majesty's express Will and Pleasure to have i^ so.

And I my self have now by me a Copy of the then Lord Treasurers Directions to
the Officers appointed for the levying of Chimney-money; commanding them to
levy it upon all Cottages and Ovens whatsoever, which was done accordingly with
the utmost rigor; which though it was a very great oppression, yet since it
chiefly concerned the poor and ordinary sort of people, who had not purses to
go to law with the King; or else such Gentlemen and others, who though they
were forced to pay for their poor Tenants, yet did they not think it worth
their while to bring i^ before the Barons of the Exchequer, where, as things
then went, they could not expect to find much Justice.

I shall not insist upon the King's taking the additional Customs contrary to
the Act of Parliament, by which they were granted to the late King Charles only
for life; and though in his last Sickness there was a Contract for the new
farming of them, by virtue of which, I grant the King might have justified the
taking of them till the end of the Farm; yet since that Contract never passed
the Seals during the King's lifetime, it was certainly against Law for the
King to take them before they were re-granted by Act of Parliament; I say, I
shall not insist upon this; since the Parliament were so easy as to pass it by
without declaring it to have been illegal; only it sufficiently shows, that
from the very beginning of the King's Reign, he was resolved to govern
arbitrarily, and to levy Money upon the Subject, whether the Law gave him any
Authority to do it or not.

But as to what you say concerning the Judges being wholly in fault, for all
the unjust and illegal Proceedings exercised in their Courts, and that the King
was wholly faultless, I should be of your mind, had I not seen, that all those
Judges who would not agree to the dispensing power (, and other illegal
Judgments I could name,) were turned out, and others, either Papists, or of
less consciences than Papists, were put in their places, which were not
conferred for any longer time, than durante been placito, and therefore no
wonder if such men were absolute slaves to the King's will and pleasure.


M. I had much more to say in defense of the King's raising and keeping up a
standing Army, and his disarming Protestants, in, and after the Duke of
Monmouth's Rebellion, which are laid to his charge as endeavors to destroy the
Rights and Liberties of this Kingdom.

But since it grows late, I shall only now take notice of something which I
forgot to insist upon, concerning your Notion, of the King's obdicating the
Crown by a wilful breach of the Laws, which is quite different from the sense
in which this Word is taken in Roman Authors; as also in our Civil-Laws; For
when Cicero uses the Expression, Itaque tutela me abdicare togito. Brison tells
us his meaning was se nolle esse tutorem: But Pompenius in his Book De orig.
Iuris, L.. 13.
gives us the true sense of this Phrase; Abdicare se Magistratu, est ante
tempu^ Magistratum deponere: which plainly shows the Romans had no notion of a
Tacit, or implied abdication of a charge or Majestracy, without a man's express
consent; and therefore if the Kings bare desertion of the Kingdom was not an
Abdication of the Throne (as you your self are forced to grant) I cannot
imagine how the King's violation of the Laws, or endeavoring to subvert the
Government (both which you lay to his charge) can properly be called an
Abdication of it; so that indeed the King has not abdicated the Government,
but your Convention has abdicated him; And tho we often read in our Civil-law,
That a Father might abdicare filium; yet I never read, or can you show me any
Example, that a Son might abdicate a Father, or Subjects their Prince.


F. You discourse upon a wrong ground; for I never affirmed, That Subjects had
any authority to abdicate or depose their Prince; nor has the Convention
assumed any such power to themselves; what they have done in this affair, has
not been authoritative, or as taking upon them to call the King to an account
for his actions, or to depose him for his misgovernment, but only declarative,
to pronounce and declare as the Representatives of the whole Nation, that by
endeavoring to extirpate the Protestant, Religion, and to subvert the
Fundamental Laws, and Liberties of the Kingdom, he had wilfully (I do not say
willingly) Abdicated the Government, that is, renounced to Govern this Kingdom
any longer as a lawful King, which I take to be a tacit, or implied Abdication
of it, as I have already proved; and to show you farther that even Tully
himself allows in our sense of an implied Abdication, in his third Philippicks,
when he says thus concerning Mark Anthony, that for his offering a Crown to
Caesar, Eo^die-non modo* Consulatu, sed etiam liberate se ab^itavit, etc.
where you see Mark Anthony is said to have Abdioned the Consulsh^p without any
express Renunciation of it; for Caesar might have continued him in it after he
had been declared Emperor.


M. I grant your Authority to be good, yet even in this sense this Abdication
of the Consulship could only take its effect from Anthony's ow^ Will, for
offering a Crown to Caesar, if he did not expressly, yet he effectually
renounced his Consulship; for had Caesar accepted in he could no longer have
been the Consul of a Popular State, but must thenceforth have acted by
authority from Caesar, or not at all: but then this would not have agreed with
your No^on of a Forfeiture, which always supposes a crime, and a depriving the
party offending from his Office, or Dignity, whether he will or not; so that if
the Convention have adjudged the King to have Abdicated, they must suppose it
to have been by his own consent, or not at all; but if they supposed him to
have forfeited, why did they not down right declare so, as well as the Scotch
Convention had done, and then I could have ^old better what to have said to
them, and have proved that only Subjects and not Kings are liable to forfeitu^e.


F. I will not deny but that the word Forfeited had been more proper than
Abdicated in this Vote of the Convention; but yet I think I have sufficiently
proved, that there is no great difference between a man's Abdicating an Estate
by a wilful disposing of it otherwise than the Law requires, and ^ forfeiture
of it, as I showed you, that Tenant for life aliening in Fee, does not only
forfeit his Estate to him in reversion, but is also an Abdication of it, though
perhaps he had reserved to himself a lease of the Estate for years, and this is
called a Forfeiture of the Estate, though he committed no other crime, than the
wrong done to him in reversion, and therefore (as I said before) this
Forfeiture does not always suppose any crime for which the party may be
punished, otherwise than by the loss of the Estate; nor yet does it suppose any
Superior Power in the party that takes it.

But your exception against my authority from Tully or Mark Anthony's implied
Abdication of the Consulship without any express renunciation of it, is very
^rivolous; for you your self own, that Anthony did not expressly, but only
effectually renounce the Consulship, when he offered Caesar the Crown; and if
he did not do it expressly, then it seems Anthony could renounce the Consulship
without ever intending it, by doing an act that in effect abrogated his own
power; and why King James might not do so too with his Crown, I desire you
would show me any sufficient (...): But that the Convention did also look upon
this Abdicati^^ of King James as a Forfeiture, appears plainly by their
declaring the Throne Vacant^ without troubling themselves to find out who was
the next Heir to be placed therein.

But to conclude, there might be a very good reason why the Convention did not
think fit to make use of the word Forfeiture, as the Parliament of Scotland
have done in the like case; for some of the most wary and prudent Members of
the House of Common^, considering that this word Forfeiture might prove of very
hard digestion to a great part of the House, and also might give great offense
to diverse of the Bishops and Lords in the House of Peers, they found out this
word, Abdicated is an expedi^^^ to solve that difficulty, and which might not
only express the Kings wilful desertion of the Government by his first
departure, but also his renunciaton of it, upon those legal conditions he was
to hold it; (...) I have already observed the word Abdicated in their Vote
refer, not only to his having withdrawn himself out of the Kingdom, but to all
the rest of the clauses foregoing, or else they would signify nothing in that
place, both the Abdication, and the Vacancy of the Throne being grounded upon
all of them alike, I should now proceed to your last exception against this
Vote of the Conventions, ( viz) That the Throne is thereby Vacant. But I see it
is now very late, and therefore it is best to defer the farther discussing of
that matter till ^^other opportunity, which I desire I may have as soon as you
please.


M. Yea, and then we will also confides* that part of the Conventions
Declaration, whereby they resolve that the Prince and Princess of Orange be
declared K. and Queen of England, etc. which if you can prove to me to be
according to the Laws of England, I will then acknowledge them to be lawful
King and Queen of England; but till I am convinced of it, I must beg their
pardons.


F. Well, I could wait on you again two or three days hence, and then I hope I
shall make out those points as well or better than any I have done hitherto;
and in the mean time I am your humble Servant.


M. I pray do it better if you can, or else you will not very much edify me;
but however I wish you good night.


FINIS.
Bibliotheca Politica: OR A DISCOURSE By WAY of DIALOGUE, On these following
Questions; I. Whether the Vote of the late Convention, wherein they declared
the Throne to be vacant, can be justified from the Ancient Constitution, and
Customs of this Kingdom. II. Whether the said Convention declaring King William
and Queen Mary to be Lawful and Rightful King and Queen of England, may be
justified by the said Constitution. III. Whether the Act passed in the said
Convention after it became a Parliament, whereby Roman Catholic Princes are
debarred from succeeding to the Crown, was according to Law.


Collected out of the Best Authors, as well Ancient as Modern.

Dialogue the Twelfth.

LONDON, Printed for R. Baldwin in Warwick Lane, near the Oxford-Arms; where
also may be had the First, Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Seventh,
Eighth, Ninth, Tenth, and Eleventh Dialogues. 1694.

Authors most commonly used in this Discourse, and how denoted in the Margin.

The Succession of the Crown discussed. S. D. Dr. Brady's Exact History of the
Succession to the Crown, B. H. S. An Enquiry into the Nature and Obligation of
Legal Rights, E.L.R.
The PREFACE to the READER.
THE ensuing Discourse being upon so Weighty a Subject as their present
Majesty's Title to the Crown, it is requisite that I give you some Account of
the Method I have pursued, and what Authors I have made use of for the proving
of it. As to the former, since the Main Questions in this great Affair are,
Whether the Convention can be Justified in declaring the Throne Vacant, and
then placing their present Majesty's thereon as the next Heirs, it was
necessary to show from an exact History of the Succession of the Crown of
England, that the late Parliament whilst it was a Convention, have done no more
in this great Affair, than what former Parliaments or Great Councils have done
ever since the time of King William I. on the like Occasions; when they have
not only declared the Throne Vacant, but have also judged which of the Royal
Family were fittest to fill it, and the Persons so placed therein have been
still taken for Lawful Kings, and as such have had true Allegiance paid them by
all the Subjects during the time they continued possessed of the Royal Power and
Dignity.

As for the Authors cited in this Disquisition, I have made use of the
Antientest, and those who lived nearest the times in which the Matters we treat
of were transacted; and therefore I have studiously forborne quoting any Authors
in Latin or English who lived in more Modern Times, unless when there are no
other to be had that treat of those Affairs.

But not to be partial to one Opinion, I have faithfully recited all those
Authorities and Arguments made use of by the Author of the Treatise, Entitled,
The Hereditary Succession discussed; as also by the Learned Dr. Brady, in his
exact History of the Succession of the Crown; wherein those Authors endeavor
to prove, that the Crown of England is, and has always been Hereditary from
the very beginning of our Monarchy, notwithstanding the many and various
Breaches that have been made upon it: which Authorities and Arguments, whether
they prove the Matter in debate, I shall leave to your better Judgment; but
hope those Gentlemen will not take it ill, if I cannot let all they write pass
for clear Demonstration; and therefore have taken upon me to cite all those
Arguments and Authorities that either have been, or (as far as I know of) may
be made use of by those of the contrary Opinion; in the performance of which,
if I have not dealt heartily with both Parties in fairly representing the
utmost that they had to say; I shall be obliged, if any Friend to Truth will
show me my failings. But tho it is true, I have not gone higher in this History
than the coming in of K. William I. yet I hope I may be excused looking farther
back, for these Reasons: First, because an Examination of the Succession before
that time, would not only be tedious, (by swelling this Discourse to an
unreasonable Bulk) but would also be superfluous; since the Gentleman whom I
suppose Freeman here Argues against, makes K. William I. to have been an
absolute Conqueror, and to have altered all the former Laws in the Saxon Times;
and if so, sure then those concerning the Succession of the Crown. And I desire
them to show me any Reason, if he and his Descendants held the Kingdom as
Absolute Monarchs by Conquest, why they might not bequeath or make it over (as
is justifiable in Patrimonial Kingdoms) to which of their Sons, Kindred, or
Relations they should think fit? and if so, what will then become of this
Fundamental Right of a Lineal Hereditary Succession? And besides all this, it
is needless upon another Account, since I have already proved in the Tenth
Dialogue, from no less Authority than K. Alfred's Will, that before the
Conquest, the Crown was partly Testamentary, and partly Elective, sometimes
wholly Elective, as in K. Edward the Confessor; and whoever doubts of this, I
shall only desire them to read impartially Dr. Brady's abovementioned History
of the Succession, and then I shall leave it to them to consider, whether he
does not grant in effect what he takes upon him to Confute; viz. That there was
no Lineal Descent of the Crown known or settled in those Times, but what was
Alterable by the Testament of those Kings.

But since the rest of this Discourse (besides the enquiry into bare Matter of
Fact) is chiefly the applying those Precedents I have here made use of to the
Case of their present Majesty's, I hope neither they nor any that wish well to
their Government, will resent it, if I have not gone in the common Road of
former Writers, in supposing the Titular Prince of Wales to be an Impostor,
without any other proof than those bare Suspicions that have been published in
the Printed Pamphlets; yet since however they may incline a Man to doubt, they
cannot make a Child Illegitimate whom his Father and Mother have hitherto bred
up, and owned for theirs: and therefore I have rather chosen to suppose him at
present to be the Lawful Son of King James and Queen Mary; and yet that what
the late Convention have done in passing him by without taking any notice of
his Title, was all that they could or were obliged to do, his present
Circumstances considered.

But, if it be here made out that King William and Queen Mary are Lawful and
Rightful King and Queen of this Realm, no Man can doubt whether Allegiance may
be sworn too them or not; and perhaps there was no need of writing any thing
farther; yet since I find a great many of the Clergy as well as Laity of this
Nation, could not go higher than their swearing Allegiance to them as King and
Queen de facto, and that even this has been violently opposed by the s^iff
Asserters of K. James's Right, I have thought fit to add in the next Discourse
(which I promise shall be the last on this Subject) all that has been said Pro
and (...) upon that Question, and to make it of the same Bulk with the rest, I
have, for the satisfaction of those of the Church of England, as well as Royal
Interest, endeavored to show the great difference between this late
Revolution, and that fatal Civil War, that ended with the Deposition and Murder
of King Charles the First. These two Questions, together with an Index to all
the Dialogues, being dispatched, (as I hope they will be shortly) shall be the
last I shall trouble the World with upon these Subjects; since I know nothing
more that can be well added to what I shall there set down.

THE Twelfth Dialogue BETWEEN Mr. MEANWELL a Civilian, AND Mr. FREEMAN a
Gentleman.
M. I Am glad, Sir, you are come, for I was wishing for you; pray sit down, and
let us begin where we left off; you may remember you promised me when we last
parted, that the next time I saw you, you would make out to me from undeniable
proofs and precedents from our Ancient Histories and Laws, that the present
Convention had done nothing in Voting the Throne vacant, and then placing the
Prince and Princess of Orange therein, but what may be justified by the
Fundamental Laws and Constitutions of the Kingdom; for I must still believe
(till I am better instructed) that there can be no Inter Regnum in England, but
that it has been from the first Institution of the Government an Hereditary
Monarchy, where the next Heir by Right of Blood (unless in some manifest
Usurpations) has always succeeded to the last Predecessor; as also our best
Lawyers with one consent maintain in their Books of Reports, and the Learned
Finch in his description of the Common Law lays it down as an undoubted Maxim,
That the King never dies, and therefore it seems altogether new and unheard of
before; for the Convention thus to declare the Throne vacant; for admitting
that King James had (never so) justly Forfeited or Abdicated the Kingdom (term
it which you please) yet certainly there could be no Vacancy of the Throne,
since the next Heir by Blood ought immediately to have been declared King, or
Queen, and so placed therein; whereas we heard in the Country, that there was
almost ten days time before the Lords and Commons could agree whether the Crown
should be declared vacant, or not; and when it was so declared, it took up
almost a weeks time more, before they could agree who should be placed therein;
whereas it was a difficulty only of their own making; for sure the Prince of
Wales (though it is true he is carried out of England) ought to have been
immediately declared King, as was done in the Case of Edward the 3 d. who was
so declared upon the Deposition or Resignation of King Edward the 2 d.


F. Though I grant ever since the Crown has been claimed by Descent, the Law
has gone as you have cited it; and that Finches Law lays it down for a Maxim, I
shall not deny; but that from the beginning or original of Kingly Government,
whether (we look before or after you Conquest) it will appear, that the Throne
was often vacant, till such time as the Common Council of the Kingdom had
agreed who should fill it; and to show you I do not speak without good
Authority, pray tell me (if this Maxim had then obtained,) why after the Death
of William the First, his Eldest Son Robert Duke of Normandy, did not
immediately take upon him the Title of King of England, or at least had done it
after the Death of William Rufus? who, you know, was placed on the Throne, ^not
by Right of Inheritance, but by his Fathers Testament confirmed, and approved
of (according to the Ancient English-Saxon Custom of Succession) by the common
Consent of the great Council of the whole Kingdom; and yet notwithstanding
after the Death of this William, Henry his younger Brother succeeded him by the
free Election and Consent of the same Common Council, and yet that Duke Robert
should never in all his Lifetime take upon him the Title of King? Pray tell me
likewise (if this Maxim had been then known) why Maud the Empress, immediately
upon the Death of her Father King Henry the First, did not take, (nor yet her
Husband the Duke of Anjou in her Right) the Title of King and Queen of England,
though she had had Homage paid her, and Fealty sworn to her in the Lifetime of
her Father, as the immediate Successor to the Crown, and yet notwithstanding
the utmost Title she could assume was that of Domina Anglorum, Lady or Mistress
(not Queen) of the English; whilst Stephen, who had no other Title, but the
Election of the great Council of the Nation held both the Crown and Title of
King as long as he lived? As also why Arthur Duke of Britain, who according to
the now received Rules of Succession, was the next Heir to the Crown upon the
Death of King Richard the First, never took upon him the Title of King, unless
it were, that he very well knew that his Uncle King John had been placed in the
Throne by the Common Consent and Election of the great Council of the Kingdom?
So likewise after the Death of King John, why Henry his Son was not immediately
proclaimed King, till such time as the great Council of the Clergy, Nobility
and People had met and agreed to send back Prince Lewis, whom they had chosen
for their King, (though not being Crowned, he never took upon himself that
Title) and so chose Henry the Third (then an Infant) for their King? Lastly,
Why all these Princes, viz. Henry the Second, Richard the First, and Henry the
Third; who according to your notions were undoubted Heirs of the Crown, never
took upon them the Title of Kings of England, nor are so styled by any of our
Historians, till after their Elections and Coronations, if it had not been then
received for Law, that it was the Election of the People and Coronation
subsequent thereunto, that made them Kings, and till this was performed (though
they might look upon themselves as never so lawful Successors) the Throne was
notwithstanding esteemed in Law vacant?

Therefore as for your I^stance of King Edward the Third's immediately
succeeding upon the Resignation of his Father (if you please better to consider
of it) that makes against you; for it is plain from Th. Walsingham, and H. de
Knyghton, that Prince Edward succeeded not to the Crown by Succession, but the
Election of the great* Council, or Parliament; the words are express, Huic
Electioni universus Populus consensit; and this was also owned by Edward the
Second himself, who when the Commissioners of all the Estates of Parliament
came in all their Names to renounce their Homage to him; yet in the midst of
all his sorrow he gave them thanks, quod Filium suum Edwardum post se
Regnaturum eligissent; which plainly shows, that the Parliament had then such a
Notion of a Forfeiture proceeding from his Deposition, for violating the
Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, that the Eldest Son and Successor could
pretend no other Right to it (even in the Judgment of the late King himself)
but what proceeded from their Election.


M. I cannot deny but what you have now urged from matter of fact, may appear
very plausible to your self, and those of your Notions, yet if it be looked
closer into, I doubt not but the known Laws then received, and the Notions the
people had then of a Lineal Succession by Right Inheri^ance, will prove
directly contrary to the matter of fact: For you know very well a facto ad Ius
non valte consequentia; but that all the Princes you mentioned, except the
three last, were really Usurpers, and not Lawful Kings; I shall let you see by
evident Authorities from the Historians of those Times: For in the first place,
though I grant William Rufus succeeded to the Crown by his Fathers last Will,
which was certainly unlawful (as being contrary to the received Laws of
Succession in Normandy as well as England) yet was it not by Election of the
people as you suppose, but by the kindness of Archbishop Lanfranc his
Godfather, and the favor of the greater part of the Norman Barons, who came
over with his Father, as well as out of hatred to Duke Robert his Elder
Brother, that he was thus made King; so that William Rufus claimed as a
Testamentary Heir, B.H.S. p. 368.
and by reason of that Claim was advanced to the Throne by the Assistance of
Lanfranc's and the Bishop's Faction, who then swayed the people, but yet never
owned any Election from them; so that if you rightly consider this Story, you
cannot call it an Election, but a Designation or Nomination by his Father
William the Conqueror, and consented to by the major part of the Bishops and
Lords of the Kingdom, but not by their Election or Decree as a Common Council,
as you suppose.

But that for all this, Duke Robert his Brother being assisted by Odo Bishop of
Bayenx, and Earl of Kent his Uncle, as also diverse other Norman Lords, who
being satisfied of his Right, raised a War in England against William, and
great mischief was done on both sides, till at last a Peace was made between
them upon these conditions (among others) (as Matthew Westminster relates it)
that because of the manifest Right Duke Robert had to the Crown, S. D. p. 7. F.
236.
he should have a Yearly Pension of three thousand Marks out of the Revenue of
England; and he, of the two Brothers that survived the other, if he died
without Children, should be Heir to the Deceased: And so far were they from
thinking this Agreement stood in need of Ratification of a great Council, that
there was but twelve of the Principal Men on each side sworn to see it duly
observed.

But if we come to consider the next putting by of Duke Robert from his Right
to the Crown, you will find it to have been done with a far less color of
Right than the former; for he being then absent in the Holy Land at the time of
Rufus's death, Henry his Younger Brother laid hold of the opportunity, and
assembling diverse of the great Men of the Kingdom, he promised them to make a
full Restitution of all their Ancient Laws and Liberties, S. D. p. 7.
and confirm them by his Charter, and abrogate such severe ones as his Father
had made; thereupon they did unanimously consent to Crown him King: Now I
cannot see how this, (managed with so much Artifice) corruption can properly be
called an Election, since that ought to be a deliberate sedate Action, and at
which all the persons concerned ought to be present; but this could not
possibly be, for King William was killed on the second of August, and buried
the next day, and the day after that, being Sunday, this pretended Election was
made, and the Saxon Chronicle tells us, That those great Men who were near at
hand chose his Brother Henry King. Anno 1100.
So that this looks more like the Combination of a Faction of Bishops, Lords,
and great Men than the free Election of a King, since it was impossible for all
that were, or ought, to be present from all parts of the Kingdom to have notice
to assemble and dispatch that great Business in two days time.

But to let you see that Duke Robert did not fit down contented with this
Usurpation upon his Right; for as soon as ever he came from the Holy Land, he
straight made War upon his Brother, and many great Men of the Normans took his
part; and this War was eagerly carried on for some time, and Duke Robert
Landing in England with an Army, K. Henry marched against him with all his
Forces, (but as the Saxon Chronicle also tells us) some principal Men going
between them, Ibid.
brought them to an Agreement upon conditions that K. Henry should pay Duke
Robert 3000 Marks Pension yearly, and that he of the Brothers who survived the
other, should be Heir of all England and Normandy, unless the party deceased
should have Children of his own; so that though I grant King Henry recites in
his Charter in Matthew Paris, B.^.S. p. 369.
that he was Crowned King by the Common Council of the Barons of England, yet
his saying so could not give him a Right; and he must say this, or nothing, for
no other, pretense or Title he could have; and there never was any other
Usurper in his circumstances, but must say that, or some such thing, to make
out a Title, and therefore to answer your Question, why Duke Robert took not
upon himself the Title of King, neither upon the death of his Father, nor after
that of his Elder Brother, I think this may serve for an Answer, that he
parting with his Right to both his Brothers successively, he then looked upon it
as needless to take the Title of King upon him, as not looking upon himself
then to be so.


F. I confess you have from your Dr. together with some assistance of your own,
made a very cunning gloss upon these two great Instances of Vacancy and
Election, to evade, if it were possible, that Right which the Common Council of
the Kingdom then challenged to themselves; and therefore I shall make bold
strictly to examine what you have now said. In the first place as to the Title
of King William Rufus, though I grant it was founded upon his Fathers
Testament, yet you see that this was not good alone without the consent and
approbation of the Common Council of the Kingdom; I think I have sufficiently
proved at our last Meeting, but one, when we discourst of the Force of the like
Testament made by King Edward the Confessor to King William the First, which
according to the English Saxon Law (that ^as still observed) was never valid
until confirmed by the consent of the Wittena Gemot, or Great Council; and he
that had both these, whether next Heir by Blood or not, was always esteemed as
lawful King, as I have also proved from the Testament of King Alfred; and
though you will take no notice of it, yet was this Testament of King William I.
then produced and read in the Common Council of the Bishops, Earls and Barons
of the Kingdom, as appears by all the Ancient Historians who treat of this
matter. I shall only give you a taste of them, P. 231.
Matthew Paris expressly relates the circumstances of it, in these words,
Optimates frequente^, ^d Westmonasterium in concilium convenere, ubi loci post
long am consultationem Gulielmum Rusum Regem fecere, and Abbot Brompton tells
us, that it was done in a full Council, Col. 983.
Convocatis Terrae magnatibus, so that here was nothing wanting to a full
Election or Confirmation at least of King William's Title, and till this was
done it is plain the Throne was Vacant.

But as for the claim that Duke Robert made to the Crown, though I do not deny
but he might think himself to have a just Title to it, by a received custom
among diverse Nations, by which the eldest Son is looked upon to have a right
before the younger; yet that this is no Law of Nature, or Reason, and
consequently not Divine, I think I have sufficiently proved at our second
meeting: But that this right of Succession of the eldest Son (to be no
fundamental Law of this Kingdom) I think I can sufficiently prove from our
English Saxon Histories, as well as Laws; and as for what you say concerning
those Norman Lords and Bishops who joined with Duke Robert after his Brother
was Crowned King, it is called no better than Treason by all the Writers of
those times, for Florence of Worcester, and Sim: of Durham, both tell us, that
the King thereupon called together the English, An. D. 1087.
and opened unto them the Treason of the Normans, and the Saxon Chronicle^, who
seemed to have lived about that time, compares the Treason of Bishop Odo to
that of Judas Iscariot against our Lord; and though I grant King William might
make such an agreement with his Brother Duke Robert, as you mention, yet as for
the 3000 Marks Pension, which you say he was to pay him, I very much doubt it,
since no Historian but Matthew of Westminster, who lived between two and three
hundred years after, makes mention of it, and therefore I think it is to be
referred to the following agreement betwixt this Duke and his Brother King
Henry, which the Saxon Chronicle expressly mentions.

Having now examined and cleared the Title of King William Rufus, I come next
to justify that of King Henry I. to the Crown, notwithstanding all you have
alleged against it, which yet is no more than what you said before, that Duke
Robert had an Hereditary Right, and therefore he could not be put by, which is
to beg the Question, for you cannot prove to me that he had this Right either
by the Law of Nature, the Law of England, or the Law of Normandy, not by the
two former, as I have already proved, for your Conqueror himself being a
Bastard, had no better Title to the Duchy of Normandy than his Father's last
Will, before he went to the Holy Land; which was not good without the consents
of the Nobility of that Duchy, as appears by the Historians of that time; so
that the greatest Objection you have to make against King Henry's being elected
in a true Common Council of all England is this, that the time was so short
between the Death of William Rufus and his Election, that it was impossible for
all the Parties that had Votes to be there present, which is a very bold
assertion; for how can you or your Doctor tell that at the time when King
William was killed, he might not then have held a great Council at Winchester
(where he then Lay) who might immediately upon his Death choose his Brother
Henry for their King; for it is certain the Election was there the Day before
his Coronation at London, and therefore it is very rashly done to affirm that
this Election was not in a Common Council of the Kingdom, when all the
Historians, L.V. p. 156.
and particularly W. Malmesbury tells us the manner of it, and the Disputes
there were about it, viz. that Henry was elected King as soon as King William's
Funerals were over, Aliquantis tamen ante controversiis inter proceres
agitatis, etc. and H. de Knyghton reciting the cause, why Duke Robert was set
aside, viz. because he had been always contrary and unnatural to the Barons of
England; Col. 2374.
therefore quod plenario consensu and consilio totius Communitatis Regni, ipsum
refutaverunt, and pro Rege omnino recusav^^^nt, and Henricum fratrem in Regem
erexerunt; which plainly shows that it was the opinion of all the Ancient
Writers out of whom Knyghton took this passage, that this election was made by
the free consent, and in a full Council of all the whole Community of the
Kingdom; nor does the after claim of Duke Robert to the Crown at all alter the
case, for the reasons already given, as also because the agreement that was
made between them, that he that survived should succeed the other, was never
confirmed or agreed to by the great Council of the Kingdom; and therefore those
Norman Lords that joined with Duke Robert here in England are justly taxed by
William of Malmesbury, and the Saxon Chronicle, Anno 1104.
with Infidelity and Rebellion: and though I grant that Mat. Paris (or rather
Roger of Wendover whom he transcribes,) seems to condemn King Henry's taking
the Crown as unjust, and contrary to Right, and that he therefore feared the
Justice of God; eo quod fratri suo primogenito, cui jus Regni manifest
competebat temere usurpando injuste nimis abstulcrat; yet this author writing
about the middle of the Reign of King Henry III. who had succeeded his Father
by a pretended right of Inheritance as well as Election, it is no wonder if He
who writ near a hundred years after this transaction, should give his judgment
in this matter according to the common opinion and prejudice of that age, and
must certainly speak by guess; for how could he otherwise affirm (unless he had
been acquainted with that Kings thoughts) as he does in the same place, that he
felt conscientiam suam in obtentu Regni cauteriatam; since no other Writer
either of that time, or after it, does thus blame King Henry for taking the
Crown.

But as for the account you give why Duke Robert never took upon him the Title
of King, if the Throne had not then been looked upon as vacant, because of the
agreement which he made with his Brothers, by which he parted with his Right
for a Pension, during his Life, is not at all satisfactory; for in the first
place neither of these agreements were made till above a year after his
pretended Title did acrue to him by the Death of his Father, and Brother; and
therefore he ought, if he had looked upon himself as true King, to have
immediately taken the Title upon him, which he never did; so likewise the
agreement it self makes wholly against your notion of any hereditary succession
to the Crown, to be then settled, since the main clause in both these agreements
is, that the survivor should be heir to him that died first, unless he left
Children of his own to succeed him; which plainly shows that in the opinion of
both those Princes, and of the great men that swore on either side to see it
observed, they knew of no such settled Right of Succession in their Heirs, which
they themselves could not part with, or else this Clause had been wholly in
vain; since both King William and King Henry's Children were to have succeeded
to the Crown of England, by virtue of both these agreements, before the Sons of
Duke Robert, had his Son William (who was only Earl of Flanders) survived him.

But now if you please you may proceed with your other exceptions against the
rest of the Instances I have here given you of the Vacancy of the Throne, till
such time as the Common Council of the Kingdom had agreed whom to place therein.


M. As to what you have said in defense of the Vacancy of the Throne after the
death of King Henry I. carries less show of Reason than what you urged in the
former Cases; since all Writers agree that this was a manifest Usurpation in
Stephen, who could pretend no sort of Title to the Crown himself, as well as
Perjury in the Bishops, Lords, and great Men of England, who having sworn
Fealty to King Henry's Daughter Maud in his lifetime, made Stephen Earl of
Blois their King; therefore William of Malmsbury, and all the Writers of those
Times do accuse Stephen of downright Perjury and Usurpation, and likewise
relate that he was advanced to the Crown through the power of the Londoners and
Citizens of Winchester; but yet all these Endeavors had been in vain, unless
he had been assisted by his Brother Henry Bishop of that City, and then the
Popes Legate in England, and favored by the Archbishop of Canterbury, who
Crowned him; and yet for all this there was but a very small Faction of the
Bishops and Lords who were for his Croonation; for W. Malmsbury tells us,
Coronatus est ergo in Regem Angliae Stephanus, L. 1. p. 178.
tribus Episcopis praesentibus, nullis Abbatibus, paucissimis Optimatibus.

And many of the Nobility and great Men of England were so sensible of this,
that being headed by Robert Earl of Gloucester (the Empresses base Brother)
they raised a War against Stephen, which after her coming over hither was
carried on with great vigor; and though I grant that after diverse changes of
fortune the Empress was at last forced to quit the Kingdom, yet her Son Duke
Henry did not fail to continue his claim to the Crown in right of his Mother,
and coming over into England renewed the War against King Stephen, which was at
last composed by an agreement between them, which as Matthew Paris and Mat.
Westminster relate it, M. Par. f. 86. M. West. 246.
was thus; That King Stephen acknowledged in an Assembly of Bishops and other
great men of the Kingdom, that Duke Henry had an Hereditary right to the Crown,
and the Duke thereupon as kindly granted, that King Stephen should peaceably
possess it during his Life; so that it is certain, till this agreement (even by
his own acknowledgment) he had no right to it; and though I grant that the
Empress Maud for some reasons we are not able to give a true account of, never
took upon her the Title of Queen, yet it is very certain that she acted as such
during all the time she was in England, receiving Homage and Fealty from those
Lords and others who came over to her side, and also granting Charters and
conferring Honors by the Title of Anglorum Domina* which shows she looked upon
her self to be the Supreme Governess of the Kingdom, though not under the Title
of Queen: so that I think you can find nothing in this transaction that can
support your Notion of Vacancy.


F. Pray give me leave to answer what you have now said, before you proceed
farther; first I cannot excuse neither King Stephen for taking the Crown, nor
the Bishops and Great men that set it on his Head, from perjury and injustice;
since the Emperess Maud had been before in a Common Council of the whole
Kingdom, declared the Lawful Successor, and that Fealty had been sworn to her
as such: All that I insist upon in this affair is this; that Quod furi non
deb^t, factum valet. And though this ought not to have been done, yet when once
done did stand good; and therefore if whilst the Throne was vacant, King
Stephen by the Election and Consent of the Bishops and Great Men of England was
placed therein; he was there looked upon as true, and legal King as long as he
lived: And this was the reason why the Emperess never took upon her the Title
of Queen of England, no not when she had taken King Stephen prisoner; and one
would have thought might have justly done it as a Conqueress: But yet she
forbore it, because that Title was not then to be taken without the consent of
the Great Council of the Kingdom; which I cannot find she ever held, her party
being not great enough to make one: And though I cannot deny, but that she
might in some particulars exercise some prerogatives of Royal Power; yet this
was only upon a pretense of her being Elected and Styled by this Title of Lady
of the English, in a Synod of the Clergy at Winchester, by the procurement of
Henry the then Bishop of that See, and the Popes Legate, who was now turned
against his brother King Stephen. For she was never generally received nor
owned as Queen, nor did she ever exercise those great prerogatives of Sovereign
Power, viz. Calling of Great Councils, making of Laws, raising of Taxes, or
Coining Money.

But whereas you represent King Stephen to have been Elected but by a very
small party of the Bishops and Noblemen of England; yet it is very much to be
doubted, whether William of Malmesbury (who Dedicated his History to Robert
Earl of Gloucester King Stephens greatest Enemy) being no friend to his Title,
is to be altogether credited in this matter. For Henry of Huntington, (who
lived not long after) tells us expressly; P. 386.
that, Omnes qui Sacramentum juraverant tam Praesules quam Consules and
Principes assensum Stephano praebutrunt and hominium fecerunt: And it is also
as certain that the Earls of Gloucester and Chester (the two greatest men of
England) did then likewise swear Allegiance to him, and own his Title, though
they afterward revolted from him again; Yet could they do nothing considerable
against him, till his own Brother the Bishop of Winchester revolted also from
him; upon pretense that the King had violated the Rights of the Church. And
though it is true that after the Empresses departure out of England, Duke Henry
her Son came over and prosecuted the War against King Stephen; yet could it not
be in his own, but his Mothers Right, who was then alive; Nor could the
agreement you mention, be made between the King and the Duke as having then a
right to the Crown in his own Person, since we read of no concession the
Empress his Mother had made to him of it: And therefore whatever Title Henry
could claim thereunto. Upon the death of King Stephen it was wholly due to this
Kings adopting him for his Son, Vid. Hen. Hunt. p. 395. Richard de Hagulstad.
Col. 314. Ioh. de Hag. p. 282.
and declaring him his Successor upon condition, that he himself should enjoy
the Crown during his life, which agreement was solemnly confirmed and ratified,
and that by Oath. in a full Assembly of all the Bishops, Lords and great men of
the Kingdom: For Ordericus Vitalis in his Annals, (p. 989.) Is very express in
the manner of this great Transaction; in these words: Sic tamen in
praesentiarum ipse Rex and Caeteri Potentes Sacramento ^irmarent quod Dux post
mortem Regis, si tempore eum superviveret, pacifice, and a^^que cont^ad^ctione
Regnum haberet; therefore as long as the Empress Maud lived (who died after her
Son King Henry's coming to the Crown,) '^is plain he could have no Hereditary
Right to it, notwithstanding what Matthew Paris, and Matthew Westminster (who
lived long after these Transactions, have said to the contrary) and therein are
to be looked upon as Authors that speak their own sense, rather than that of
the Writers of those times.


M. I confess what you have urged in this matter concerning Duke Henry's being
admitted as Heir of the Kingdom during the Life of his Mother the Empress Maud
seems to the purpose, and there could be nothing said against it, but that this
was done by the Concession of the Empress her self, who surrendered all her
pretentions to her Son, though we have no particular account of it, or else
(which is more likely in my opinion) that the Government of Women being then
unknown in England and Normandy, and consequently odious to the English and
Norman Nobility, and for which reason chiefly they had before set this Empress
aside, they thought they did in effect perform their Oath to her, when they
acknowledged her Title in her Son Duke Henry, who is said by the Historians of
those times to have succeeded Stephen Iure Haereditario, which could not at all
agree with your notion of his receiving his Title from the Consent or Election
of the great Council.

But I shall pass over this, and come to your next instance of the Vacancy of
the Throne, which you pretend to have been upon the Death of King Henry the II.
Now your only argument to prove this is, that King Richard, though his Eldest Son
alive, was only called Duke of Normandy, and never King of England till after
his Coronation; but whoever will but consider the circumstances of this matter,
will find that he was indeed owned for King of England, before his pretended
Election or Coronation; for before his coming into England to be Crowned, Rocer
Hoveden tells us, P. 373.
That every Freeman of the whole Kingdom, by the Command of his Mother Queen
Elianor, swore, quod fideni portabit Regi Angliae Richardo Regis Hen. filio,
which plainly shows, that he was then by common intendment looked upon as King
before his Coronation; and though I confess that this very Author also relates
that all the Estates of the Kingdom being assembled at London, by whose Council
and Assent the said Duke was Consecrated and Crowned King of England; and
though Ralph de Diceto, then Dean of St. Paul's (who in the Vacancy of that
Church then supplied the Office of the Bishop at King Richard's Coronation)
has this passage, Col. 647.
Comes itaque Pictavorum Richardus hereditario jure praemovendus in Regem, post
tam cleri, quam populi solemnem and debitam electionem involutas est triplici
Sacramento, etc. Now what can this solemn and due election here signify? Or
what can it mean farther than that Richard being King by Hereditary Right, was
so owned and recognized by the Clergy and Laity?


F. I desire I may reply to this before you proceed farther. I confess what you
say about the Empress Maud's surrender of her Right to her Son Duke Henry would
be considerable, if you had any Authorities from our Ancient Historians to
support it, but since you have not, I look upon it as no better than a mere
surmise of those of your opinion, that the Crown was then enjoyed by an
Hereditary Right without any consent or election of the people; and so likewise
is your other fancy, that because Women were then looked upon as incapable to
Govern, therefore the Bishops and great men of the Kingdom, supposed they had
sufficiently performed their Oath of Allegiance to her by acknowledging her Son
Duke Henry for the right Heir of the Crown; now if this had been so, pray tell
me to what purpose King Henry I. (Father to the Empress) should have made all
the Estates of England swear fealty to his Daughter, if a Woman had been then
looked upon as incapable to Govern? or to what purpose should the Clergy in the
Council at Winchester choose this Empress as the King's Daughter, Lady both of
England and Normandy, Hov. p. 106.
as William of Malmesbury tells us expressly that they did, and that he was
present at it? or how could the great Council of the Kingdom believe that they
had sufficiently satisfied their Oath to the Daughter in conferring the
Allegiance that was due to her upon her Son? I am sure no Heiress of the Crown
would look upon that as a good performance of their Oath at this day; when you
can answer me these queries, I shall be of your opinion in this point; but till
then I beg your pardon.

But as to what you say against the Vacancy of the Throne upon the Death of
King Henry the II. till King Richard was Elected and Crowned, I desire no
better Authority to the contrary than those very Authors you have now cited for
your opinion; for first Hoveden in the very place you have quoted him, says,
That the Duke was to be Crowned King by the Council and As^^nt of all the
Parties there present; now if I understand any thing of Grammar or Sense, he
was not King before, and therefore needed their Assent to make him so; likewise
in the next quotation from Ralph De Diceto, the Duke is said Hereditario jure
promovendus in Regem, which words being in the Future Tense, show he was not
then, but was to be promoted to that dignity; now if his Hereditary Right alone
could have done it, then to what purpose are all these words aforegoing? so
that though this Right gave him the fair pretense to succeed to the Crown, yet
it is plain from both the Authors you have quoted, that he was not so till
after the due Consent and Election of the Clergy and People, so that after, all
your questions, (what can this solemn and due Election signify? or what can it
mean farther, than that Richard being King by an Hereditary Right was so owned
and recognized by the Clergy and Laity?) will receive a very easy answer from
what has been already said, till you can show me out of any Dictionary that
Consilium and Assensus (which are the words of Hoveden) and the words Solemnis
and debita electio, ever signified an owning, or recognition of an Hereditary
Right.

I confess the only color you have for your interpretation of those words in
Hoveden which you have now cited of Queen Elianors making every Freeman of the
Kingdom swear Fealty to Richard King of England, as to their Liege Lord; from
whence you would infer, that by common intendment of Law he was looked upon
King of England before he was Crowned, and consequently there could be no
Vacancy of the Throne: now admit that he was commonly called King before he was
Crowned, or that the Queen his Mother would make the People swear to him as
such, yet that could not make him so, since the same Historians also tell us,
that Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury, and William Earl Marshall made the
people of England take a like Oath to Earl John as their Lord, (not King)
immediately after the death of King Richard his Brother, and yet I suppose you
will not affirm that their swearing Fealty to him as their Superior Lord, made
him King, or gave him a just Title to the Crown; and I desire you or any
indifferent man to tell me which was Hoveden's opinion, whether this swearing
Fealty was a sufficient Declaration of his ^eing King, or else all those other
expressions which signify the contrary, when immediately before his Coronation
he only calls it ducem Richar^m qui Coronandus erat in Regem, which I think is
as plain a distinction, of his being a Duke before he was Crowned, and a King
afterward, as words can make.


M. I see it is in vain to urge this point any longer, and therefore I shall
proceed to your next instance of the Vacancy of the Throne, after the death of
King Richard until King John was placed therein: now though it is certain that
this Prince was an Usurper, upon his Nephew Duke Arthur, yet whether he was
ever Elected in a Common Council of the Bishops, Earls and Barons of the
Kingdom, is very doubtful. But suppose he were, it was done wrongfully, and to
the prejudice of Arthur Duke of Britain, the right Heir to the Crown, who being
young and a stranger, it is no wonder if he were put by, and his Uncle who was
a man and better acquainted with England, and having the Interest of the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and most of the great men were of his party, and yet
for all that Hoveden, who was alive at this time, speaks not a word of his
being Elected, but only that upon his coming into England he was received by
the Nobility, and Crowned by Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury; so that there is
not one word there of any Election by, but only a submission from the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal to King John; and a recognition that he was their King:
nor indeed could he need it if it be true what the same Author tells us. That
when King Richard despar'd of Life, Hov. f. 449.
he devised to John his Brother, the Kingdom of England, and all his other
Lands, and caused all those that were present to do him Fealty; and this is
related by Hoveden, in all probability an Eye Witness of these transactions.

So that the first Author we find to mention any thing of the particulars of
this pretended Election is M^tthew Paris, who has given us the Speech which the
Archbishop made at this supposed Election, Matt. Paris f. 197.
and also reciting the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls and Barons, and all others
who ought to be at his Coronation; the Archbishop standing in the middle of
them, said thus, Hear all of you, your Discretion shall know, that no man has
right to succeed in this Kingdom, unless, after seeking God, he be unanimously
chosen by the University of the Kingdom (that is, those that are here said to
meet at London) the rest of the Speech needs no repeating, only he lays it down
for Law (which I think was never heard of before) That if any of the Progeny of
the dead King did excel others, they ought more readily to consent to the
Election of him; and so upon this Speech made in behalf of Earl John, and full
of a great deal of fulsom slattery, he was declared King.

But to let you see what a sort of Man this Arch bishop Hubert was, here see
what the same Author tells us in the same place, that being asked afterward,
why he said these things? Ibid.
answered, That he guested, and was thought ascertained by certain Prophecies
that John would bring the Kingdom and Crown into great Confusion; and
therefore, lest he he might have too much liberty in doing, he affirmed, he
ought to come in by Election and not by Hereditary Succession. Now though this
Learned Doctrine of the Arch bishop asserts a right of Election in the
Convention of Bishops, Earls, Barons, etc. yet by his own answer when he was
asked why he said these things, it clearly discovers it to be only a design and
artifice in the Archbishop, to cause them to set up, and make John King: and in
which also he denies any such right of Election, but since Hoveden, nor any
other of our ancient historians make mention of this Election but only of his
Coronation, and the Bishops, Earls and Barons assisting at it, not giving their
consents to it, it may very well be, that that story of an Election and this
Speech of Arch bishop Hubert might be only an invention of Matthew Paris, or
rather of Roger of Wendover from whom he took most of his History: but that
this doctrine of the Archbishop concerning the Election of our Kings, if meant
according to the modern understanding of it, was then new. Gervase a Monk of
Canterbury in the year 1122. who also speaking of the Coronation of Henry the
First, says, it was manifest and known almost to all men, that the King's of
England were only obliged, and bound to God for the possession of the Kingdom,
and to the Church of Canterbury for their Coronation, Col. 1338. N. 30.
manifestum est autem and omnibus fire notum; Reges Angliae soli Deo obligari
and teneri ex ipsius regni adeptione and Ecclesiae Cantuariensi ex Coronatione.

But that King John was looked upon as an Usurper is very certain, since
besides some of the honest English Nobility, that took Duke Arthurs part, the
King of France did also make War upon King John upon his Nephews account,
because he looked upon him as true Heir to the Crown, and therefore when K.
John had privately made away his said Nephew in prison, the K. of France
summoned him as Duke of Normandy, and Peer of France, to answer for the Murder
in an Assembly of the Peers of France at Paris, where for his refusing to
appear, he was condemned to death and his Dukedom of Normandy declared
for^eited to the King of France.


F. I confess you have said as much as can be, to prove that King John had no
Hereditary Right to the Crown, nor was so solemnly Elected to it (as Matthew
Paris relates) but yet for all this, I think I may very justly oppose all that
you have now said upon this Head; for in the first place, it was then very much
disputed (as it has been also since that time) if an Elder Brother died and
left a Son a M^nor, whether his Younger Brother or the Son should succeed; for
though the People of Anjou and those of Guienne owned Duke Arthur for their
Prince, yet the States of Normandy were of another mind, and as well by virtue
of King Richard's Testament, he was immediately after his Death invested with
that Dukedom, nor was he then at all opposed in it by the King of France,
though Suprea^ Lord of the Fee, and as for England besides his Brothers
Testament, whereby he left him Heir of all his Territories; it was also then
generally held in England as most consonant to the Ancient English Saxon Law of
Succession, that the Uncle should succeed to the Crown before the Nephew,
therefore it is no wonder if Duke Arthur found so small a party here, not any
Bishop, Earl or Baron (as I read of) owning his Title, and as for the King of
France it is also as certain, that he did at first own King John for lawful
King of England, and Duke of Normandy, and entered into a Treaty of Peace, and
made a League with him as such; though it is true that afterward, when he had
a mind to pick a quarrel with that King, he then set up Duke Arthur's Title;
And though this Duke was made away in the beginning of King John's Reign, yet
did not the King or Peers of France ever take any notice of it, till about
twelve or thirteen years after, when he had now unjustly Conquered all
Normandy, and almost all that Kings other Territories in France, and then
wanting a Title to keep them, he began this Prosecution you mention against
him, and upon his non appearance he was condemned unheard; but that the King of
France himself, and all the great men of that Kingdom did look upon him to have
been lawful King of England, appears by that Speech, Fol. 236.
which Matthew Paris relates to have been made after King John's Deposition by
the Barons of England, by a Knight whom Prince Lewis of France had made his
Procurator, to treat with the Popes Legate about his coming over hither; where,
when he had recited that King John had been condemned by his Peers for the
Death of his Nephew Arthur, and that he had been also for his great cruelties
and other wickedness Deposed by the Barons of England; and farther reciting
that the said King, without the assent of his Nobility had resigned his Kingdom
to the Pope to hold it of him, at an Annual Tribute of a thousand marks, (the
rest I will give you in Latin, because you your self shall translate it,) etsi
Coronam Angliae sine Baronibus alicui dare non potuit, potuit tamen dimittere
tam* quam statim cum resignaverit, Rex esse desiit, and Regnum, sine Rege
vacavit, vacans itaque Regnum sine Baronibus ordinari non debuit, etc. so that
you may see that by the order of Prince Lewis, and the allowance of the King of
France himself, every one of our opinions are maintained for good; first, That
King John was before the resignation of his Crown to the Pope, true and lawful
King. Secondly, That by that resignation to the Pope, he did dismiss or
abdicate his Right to it, (for so I suppose the word demittere Regnum, is here
to be rendered.) Thirdly, That upon this dismission of the Crown, the Throne
became Vacant. Fourthly, That upon this Vacancy the Kingdom could not be
conferred without the consent of the Barons* that is, the great Council of the
Kingdom.

But let King John's Right to the Crown have been what it would, it is certain,
that he could not take it upon him, until such time as this Great Council had
both heard and allowed his Title, and that this was in the nature of an
Election, notwithstanding his Brothers Will, appears by that account which
Roger Wendover and Matthew Paris have given us of it, which though Hoveden and
other Writers have omitted, yet does it not therefore follow, that this was all
the pure invention of Roger of Wendover or Matthew Pari^, since the former, he
living near that time, might write from the relation of ^o^e that were then
present; and as for the latter, I look upon him, though a Monk, as a man of too
great integrity to invent any thing of his own Head; and though I confess the
account that Archbishop Hubert gives, why he put King John's Title rather upon
Election than Succession, looks very suspicious; since the Archbishop must
thereby have made himself a Knave and a Hypocrite, and seems also to contradict
what Matthew Paris had before said, viz. That all those that heard his Speech,
dares not so much as doubt of these things, knowing that the Archbishop had
not th^s judged of this matter without cause; and therefore I grant that this
part of the relation concerning the Archbishops vindicating of himself, for
thus giving his Judgment, might be a Story commonly taken up, and being told to
this Author, was by him inserted in his History at a time when I grant the
Crown of England began to be thought successive by reason that King Henry the
III. had succeeded as the eldest Son of his Father, though he was no^ for all
that admitted without Election as I shall prove by and by; but that King John
was made King by Election, though he claimed it from his Brother by successi^n
likewise appears from his own Charter still to be seen at this day, in the
Archbishops Archives at Lambeth, wherein he recites, that he came to the
Crown, Vi. Charta moderationis feodi magni sigilli.
Iure hereditario and mediante tam Cleri quam populi unanimi consensu and
favore: where you see plainly that he derives his Title from the consent and
favor of the Clergy, and People, as well as his own Hereditary Right.


M. Notwithstanding what you have now said, I cannot agree with you, that by
these words you have now cited from this Charter, is to be understood any
formal Election of the Clergy and People; but that this unanimous consent
mentioned in it, was rather their acknowledgment of his Title, and submission
to him, than any thing else; for according to Hoveden's relation of his coming
to the Crown (which I think the most exact extant) the whole Nation submitted,
and swore Fealty to him against all men, before he came over into England.

But as for his Son Henry the III. it is much more plain that he succeeded by
Succession, and not by Election, as being the Eldest Son of the Late King his
Father, as appears by the relation of his Coronation in Matthew Westminster,
Fol. 277.
who tells us thus. Henricus Iohannis primogenitus in Regem inunctus and
solemniter Coronatus est; and tho* from the Speech which was made to the Clergy
and Nobility that was then at Gloucester by the Earl Mareshall, S. D. p. 13.
it is pretended, that Henry was Elected, yet I dare say if any one do but
impartially consider the tenor of it, he will find that the design of it was
rather to persuade all those then present to return to their duty and
acknowledge Him for their King, whom God and Nature had designed for that great
charge; for the Earl begins his discourse to 'em thus, (as it is in Knighton)
Ecce Rex Vester, (which certainly could not then be true if an Election was
necessary to make him such) but amongst the rest of his Arguments he urges
this, Col. 2426.
Hunc igitur libeat, regem dicere cui ipsum Regnum debetur, you ought to choose
him to whom the Kingdom is due, (which surely it can be to none if it be not
Hereditary) and what puts all out of doubt that the Kingdom was not then (and
if not then I am sure never since) Elective, is the answer of Hubert de Burgh
to Lewis when he summoned him to deliver up Dover Castle to him, since his
Master for whose use and service he held it was dead; but see his answer, If my
old Master, says he, he dead, he has left behind him Sons and Daughters to
succeed him. A thing he never would have asserted, had he not thought there had
been a Divine Right somewhere else than in the People.


F. Before I speak any thing to King Henry the III ds. Election; give me leave
to reply to what you have said against the express words of King John's Charter;
for if Favor and Consensus does not signify somewhat more than a bare
acknowledgement and submission, I understand neither English nor Latin. Nor is
this any answer to the express testimony of Roger of Wendover, and Mat. Paris
to the contrary. And as for Roger Hoveden, he does not say he was not Elected,
but only omits the manner of it, as diverse other Historians do: So that (at the
best) this is but a negative Argument: And yet that Hoveden himself did not
look upon him as King even after the whole Nation had sworn Fealty to him
before his Coronation, may appear from this passage a little before his coming
over: W^^ielmus Rex Scotorum misit nuncios ad Iohannem Ducem Normandiae, etc.
Where you see he calls him no more than Duke of Normandy.

But to come to the Election of his Son Prince Henry; if this be all you have
to prove a Divine right of Succession in Henry the IIId. I doub. it will do you
but little service; for according to your own principles it must have been
lodged some where else than in this Prince: For when King John his Father died
Eleanor the Sister of Duke Arthur was then alive, and died not till the 25 th.
year of King Henrys Reign a close Prisoner in Bristol Castle, as Matthew Paris
relates. Mat. Paris F. 574.
So that it is apparent he could have no such Divine Hereditary Right as you
suppose; and therefore perhaps his Father, to strengthen his Title, and to
recommend him the more to the Peoples savor, Mat. Paris. F. 288. Mat. Westminster.
F. 276.
appointed him his Successor by his last Testament. And Matthew Paris, and
Matthew Westminster tell us, that when King John died Henricum Primegenitum
suum, Regni constituit haeredem. So that it seems there was then no such
Hereditary Right, for if it had, what need had there been of this Testament?

But for all this Divine Right I do not find that this poor Princess Eleanor
had any of the Bishops or great Lords to take her part, but all the dispute
then was at this great Convention at Gloucester; whether they should abjure
Prince Lewis, whom most of them had before chosen for their Lord, and adhere to
Prince Henry, P. 145.
there present before them, as Matthew Paris tells us: Erat autem ta tempestate
inter Optimates Angliae fluctuatio maxima, cui se Regi committe^ent; Iuvenine
Henrico, An Domino Ludovico? So that it seems by the relation our Historians
give us of this matter, it was not from any great sense that the Clergy and
Nobility had of the justness of Prince Henry's Title, that made them agree to
choose him King; but the hatred they then bore to Prince Lewis when they found
he had broken his contract with them, and put all the strong places of the
Kingdom in the hands of French men; and treated the English Nobility with scorn
and contempt: And therefore no wonder if they preferred an innocent young
Prince of their own Nation, who had never been guilty of his Fathers faults;
before a Stranger whose fraudulent dealing with them, they had found not to
answer their expectations; and therefore Mat. Westminster tells us, That Omnes
nobiles Terrae in brevi ipsi Iuveni Regi Hemico, qui nihil culpae versus tos
merueras fideliter adhaeserunt.

But to prove farther that this King came in by Election and not by Succession,
appears, by what our Historians relate concerning the manner of it. Henry de
Knyghton in his Chronicle tells us, Col.
that on the Feast of St. Simon and Jude, Henry Son of King John in Regem
erigitur viribus, and industria Gualonis Pap^e Legati; which plainly shows that
he was not King before; and I desire no better an authority than your own
Author Matthew Westminster, who says that he was in Regem inunctus, anointed to
be King, which shows, that he thought him not so before his Coronation; and
though I grant Mat. Paris makes the Earl Marshal to begin his Speech with those
words, Ecce Rex vester, as you relate them, yet this was no more than an
allusion to that place in St. John chapter 19. Behold your King* it being usual in
those days to begin their Speeches with a Text of Scripture. So that the Earl
did not intend to be understood literally, for then he should have in this
Speech contradicted what he had said before; for though to prepossess their
minds, he says of the young Prince there present, Behold your King: Yet it is
plain, that how much soever he thought the Kingdom his right, yet that it could
not be conferred upon him without their choice; as appears by these words,
which you your self have made use of, viz. You ought to choose him to whom the
Kingdom is due. And it is evident by the assent, which the whole Assembly gave
to the reasons declared by him in this Speech, that it was their choice alone
that made him King; their Votes being given in these words, Fiat Rex; which had
been altogether needless, had they looked upon him as King already: And
therefore the Speech of Hubert de Burgh, which you mention; may very well be
reconciled to this Hypothesis of supposing a necessity of an Election and
Coronation to confer a full and legal right in those times: For when he said, "
That the King if dead, had yet left behind him Children who ought to succeed
him. This, if strictly taken, is altogether false; for Eleanor the true Heiress
of the Crown (according to your rule of Succession) was then alive: But if
taken in a limited sense is true, that is, the Children ought to succeed if
the great Counsel of the Nation thought fit; without whose consent, though they
might have Ius ad rem, yet had they not Ius in re: This Election and Coronation
being then looked upon as Livery and Seisen at this day is to an Estate in Fee,
without which, though the writings are sealed and delivered, the Land will not
pass.

To conclude, I pray answer me that question I have so long put, though without
any reply, viz. why, before this Election and Coronation was performed, none of
those Princes that came to the Crown by your supposed Right of Succession, are
called by any higher Title than Dukes of Normandy, or Earls of Poictou? So that
from what has been here said, I think it plainly appears, that no less than
seven of the eight Princes from your William the Conqueror (reckoning him for
one) to King Henry the III. have owed their Title to the Crown, not to any
right of Succession; but either to the Election of the People alone, or else to
the will or designation of the last King, confirmed by the general consent of
the People given thereunto; and without which it would not have been good
according to the ancient custom of the English, Saxons before your Conquest;
where besides the Testament of the King deceased, there was also required the
consent or Election of the great Council. So that you see here was no
alteration made in the form of our choosing our Kings after your Conquest from
what it was before; for no less than seven or eigh^ descents; and when you can
answer this, I shall then come over to your opinion.


M. In answer to your Question, I shall not deny but that all our Historians
give all the Kings you mention no higher Titles than Dukes of Normandy, or
Earls of Poictou before their Coronations; which though I suppose they might do
from a foolish superstition of that Age, which made them fancy that none were
properly to be called Kings until they had been Anointed, and solemnly Crowned
by a Bishop; yet that they looked upon them as Kings indeed, appears in that
they ordered and disposed of all public Affairs, conferred Offices and
Bishoprics as if they were lawful Kings before your pretended Election, or the
ceremony of their Coronation, and also had Ambassadors sent to them from
Foreign Princes; as appears from your own Quotation out of Hoveden: Of those
that were sent by the King of Scots to King John before he was crowned, though
it is true he there styles him no more than Duke of Normandy: And this also may
further appear by that passage I have cited out of the same Author; that King
Richard had Fealty Sworn to him as King of England by all the Freemen of
England before he was Crowned, and you your self acknowledge the same Oath to
be taken by the same persons to King John before he came over to take the Crown.

And Lastly, To make it yet plainer that there was no Vacancy or Inter-regnum
in all these Successions you have mentioned; consult what Chronologer you
please, or look into the most ancient Tables of the Succession of our Kings of
England, or into our old Printed Statutes or Law Books; and you will still find
the Reign of the Suceeding Prince to commence from the Death of his next
Predecessor without any Vacancy or Inter-regnum between. And these I think to
be a great deal surer marks of their succeeding to their Royal Dignity, by a
pretense at least of a right of Inheritance from their Father or Brother;
rather thau this fancy of yours that you lay so much stress upon: That because
of their not being styled Kings by our Historians till their pretended Election
and Coronation was over, they were not so indeed. And I hope this may serve to
satisfy this mighty Objection.


F. I must beg your pardon if I still declare my self not satisfied with your
answers, for though I grant, that if this Argument of the Historians not
stiling them Kings, had stood single without any thing else to support it, that
your answers might have signified something. But if you please better to
consider it, you will find that of these Princes (taking in William your
Conqueror) claimed, as your self must acknowledge, not by any Hereditary right,
but by the Testament of the deceased Predecessor: and if so, where was your
settled right of Succession by right of Blood? Secondly, It is likewise as
plain, that these four were never admitted or acted in England as lawful Kings,
till those Testaments were confirmed by the Election of the Great Council,
before whom they declared their Rights: And till this was done, how the Throne
could be otherwise than Vacant, I cannot for my Life conceive. But as for two
of them, (whom you call downright Usurpers,) ( viz.) Henry the I* and King
Stephen; it is certain they could have no color of a Title till their
Elections, and if not till then, and that neither your next Heir of the Crown,
nor yet they themselves took upon them the Title of Kings; Was not this a
Vacancy of the Throne in the mean time? Suppose that time to have been but for
the space of three or four days, as it was after the death of King William
Rufus.

In the next place pray consider, that upon the death of every one of these
Princes we do not find the Great Council of the Kingdom, which still assembled
to Elect the Successor, was ever called in their names, but met by their own
Inherent Authority; for how could they be summoned by the King before he took
that Title upon him, which as your self are forced to acknowledge, he never did
till after his Coronation.

Lastly, Pray remember farther, that whoever was thus Elected and Confirmed by
the Great Council, whether he was next Heir by Blood or not, was always looked
upon as Lawful King, and has always passed for such in all our Chronicles and
Laws, and not those that claimed as the right Heirs by Blood; and if this be
not sufficient to prove that these Princes had no true and complete right to
the Crown till this Election was past, I desire you would show me my mistake.

These things premised I think it will be very easy to reply to every one of
those answers you pretend to have made to my Query. Therefore as to your First,
That they were really Kings before their Election or Coronation, because they
ordered and disposed of all public affairs I do not deny; but that some of
them, who Succeeded either as Heirs by Testament, or by right of Blood, might
do many public Acts, by reason that they looked upon themselves as Heirs
Apparent to the Kingdom, and whom the Great Council I grant could not without
high Injustice set aside, and upon this account they might also receive
Ambassadors from Foreign Princes, in Affairs relating to Peace or War, that
they might know how to deal with them, or what to expect from them, after they
were settled in the Throne; yet that they sent not to them by the Title of
Kings, appears by that passage I cited out of Hoveden; but I defy you to show
me any one instance that any of these Princes above mentioned ever took upon
them to exercise any of those Prerogatives of Sovereign Power, such as making
War or Peace, Enacting Laws, Coining of Money, before their Election and
Coronation; which though in some of them was done both at once, yet in others
it appears plainly to have been at different times, and not upon the same day,
as it happened in the case of Henry I. whose Election was at Winchester upon
Saturday, and his Coronation was not till the next day; as also that of Henry
the 3 d. whose Election was upon St. Simon and Iude's Day, but his Coronation
not till the day after.

But as for your next reply, which I grant to have been the strongest you have
made, that King Richard I. and King John had both of them Homage and Fealty
sworn to them, as Kings by all the Freemen of England, before they were
Crowned; this were a material argument if it were made out, as I think it
cannot: for in the first place, the bare swearing of Homage and Fealty to a
Prince, does not make him immediately King, though I grant it might give him in
that Age a right to be looked upon as Heir Apparent to the Crown: thus Henry
the I. made all the Lords and Great Men of England to swear Homage and Fealty
to Prince William his Son, and so after his being drowned, to the Empress Maud
his Daughter, which was the true reason why she looked upon her self afterward
as Heiress to the Crown; so likewise King Stephen a little before his Death (at
the great Council I have mentioned) caused all the great men of the Kingdom to
Swear Homage and Fealty to Henry Duke of Anjou, as his immediate Successor: so
that you see this swearing of Fealty was in those days often performed, before
the persons that received it were Kings indeed; and so I believe it was done in
both those instances you now give me; for though I grant, that Hoveden (as you
cite him) relates that Homage to be made, and Fealty sworn to Richard the I. by
the Title of King; yet is it very much to be doubted whether this was not only
by a Prolepsis, or perhaps a slip of the Pen in this Author; since he writ this
History long after King Richard's Death, and therefore without we had the very
words of this Oath, there is no certain conclusion to be drawn from thence; and
I think we may as well credit the Chronicle of Abbot Brompton, who likewise
lived about the same time and recites all this affair almost in the same words
with those in Hoveden, but there the Oath does not run exactly in the same
words as in this Author, but thus, quod unusquesque liberorum hominum totius
regni Iuraret quod sidem portaret Domino Richardo, Domino Angliae filio Domini
Regis Henrici, etc. ficut legio Domino suo contra omnes mortales, where you see
the Oath is not made to King Richard as King, but only as Lord of England, and
that there is a great deal of difference between those two Titles not only in
name but in Substance, I have already proved when I spoke of the Empress Maud's
stiling her self Domina, and not Regina Anglorum, though she had Homage rendered,
and Fealty sworn to her, not only in her Fathers Life time, but also after her
coming over again into England, in the Reign of King Stephen, by all that owned
her Title, and that Hoveden himself meant no more than this, appears by that
passage I have already taken notice of ( viz.) that Hubert Archbishop of
Canterbury, P. 793.
and William the Earl Marshal being sent over to keep the Peace, made all the
men of the Kingdom, as well of Cities as Buroughs, with the Earls, Barons, and
Freeholders, Iurare fidelitatem and pacem Iohanni Normanorum duci, filio
Henrici regis, filii Matildis Imperatricis contra omnes homines; where you see
the Oath is taken to him only as Duke of Normandy, and not as King at all; and
therefore you are mistaken to say that Hoveden mentions the like Oath to be
taken to Duke John, as it was before to King Richard.

But I come now to answer your last argument whereby you would prove that there
was no Vacancy or inter-regnum in this Age, which is, because that our
Chronicles and Tables of Successions do still begin the Reigns of each King,
from the day of the Decease of his Predecessors, without any Vacancy or
Inter-regnum between them; to which I reply, That none of our ancient
Chronicles or Historians reckon thus as I know of, but rather acknowledge a
Vacancy of the Throne to have been between each Succession; and as for the
Tables of the Succession of our Kings, when you can show me one more ancient
than the time from which I grant the Crown of England began to be looked upon
as a Successive, and not an Elective Kingdom, I shall be of your opinion: but
admit it were so, since the Succession to the Crown has been for the most part
mixed, partly Elective and partly Hereditary, our Kings might, to maintain the
honor of their Title, still reckon their coming to the Crown immediately from
the death of the last Predecessor, though there has been oftentimes some days and
weeks between the one and the other, as I have now proved, and shall prove
farther by and by, which being but small fractions of time, are not taken
notice of in the whole account, which may be notwithstanding very agreeable to
Law, for both my Lords Dyer and Anderson in their Reports do agree, That the
King, who is Heir or Successor, may Write and begin his Reign the same day that
his Progenitor or Predecessor dies.


M. It will be to no purpose to dispute this point with you any longer, since I
must confess that there were so many Usurpations in the Succession of most of
those first Kings after the Conquest, that it is a difficult matter to prove
any settled rule of Succession to have been then observed in England; and
therefore I only desire you to take notice, that though it is true, King Henry
the 3 d was an Usurper, for the first Twenty five years of his Reign, yet for
all the rest of it, which was near Thirty more, he was a true and lawful
Prince, for Elianor his Cousin being dead in Prison without issue, and there
being no more of that Line left, her Right wholly devolved upon King Henry, and
he and his Children are to be from henceforth reckoned to have a true
Hereditary Right to the Crown without any Competitors.

And that this was so, will plainly appear from the Testament of King Henry the
3 d. (a Copy of which I have by me) where though he Bequeaths a great many of his
Jewels to the Queen, and a great deal of Money to charitable uses; yet for this
Kingdom, and other Territories in France and Ireland, he makes no Bequest of
them at all, either to Prince Edward his Eldest, or to Edmund his youngest Son,
though his Father King John had bequeathed the Kingdom to him, by his Will, (as
you have already showed) and what could be the reason of this? But that there
being now no Title left, to contest with his Son, there was no need of it; and
therefore though Prince Edward was absent in the Holy Land when his Father Died,
yet a great Council being called in his Name at London, he was there only
recognized and acknowledged to be their natural Liege Lord and Lawful Successor
to his Fathers Throne; F. 49.
pray read the words as they are in Walsingham's Life of this King, Edwardum
absentem Dominum suum Leigium recognoverunt, paternique successorem honoris
ordinaverunt: we meet not here with any thing like Election, which no doubt we
should not fail to do, if there had been any such thing practiced.

So likewise upon this King's death, his Son King Edward the 2 d. by the like
Right succeeded as Heir to his Father; and though this Prince by suffering
himself to be too much guided by his Minions, fell at length into such
Arbitrary and Irregular courses, as procured him the hatred and ill will of his
Subjects to that Degree, that by the Disloyal and Ambitious practices of his
Lascivious Queen, he being made Prisoner, a Parliament was called in his name,
who took upon them to Depose him for his misgovernment contrary to all Law and
Right; and though his Son Prince Edward had hitherto joined with his Mother
against his Father, yet is he herein so far to be commended, that though the
Crown was offered him, by Election of the Great Council; yet the same Author
tells us, he swore, that without his Father's consent he would never accept it;
whereupon diverse Messengers or Delegates being dispatched from the Parliament
to the King, then Prisoner at Kenel-worth Castle, who told him what had been
done, and concluded of at London, required him to resign his Crown, and permit
his Son to Reign in his stead; which though with some reluctance he at last
agreed to; and thereupon Prince Edward took the Crown not by Election as you
set forth, but by the cession and resignation of his said Father, as appears by
the account which this King gave of it to the Sheriffs of all the Counties of
England, within a few days after his taking upon him the Crown, B. H. S. p.
381. Rot. Cl. 1. E. 3. P. 1 M. 28. Part of it is also in Walsingham. F. 126. M.
50.
which Writ or Letter is still to be seen among the Roll's in the Tower, and is
also published in Walsingham as a Proclamation, which because it will give very
great light in this matter, I pray now read it at length. Rex. vicecom. Ebor.
Salutem quia Dominus Edwardus nuper Rex Angliae pater noster de communi
confilio and assensu praelatorum Com. Baron. and Alior. Magnat. necnon
Communitat. totius Regni praedict. spontanea voluntate se amovit a Regimine
dicti Regni volens and concedens, quod nos tanquam ipsius primogenitus and
haeres Regni gubernationem and regimen assumamus, nosque ipsius patris nostri
been placito in hac part de consitio and avisamento Praelator Com. Baron
Magnat and Communitat. predict. onnuen^es pubernacula suscepimus dicti Regni;
and fidelitates and Homagia ipsorum Praelitor, and Magnat. recepimu^, ut est
moris, test Rege apud Westmonast. 29. Ian. So that you here see this King
takes no notice of the deposition of his Father, or the Election of himself,
but only that by the Common Council and Assent of the Prelates, Earls, Barons,
etc. The King his Father had by his own free Will. removed himself from the
Government of the Kingdom, and that therefore he had by the good Will of his
said Father, and by Council and Advice of the said Prelates, Earls, etc. taken
the Government of the said Kingdom upon him.

But King Edward the 3 d. being dead, his Grandson Richard the 2 d succeeded
him, having been before recognized by Act of Parliament, as Heir Apparent to
the Crown in his Grandfather's Life Time, immediately upon the Death of his
Father Edward the black Prince; so that he succeeded to the Crown, though an
Infant, and having great and powerful Uncles then alive, and though by his
ruling too Arbitrarily, and being too much governed by Flatterers, be became
hated of his Subjects, and thereupon gave occasion to Henry Duke of Lancaster
(whom he had before banished) to come over and take the Kingdom from him,
without striking a stroke; and having taken the King Prisoner, called a
Parliament in his name, who took upon them most unjustly to Depose King
Richard, though it is true he also made a solemn resignation of it by his own
seeming consent; but it is certain it was forced from him, for fear of worse
usage if he refused it.


F. Pray give me leave to answer what you have now said, before you proceed
farther in this History of the Succession. In the first place I shall not deny,
but that from the Reign of King Edward I. the Crown has been always claimed
(though not constantly enjoyed) by right of Blood; yet that the custom was
otherwise before, I think the Instances I have given from the time of your
Conquest, are more than sufficient; it is likewise as certain that this
Succession by right of Blood, was never settled by any positive Law, and
therefore must be purely derived from that Tacit consent of the People called
Custom. Secondly, That the two Houses of Parliament have often notwithstanding
this claim, placed or fixed the Crown upon the Heads of those Princes whom they
very well knew could have no Hereditary Right to it. Thirdly, That such Princes
have been always obeyed and taken for lawful Kings* all their Laws standing
good as this day without any confirmation by their Successors, though they
pretended to a better Title. Now if I prove every one of these three
propositions, I think the case will be very plain, that though the Crown has
been claimed and often enjoyed by right of blood, yet has it been held near as
often otherwise since that time; so that the Succession to it has been still
declared under the direction and limitation of the Present King, and Parliament.

This being premised, I shall proceed in the next place to answer what you have
said concerning King Edward the first's being only Recognized and not Elected
King by the Parliament, it is plain from this History, that the Great Council
still maintained their an^ient right of assembling upon the death of the King,
and of Judging who should be his Successor, and that without any summons from
him, which will serve to justify (as do all the other instances aforegoing)
that the late Convention meeting, and settling the Crown without any Writs or
Authority derived from King James was no new thing; but that they have therein
done no more than what has been anciently practiced in like cases; and though
('it is true) the words in Walsingham is recognoverunt, yet there is also other
words which seem to intimate, that it was then in the power of the Great
Council whom to declare for lawful Successor; the words are, Paternique
Successorem honoris ordinaverunt, that is, they ordained or decreed him
Successor of his Fathers Dignity, which sure is somewhat more than a bare
Declaration of an undoubted precedent Right, and what power the Great Council
was then looked upon to have in the ordering of this Kingdom appears by that
Writ of Dedimus, for all men's taking the Oaths of Allegiance in the Country,
which is still to be seen in the close Rolls, and begins thus; Quia defuncto
jam celebris memoriae Domino Henrico patre nostro ad nos Regni Gubernaculum
successione Haereditaria Procerum Regni voluntate and fidelitate nobis
praestita sit devolutum, etc. where besides the Hereditary Succession, the good
Will and Fidelity of the Great Men is reckoned as one of the means by which the
Kingdom came to him; and that this course was also observed upon the accession
of his Son Edward the 2 d. to the Crown seems likewise as evident from the same
Author, who tells us in the beginning of the Life of this Prince, that he
succeeded his Father King Edward, non tam jure Hereditario quam unanimi
consensu Procerum and Magnatum; which observation had been altogether needless,
had an unalterable Hereditary Right to the Crown been the settled.

But as to what you say of King Edward the 3 ds. Right, whilst his Father was
Living, to have been wholly due to his resignation, though the place I cited out
of Walsingham be express in this point; yet against this you urge a Writ, or
Declaration, as also a Proclamation of this Kings, wherein he thus sets forth
his Title, viz. That by the Voluntary resignation of King Edward his Father,
and by the Council and Advice of the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, etc. he had
taken upon him the Government of the Kingdom; and consequently that succeeding
immediately upon his said Fathers resignation, there could be no Vacancy of the
Throne; to which I answer, that I do not deny that after this King was once
settled in the Throne, but that he might think it most to his honor, and the
independency of his Title, to rely wholly upon his Right of Succession as
Eldest Son, and Heir without taking any notice of the Parliaments Election of
him; though this be also convertly expressed in these words, which are in this
Writ, and Proclamation, viz. `That consenting to his said Fathers pleasure, he
had taken the Government, de consilio and advisamento Praelator. Com. Baron.
Magnat. and Communitat. praedict. which though you translate by Council and
Advice of the Prelates, Earls, Barons and Commonalty: yet I do suppose that by
consilio is here mean not Council, but Consent, as I have already proved the
word consilium often signifies in our ancient Statutes; for otherwise if this
word must here signify Council, it would be a plain Tautology, for Advice and
Council are the same thing.

But to show you also that there must needs have been a vacancy of the Throne,
either upon the Deposition or Resignation of Edward the 2 d. (take it which way
you will) appears from matter of Fact, for it is plain, that when Prince Edward
refused the Crown upon the Parliaments Electing him, unless his Father would
willingly resign it, he did at their request resign his Title to it, by certain
Commissioners sent down to him to Kenelworth Castle to take it; now that place
being at least two days Journey from London, it is certain there must be as
many days vacancy of the Throne if not more before the said Commissioners could
get to London, and that Prince Edward had agreed to take the Crown upon his
Fathers Resignation; for till then the Throne was Vacant, since till the Prince
had declared his assent to take it, he might have chosen whether he would have
accepted of it or not; as not being satisfied whether his Fathers resignation
were voluntary, and not by constraint. Now if there were a Vacancy of the
Throne in this case, though but for two or three days; it serves to prove the
matter in question as well as if it had been for two years.

So likewise let the Reign of King Henry the IVth. begin either from the
Resignation or Deposition of King Richard the II d. (take it which way you
please) there must have been a Vacancy of the Throne; as appears by the
Parliament Roll still extant. For it is there plain, that after the instruments
of King Richards Resignation and Deposition were solemnly read, that the Throne
continued Void for some space: Till such time as Henry Duke of Lancaster stood
up and made his Claim to it, in that form of words which stands to this day to
be seen upon the Parliament Roll, and that the Arch Bishop of Canterbury taking
the Duke by the hand, had led him to the Throne, and placed him therein.


M. I cannot deny but as you have set forth the matter of fact, there must have
been a Vacancy of the Throne in these two cases; but since the depositions of
both these Kings were contrary to Law, and their resignations extorted from
them by constraint whilst they were in prison; they are neither of them looked
upon as valid, or to be urged as presidents in future times. But however the
Throne might seem then to be Vacant in point of fact, yet in Law it was
otherwise; for Edmund Earl of March ought to have immediately Succeeded upon
the Death or Resignation of King Richard, as being Lineally descended from
Philippa only Daughter and Heir to Lionel Duke of Clarence, Third Son of King
Edward the IIId.

But to let you see that Henry Duke of Lancaster, (as much an Usurper as he
was) yet was so sensible that the Crown could not be then enjoyed by Election,
but by Right of Blood; and that the Parliament also thought themselves in duty
bound to submit to him to whom by Right of Blood the Crown did belong: B. H. S.
p.
Will appear from this Dukes manner of laying claim thereunto: Which, since you
have not particularly mentioned, I will. For no sooner was the Throne Vacant by
the pretended voluntary resignation of King Richard. Vi. Rot. Parl. 10. Hen.
4.20.
but Duke Henry having fortified himself with the sign of the Cross; stood up,
and made his demand of the Crown in his Mother Tongue in this form of words (as
I have extracted them out of the Parliament Roll.) In the Name of the Father,
Son and Holy Ghost.
I Henry of Lancaster challenge this Reawme of Inglonde, and the Corone,
withal the Members and appurtenances; also that I am Descendit by Right Line
of the Blood, coming fro the good Lord King Henry the Third: And thorghe that
Right, that God of his Grace has sent me with the help of my Kyn, and of my
Friends to recover it: The which Reawme was in point to be undon for default of
Governance and undoyng of the good Laws.



And after which Challenge and Claim, (says the Record which I render out of
Latin) as well the Lords Spiritual as Temporal, and all the States there
present being all severally interrogated, what they thought of the aforesaid
Challenge and Claim; the above named States, with all the Commonalty, without
any difficulty or delay unanimously agreed; that the aforesaid Duke should
Reign over them. Where you may see that this whole Parliament admit the Dukes
Claim for good without proceeding to any formal Election of him.

And by virtue of this pretended Right, and Claiming as Heir of Earl Edmund
(Surnamed Croutch-back, Brother to King Edward the Is It.) (whom he falsely
pretended to have been the Eldest Son to King Henry the IIId. and put by for
his Deformity) did not only himself, but also his Son Henry the IVth. and his
Grandson Henry the VIth. (though Usurpers) Succeed as right Heirs to the Crown
till the 39th. year of Henry the VIth. when Richard Duke of York did in a full
parliament lay Claim thereunto; in right of his Mother, being only Sister and
Heir of Edmund Earl of March. And because the Judgment of the Parliament in
this case is very remarkable, pray read this part of it, as it stands recorded
in the Parliament Roll. Whereupon consideration of the Answer, Vi. Rot. Parl.
39. Hen. 6. M. 18.
and Claim of the Duke of York; it was concluded and agreed by all the Lords
that his Title could not be defeated: And therefore for eschewing the great
inconveniences that may ensue; a mean was found to save the Kings Honor and
Estate, and to appease the said Duke if he would: Which was, That the King, (
viz. Henry the VIth.) should enjoy the Crown during Life, the Duke to be
declared the true Heir, and to possess it after his Death, etc. And note that
all this was done after a solemn hearing of all that could be said on both
sides.


F. I confess the matter of fact concerning King Henry the VIth. coming to the
Crown is truly recited by you from the Parliament Roll; yet for all that it
does not follow that the Parliament allowed this Kings seigned and false claim
to be good by their not contradicting it: For though the Record says, That upon
the hearing of this Challenge or Claim, all the Estates of the Kingdom being
then asked their Judgments severally; they declared, that the same States
without any difficulty or delay, unanimously agreed that the said Duke should
Reign over them. For considering the Dukes great Power, it was not safe telling
him to his face, that he had no true Right by Inheritance; therefore they only
declared in general words without expressly denying or affirming his said Claim,
That he should Reign over them: Which words do rather amount to an Election of
him to be King, without declaring what Title he had to be so: And this they
thought they might very well justify, not only for his having delivered them
from the Tyranny of King Richard, but also because they then looked upon it as
their Right not only to Depose the King in case of an apparent violation of the
Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, but also to place in his stead any of the
Blood Royal, though not next Heir by Blood; according to the Message the whole
Parliament had formerly sent to K. Richard in the beginning of his Reign by the
Archbishop of Canterbury and his Uncle the D. of Gloucester; H. Knighton. Col.
2681.
which I gave you at our ninth Meeting (as I remember:) And pray take notice
the words were, Et propinqai rem aliquem de stirpe Regia, loco ejus in
Regnisolio sublimare: Where observe that the words were not the next of Blood,
but some near Kinsman of the Blood Royl.

And though it is true that both King Henry the Vth. and VIth. might both seem
to succeed to the Crown by Right of Blood, yet I do rather attribute their
right of Succession to an Act of Parliament made in the seventh, and confirmed
in the eighth year of Henry the IVth. Vi. 7. Hen. IV. Cap. 2.
whereby the Crown was entailed upon all his Sons by Name, and the Right Heirs
of their Bodies: By virtue of which settlement both Henry the Vth. and VIth
Succeeded thereunto. For if he had thought his own feigned Hereditary Title to
have been sufficient, he would never have troubled himself to have procured the
Crown to be settled upon himself and his Children by Act of Parliament.


M. All this signifies nothing, for I have already sufficiently proved that in
the 39th. year of Henry the VIth. upon a solemn hearing before the Paliament of
the Claim of Richard Duke of York to the Crown, the said Act was set aside, And
it was there expressly declared that the said Dukes Title could no ways be
defeated: And this agreement is still on Record, between Henry the then
possessor of the Crown, and the said Duke (whose Right it was) and the Judgment
of the Parliament was then given in the behalf of proximity of Blood, B. H. S.
p. 386.
as to have always been the foundation and ground of Succession to the Crown of
England; and of taking it from the Son of Henry the VIth, and restoring it to
the Duke of York and his Issue as right Heirs thereof: As appears by the Title
and Pedigree of the said Duke set down at large in the first Article of this
Agreement confirmed by Parliament; that is, by King Henry the VIth. himself,
who was then King de Facto, though not de Iure.


F. I will not deny the matter of fact to be as you have set forth, yet if you
will but please to consider the time when this Declaration and Agreement was
obtained, and the manner how it was done; you will quickly find, that it was
rather got by force and constraint upon that poor Prince Henry the VIth. than
by any real Right the Duke of York had to the Crown, after its being settled for
three Descents in the House of Lancaster.

For the proof of which I desire you in the first place to take notice that at
this time the whole Kingdom was under general discontent, no^ only for the loss
of all our Conquests in France, but also for the great mismanagement of Affairs
at home; by reason of the exorbitant power of the Queen and her two favorites
the Dukes of Somerset and Suffolk; who made the King a mere Cipher, and had
without his consent made away Humphrey Duke of Gloucester (the Kings only Uncle
then living) contrary to Law; so that affairs being in this ill posture, it was
very easy for the Duke of York and the Earl of Warwick, to procure a
sufficient Interest in the Nobility and Great men of the Kingdom, to raise an
Army upon pretense at first, only of reforming the grievances of the Kingdom,
Vi. Grafton's Chronicle.
and bringing the said Dukes of Justice, the issue of which War was, that the
Duke not being strong enough at first to oppose the Kings Forces, was forced to
surrender himself, and to obtain his Pardon, took a Solemn Oath never to Rebel
against the King again; but being afterward Attainted at a Parliament held at
Coventry for new Conspiracies, he then again Rebelled, together with the Earl
of Warwick; and then that King Henry being carried to head his Army, was by the
Duke of York taken Prisoner in the Battle near Northampton, and being thence by
him brought up to London, a Parliament was called in the Kings name (though
without his consent) wherein the Duke of York had the confidence to seat
himself in the Royal Throne, and to make that challenge of the Crown you have
recited; and under how great a terror all the Friends and Servants of this poor
Prince was at that time, Vi. Record 39. H. 6. N. 11, 12, 13.
appears plainly from this, that neither the Kings Attorney, nor any of his
Council durst undertake to plead his Cause before the Parliament, nor yet would
the Judges give their opinions in a matter of such great moment, but they all
answered, That this Matter passed the Learning of the Justices; and also that
they durst not enter into any Communication in that matter, and besought all
the Lords to have them excused for giving any Advice or Council therein; but
the Lords would not excuse them; and therefore by their Advice and Assistance
it was concluded by all the Lords that the Articles following should be
objected against the Claim and Title of the Duke; So that you see from the
Record it self that the Judges were with much ado prevailed with to object any
thing against the Dukes Title.

Therefore considering the great contempt the Kings Person was then under by
reason of his weakness, and the great hatred and weariness the Nation had then
of the evil Government, of the Queen and her Favorites, it was no more
difficult for the Duke of York to procure this Judgment in Parliament in savor
of his Title, than that Henry the 4 th should after he had put Richard the 2 d
in Prison get him Deposed, and make his own Title to be allowed for good; and
certainly if it were Rebellion for the Duke of Lancaster to take up Arms
against King Richard the 2 d and to Depose him, I cannot see why (according to
your own Principles) it should not be the same crime in the Duke of York to
take up Arms against King Henry the 6 th, to whom he had more than once sworn
Faith and Allegiance, and having taken him Prisoner, to call a Parliament
whereby himself was declared Protector of the Kingdom, and the Son of King
Henry disinherited after a quiet possession in three descents, during the space
of above sixty years, which if it will not give a thorough settlement after two
Acts of Parliament to confirm it, I know not what can.


M. I confess you have given me a more exact account of this transaction than
ever I had yet, and I should very much incline to be of your opinion, were it
not that I am satisfied that our Kings have a Right to the Crown by Gods Law as
well as man's, as also by the Law of Nature, and that more than one Parliament
have been of my opinion in this matter, I shall show you from several Statutes
and Declarations of Parliament, which though not Printed, are yet to be seen at
this day upon the Parliament Rolls; for after that Henry the 6 th or rather his
queen for him, had broken the aforesaid solemn agreement made between this King
and Duke in Parliament, whereby it was accorded, that if King Henry made War
again upon the Duke of York, he should then forfeit his present Right to the
Kingdom during his Life, Vi. Grafton's Chron.
whereupon Queen Margaret and her Son Prince Edward, who would not submit to
this agreement renewed the War, and fighting another Battle at Wakefield, the
said Duke was slain; but though he did not live to enjoy his right, yet his Son
Edward Earl of March again, recovered it; and having in the second Battle of
St. Albans taken K. Henry Prisoner, triumphantly Marching to London, he there
declared himself King, Par. Rolls 1. Ed. 4. N. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. B.H.S. p.
388.
and having immediately called a Parliament, it was therein declared, that all
the proceedings against K. Richard the ad are repealed, and the taking him
Prisoner by Henry Earl of Darby was declared against his Faith and Allegiance,
and that with violence he had usurped upon the Royal Power and Dignity, etc.
and that he had by cruel Tyranny Murdered and Destroyed the said King Richard
his Liege and Sovereign Lord, against Gods Law and his own Oath of Allegiance.

And then they proceed further to declare in these words, That the Commons
being of this present Parliament, Ibid.
having sufficient and evident knowledge of the said unrightwise Usurpation,
and intrusion by the said Henry late Earl of Derby, upon the said Crown of
England; knowing also certainly, without doubt and ambiguity, the Right and
Title of our said Sovereign Lord ( viz. King Edward the 4 th) thereunto true,
and that by Gods Law, Man's Law, and the Law of Nature, he, and none other, is,
and ought to be their True, Rightwise, and Natural Liege, and Sovereign Lord,
and that he was in Right from the death of the said noble and famous Prince his
Father, very just King of the said Realm of England, and will for ever take,
accept, and repute, the said King Edward the ^ourth, their Sovereign and Liege
Lord, and him and his Heirs to be Kings of England, and none other, according
to the said Right and Title.

And that the same Henry unrightwisely, Id. p. 389.
against Law, Conscience, and the Customs of the said Realm of England Usurped
upon the said Crown; and that he and also Henry, late called K. Henry the 5 th.
his Son, and Henry Late called Henry the 6 th. his Son, occupy'd the Realm of
England, and Lordship of Ireland, and exercised the Governance thereof, by
Unrightwise, Intrusion, Usurpation, and no otherwise; that the ^motion of Henry
late called King Henry the 6 th from the Exercise, Occupation, Usurpation,
Intrusion, Reign and Governance of the* said Realm and Lordship, done by our
Sovereign Lord King Edward the 4 th. was and is rightwise, Lawful, according to
the Laws, and Customs of the said Realm, and so ought to be taken, holden,
reputed, and ^ccupied.

I have been the larger on this point, because it is a full and free
Declaration of the whole Parliament, nor only against all past as well as
future Parliaments having any thing to do in the disposal of the Crown, but is
also as express a Declaration as words can make, against any Vacancy of the
Throne upon the Death of the Predecessor; and therefore I hope you will pardon
me, if I have been a little too tedious in reciting these Records.


F. I cannot blame you for being very exact in this point, because the whole
strength of your Cause depends upon it; but yet I doubt not but to show you,
that this Parliament was as much awed by King Edward's Power, being now
Conqueror, as ever those Parliaments were that Deposed Edward and Richard the 2
d* for you your self have sufficiently set forth the manner of it, that it was
not till after a great Victory obtained against King Henry the 6 th. and I
never found in all my reading, that a Victorious Prince ever wanted power
enough to get a Parliament called to settle himself in the Throne, and declare
his Competitor an Usurper; as I shall show you more fully by and by: but that
this Act of Parliament, which thus posi^ively declares Edward the 4 th to be
their Sovereign Lord, by God's Law, Man's Law, and the Law of Nature, I think
can no ways consist either with Scripture, Reason, or Matter of Fact; for in
first place, I think I have sufficiently proved, that there is no Divine Right
of Succession for the Heirs of Crowns, any more than of other Inheritances,
either by the Law of God, or that of Nature; and as for Man's Law, I think I
have here also proved, that the Succession to the Crown by right of Blood
alone, was never established by any positive Law, nor yet settled by any constant
or interrupted Custom, when this Declaration was made; for the Crown had then
never descended from Father to Son. for above two Descents, without a
deposition, or possessed by those who claimed by Right of Blood, without any
other Title; for as for the three Kings of the House of Lancaster, I have
already proved (and your self must also own it) that they could have no Title
to the Crown, but from the Acts of Entail of the 7 th and 8 th of Henry the 4
th above mentioned so that according to Man's Law, that is Custom, and also the
Statute Law of this Kingdom, the House of Lancaster, had all that time the
better Title.

But to show you what uncertain things Parliaments are, when King Edward the 4
th had Reigned ten years, he was driven out of the Kingdom, by the Earl of
Warwick's turning suddenly against him, and in his absence he replaced King
Henry the 6 th upon the Throne, who had been all this while kept in Prison; and
the first Act this King did after his Restoration, Vi. Grafton's Chronicle.
was to call a Parliament, which revoked all the former Statutes and
Declarations of the 39 th of Henry the 6 th. and 1 st. of Edward the 4 th. and
then entailed the Crown anew upon the issue of King Henry, the remainder to the
Duke of Clarence, who then took part with King Henry against his own Brother.

It Is true indeed that King Edward the 4 th returning again not long after into
England, and regaining the Crown from King Henry the 6 th. the said King was
not only murdered, together with his Son Prince Henry, but in the next
Parliament, was also attainted of Treason, with all others of his Party, and
yet lot let you see that this very Act is now null and void against King Henry
the 6 th. and his Son Prince Edward; see an Act of Parliament of the first of
Henry the 7 th. (not Printed) which because it is not commonly known, Roll. Par.
1. H. 7. N. 16. Restitutio Henrici sexti.
I will read it almost verbatim, The King our Sovereign remembering, how against
all rightwiseness, honor, nature, and duty, an inordinate, seditious, and
slanderous Act was made, against the most famous Prince of blessed memory King
Henry the sixth his Uncle, at the Parliament holden at Westminstey, the fourth
day of November, the first year of the Reign of Edward the 4 th. Late King of
England, whereby his said Uncle contrary to the due Allegiance, and all due
order, was attainted of High Treason, wherefore our same Sovereign Lord, by the
Advice and Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this
present Parliament* assembled, and by Authorities of the same, ordains,
enacteth, and establishes, that the same Act, and all Acts of Attainder,
Forfailure, or Disablement made or had in the said Parliament, or else in any
other Parliament, of the said Late King Edward against the said most blessed
Prince King Henry, or against the right famous Princess Margaret Late Queen of
England, his Wife, or the right Victorious Prince Edward, Late Prince of Wales,
Son of the same blessed Prince K. Henry and Margaret, etc. are void, annulled,
and repealed, and of no force, nor effect; so that by virtue of this Act, the
Title of the House of Lancaster was again declared to be good.

But to conclude, I cannot but take notice of one mistake you have fallen into,
by saying, that all proceedings against King Richard the 2 d. are repealed by
that Parliament of the first of Edward the 4 th. which is not so; for though I
grant that the dealings of Henry Earl of Darby (as he is there called) in
imprisoning the said King, and Usurping the Royal Power, is there expressly
condemned, and his Murdering of him said to be against Gods Law, and his own
Oath of Allegiance (as certainly it was) yet the Deposition of the said King
Richard by Parliament is no ways repealed by this Act, for then all the Records
thereof would have been quite Cancelled and taken off the Rolls, whereas they
still remain to be seen at this day; and you see by this Act I now recited,
That the attainder of King Henry the 6 th is declared contrary to due
Allegiance, and all due order, and all forfeitures, and disablements of the
said King and Prince are quite annulled and made void.


M. I must confess you have so staggered me with this Act, that I know not what
to say to it, but that it was made in the first Parliament of King Henry the 7
th. and before he had married the Princess Elizabeth, and consequently had no
good Title to the Crown himself, therefore till then I look upon him as an
Usurper; but I shall now proceed to show you, that that very King, nay, even
Richard the 3 d. himself, chiefly relied, not upon any Parliamentary Election,
but upon their own pretended Titles of being right Heirs by Blood; for after
the death of Edward the 4 th. his Son Edward the 5 th. was proclaimed King and
might have quietly enjoyed it, if his ambitious Uncle Richard Duke of
Gloucester had not plotted to defeat him of it; and knowing very well that he
had no way to bring it about, but by inciting a corrupt party of the Bishops
and Lords, Vi. Grafton's Chronicle.
together with the Lord Mayor of London, and some of his Party in the City, to
set forth by way of Petition to the Duke then Protector of the King and Realm,
That all the Children of K. Edward the 4 th were Bastards, supposing that King
to have been Contracted with a certain Woman called Eleanor Boteler, before he
Married Queen Elizabeth; moreover, that the Blood of his Elder Brother George
Duke of Clarence deceased, was attainted; so that none of the Lineal Blood of
Richard Duke of York could be found uncorrupted but in himself; and there was
at the conclusion of that Roll, an Address to him from the Lords and Commons of
the Kingdom; that he would take the Government upon himself: this fine artifice
assisted on one side with his feigned excuses, which induced the less thinking
sort of People to believe, he desired not the Royalty, and prompted on the
other side with the fear of his power, procured his accession to the Throne, so
that at last, he and his Wife Anne were solemnly Crowned King and Queen at
Westminster; and by these steps did that inhumane Prince, who had no Title to
the Crown, either by descent, or by merit ascend the English Throne; see you
that not by Election, but by pretense of blood, and by bastardising and
attainting his Nephews, he set himself up for the only true Heir of the Crown;
and therefore in the Parliament he called immediately after his Coronation,
when they had declared almost the very same things as were before in the said
Petition, Vid. Collection of Records. 1 Richard III.
they proceed further; To declare that the Right, Title, and Estate which King
Richard the III d had to, and in the Crown and Royal Dignity of the Realm of
England, with all things thereunto, within the said Realm, and without it,
annexed and appertaining, was just and lawful, as grounded upon the Laws of
God and Nature, and also upon the ancient Laws and laudable Customs of this
said Realm, as also taken and reputed by all such Persons as were learned in
the abovesaid Laws and Customs, (and proceeds farther thus,) therefore at the
request and by the assent of the three Estates of this Realm, (that is to say)
the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and Commons of this Land, Assembled in this
present Parliament, and by the Authority of the same, it is pronounced,
decreed, and declared, that our said Sovereign Lord the King was and is the
very undoubted King of this Realm of England, with all things thereunto
belonging within the said Realm, and without it, united, annexed, and
appertaining, as well by right of Consanguinity, and Inheritance, as by lawful
Election, Consecration, and Coronation.

So that you see though they put in his Election, as also his Coronation, as
means of obtaining the Crown, yet the pretended hereditary right of blood was
the main ground of his Establishment. But as for King Henry the VII th, though he
could claim the Crown by no true Right of Inheritance, yet would he never own
it to be an Election by Parliament; for as soon as King Richard was slain in
the Battle of Bosworth, the Lord Stanley put his Crown upon Henry's head; who
immediately stiling himself King, Vid. Lord Bacon's Life of K. Henry the 7th.
as well by right of Conquest, as by being sole Heir Male of the House of
Lancaster, He as such, caused himself to be Crowned King; and though he
afterward called a Parliament, in which he procured his Title to be
recognized, Fol. 7.
yet, as my Lord Bacon very well observes, he was afraid to take the Crown (by
his only true Title) in right of the Lady Elizabeth his Queen, for fear he
should only be King by Courtesy, and must upon the Queens death have resigned
it again; and should he take it by Election, he knew there was a very great
difference between a King that holds his Crown by a Civil Act of the Estates,
and one ( mind that) that holds it originally by the Law of Nature, and
descent of Blood; and therefore upon these Considerations, he resolved to rest
upon the Title of the House of Lancaster as his main Right; and thereupon he
caused an Act of Parliament to pass, wherein his Title was acknowledged (as my
Lord Bacon there tells us) not by way of Declaration, or Recognition of Right,
as on the other side, he avoided to have it by a new Law of Ordinance, but
chose rather a kind of a middle way, by way of establishment, and that under
covert and indifferent words, that the inheritance of the Crown, should rest,
remain and abide in the King, etc. which words might be equally applied, that
the Crown should continue to him; but whether as having former right to it
(which was doubtful) or having it then in fact or possession (which no Man
denied) was left fair to interpretation either way. I speak not this to
justify all his actions, but to let you see that he chiefly insisted upon his
right of inheritance, and absolutely disowned any Title by Election from the
People.


F. I cannot deny the matter of fact concerning King Richard the III ds
Deposing his Nephew, and Usurping the Crown to have been very wicked, and
contrary to the received Law of England concerning the Succession at that time;
and likewise that by Bastardizing his Brother the late King's Issue without due
course of Law, and by attainting the blood of his other Brother the Duke of
Clarence, he would have made the World believe that he was Lawful Heir by right
of blood; yet you will not deny but that for all this, he was so sensible of
the weakness of his Title, that though (it is true) his right by blood is
declared in the first place in that Act of Recognition, yet it is plain he
would not rely upon that alone, and therefore you see the Parliament there also
insists upon his right by Election, and Coronation, which they would never have
done, had it not been that they looked upon it for good Law, that whoever was
Crowned King, and called a Parliament, and had his Title therein Recognized and
Confirmed, was thenceforth true and lawful King to all intents and purposes;
therefore though you have omitted it, I shall proceed to show you, what this
Statute also farther declares: For after they had declared the said King's
Title, as grounded upon the Ancient Laws and Laudable Customs of the Realm,
according to the Judgment of all such Persons as were learned in them; they
proceed thus: Yet nevertheless, for as much as it is considered, that the most
part of the People is not sufficiently learned in the aforesaid Laws and
Customs, whereby truth and right in his behalf, of likelihood may be had, and
not clearly known to all People, and thereupon put in doubt and question; and
over this, how that the Court of Parliament is of such Authority, that a
Declaration made by the three Estates, and by the Authority of the same, makes
before all other things most faithful and certain quieting of Men's Minds, and
removes the occasion of doubts, and seditious Language; therefore they also
declare that he was the undoubted King. Whence it is evident, that the reason of
this Law supposes that the Subjects in general are not capable of
understanding the Laws and Customs upon which the Titles of our Kings depend;
and that the best satisfaction that the generality of the People can possibly
have in those high Matters, was to rest on the judgment and determination of
the Kingdom, declared by Act and Authority of Parliament, and therein to
acquiesce for the preventing Sedition, so much as in Language: therefore what I
said before in the Case of King Stephen, is also true in this, quod fieri non
debuit, factum valet; and all the Acts made in the Reign of this King Richard,
though ^ horrid Usurper, were never repealed, but stand good at this day.

As to what you say concerning the manner of King Henry the VII ths coming to
the Crown is also true, but as for his Title to it by right of Succession, that
was certainly false; for his Mother the Countess of Richmond was then alive, by
whom he Claimed the Crown, and lived diverse years after he was King; so that
though I grant that it is recited in the Parliament Roll that he claimed the
Crown in Parliament, Rot. Parl. 1. Hen. VII.
tam per justum titulum haereditantiae, quam per verum Dei judicium, in
tribuendo sibi victoriam de Inimico suo in campo; though the latter of these
Titles may be true, Viz. the Conquest of King Richard, especially when once he
was confirmed and recognized in Parliament, yet that the former could not be
so, is plain from what I have now said; so that it is certain that King Henry
the VII ths best Title was neither by Inheritance nor Marriage with the
Princess Elizabeth, but by the Act of Parliament, as appears by the unprinted
Statute it self, still upon the Roll, which since you did not repeat, Vid. Buck
's History of Richard the III d.
I will; the Title is Titulus Regis, and it runs in these words, To the
Pleasure of Almighty God, the Wealth, Prosperity, and Surety of this Realm of
England to the singular comfort of all the Kings Subjects of the same, and in
avoiding of all ambiguities and questions, be it Ordained, Established, and
Enacted by Authority of this present Parliament, that the inheritance of the
Crowns of the Realms of England, and of France, with all the preeminence and
dignity Royal to the same pertaining, and all other Seignouries to the King
belonging beyond the Sea, with the Appurtenances thereto in any wise due or
pertaining, be, rest, remain and abide in the Most Royal Person of our now
Sovereign Lord King Henry the VII th, and in the Heirs of his Body lawfully
coming perpetually with the grace of God so to endure, and in none other.

Now this was done some time before he Married with the Princess Elizabeth, for
as soon as this Act was made, the Commons requested the King to marry Elizabeth
the Daughter of King Edward the fourth, that by God's Grace there might be
Issue of the stock of their Kings (as their own words were;) and that this was
rather to preserve the Blood Royal, than to give any new confirmation to his
Title appears from hence, that there was never any other Act after the Marriage
to declare the right of the Crown to be in the King, and Queen, or so much as
to entail it on the issue of their Bodies; so that it is plain he enjoyed it
not in his Wives, but in his own right, since he held it after her death, by
virtue of this Statute, which plainly shows, (that in the judgment of that
Parliament) the House of Lancaster was looked upon to have the better Title: And
(though it is true) that the King procured the Pope's Bull now in the Cotton
Library, to strengthen his Title, threatening all those with Excommunication
that should offer to rebel against him; yet even that Bull (though his right by
Inheritance and Conquest be first mentioned) concludes with his Title by the
Election of the Prelates, B. H. S. p. 391.
Nobility, and People of England; and the Decree or Statute of the three
Estates in their Convention, called the Parliament, as this Bull it self
expresses it.


M. I must confess you have told me more of these matters, than ever I heard of
before, for I always thought that there had been no Act of Settlement upon King
Henry the VII th, until after his Marriage with the Princess Elizabeth; for
till then I look upon him as an Usurper upon her right, as he was also after
her death upon his Sons successively; so that if you will have my Opinion, I
conceive that this Statute being made before he had a lawful right to the
Crown is wholly void, as is also that of the repeal of the attainder of King
Henry the VI ths for the same reason.

But let his Title be what it will, it is ce^^ain, his Son King Henry the VIII
th Succeeded to the Crown, as Heir rather to his Mother, than his Father, and
so was in by remitter; but as for King Edward the VI th, he was undoubted Heir
by right of blood, as being the only Heir Male to his Father; and though it is
true, that King Henry made diverse Statutes whereby he altered the Succession of
the Crown as to his two Daughters Mary and Elizabeth, sometimes declaring them
both illegitimate, and then again giving them a right to Succeed by Act of
Parliament; B. H. S. p. 393.
yet these Acts of Succession were obtained purely by the King's Solicitation,
and Command; and though at last he got himself empowered to make a Will, whereby
he might settle and entail the Crown on whom he pleased, yet all these Acts of
Parliament, as also this, will signify just nothing after his death; for though
his said Daughters Queen Mary, and Elizabeth, did one after another succeed his
Son King Edward the VI th, yet was it not by virtue of any of these Acts of
Parliament, or by the aforesaid Will, but by pure right of inheritance (or
color of it at least) and therefore in the first of Queen Mary, there is an
Act declaring the Queens Highness to have been born in most just and faithful
Matrimony, 1 Mar. 2 chap.
and also repealing all Acts of Parliament, and Sentence of Divorce made or had
to contrary.

Now certainly the intention of this Act was to declare her Succession to be
Inheritance by right of blood; so likewise in the first of Elizabeth, the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons do declare and confess that Queen Elizabeth
is in very deed, 1 Eliz. c. 1.
and of mere right, by the Laws of God, and by the Laws and Statutes of this
Realm, their most rightful and lawful Sovereign Queen, and that she was
rightly, lineally, and lawfully descended and come of the Blood Royal of this
Realm of England; all which (whether it were true or not in her) yet the lineal
and lawful descent of Queen Elizabeth, was the ground upon which she was
declared to be their Rightful and Lawful Queen.

And though I grant that King Henry the VIIIth. had by his Last Will and
Testament post poned all the Issue of his Sister Margaret Queen of Scots, and
preferred the Children of his younger Sister the Queen Dowager of France,
(which she had by Charles Duke of Suffolk before them: Yet was this Will
afterward cancelled, and torn off from the Rolls in Chancery where it was
Recorded; B. H. S. 394.
and that by order of Queen Mary (as is supposed.) So that James the VIth. King
of Scotland was by Right of Blood Declared and Proclaimed King of England
immediately upon the Death of Queen Elizabeth, as right Heir of the Crown. And
in the first Parliament after his Coronation, his Title is by them particularly
recognized in the words which I desire you to read with me: Where after setting
forth his Pedigree as lineally descended from the Lady Margaret, eldest
Daughter of King Henry the VII th, and Queen Elizabeth his Wi^e, Daughter of
King Edward the IV th; they farther acknowledge King James their Lawful and
rightful Liege Lord, and Sovereign; and farther say, as being bound thereunto
both by the Laws of God and Man, that they do recognize and acknowledge that
immediately upon the dissolution and decease of Elizabeth late Queen of
England, the Imperial Crown of the Realm of England, and all Kingdoms and
Dominions belonging to the same, did by inherent Birthright, and lawful and
undoubted Succession descend and come to his Most Excellent Majesty, being
lineally, lawfully, and justly, next, and sole Heir of the Blood Royal of this
Realm* and thereunto they do most humbly and faithfully submit and oblige
themselves, their Heirs and Posterities for ever, until the last drop of their
bloods be spent. I have been the more particular in the recital of this Act,
because it stands not only as a perpetual Declaration of the sense of the
Representatives of the whole Nation for an hereditary Succession of the Crown
without any vacancie or election, but also because it contains, their solemn
engagement for themselves and their posterities for ever to King James, and his
issue, and consequently to his right Heirs for ever; so that nothing can be
more directly contrary than this Act to the late proceedings of the Convention,
first in declaring the Throne vacant, and then placing the Prince and Princess
of Orange therein.


F. I will not deny but that King Henry the VIII th, and Edward the VI th, both
succeeded by right of inheritance, but whether the former claimed it as Heir to
his Mother or his Father, is much to be doubted; since being Heir to both of
them, he never declared by what Title he held the Crown: But as for his two
Daughters, Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth, it is certain their best Titles
were from these Acts of Parliament; for as to Queen Mary, it is plain, that at
her coming to the Crown, she could not be looked upon as Heir by right of
blood, because by the Statute of the 25 th of Henry the VIII th, Chap. 22.
his Marriage with Queen Catherine her Mother was declared unlawful, and the
Crown settled upon the King, and the Heirs of his Body lawfully begotten on
Queen Anne Bullen; and besides all this, she was but Sister by the half blood
to King Edward the VI th, and so could not inherit as heir to him; and though
in the first year of her Reign, the Parliament (it is true) took off her
illegitimation, and repealed the Acts of the 25 th, and 28 th of Henry VIII.
whereby she was declared illegitimate; yet in this, the Parliament seems rather
to provide for the honor of her descent, than (as you would have it) to
declare her Succession to be Inheritance by right of blood, because the Statute
of the 35 th of Henry the VIII th, whereby the Crown was settled upon Prince
Edward, and the Heirs of his Body, the remainder upon the Ladys Mary, and
Elizabeth; and whereby the King had also power given him, of disposing the
Crown by Letters Patents, or by Will, was not at all repealed; and for which, a
memorable Reason is given in both these Acts, least if such Heirs should fail,
and no provision made in the King's Life, who should Rule and Govern this
Realm, for lack of such Heirs, that then this Realm should be destitute of a
Lawful Governor; whereby it seems plain, that the Parliament then esteemed no
Heirs to have a Right by Law, farther than had been declared by these Statutes.

So likewise for Queen Elizabeth, her Title was more apparently by Act of
Parliament, and that she looked upon her self sufficient to have succeeded, by
virtue of the limitation of the Statute of the 35 th of Henry the Eighth, last
mentioned, appears in that she never procured her Mothers Marriage to be
declared good, and consequently her own illegitimation to be taken off; so that
take it which way you will, it is certain that either Queen Mary's or Queen
Elizabeth's Title must have been only by Act of Parliament, since she was born
whilst Queen Catherine, King Henry's first Wife was living; and therefore, when
the Parliament you mention, in the first Year of Queen Elizabeth, declared,
that she was Rightly, Lawfully, and Lineally descended, and come of the blood
Royal of this Realm, yet these words can only be understood of such a lineal
and lawful descent as is here declared to be so by virtue of this, as well as
the former Statute; and not according to any hereditary descent at Common Law,
since it is very well known, that as long as the Popes dispensation for King
Henrys Marriage with the Princess Catherine his Brothers Wife was allowed for
good, as it was till the latter end of Henry the VII ths, and all the first 25
years of Henry the VIII ths Reign, the Princess Mary was looked upon as the
only presumptive Heiress of the Crown; this I tell you, not to invalidate Queen
Elizabeth's Title, but to let you see that Acts of Parliament, if they declare
that which is apparently false in matter of Law or Fact are not to be credited,
unless you will give them more power than God himself, who cannot (as all
Divines agree) make that to have been done which was never done, or that not to
have been done, which has once come to pass.

I come now in the last place, to examine the Act of Recognition of King James
the Firsts Title to the Crown, which I will not dispute to have been by right
of blood, since none of the descendants of King Henry the VII th could have any
Title before him; for though it is true it was otherwise ordained by King Henry
the VIII ths Will, yet that (as you your self show) was not only cancelled in
Queen Marys time, but was also void in it self; for, whereas by the Statute of
the 35 th of Henry the VIII th, there was a power given him to dispose of the
Crown, either by his Letters Parents, or else by his last Will Signed with his
Hand, yet was this power never legally executed; for those that have argued
against this Will, Vi. Lethington's Letter to Sir Will. Cecil. Appendix to the
2 d Vol. of the History of the Reformation. fol. 269.
have told us, that he never Signed it in his life time, but that a stamp of
his Name was put thereunto after his decease, as most manifestly appeared by
open declaration made in Parliament of this matter by the Lord Paget, and
others, that King Henry did never Sign it with his own Hand, as was also proved
by the Pardon obtained for one William Clerk, for putting the Stamp unto the
said Will, after the King was departed. So that though I grant that King James
had a very good Title to the Crown of England by Inheritance, yet whether it
was from King Henry the VII th alone, or from Queen Elizabeth his Wife, is not
there declared; only that he was lawfully descended of Lady Margaret, Eldest
Daughter to King Henry the VII th, and Queen Elizabeth his Wife, Eldest
Daughter of King Edward the IV th, and therefore, that they are bound both by
the Laws of God and Man to Recognize his Majesty as sole Heir of the blood
Royal of this Realm; all which is so far true if by Gods Law, and Man's Law, you
will thereby understand such Laws as God impowers the King and Parliament to
make, for otherwise, there is no more heed to be taken of this Declaration,
than that which was made before to Richard the III d, which also declared him
to have a good Title to the Crown by the Laws of God, and Nature, and the Laws
and Customs of this Realm. So that I see nothing in all this Act of
Recognition, that at all contradicts my notion, that King James's Title is
wholly derived from the Act of Settlement made on King Henry the VII th, from
whom he was lineally descended; so that though his Pedigree be also derived
from Queen Elizabeth, Eldest Daughter to King Edward the IV th, yet this was
only ex abundanti, to show that he had every way a Title to the Crown, and if
she her self had any Title, it was wholly by virtue of those Acts of Parliament
of the 39 th of Henry the VI th, and 1 st of Edward the IV th, which vested the
Crown in Richard Duke of York, and King Edward the IV th his Son, and which
last Act first declared that the three Henrys of the House of Lancaster were
only Kings in deed, and not of right; for before that time I defy you to show
me in all our Histories or Law Books any such distinction. In all foregoing
times he that was solemnly Anointed and Crowned King in Deed, was also looked
upon so to be in point of right, and therefore let those Statutes you so much
insist upon, talk never so much of any Kings being so, by any fundamental
hereditary right precedent to, and independent from the power of the two Houses
of Parliament: I am very well satisfied that such a Declaration must be void in
it self, since I have sufficiently proved that there was no such Law of
Succession ever settled by any general Custom, or Common Law, since it has been
near as often broken, as observed; and as for any positive or Statute Law
enacting any hereditary right of Succession you do not so much as pretend to
show it; so that I think I have sufficiently proved the three Propositions I
laid down, viz. That ever since the time of Edward the First, though the Crown
has been claimed by right of blood, yet has it not been very often enjoyed by
Princes who had no just pretense to that Title Secondly, that the two Houses of
Parliament have often, notwithstanding that claim, placed, or at least fixed
the Crown upon the heads of those Princes who they very well knew could have no
hereditary right to it. Thirdly, That such Princes have been always taken for
lawful Kings, all their Laws standing good at this day, without any
Confirmation by their Successors.


M. I did not think that you who were so great an admirer of the two Houses of
Parliament, should now be so much against their power in joining with the King
to declare what the true right of Succession to the Crown is, and has ever
been from time beyond memory: But I see Acts or Declarations of Parliament
signify nothing with you if they are against your Hypothesis, or else you
would never go about thus to expose those Acts of Parliament of King Edward the
IVth. and King James the Is It. Whereby they are declared both by the Law of God
and Man undoubted Heirs of the Crown. And the last Act I cited, ( viz.) That of
King James the Is It. does sufficiently confute your Notion of a Vacancy of the
Throne: Where it is expressly declared, That immediately upon the decease of
Queen Elizabeth, the Crown of England with all the Dominions belonging to the
same, did by Inherent Birthright, and Lawful and Undoubted Succession descend
and come to his Majesty King James. So that if there then were no Vacancy of
the Throne, I cannot see how there could be any such thing now; the next Heir
to the Crown (be He who they will) being certainly not so far removed from King
James the Is It. as himself was from King Henry the VIIth. under whom he claimed.


F. I must still confess my self to have a great veneration for the solemn
Declarations of King and Parliament, made by any Statute; yet not so as to
Idolize them, or to look upon all their Declarations as infallible: I grant
indeed that whosoever is by them Declared and Recognized for King or Queen of
England, is to be acknowledged and obeyed as such, by all the Subjects of this
Kingdom; without farther questioning his Title: But if not content with this,
they will also take upon them to declare that such Kings or Queens have an
undoubted Hereditary Right by the Laws of God and Nature, When I plainly find
from the Holy Scriptures, as well as the History of matter of Fact, and the
knowledge of our Laws, that they have no other Ti^le than what the Laws of the
Land have conferred upon them; and therefore you your self cannot deny, but
that it was gross flattery in the two Houses of Parliament to declare, that
Richard the IIId (for-example) had a true and undoubted Right to the Crown, by
the Laws of God, and Nature, and also by the Laws and Customs of this Realm,
when you know he was a notorious Usurper upon the Rights of his Brother King
Edward's Children. now how can I be assured that the like Declaration made to
King James the I. was not l^kewise a piece of Courtship of the Representative
of the Kingdom to this King then newly settled in his Throne; since we find the
People of this Nation, when they are in a kind fit, never think they can say,
or do too much for their Princes; and therefore I must freely tell you, that it
is not the bare Declaration of a Parliament that this or that has been always
the Law or Custom of this Realm, when we can find from History that it has
never been so held for above four hundred years at least, and therefore not
beyond the memory of Man (as you suppose) since that must be before the Reign
of Richard the First as I have already proved to you at our Eighth Meeting.

But to answer your Objection against the vacancy of the Throne, I do freely
grant, that a^ often ^s the Crown descends by lineal Succession, there can be
no vacancy of the Throne, as it did in the Case of King James the First: yet
does it not therefore follow, that there can never be any such Vacancy in any
Case whatsoever, since certainly it may so happen, that all the Heirs Male of
the Blood Royal may fail, as it happened in the Case of Scotland, when John
Balioll and Robert Bruce contended for the Crown, which not being to be decided
by the Estates of the Kingdom, they were forced to referr it to our King Edward
the First; and as also happened in France, when Philip of Valois, and our
Edward the III d, both claimed the Crown, which was decided by a great Assembly
of the Estates of France in the favor of the former, who claimed as Heir of
the Male Line, against King Edward* who was descended by a Woman; and if King
James's Abdication, or Forfeiture (call it which you will) is good, pray give
me a sufficient Reason, why the Convention of the Estates of England should not
have as much Authority as those of France, or Scotland; this being as much or
more a limited Kingdom, thau either of the other ever were.


M. I do not deny that, but pray show me any sufficient Reason why the
Convention should now Vote a Vacancy of the Throne, since there was certainly
an Heir Apparent not long since in England, and I hope is now safe in France,
who ought to fill it, or at least there should have been some sufficient cause
alleged against him, to prove that he was not true Son either of the King or
Queen; and till this was done, they could not with any Right or good
Conscience, place any other Relation of his in the Throne, since every Person
ought to be esteemed the Son of that Father and Mother that publicly own him
for such; for it is a Maxim in our as well as your Law, Filiatio non potest
probari.


F. How this could be performed without first declaring the Throne vacant, I
cannot apprehend; for you your self must grant, that there have been great
doubts and suspicions of the Realty of this Prince of Wales; and therefore,
that being one great reason of the Prince of Orange's coming over, The truth of
this Child whether he was really born of the of the body of the Q. is first to
be examined and determined, before he can be declared K. of England in the room
of his supposed Father, whom we will also suppose Civilly (though not Naturally
dead) and till this be done, (unless you would have had him been declared King
without ever examining the truth of the matter) the Throne must have continued
vacant till it could be decided, whether he or his half Sister the Princess of
Orange were to fill it; and if so, whilst the Convention remained in this
suspense, they could do no other than Vote the Throne vacant till they were
sufficiently satisfied who had the best Right to it.

But to answer your argument, that unless something could have been presently
alleged against this Infant to have proved him not to have been born of the
Body of the Queen, he ought to have been declared King: the Maxim you mention
may be well allowed in the case of Common Inheritances, but not in that of
Crowns, for in those we have read that Common and violent presumptions have
been looked upon as sufficient proofs to set aside a supposed Heir of the
Crown: Vi. Marianas History of Hispan.
as for example, something above two hundred years since, Henry King of
Castile, called the Impotent, (because he was not able to get his Queen or any
other Woman with Child) did out of hatred to his Sister Isabella, permit a
favorite of his to lie with his Queen, and get her with Child, she was brought
to Bed of a Daughter, but the Estates of the Kingdom would by no means admit
her for Legitimate, because the Queen had before declared her Husband to be
Impotent, and therefore they did not only protest against her Legitimacy in the
Kings life time, in an Assembly of the Estates, but also as soon as he died,
they set this pretended Princess quite aside and declared the Sister of the
Late King, Queen of Castile, who was Married to Ferdinand King of Arragon. Now
though I will not say, that either the suspicions or proofs against the present
Prince of Wales are as pregnant as those against that Princess; yet certainly
they were sufficient to debat him from being placed in the Throne, till such
time as it shall be made apparent that he is really Son to the Queen.


M. If the Convention had gone this way to work, I grant there might have been
some color for what they have done, but then they ought before they had placed
any body else in the Throne, to have first examined the Truth of the Queens
being with Child, and her being truly delivered of this Prince, before ever
they had declared the Prince and Princess of Orange King and Queen, and till
this had been done, certainly the Throne should have still continued Vacant;
therefore I doubt your Convention have made more haste than good speed in this
matter, which certainly required much more deliberation.


F. Come, I will for once admit that they ought in the first place, to have
examined your Princes Title, but this is still to be understood, as far as it
was possible for them to do it, as it ought: now pray tell me, how this could
be done, when the Infant was not only carried away into a Foreign Kingdom, but
also the Midwife, the Nurse, and several other of the Queens near Servants and
Attendants, went away along with him? who if they had been here to have been
cross examined, might have declared the Imposture (if it be one.)


M. But pray Sir, are there not Protestant Ladies enough left behind, who have
already Deposed before the Council (as appears by their Depositions published
by the Kings express command, and enrolled in Chancery, in perpituam Rei
memoriam) not only that her Majesty was with Child, but that also she was
really delivered of this Prince; so that the Prince of Orange and the
Convention, ought to have in the first place summoned those Witnesses you
mention to be now in France to have appeared before them, and if they had not
come, then to have proceeded as the matter had required.


F. You must then grant that the Protestant Witnesses alone, who are now in
England were not sufficient, for if they should have Deposed, that this Child
had been an Impostor, I suppose, you would not have rested satisfied that they
had spoke nothing but the Truth: since the Witnesses now in France (who best
know the matter of Fact) might have sworn the contrary; but as for sending any
Summons for them into France it was altogether in vain, and also that which the
Convention were not at all obliged to do; it was in vain, because neither King
James nor his Q. did ever own the Power of the Convention to hear or determine
this affair, and therefore would not have let the Witnesses come over; for
after the Throne was declared Vacant, the King must by sending those Witnesses
have racitly owned the Authority of the Convention, in declaring himself to
have Abdicated the Throne, as also that they might place his Son therein: so
that any such Summons would certainly have been only rejected with scorn, and
we should gain nothing, but the loss of so much time, and hindered our present
settlement and defense, a whole Summer. Nor was the Convention obliged to do
it, since the Parliament it self is not bound to take cognizance of any person
or thing that is not within the Kingdom of England or the Territories belonging
to it; and therefore it was not their business to enquire (without it had been
brought before them) what was become of this Infant, whether he was legitimate
or not, or whether he was alive, or else had been cast away at Sea, or taken by
Pirates, any of which might very well have been; and therefore indeed this
business could never have been decided, unless the Infant himself were actually
present and sufficient proof made, not only that this was the same Child that
was born of the Queen, but which was also carried away into France, all which
could never have been examined as it ought, without the Child's personal
presence here, which I suppose you will grant that King James and his Queen
would never admit of as things now stand; therefore since a thorough
examination into this business was impossible to have been performed, The
Convention have done no more than what can be justified, in first declaring the
Throne Vacant, and then who should fill it.


M. Well, but admit the case were so as you have put it, the Kingdom ought
however to have remained without a King, till the succession had been duly
settled. since according to the act of recognition to King James I. The Nation
did not only oblige themselves but their Posterity (that is, we that are now
alive) to that King and his Right Heirs; and therefore till this Princes Right
had been determined, either the Convention should have Governed, or else they
ought to have made the Prince of Orange only Governor or Regent of the
Kingdom, and not to have placed him and his Princess in the Throne, till the
young Prince had died, or else had been proved to be an Impostor.


F. I doubt not but I can show you not only the unreasonableness. but also the
unpracticableness of this supposition. First, its unreasonableness, since you
are very much mistaken to allege that the whole Nation, by that Act of
recognition to King James obliged themselves, and their Posterities, to him and
his right Heirs. It Is true they there tell him, That they made that Recognition
as the first fruits of their Loyalty and Faith to him, and his Royal Progeny
and Posterity for ever, and also when they have acknowledged him to be justly
and lawfully next, and sole Heir of the Blood Royal of this Realm. and that
they thereunto submit and oblige themselves, their Heirs and Posterities for
ever, etc. there is no more meant or expressed in all this, than that the whole
Nation did by their Representatives in Parliament oblige themselves and their
Children to King James and his Posterity for ever, and I think that this part
of the Recognition is sufficiently performed, by placing two of his Great
Grandchildren in the Throne, for as to the words rightful or lawful Heirs,
they are not to be found in all this Statute.

But as for your Notion of a Regency, it is plain it could have signified
nothing, either for our present security, or future settlement; not to the
former, since this Regent (be he whom he would) must have Governed in the Right
of some body or other, since I never read of a Regency in England during a
Vacancy of the Throne; therefore I will at present admit that the Vote for King
James's Abdication had never been made, only that the Prince of Orange had been
declared Regent of the Kingdom, till such time as King James would have given
the Nation sufficient satisfaction of his reforming all past miscarriages, and
that his future Government should be according to Law. Now I would very fain
know how it can be justified according to your Notion of the King's absolute
irresistible power, to place a Regent over the Kingdom to Govern in his stead,
whether he will or not, when it is certain he is neither a Minor, an Idiot, nor
a Lunatic: so that then he must have returned again to the Government whenever
he had pleased, or else the Convention must have been Judges whether the
security or satisfaction he offered was sufficiently satisfactory or not, for
if he himself was to be sole Judge in this case, I suppose you will grant this
Regency would quickly have been at an end; but on the other ^ide, if this Right
of Judging had been left in the Convention, whether the King's proposals were
satisfactory or not, they might also have voted them not to be so; and till
this was done, they might very well have justified there keeping him out of the
Kingdom by force, now how that could have consisted with your doctrine of the
Kings Irresistible Power I desire you would satisfy me if you can; so that by
this Regency, the King must either have been deprived of his whole Power, or he
must not; if the former, that would have been as good as Deposing him from
being King, and had left him no more than the bare Title, and whether this had
not been a great deal worse, (as more Hypocritical) than the Conventions
declaring him to have Abdicated the Government, I leave it to any indifferent
person to Judge.

But if you will suppose that this Regent must have Governed in the name of
your Prince of Wales, as being declared King, that would have been to have
granted his Title to be good without hearing of it, and had been indeed to have
given up the main point in dispute.


M. I see you would fain find out any shifts for this pretended Vacancy, and
placing those in the Throne to whom it does not belong; yet though I grant that
the word Right Heirs are not expressly recited in this Act of Recognition to
King James I. yet for all that, it is employed, for the Oath of Allegiance is
Enacted by I. Eliz. to be taken to the Queen, her Heirs, and lawful Successors;
and by the Oath of Supremacy (Enacted in the IVth of King James) we are
likewise obliged to swear, that we will bear true Allegiance to his Majesty,
his Heirs, and Successors: now who these Heirs are, this very Act of
Recognition does sufficiently declare, viz. The next Heir by Descent of Blood;
for as King James is hereby acknowledged to be Heir by Inherent Birthright: so
when they oblige themselves, and their Posterity's to King James, and his
Progeny, it is to be understood (by parity of reason) that they oblige
themselves and the Nation, for all future Generations to Him and his Issue in
that sense, as that their Allegiance should be only due to him, or her who
should be Lawful Heir to their Father, Brother, or Uncle, according to those
rules of Succession, that had been commonly received for above four hundred
years last past, that is to say the Eldest Son, Brother, or Daughter, being
still to be preferred before the Younger, and Sons before Daughters, and the
same rule must also hold for their descendents; since upon this ground it was,
that the Title of the House of York was preferred by Parliament before that of
Lancaster, and the Title of the King of Scots who was descended from the Eldest
Sister, before that of the House of Suffolk, who came from the Younger, and
this being never altered by any subsequent Statute, (or if it had, I think it
would not have been good;) the Convention ought either to have declared the
Prince of Wales King immediately, or at least to have continued the Throne
Vacant, let the difficulties or inconveniences that you suppose might have
followed, to be never so great; and therefore it was their duty to have fought
out King James and the Prince, wherever they had been, and to have desired him
to have sent over the Prince, together with the Witnesses that went away with
him; and till this had been absolutely refused, or else that upon a fair
hearing, this Prince had been proved an Impostor. I say till one of these had
been done, the Throne ought still to have continued Vacant (if it were so at
all) nor till this had been cleared could they have justified the placing any
body else upon the Throne, though never so nearly related to the King; whom I
will suppose for discourse sake, to have really Abdicated the Kingdom.


F. I will not deny that the legal and common course of Succession ought to be
inviolately observed according to the Rules you have now laid down, when ever
it may consist with the public good and safety of the Kingdom; and yet for all
that I cannot believe, that the King himself, much less any other, that only
pretends as next Heir to him, can have such an absolute Right to the Kingdom,
as that no considerations whatsoever can make them lose or forfeit their Right
thereunto; therefore I look upon the Government of a Kingdom not to be like
that interest which a private Man has in an Estate, which is his Right let him
be what he will, or let him manage it how he will. Whereas in the Right to a
Kingdom, I take it to be a true Maxim, That the Representatives of a Nation (as
the Convention was) ought to have more regard to the happiness and safety of
the whole People, or Commonwealth, than to the Dignity or Authority of any
particular Person whosoever, or howsoever nearly related to the Crown, when it
is evident that the advancement of such a Person to the Throne, will prove
destructive to our Religion, Civil Liberties and Properties.

Now give me leave to apply what I have said to the Point now in question; Let
us therefore at the present suppose, that your Prince of Wales is true, and
lawful Son to King James and Queen Mary; and let me also farther suppose, that
in his late passage over Sea, he was taken by the Pirates of Argiers, or Tunis,
and by them been carried to one of those places, and been bred up in the
Mohammedan Religion, and after he had been Circumcised and fully grounded in
that abominable Superstition, the Grand Seignior, together with the Kings of
Argier, and Tunis, should send this Nation word, that if they would not admit
him quietly for their King, and allow him all those Priests he should bring
with him a free exercise of their Religion in England, they would then make War
upon this Nation with all the Forces they could raise. I ask you what we ought
to do in this case, whether we should receive him for our King, or keep him out?


M. I must confess it is a nice Question, and since it is a thing that never
did yet, nor I hope will ever come to pass, I think I may freely Answer you,
That supposing this Prince could be proved to be the very same who was carried
away so many years ago, we ought, notwithstanding his false Belief, to receive
him; especially if he would solemnly Swear, only to worship God in private
after his own way; and that he would Swear not to violate our Religion, or
invade our Liberties and Properties; and this being done, I think we ought then
to admit him for our lawful Sovereign; since, as you your self have already
acknowledged at our third Meeting, the Supreme Powers are not to be resisted,
because they are of a different Religion from that of the People or Nation they
Govern.


F. Very well: But let me tell you, In this you are much more kind to Mohammedan
and Heretical Princes, than the Church of Rome, who have decreed, That no
Prince ought to be received as right Heir to a Crown, who is a Pagan, Turk, or
Heretic; and upon this ground it was, that the States of France, during the
time of the League, by the Pope's Decree, refused to own Henry King of Navarre
for their Sovereign; and also, that the Papists of the Nuntio Party in Ireland
during the late Rebellion, refused to own the late Duke of Ormond for Lord
Lieutenant of that Kingdom, because the King was a Protestant.

But pray answer me a Question or two further; Suppose this Prince refused to
promise these or such things, or else if he did promise, and Swear them, pray
tell me how could we be assured, that according to the Principles of that
Religion he had been bred under, and those Arbitrary Notions he had learned
concerning the Absolute Power of Kings in Barbary, and which he would believe
due to himself, as being as Absolute a Monarch as any of them; I say, how such
a Prince ever could be trusted? Since if he had the whole Power of the Militia
in his hands, he might bring in what number of Turkish or Moorish Guards he
should think fit, who might easily set up that Religion and Government too, in
this Nation, since, according to your Principles of Passive Obedience and
Non-resistance, no Man ought to lift up so much as a Finger against him, though
he went about to make us all Turks and Slaves.


M. Well, supposing all this, as long as it is his Right he ought to have it,
let the consequence be what it will.


F. You have said enough, I desire no more; but I hope every true Protestant
and English man will be of another mind if ever such a case should happen; but
indeed, it appears very strange to me, that a natural Disability, such as
Ideocy or Lunacy, should be esteemed sufficient in all Kingdoms to debarr the
next Heir from the Government, and yet that a Moral or a Religious Disability
should not have the same effect; and though I grant that a King ought not to be
Rebelled against, or resisted, merely because he is of a different Religion
from that of his Subjects, for I was never for resisting King James merely upon
that score; yet it is another thing when a Prince is not actually possessed of
the Throne, but is to be admitted to it upon such Conditions as may appear safe
for the Religion and Civil constitution of a Kingdom. In this case, if a Prince
be certainly infected with such pernicious Principles either in relation to
Religion or Civil Government, it is much otherwise; as for Example, That no
Faith is to be kept with Heretics; That his own Religion is to be propagated
by Arms, Blood, or Persecution; That no Government can be safe for the Prince,
or in which he can appear Great or Glorious, but as an absolute Monarch; let
such a Prince be either a Christian or a Mohammedan, I think it would be a
certain ruin to a Kingdom to be obliged to receive such a Prince, when they
were morally sure, that he would not only subvert their Religion, but destroy
the very professors of it, and not only those, but alter the Civil constitution
too, by turning it from a limited Kingdom into an absolute despotick Tyranny.

To conclude, I shall only desire you to consider, into what a Country your
Prince of Wales is carried, and what Instructors he is like to have, and what
Principles he will receive from them: and then pray tell me, if he continues
there till he is a Man, what difference there will be between this young Prince
bred up in such a Religion and such Principles, and the same, if he had been
carried away by Pirates to Argier, as I at first supposed?


M. This is a very invidious Comparison; for though I do not approve of the
Roman Catholic Religion, yet sure there is a great deal of difference between
that which professes all the Articles of our Creed, and in which we of our
Church own Salvation may be obtained, and the Mohammedan Superstition, which
denies that fundamental Article of our Creed, ( viz.) That Jesus Christ is the
Son of God; and as for Civil or Political Principles, I hope the King his
Father will take care to have him instructed by some of those English Noblemen
or Gentlemen who are now with him, in the Customs and Constitutions of the
English Government, and wherein it differs from the French, as we read
Chancellor Fortescue did Prince Henry, Son to Henry the VIth. and I hope he
will come over again to practice them in his own Country before he comes to be
infected with the Arbitrary Principles of the French Government; Vid. Fortescue
de Laud. Leg. Angl. in proem.
but as for those of not keeping Faith with Heretics, and a propagating his
Religion by Persecution, I doubt not but the King his Father will take care not
to commit his Education to any of those who are infected with such Principles;
and I am the more inclined to believe it, because it is very well known that
his Majesty's tenderness and moderation in matters of Religion, and not
persecuting any body for the belief or bare profession of it, as it was the
greatest cause of his late Declaration of Indulgence, so it was the main
original of all his late Misfortunes; nor can I see any reason why a King by
being a Roman Catholic, must necessarily be a Tyrant and a Persecutor, since
you cannot deny but that we have had many good and just Kings of that Religion,
and it is from those Princes that professed it that we derive our Magna Charta,
and most of the privileges we now enjoy.


F. Though I would not be thought to affirm, that the Romish Religion is every
way worse than the Mohammedan, yet this much I may safely affirm, that there is
no Doctrine in all that Superstition, so absurd and contrary to Sense and
Reason, as that of Transubstantiation, held by the Church of Rome, in which the
far greatest part are certainly Idolators, which can never be object^d against
the Turks; and therefore though I will not deny but that a Man may be saved in
the Communion of the Romish Church, yet it is not for being a Papist, but only
as far as he practices Christ's Precepts, and trusts in his Merits, that he can
ever obtain that favor from God.

But as for those evil Principles both in Religion and Civil Government, which
you cannot deny but are now commonly believed and practiced in France, and
which you hope King James will take care that the Prince his Son shall be bred
to avoid; I wish it may prove as you say; but if you will consider the Men that
are like to be his Tutors and Instructors in matters of Religion, viz. his
Fathers and Mothers Confessors the Jesuits, and for Civil Government, those
Popish Lords and Gentlemen of notorious Arbitrary Principles and Practices, who
are gone over to King James, you will have small reason to believe, that there
is ever a Fortescus now to be found among the Englishmen in France, or who is
likely to instill into him those true English Principles you mention.

And though I do not affirm, that every Popish Prince must needs be a
Persecutor, yet since that wholly depends upon those Priests that have the
management of their Consciences, show me a Prince in Europe who has a Jesuit
for his Confessor, and tell me, if he has not deserved that Character.

But though I am so much of your Opinion, that King James ownes the greatest
part of his Misfortunes to his Declaration for Liberty of Conscience; yet was
it not so much to the thing it self, as to his Arbitrary manner of doing it by
assuming a Dispensing Power contrary to Law; and you may be very well assured
by the little opposition which the late Acts met with for taking off the
Penalties against Conventicles and not coming to Church, in respect of all
Dissenters, except the Papists, that King James might have as easily obtained a
like Act to pass in respect of those also, as to the free profession of their
Religion, and having Mass in their Houses, which is more than the Papists will
allow the Protestants in any Country in Europe. And therefore I must beg your
pardon if I still find great reason to doubt whether K. James his tenderness
toward those that differed from him in matters of Religion, and the Indulgence
he gave them were purely out of consideration of tender Consciences, and not
rather thereby to destroy the Church of England Established by Law; since the
Dispute began between King James and his Parliament, was not about Liberty of
Conscience, but those Offices and Commands which the King was resolved to
bestow upon the Papists, whether the Parliament would or not. And certainly
there is a great deal of difference between a Liberty for a Man to enjoy the
free profession of his own Religion, and the power and benefit of having all
the chief Employments of Honor and Profit in the Commonwealth. But that the
Indulgence of Popish Princes toward those that dissent from them in matters of
Religion, may not always proceed from pure Tenderness and Compassion, appears
from a Manuscript Treatise of F. Parsons, that great Jesuit in Queen
Elizabeth's time) which I have been told was found in King James's Closet after
his departure. This (if you can see it) will show you, that the subtle Jesuit
does there direct his Popish Successor in order to the more quiet introducing
the Romish-Catholick Religion, to grant a general Toleration of all Religions,
out of a like design. Thus did Julian the Apostare long ago, tolerate all the
Sects and Heresies in the Christian Religion, because he thereby hoped utterly
to confound and destroy it.

But as to what you allege concerning Magna Charta's being granted by Popish
Princes, and that there has been many good Kings of that persuasion: As I will
not deny either the one or the other; so I desire you to remember with what
struglling and great difficulties this Charter was at first obtained and
afterward preserved, though it was no more than a Declaration of most of those
Ancient Rights and Liberties which the Nation had always enjoyed. And you may
also remember that they were Popish Princes, who more than once obtained the
Pope's Dispensation to be discharged from those solemn Oaths they had taken to
observe those Charters; and though there has been diverse good Princes before
the Reformation, yet even the very best of them made the severest Laws against
Protestants, and were the most cruel in their Persecutions, witness King Henry
the IVth, Henry the Vth, and Queen Mary. And indeed, it is dangerous to rely
upon the Faith of a Prince, who looks upon it as a piece of Merit to destroy
all Religions but his own; and when he finds it cannot be done by Law, will not
stick to use any Arbitrary means to bring it about. To conclude, pray consider
whether the strict observing or violation of Magna Charta and his Coronation
Oath, has been the cause of King James's Abdication. Pardon this long
Discourse which your Vindication of the Opinion and Practices of Popish Princes
has drawn from me.


M. Pray Sir, let us quit these invidious Subjects, which can do no good, since
Princes must be owned and submitted to, let their Principles and Practice* be
never so Tyrannical, and let us return again to the matter in hand. I will
therefore at present suppose the Prince of Wales to have been either dead, or
justly laid aside. now make it out to me how you can justify the placing the
Prince and Princess of Orange in the Throne, when the Crown is really her right
after the Prince of Wales, and not her Husbands; as also the putting the
Government solely into his hands, since this can no ways agree with the Act of
Recognition to King James the First, which you your self cannot deny but ought
to be observed, when it may be done without any apparent hazard or prejudice to
the Protestant Religion and the Constitution of our Government, which I think
might have been as well, if not better secured, by letting it have gone in the
right Line, that by placing the Crown upon the Head of a Prince, who, though it
is true, is of the Blood Royal by his Mother, yet being a Foreigner* is a mere
Stranger to our Government and Laws, and has been bred up in Calvinistical
Principles, and upon that score is not like to have any good intentions toward
the Government and Ceremonies of the Church of England, as appears by his late
agreeing to abolish Episcopacy in Scotland, upon his accepting that Crown from
the Presbyterian Convention.


F. If these be all the objections you have to make against placing King
William and Queen Mary in the Throne, I hope they will not be of any great
moment to your self, or any other considerate man; for if that upon the
Abdication of King James and the impossibity of determining your Prince of
Wales's Title (if it be one) a Regency was impracticable and unsafe for the
Nation at this conjuncture of time, when we want a King to hold a Parliament,
as well to raise Money to defend us against the Power of France, as also to
make new Laws for the ease and reformation of the Kingdom, all which a Regents
acting without Royal Authority could never do, by the constitution of this
Kingdom: so that if there was now a necessity of placing some body in the
Throne, for the Common Good and Safety of the whole Commonwealth, I think you
your self cannot but acknowledge, that the Princess of Orange had an Hereditary
right to the Crown, and if her Highness had, the Prince her Husband also ought
to Govern the Kingdom in her Right during her life, and those who deny King
Henry the VIIth to be Lawful King before his Marriage with the Princess
Elizabeth, will yet grant he was so in her Right after his Marriage; and this
has not been only the Custom in England, but also in other Kingdoms of Europe,
as I can give you several Instances. For upon this ground it was that Ferdinand
King of Arragon, by Marrying with Isabella Queen of Castile, Governed that
Kingdom during his Life; so also Anthony Duke of Bourbon marrying with Jane
Queen of Navarre, did in her Right administer the Government of that part of
it, which was left unconquered by the Spaniards; and here at home Philip Prince
of Spain by his Marriage with Queen Mary, had certainly in her Right Governed
this Kingdom, and had enjoyed something more than the bare Title of King, had
he not by the Articles of Marriage, confirmed by Act of Parliament, been
expressly debarred from it.


M. Admit all this to be true, yet this was only the enjoyment of a bare
Matrimonial Crown, and held no longer than during the Lives or Marriage with
those Queens you mention. But pray tell me, how can the Convention according to
the ancient constitution of this Kingdom, justify the settlement of the Crown,
not only on King William during the Queens Life, But for his own Life also, to
the prejudice not only of his own Issue (if ever he have any by the Princess)
but also of the Princess of Denmark and her Heirs?


F. I doubt not but to show you, that this may be easily justified by the
constitution of the Kingdom, and former Precedents of what has been done in
the like cases. First, as to the Constitution, I have already proved that upon
the deposition of a King, (which is all one with a Forfeiture of the Crown) the
Great Council or Parliament has taken upon them to Elect or Admit either the
next Heir by Blood, or some Prince (though more remote) of the Royal Family to
the Crown; thus King Henry the IVth upon the Deposition or Resignation of King
Richard the Ild. was placed in the Throne by the Archbishop of Canterbury,
after the two Houses had Voted and consented he should Reign over them; though
I grant that by right of Blood, Edmund Earl of March ought to have succeeded to
it; but he being then a Child was passed by unmention'd, Duke Henry being then
powerful, and having delivered the Kingdom from the Tyranny and Evil Government
of Richard the ^Id. I shall pass by Richard the IIId. because I own his
Government to have begun by Unsurpation and to have been established by the
Murder of his Nephews. But as for Henry the VIIth. I have already showed you,
that the Parliament before his Marriage with the Princess Elizabeth, settled the
Crown upon him, and the Heirs of his Body, by virtue of which he held it all
his Reign: whereas there is no such thing done in the present case of King
William, since he has only the Crown settled upon him during his own Life, with
the remainder after his decease without Issue by the Queen to her, and not his
Right Heirs; and as for such Children as he may have by her, it is agreeable to
reason, that he should hold the Crown by that which we call the Courtesy of
England during his Life, and not from a King to become a Subject to his own
Children, in case he should desire to live here after her Majesty's decease,
which I hope God will prevent.


M. I confess you have dressed up a pretty plausible Title for King William; but
yet all that you have said amounts to no more than this, that because other
Kings have been Usurpers he may be so too; for as to all the instances you have
brought, they have been only from depositions or manifest usurpations, both
which our Laws have condemned as absolutely unlawful, as I have showed you has
been declared by two Acts of Parliament, against the Title of Henry the IVth,
and his Descendents; but since you will not insist upon the right of Richard
the IIId. I pass to that Act of Henry the VIIth. which (as I told you before)
so I must repeat it again, that it was done upon his supposed Right by Blood,
as Heir to the House of Lancaster, and upon that pretense he claimed the Crown
as his Right, in his Speech to the first Parliament he called; besides the
Princess Elizabeth, the Queen de Iure made no claim to the Crown, and so did
tacitly resign it, which seemed to make him de Iure as well as de Facto King,
and if it were done otherwise, I look upon that whole Act as void in it self,
because made by him before his Marriage with that Princess, and whilst he was
and Usurper upon her Right; so that certainly it is no argument that since
Parliaments have acted illegally, therefore your Convention may do so too; for
it is a known Maxim in our Civil Law, a facto ad Ius non valet consequentia,
therefore whatever they have done toward creating a good Title to King William
in respect of the Queen his Wife, and his Issue by her, yet this does no way
excuse the wrong done to the Princess of Denmark and her Issue, in case they
survive your King.


F. It Is very wonderful to me, to see how ingenious some Men are in finding
faults with the present settlement of things, though never so much for the
best, if not done exactly according to suit with their Humor, or Hypothesis,
when indeed there can no fault be justly found with it, for you agree that if
the Queen has a Right, King William has so also, during his Life, and whether
the Princess of Denmark and her issue may survive the King, is yet uncertain;
but if either she or they should happen to survive his Majesty, yet since she
has made no claim or protestation in the Convention, against the Kings holding
the Crown after the Decease of the Queen. I cannot see why this should not pass
for a tacit Resignation o^ ^er Right, as well as in the case of the Princess
Elizabeth you but now mentioned.

But admit his present Majesty according to the late received rules of
Succession, has not a Title by Descent; yet according to those principles I
have already laid down, he certainly has not only a Right to the Crown, from
that inherent power which I suppose does still remain in the Eslates of the
Kingdom, as Representatives of the whole Nation to bestow the Crown on every
Abdication, or Forfeiture thereof, on such Prince of the Blood Royal, as they
shall think best to deserve it* and upon this account I conceive there is none
of the Blood, that can stand in competition with his Present Majesty for
Prudence, Valor, Moderation, and all other Royal Virtues; and therefore it is
not at all to be wondered at, if the Convention has in this case exercised
that Original Power, which the People reserved to it self, at the first
institution of Kingly Government in this Island; especially if we consider his
present Majesty not only as a Conqueror over King James, but as our Deliverer
from his Oppression, and that Arbitrary Government that we were so lately
under, and which was like to be much worse, had his reign continued a little
longer.

Therefore I cannot but here take occasion to vindicate his Present Majesty
from those exceptions you have made against his Country, and Civil, as well as
Religious Principles, First, As to his Country, it is true he is a Foreigner;
yet that can he no exception against his admission to the Throne, since it was
none against his great Grandfather King James, and I doubt not but his Majesty
may understand as much of the English Constitution and Government, as his said
Grand father did, when he first came to the Crown.

But as for his principles in Religion, I cannot see any reason to suspect him
more inclinable to the Church Government of Holland, then that of England,
since he was bred up under a Mother, who was always firm to the Religion and
Discipline of our Church, and ever since he was Married to the Princess, he
has always showed a very great respect to its Liturgy and Ceremonies, by his
so constant frequenting his Princesses Chapel; so that besides his Majesty's
Interest to maintain Episcopacy, as most agreeable to the Monarchy, and Ancient
Constitution of this Kingdom, it is likewise (if he were able) not in his power
to destroy the Church of England, since the main body of the Clergy, Nobility,
and Gentry of this Nation is to zealous for its preservation, that if he had
any such inclinations, it would not be easy for him to effect it, and he is
too wise a Prince to let others persuade him so visibly against his own
interest, and having so late an example before his Eyes, that it was King
James's ruin to attempt it.

As for what you say of Scotland, it is true, Presbitery is for the present set
up there, but it is uncharitable to impute this to the Kings inclinations; for
it is notorious, that of them which call themselves Episcopal in that Kingdom,
a very great number did either out of prejudice to the Princes Cause, or in
contempt of his Power, refuse to be chosen Members of the Convention, or else
after they were chosen, did so far adhere to King James's interest as to desert
it; as did my Lord Dundee, and many others, and by that means gave the
Presbyterian Party an advantage to carry all things as they pleased; and this
Party finding the King not well settled here, and the Irish in Ireland in Arms
against him, took hold of that opportunity to put the abolishing of Episcopacy
into the very instrument of Government, and to press it upon him at a time when
an unavoidable necessity and the obstinacy of too many of the Episcopal Party
forced him to consent to it. wherefore this no way shows his Majesty's
inclinations to set up Presbytery even in Scotland; much less does it prove he
would set it up here, where the Circumstances, are quite different; for here
the main body of the People hate that Government, and will be so far from
desiring it, that they will never endure it; so that as to this, your fears of
King William are as vain, as your hopes of King James.

I shall conclude with a few words in answer to your reply against those
examples wherein I have shown you that the Crown has always been under such a
disposition as the two Mouses of Parliament should appoint, to which you have
nothing else to object, but that their admission of Henry the IV th to the
Crown was condemned as unlawful by two Acts of Parliament, which I have already
answered, by showing you that those Acts were obtained by Richard Duke of York,
and Edward the IV th his Son, by actual Rebellion, and by as great a force upon
King Henry the VI th, as ever was used against King Richard the II d, by Henry
the IV th, and as for the Statute of the first of Henry the VII th, you have
found out a very easy way of answering it; by affirming that it was done
whilst he was an Usurper, and before his Marriage, or that he had any right to
be King. But by this way of arguing, no Act he ever passed would be good, since
It is certain he did never take upon him to Govern in right of his Queen, as
all those that have writ his Life do acknowledge; and therefore if the
Parliament would then settle the Crown upon him and his right Heirs without any
respect to his Queen, or her Issue or Sisters, in case she should die
Childless, I cannot see why the Convention may not as well now settle the Crown
upon King William and Queen Mary, and their issue, with remainder to himself
for Life; especially since he has also another Title of his own to confirm it
( viz.) that of a Conqueror over King James, and our Deliverer from his
Arbitrary Government.


M. I shall not go about to derogate from King Williams Personal Virtues, which
you so highly extol; only I wish I may not prove too true a Prophet, since
that is not the main question between us. I shall only take upon me to answer
in the first place what you have urged on the behalf of King William's pretense
to the Crown as a Conqueror over King James, and Deliverer of the Nation; for
whatsoever he may pretend to in respect of the latter, I am sure he cannot
justly pretend to the former; since sure he can never have any right by
Conquest: who expressly sets forth in his first Declaration, that he only came
to obtain a Free Parliament, and to Redress our Grievances. Much less can he be
properly called a Conqueror, who never overcame his Enemy in any pitched
Battle, but by false Stories made the King's Army desert him, and then, when
this was done, having forced the King to leave the Kingdom for fear, he has in
the day of his power by these means obtained the Crown; and as for a Deliverer,
you must pardon me, if I cannot think him so, since I am not yet satisfied that
the worst of King James's Oppressions ever deserved that the Prince of Orange
should take the pains to come over to redress them.

And therefore your parallel between your King's Title, and that of Henry the
IV th, and Henry the VII th does not at all agree, since both of them claimed
not so much by Conquest, or force of Arms, as by a pretended right of
inheritance, as you may see by both their Claims. And as for Henry the IV th,
it is plain, he looked upon his Title by descent of blood (having been allowed
in Parliament) to be so good, that for the first seven years of his Reign he
never thought it worth while to pass an Act for the Settlement of the Crown
upon himself, and his Issue; but for Richard the III d, and Henry the VII th,
they were so far from owning their Titles to any Act or Declaration of
Parliament, that they first clapped the Crown upon their own heads, and after
they had done it, they immediately called their Parliaments; which though they
recognized their Titles, yet did not make them Kings, but found them so.
whereas the Convention has by their sole Authority, made the Prince of Orange,
and Princess, King and Queen of England, to the prejudice of the right Heirs of
the Crown.


F. I doubt not, but what I have already said, may very well be desended,
notwithstanding the utmost you have now argued against it. In the first place,
as to what you say against King William's Title, as a Conqueror over King
James, is very trivial; for though it is true, the Prince declared before he
came over, that his coming was for no other end but to obtain a Free
Parliament, Redress Grievances, and to remove Evil Counselors from King James,
yet that is still to be understood, that the King would agree to those
reasonable demands the Prince then ^a^e; for if by his own obstinacy he would
bring things to that pass, as that instead of redressing those violations he
had made upon our fundamental Laws, he raised an Army to support himself in
them; and when he thought this Army would not sight in his so bad a Cause, he
then disbanded it; and by that, as well as the desertion of the Throne, owned
himself vanquished: Can any body deny the Prince of Orange a right of making
what advantage he could of his Successes? And therefore I doubt not but that
the Prince might if he pleased have taken upon him the Title of King
immediately upon King James's first departure; and have summoned a Parliament
to recognize his Title, as Henry the VII th did after his Victory at Bosworth
Field; nor would this have made him a Conqueror over the Kingdom, since he
never made War against it, but came to deliver it from Tyranny and Oppression.
Nor did William the Corquerour himself by his Victory over King Harold, ever
pretend to a right by Conquest over the whole Kingdom, but only over the
Estates and Persons of those who had fought against him, as I have fully proved
at our Tenth Meeting; nor did Henry the VII th in the first Speech he made to
the Parliament after his taking upon him the Crown, claim a right to it by
Conquest over the Kingdom, as his own words were in that Speech you mention to
this first Parliament, but only that by the just judgment of God in giving him
the Victory over his Enemy in the Field; and he then farther declared, that all
his Subjects of whatsoever State and Condition, should enjoy their Lands and
Goods to them and their Heirs as they did before, except such Persons who were
to be attainted by Act of Parliament.

Nor is it any objection against his right by Conquest that he obtained no
Victory in a pitched Battle; since I never heard or read, that to make a Prince
a Conqueror, it is necessary that so many thousand Men should be killed upon
the spot; for admit the adverse Prince against whom he fights, will through
Cowardice desert his Army, or that his Army will desert him, either through
fear, or a sense of the greater justice of the adverse Princes Cause, or an
affection to his Person, so that it never come to a Battle, yet it has been in
all Ages looked upon as all one with a Victory, as I can show you from several
examples in History: and particularly in Plutarch concerning Pyrrhus King of
Epyrus, who making War against Demetrius then King of Macedon, In vita Pyrri.
and both Armies being encamped near each other, the Army of the latter forsook
him, and went over to Pyrrhus, as well out of hatred to him, as esteem for his
Enemy; so that Demetrius being forced to steal away in disguise, Pyrrhus
thereupon was immediately in the Field Proclaimed King of Macedon. And I doubt
not but the Prince of Orange might have done the same, had it not been for his
great moderation, and least it might give his Adversaries occasion to traduce
him, that he came over for no other end but to drive the King out of his
Kingdom; and therefore he chose rather to owe the Crown to the free Act of the
Nation, than to his right by Conquest over King James; but yet I do not think
he has at all lost that right, though he does not think fit (for fear of
giving offense) to insist upon it; and therefore certainly the Convention might
very well justify the settling the Crown upon his Highness during his Life, not
only as a Conqueror over K. James, but a Deliverer of the Nation from his
Oppression, though the Prince was pleased to accept it upon those terms
expressed in the late Declaration of the Convention, and upon his free promise
to preserve preserve our Religion, Laws, and Liberties, which he has since also
confirmed by his Coronation Oath.

But as to what you say, that the Prince made the Kings Army desert him, and
wrought the People into hatred of his Person by lying Stories and mean Arts, is
altogether untrue; since I know of no Reports he made of the King, or his
Government, but what are in his first Declaration, and that is certainly true
in every part of it, and as has been justified by the express Declaration of
the Convention in every particular, except that concerning the Prince of Wales,
which I confess is left still undecided because (as I have already proved) it
is impossible to give any certain judgment in it, unless the Witnesses as well
as the Infant himself could be brought over hither. nor does the Prince in his
said Declaration say any more concerning that business than that there are
violent suspicions that the pretended Prince of Wales was not Born of the
Queen; but for the report of the Secret League with France for the extirpation
of the Protestant Religion, as there is no such thing in his Highnesses
Declaration, so the spreading of it cannot be laid to his charge, since he
never gave it out as I know of; yet there are certainly great presumptions, and
too much cause of suspicion that it may be so, as I proved at our last Meeting.
But though you will not allow the Prince the Title of our Deliverer, yet I am
sure the greatest part both of the Clergy, and Laity of the Church of England
were once of Opinion, that King James's violations both upon our Religion and
Laws were so great, that nothing could preserve the Kingdom from a total
Subversion in its Established Religion, and Civil Constitution, but his
Highnesses coming over; and most of the Bishops were of that Opinion, who, now
the Government is settled, refused to take the Oath of Allegiance to their
present Majesty's.

But to answer what you say, that the manner of Henry the IV ths, and Henry the
VII ths coming to the Crown, does not at all agree with this Case of King
William, because they claimed by right of blood, which you say King William
cannot do; that is not so in respect of the Queen, who has certainly a right to
succeed her Father by right of blood, in case the Prince off Wales be not the
true Son of the Queen, and until he can be proved so, we must at present look
upon him as if he were not so at all; so that the Convention has done no more
in settling the Crown upon the King, during his Life, than what the Great
Council of the Kingdom have frequently done before upon other vacancies of the
Throne, as I have proved from the Examples of William Rufus, and Henry the
First, King Stephen, King John, and Henry the Third. And it is very hard to
suppose the whole Nation to have been guilty of Perjury and Treason, upon their
Swearing to, and Fighting for those Princes after they were so Solemnl^
Elected, Crowned, and Invested with the Royal Power. But as for Edward III. his
first and best Title was from the election of the Great Council of the Kingdom,
who I doubt not but if they had found him unworthy of the Royal Dignity by
reason of folly or madness, or Tyrannical Principles, would have set him aside,
and have made his young^^ Brother King, a Protector to govern in the King's
Name with Royal Power having never been known in England till the Reign of
Henry the VI th; but as for Henry the IV th, notwithstanding his claim by right
of Blood, I have already proved that the Pa^liament by their placing him in the
Throne did not at all allow it, nor is any such Right recited in the Act of the
7 th of Henry the IV th, which by the Crown is entailed upon that King and his
four successive Sons. And though it is true Henry the Seventh also claimed the
Crown by right of Inheritance, in his Speech in Parliament, yet they were so
far from allowing it, that they do not so much as mention it in that Act of
Setlement, which, as I have recited, they made of it upon that and the Heirs of
his Body: And therefore I think I may still maintain, that the Convention has
done nothing in the present Setlement of the Crown, but what has been formerly
done upon every vacancy of the Throne, either by deposition or resignation of
the King, or Abdication, or Forfeiture of the Crown; as in the case of King
James, in which the Convention have done no more than exercised that Power
which has always been supposed to reside in the great Council of the Kingdom,
of settling the Crown upon such a Prince of the Blood Royal as they shall think
best to deserve it.

Thus much I have said to preserve the Ancient Right of the Great Council of
the Nation. But to put all this out of dispute, I have been credibly informed,
that the Princess of Denmark her self did by some of her Servants in both
Houses, as well of the Lords as Commons, declare upon a great Debate that arose
about securing her Highnesses Right to the Crown immediately after her Sister
the Queen; that her Highness had desired them to assure the Convention, that
she was willing to acquiesce in whatever they should determine concerning the
Succession of the Crown, since it might tend to the present setlement and
safety of the Nation: which I think is a better Cession of her Right to his
present Majesty, than any you can prove that the Empress Mawd made to her Son
Henry the Second, or than the Countess of Richmond ever made to her Son Henry
the Seventh.


M. You have often talked of this forfeiture and extravagant Power of your
Convention, by whom you suppose they are not obliged to place the Crown upon
the head of the next Heir by Blood, which I shall prove to be a vain Notion;
for if there be an absolute forfeiture of the Crown, the Government would have
been absolutely Dissolved; for since there is no Legal Government without a
King, if the Throne were really vacant, and that the People might place whom
they pleased in it, yet the Convention can have no Power to do it, as their
Representatives; since upon your supposed dissolution of the Original Contract
between the King and the People, there was an end of all Conventions and
Parliaments too. And therefore if a King could have been chosen at all, it
ought to have been by the Votes of the whole body of the Clergy, Nobility, and
Commons, in their own single Persons, and not by any Council or Convention to
represent them, since the Laws for restraining the Election of Parliament Men
only to Freeholders, are upon this supposed Dissolution of the Government,
altogether void; and if you say such a way of Election is now impossible, I
shall do so too; but however, it plainly shows the absurdity of supposing a
King could ever now be fairly Elected were all the Blood Royal totally extinct.

As for what you say concerning that Cession which the Princess of Denmark made
of her Right to the Crown, I never heard any thing of it before; but admit it
were so, this could only serve in relation to her self, and she could not give
up the Right of her Brother the Prince of Wales, no, nor that of her own
Children, if God shall give her any.


F. This Objection concerning the total Dissolution of the Government proceeds
from a wan^ of your consideration of what the ancient Government of England
was, not only before, but a good while after your pretended Conquest; which was
not a settled Hereditary Monarchy, but a Testamentary, or Elective Kingdom,
where the Kings, being often recommended by the Testament of the precedent
King, were chosen out of the Royal Family, though not according to the Ruler of
Succession now in use; and therefore in all such Governments, it is very well
known, that there was at the first institution of Kingly Government among them,
a great Council, or Assembly of Estates of the whole Kingdom appointed, who
upon the death of the last King and vacancy of the Throne, were still to meet
of course to appoint a Successor, which was commonly one of the Sons of the
last King, or at least some other Prince of the Royal Blood. Thus it was, till
of late years, in Denmark and Swe^den, and so it was anciently in France during
the Succession of the first Race; as also in Spain during the Government of the
Vandals; and so it likewise was in England during the whole Succession of our
English Saxon Kings, and so I have also proved it continued till Edward the
First. And though since his time that the Crown has been claimed by right of
Inheritance, yet in all times precedent it is apparent that the great Council
of the Kingdom upon the death of every King, Assembled by their own inherent
Authority, to consider whom they should place in the Throne, which they then
looked upon as vacant. And therefore though I grant in the case of Edward the
First, the Parliament did not only ordain him Successor to his Father, but also
recognized his ^ight by Blood; yet for all this, they still remained their
an^ient Power of meeting without Summons from the King* he being in the Holy
Land, and they not knowing whether he was alive or dead; so that it is a false
assertion to affirm, that there can be no Government without a King, since in
all those vacancies of the Throne, it is plain, the Government devolved of
course upon the geat Council of the Nation. And though it is true, there can be
now no Parliament without a King, according to the present notion and
acceptance of that Term, yet before that word was ever in use, (which is no
older than about the middle of the Reign of Henry the Third) it is plain, that
our great Councils often met by their own inherent Authority without any King,
and preserved the Pe^ce of the Kingdom till a new King was either chosen or
declared. And though it is true the Crown has been long enjoyed by those who
have claimed by Inheritance, yet there is no reason for all that, if the like
cases should fall out as have done in former times, why the Government should
devolve to the mixed Multitude now, any more than it did then; since it may be
as well supposed, that the same tacit Contract still continues of maintaining
the Original constitution of great Councils, which I have proved to be as
Ancient as Kingly Government it self. And though perhaps the Form of choosing or
sending th^se Representatives of the Nation may have been altered in diverse
particulars by for ^er Laws, or received Customs, yet this is nothing to the
purpose, as long as the thing it self remains the same in Substance as it was
before; for it can never be thought to have been the intent of the People who
Established this form of Government, that upon the extinction of the Royal
Family, the Government should be so quite dissolved, as that it should be left
to the confused Multitude to choose what form of Government they should think
fit.

Therefore to conclude, I wish you would be persuaded to own this Government as
it is now Established, and to take (...) Oath of Allegiance which is enjoined
by the Declaration of the Convention, who are the only proper and legal Judges
we can now have of conferring the Rights of those to whom our Allegiance is
due. And if in case a Dispute about the right Heir of the Crown, the People of
this Nation were not all bound to the decision of this Assembly, we must
necessarily fall together by the ears, and fight it out as they do in the
East Indies; where upon the death or deposition of a King, he has still the
Right who can Conquer his Competitors in Battle.


M. Well, I wish there were not something very like it practiced here of late;
for I think you will grant, that if the Prince of Orange's Party had not
prevailed over the King's, the Convention would never have placed the Crown
upon his head.

But I must beg your pardon if I cannot agree to your Proposals of taking the
New Oath of Allegiance to King William and Queen Mary, since I have already
taken the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance to King James, and I do not believe
that any Power on earth can disengage me from that Oath as long as he and his
Son the Prince of Wales are alive: For as to your Doctrine of Abdication or
Forfeiture, they are too hard for my Reason to understand, or for my Conscience
to comply with; and therefore it is all one to me whom your Convention places
on the Throne, since I am very well satisfied, that none but the King can have
a Right to it.


F. I wish I could see some better reasons for this opinion of yours, than
those you have already given, for if you could convince that me the Nation has
done any thing in this Revolution which cannot well be justified by the Ancient
Customs and Constitution of the Kingdom, I should come over to your opinion;
But if King James has truly Abdicated or Forfeited the Crown (as I hope I have
sufficiently made out) and that your supposed Prince of Wales either is not
really, or else cannot now be proved to be the true Son of the Queen, by reason
of those Obstacles and Impediments I have shown you; I cannot see any thing to
the contrary why you should not be wholly free, and discharged from your former
Oath of Allegiance to King James; so that King William and Queen Mary being now
placed on the Throne, your Allegiance to King James, and the supposed Prince of
Wales is lawfully determined: pray tell me therefore, why you cannot take this
new Oath of Allegiance; since you have the Judgment and Declaration of the
Convention, which is the Representative of the whole Nation, to justify you in
so doing?


M. I must tell you once again, that I think Allegiance is not only due to the
King by the Law of the Land, but also, by the Laws of God and Nature, and
consequently cannot be dissolved by any subsequent Judgment of a Convention,
who are and always ought to be Subjects to him and his Right Heirs, as long as
they are in Being; and therefore I should not allow the Prince and Princess of
Orange for such, were the King now actually dead: nay if King James himself had
stayed in England, and had been so over awed by fear, or overcome by
persuasions, as to have declared in Parliament, that the Prince of Wales was
not his true and lawful Son born of the Queen, and had thereupon settled the
Crown upon the Princess of Orange as his Heir Apparent; I could never have
thought my self obliged to swear Allegiance to her, or to own her for my lawful
Sovereign, as long as the Prince of Wales, or the Heirs of his Body are in
Being; since I am very well satisfied, and that by unexceptionable proofs that
he is really the Son of the King and Queen; for I think I have sufficiently
made out by several Declarations of Parliament, that the Hereditary Right of
the Crown can never be defeated nor altered by any Statute whatsoever, but
according to the Act of Recognition of King James, the first's Title (which I
have already urged) the Crown ought to descend to the next Heir by Blood,
according to the rules of Descent, I have now laid down.


F. I cannot but admire your obstinacy in this matter, which proceeds from your
old error of believing, that there is a Natural or Divine Right of Succession
to Crowns different or abstracted from the Civil and Political Laws, and
Constitutions of particular Kingdoms, which I think I have already confuted, by
showing you that there was no such thing in Nature as a Patriarchal Right in
Adam or Noah, or their Heirs; nor yet to any other King as their Assigns, or
Representatives; and therefore though I grant that Allegiance to every lawful
King is due by the Laws of God and Nature, yet who that King is, or who is to
be his lawful Successor in limited or mixed Monarchies (as ours is) can only be
determined by the Assembly of Estates of the whole Nation: for notwithstanding
all you have said, there is a very great difference between the Legal Rights of
Princes, and the natural Rights of Fathers and Husbands, which yet may cease
and be dissolved in some cases, E.L.R. p. 27.
as I have already sufficiently proved: for I think it is evident that not only
a Legal Title, and Legal Authority may be parted from each other; but that
Legal Titles and Legal Authority may be rightfully separated from the persons
to whom they were once due, which natural Rights can never be. A King may cease
to be a King, though a Father can never cease to be a Father; for Laws have not
the same force and power that nature has. Now all men confess this separation
may be made by a voluntary resignation as also by Conquest in a just War, both
which will divest such a Prince of all Right and Authority to Govern; and if it
may be done by either of these ways, his Right and Authority is not inseparable
from his Person; since then there is no natural inherent property in Lands or
Kingdoms, but what proceeds from the particular Laws of each Kingdom, or
Commonwealth: therefore who ever the Supreme Power appointed by the
Constitution of such Kingdoms shall Judge or Determine to have a true and legal
Right to the same are to be owned, and esteemed as the true legal owners and
possessors thereof, by all the Subjects: so that if a King can part with his
Kingship, it is possible he may lose it too; since there are more ways than
one, of parting with that which may be parted with, If then a voluntary
Resignation of a Crown, or Conquest in a just War, can give another Prince a
just Title to it, I cannot see why a ^acit Abdication or Forfeiture of a Crown
upon a limited Kings total breach of the Fundamental Laws and Constitution of
the Kingdom, should not as much discharge all the Subjects of their Allegiance
to him, and also give the great Council, as the Representative of the Nation, a
like Right of Ordaining a Successor upon such a Vacancy of the Throne, and who
being once placed therein, all the people of the Nation ought to pay the same
Allegiance to him as they did to his Predecessors.

But as for the latter part of your supposition, that the right Heirs of the
Crown by blood, must always necessarily succeed to it, that is likewise sounded
upon two very false principles, first, that a lineal hereditary succession to
the Crown, is established by the Fundamental Laws and Customs of the Kingdom.
Secondly, That the Succession to it cannot be limited by the Parliament or
Great Council of the Nation, the former of which suppositions I have confuted
at our last meetting: and as for the other, you cannot deny but the Crown has
been frequently settled and limited by Act of Parliament, contrary to the common
rules of Succession, as has been sufficiently proved by the Statute above
mentioned of Henry the VII th, as also by those several Acts concerning the
Succession in Henry the VIII ths time, and so it continues at this day by the
Statute of the 13 th of Queen Elizabeth, Chap. 1.
whereby it is declared Treason during the Queens Life, for any person to
affirm that the Queen and Parliament had not power to make Laws to limit and
bind the descent and inheritance of the Crown: or that this Act was not of
sufficient force, to bind, limit and govern all Persons, their Rights, and
Titles that in any way claim any Interest or possibility in or to the Crown of
England in Possession, Remainder, Succession, Inheritance, or otherwise
howsoever; and every Person so holding or affirming after the decease of the
Queen, shall forfeit all his Goods and Chattels: So that I can see no just
reason you can have to refuse Swearing Allegiance to Their present Majesty's,
and Their Successors, according to the limitation in the said Act.


M. Well, I see it is in vain to argue these Points any longer with you, since
it would only force me to repeat the same things over again, which will neither
edify you, nor my self; only give me leave to tell you this much, that the
last part of your Argument (which is the only thing that is new in all your
Discourse) is founded upon a very wrong ground; for though I should grant, as I
do not, (since this Act you last mentioned is expired) that the Crown may be
limited, or entailed by Act of Parliament, contrary to the due Rules of
Succession, yet even that will not hold in respect of the present settlement
thereof by the Convention, upon the Prince and Princess of Orange for their two
Lives; since you cannot but know that no Parliament yet, was ever so
presumptuous as to take upon them to settle or limit the Succession of the
Crown without the consent of the King or Queen then in being. Whereas the
present Settlement was first made by the Convention, upon the making of the
Prince and Princess King and Queen; though I grant it was afterward confirmed by
another pretended Act, whereby all Princes that are or shall be Roman
Catholics when the Crown shall descend unto them, are debarred from their
right of Succession; This though I grant to be made after the Prince and
Princess of Orange took upon them the Title of King, and Queen; yet since that
Statute was not made in a Parliament called by the King's Writs, but in a
Convention, who owe their Meeting wholly to the Prince of Orange's Letters, it
is not only void in respect of the subject matter, but also in the manner of
making it; and therefore I cannot believe that the Throne was ever vacant. And
I have as little reason to be satisfied, that the Prince and Princess could be
lawfully placed therein, or that all Roman Catholic Princes can ever be barred
from their right of Succession, when ever it may fall to them.


F. If this be all you have farther to object, I think I can easily answer it;
for in the first place, I have already told you, that the Convention did not
take upon them to create or make any new form of Succession to the Crown, but
only to declare that the Prince and Princess of Orange are Rightful and Lawful
King and Queen of England; for upon supposition of King James's Abdication of
the Crown, and that the Prince of Wales cannot be taken for the lawful Son of
the King 'till he can be brought over, and that his Legitimacy be duly proved,
it must 'till then certainly be their right, and no others; and as for King
William's holding the Crown during his own Life, I have already told you it was
not done without the tacit consent of the Princess of Denmark her self, though
I doubt not but it may also very well be justified upon those suppositions of
the forfeiture of the Crown by King James, and the Conquest the Prince of
Orange made over him; which are sufficient in themselves to bar any legal
claim of those that either are or may pretend to be right Heirs.

But as for the other part of your Objection, whereby you would prove, that
Popish Princes cannot be excluded from the Succession, because the Act was made
not in a Parliament, but a Convention; this wholly proceeds from your want of
Consideration,, that at the first institution of the Government, and long
after, whilst the Kingdom continued Elective, there was no difference between a
Great Council or Convention, and a Parliament; for pray call to mind the four
first Great Councils after your Conquest (reckoning that for one wherein King
William I. was Elected or declared King) whether it was possible for those
Councils to be summoned in the Kings Name, before any body had taken upon
themselves the Title of King; the like I may say in the case of King John, and
Henry the III d, and that this continued after the Succession was settled in the
next Heir by Blood, appears by that Great Council that was summoned after the
death of Henry the Third, which Recognized or Ordained his Son Prince Edward to
be his Successor. So likewise the Parliament that deposed King Edward the
Second, sat both before and after his deposition, and resignation, and elected
his Son Edward the Third to be King, and appointed his Reign to begin from the
time of their Election, and not of his Fathers resignation of the Crown; so
also upon the deposition of King Richard the Second, the same Parliament that
deposed him, placed Henry the Fourth in the Throne; and though the Writs of
Summons were in the name of King Richard, Vide Rot. Parl. 1o Henry IV.
and they were never re-summon'd or new Elected in the Reign of Henry the
Fourth, yet did they still continue to sit, and made diverse new Acts, and
repealed several old ones, all which hold good to this day.

And that the Parliament are the only proper Judges of the right of Succession,
even without the King, you your self must grant, or else how could they declare
in the Thirty Ninth of Henry the VI th, that the claim which Richard Duke of
York made to the Crown could no way be defeated? and certainly if that
unfortunate Prince King Henry the Sixth had had sufficient Power or Interest in
that Parliament, they might, and would have adjudged the Duke of York's Claim
to have been groundless and contrary to Law, and then I believe it would scarce
have ever been heard of again.

But to make it out beyond exception, that a Convention may become a Lawful
Parliament, though never called by the King's Writs, when the King's Authority
and Presence come once to be added to and joined with it, appears by the first
Parliament of King Charles the Second; which though Summoned in the Name of the
Keepers of the Liberties of England, yet nevertheless continued to Sit and make
several Acts which hold good to this day; and I doubt not but they might have
made the like limitations of the Crown in respect of Roman Catholic Princes,
as the Convention have now done, and that it would have held good at this day,
since it is so much for the security of our Religion, Liberties and Properties
that it should be so, since we have found by a dear bought experience in the
Reigns of the four last Kings of the Scotch Line, that still as they began to
favor the Popish Religion and Interest in this Kingdom, so did the Protestant
and true English Interest in respect of our Religion, Liberties and Properties
still decline, 'till at last they were like to be totally ruined, and
extirpated; for that restless and dangerous Faction very well know, that there
is no means possible for them to re-establish their Superstition among us by
due and legal Methods, but only by introducing Arbitrary Power, taking away
Parliaments, or else making them wholly to depend upon the King's Will, as we
see was labored and almost effected in the Reigns of the two last Kings; and
therefore I cannot but believe that the present Parliament has not only acted
wisely, but also legally, to enact that for the future no Prince who is
actually a Roman Catholic shall succeed to the Crown though he be next heir by
blood.


M. I must still tell you I am as little satisfied with your suppositions of
the forfeiture of the Crown by King James, and the Conquest to the Prince of
Orange, as I am with your instances out of History concerning the power of the
Great Councils meeting and choosing a King by their own inherent Authority,
since besides that it was done by Usurpation in those rough and unsettled times;
yet I believe if the ancient Writs of Summons were now in being, you would find
that they were called by those Usurpers, though not by the Title of Kings; but
I defy you to show me since the Reign of Edward the First any Parliament ever
called without the King's Writs of Summons; and though upon the deposition of
Edward and Richard the Second the Parliaments you mention might continue to
sit, and transact public business, yet was it during a plain Usurpation upon
those Princes whom you your self must grant to have been unlawfully deposed;
and therefore we find upon the Parliament Roll of the 21 st of Richard the
Second, that an Act of the first of Edward the Third confirming the Judgment
given upon the two Spencers, Rot. Par. n. 64. 21. Ric. II.
was not only repealed in Parliament, but declared to be unlawful, because
Edward the Second was living, and true King, being imprisoned by his Subjects
at the time of that very Parliament of 1 Edward III. But as for your last
instance of a Conventions declaring it self a Parliament in the Reign of King
Charles the Second, there is a great deal of difference between them, and the
present Convention; since they did not take upon them to declare or make a King
(as this Convention has done) but only to recognize him to be their Lawful
Sovereign which (as I have already told you) being that which was their duty to
do, they might very well justify, though they were not Summoned by the King's
Writs; but however, all their Acts were looked upon as made without legal
Authority, and therefore were confirmed in the first legal Parliament of King
Charles's Reign.

But as for the Authority of the Statute of the 13 th of Eliz. whereby you
would prove, that the Parliament has at this day power to alter or limit the
Succession of the Crown; besides, that such an Act being against the
fundamental rules of Succession, was void in it self, yet if you please to look
upon the Act in Rastal's Statutes, you will there find it was only made to
serve a present turn, and to keep the Queen of Scots and her Party from
enterprizing any thing against Queen Elizabeth; and therefore it is there only
declared to be Treason during the Queens life, for any Persons to maintain,
that the Queen could not riot with the Authority of the Parliament limit the
Succession of the Crown; and as for the last Clause, that makes it forfeiture
of Goods and Chattels, to maintain the contrary after her decease; this was
made to strengthen and confirm the former part of the Statute, B. H. S. P. 40.
which was a provision and security against such pretenses and Practices as had
been lately made against her by the Papists, on the behalf of the Queen of
Scots Title; and this Clause could not take effect after her death, but was
added to preserve Queen Elizabeth's Memory from being defamed after her
decease, or being slanderously charged with the heinous Crime of Usurping the
Crown, which must have been the inevitable consequence of affirming, that she,
and her Parliament could not limit the Succession. For to confess the truth, I
think Queen Elizabeth's best Title was by Act of Parliament, since her
Legitimacy might be justly questioned, by reason that her Mothers Marriage was
declared unlawful by the 28 th of Henry the VIII th, and she was as good as
declared illegitimate by her Father in that very Act that settled the Crown upon
her; but that this Statute of the 13 th of Queen Elizabeth is now looked upon
as expired, appears in Palton's, and all other late Collections of the Statutes
since her time; wherein the Title of the Statute is barely mentioned with EXP.
immediately following it, to show it is looked upon as expired: So that you are
mistaken to affirm that the Convention has done nothing in the late limitation
of the Crown, but what may be justified from that Statute; therefore if it be
not Law at this day, I think they had no Authority to alter the Succession of
the Crown from the right Line, let them be of what Religion they would.


F. I see you do all you can to evade the force of my Authorities from History,
and direct matter of Fact; and therefore as to what you say, that those were
rough and unsettled, and therefore no Precedents to be drawn from thence, this
is to beg the Question; for what could be the Law concerning the Succession of
the Crown for the first hundred and fifty years after the Conquest, but the
constant usage of the Great Council of the Nation, as low as the Reign of Henry
the Third; and it is a bold assertion to accuse the whole Nation of Perjury,
and Rebellion against their Lawful Kings during all those Successions I have
now instanced in; nor have you any thing to say against those Parliaments that
met in the 1 st of King Edward III. and Charles the II. but that their Meeting
was Lawful because it was only to recognize those Kings, and not to make them,
which is indeed to beg the Question, since you cannot deny but those
Parliaments are held for good, notwithstanding they were not called by the
King's Writs. But as for making a King the present Parliament have not taken
upon them to do it; since they do not in the Act for the Succession Elect King
William and Queen Mary to be our Lawful King and Queen, but only declare or
recognize them to be so, upon supposition that the Prince of Wales is either an
Impostor, or else his Legitimacy impossible to be tried and determined by them.
Nor are your Objections material against the Authority of those Acts of
Parliament which were made in the 1 st. of King Henry the IV th and Charles the
II d. which were never Summoned by those Kings Writs. For as to the first of
those Instances most of those Acts of Henry the IV th. stand good at this day,
without ever being confirmed by any subsequent Parliaments. And though I grant
that the public Acts made in the first Year of King Charles the II d. were
confirmed in the next Parliament of that King, yet this does not prove that
they would have been void without it; since diverse private Acts passed in that
Parliament which were never confirmed in any other, and yet are held for good:
As particularly an Act of that Parliament for making the Church of St. Paul's
Covent Garden Parochial. And this Act, though never confirmed, was yet adjudged
to be in force by the Lord Chief Justice Hales and the rest of the Justices of
the Court of King's Bench, in a Case concerning Rate Tithes between the
Minister and some of the Parishioners of the said Parish.

Nor is what you have now said to prove the Statute of the 13 th. of Queen
Elizabeth (whereby the Crown is declared capable of being limited by Act of
Parliament) to be now expired; since it is plain by the purport of the Act,
that it is Declaratory of the former Laws of England made in King Henry the VII
th. and VIII ths. and other Kings Reigns, whereby the Succession of the Crown
had been frequently entailed upon those who were not the next Heirs by Blood;
and though the Queen be only mentioned in it, yet it certainly as much concerns
her Successors, as all future Parliaments: as the Oath of Allegiance, in which
the Queen is only mentioned, does all future Kings and Queens: And it is not
only made Treason during her Life, but also there is a loss of Goods and
Chattels to be inflicted on all those who shall maintain after her decease,
that the Queen and Parliament had not Power to Limit the Succession. And if the
Parliament in her Reign could do this, I desire to know whence it is that the
present Parliament may not have the like Power?

As to what you allege concerning the Judgment against the two Spencers being
reversed in ^1 th. of Richard II. because done whilst Edward II. was still
alive, I desire you would take notice, that this Parliament of Richard the
Second was wholly made and pact by King Richard after the Banishment of the
Dukes of Lancaster and Norfolk; and that as well the Lords as Commons, were in
such fear of the Arbitrary Power he then exercised, that they past whatever he
would: And in this Parliament it was that the Proceedings against the Chief
Justice Tresilian and his fellow Judges, who had been Condemned and Executed by
Judgment in Parliament in the 11 th. of this King, were reverst. And no prove
the Illegality of this Parliament, you need but consult the Statute-Book in 1
st. of Henry the IV th. where you will find one of the first Statutes after his
coming to the Crown, is to repeal all Acts and Proceedings made in that last
Parliament of Richard the II d.


M. I doubt this will not do the business; for we maintain, that Henry the IV
th. also his Son, and Grandson, were Usurpers; and consequently all the Acts
made in their Reigns were null and void.


F. I will grant you for once, that Henry the IV th. was an Usurper, and that
Edward the III d. was so also during his Fathers Lifetime; but then it does
not follow, that all the Laws and Statutes made during those Times, were null
and void, since you must needs know the contrary; for even in that Parliament
of the 21 th. of Richard the II d. though it is true that Judgment against the
Spencers was reversed for the Reason you have given, yet did that Repeal extend
to no other Statutes but that, though made in the same Parliament of Edward the
III d. whilst his Father was yet living: But they are all of them held for good
at this day, as are also all the Statutes of the three Henry's, whom you
suppose to be Usurpers, which have not been repealed by any subsequent
Statutes, as I can assure you those of the first of Henry the IV th. are not,
and therefore are good Laws at this day: So that nothing can be a plainer proof
than this, that let the King's Title to the Crown have been it would, yet
Allegiance was due to them as long as they continued in the Throne.

Therefore to conclude, let me tell you, I think it behooves you, if you mean to
keep that Office you hold under the Government, to take the Oath of Allegiance
to their present Majesty's, since you owe your Protection to their Government,
which certainly deserves a Temporary Allegiance as long as you enjoy the
benefit of it. And indeed, the Oath it self is so loosly worded, that methinks
any Man may take it without any scruple, since it does no ways declare, that
the present King and Queen have an Hereditary Right to the Crown, but only the
Person swears to bear true Allegiance to their Majesty's King William and Queen
Mary; which I think even Strangers and Denizens are bound to take as long as
they continue in the Kingdom.


M. I am sorry you should think me, after so long an acquaintance, capable of
doing any thing against my Conscience for any Worldly advantage whatsoever; and
therefore I must freely tell you, that as for the Employment I hold, I will
rather part with it, if it were never so great, than do any thing against my
Conscience, and that reputation I have hitherto maintained in the World of
being an Honest Man.

And therefore I cannot take the Oath as a mere Denizen that owes Protection to
the present Government: Not only because this Oath is inconsistent with that I
have already taken, but also there is much more required of those that owe a
Natural Allegiance to their rightful King, than can be required of Strangers,
till they become Naturalized by Act of Parliament. And therefore it is, that
when any War breaks out between Neighboring Princes, all such Denizens who do
not become absolute Subjects of this Kingdom by Naturalization, if they will
act like Honest Men, must look upon themselves as obliged either to quit the
Kingdom in case a War be declared against their natural Prince, or at least are
obliged not to act any thing to his prejudice, though they may still inhabit
and Traffic here; which is a quite different Case from those who are not only
born the King's Subjects, but have also taken the Oath of Allegiance to him.
And therefore I can by no means think it Lawful to take this New Oath to King
William and Queen Mary, though it were required in no higher a sense than as
King and Queen de facto; since it can no ways consist with that Oath which I
have already taken to King James and his right Heirs; as I shall prove to you
another time (since it is now very late) from the true sense and meaning of
those words, I will be Faithful, and bear true Allegiance, etc. which can only
be sworn to such Kings and Queens, who besides a bare Possession, have also a
Legal and Hereditary Right to the Crown.


F. I shall be very glad to hear you farther upon this Question; for if that
can be made out, I fear too many of the Clergy as well as Laity, by mistaking
the true Sense of this Oath, have been Forsworn. But pray tell me when I shall
wait on you, and hear what you have further to say upon this Important Subject.


M. Pray let me see you two or three days hence, and then I shall be at
leisure, in the mean time am your humble Servant.


F. And I am yours.


FINIS.
Bibliothera Politica: OR A DISCOURSE By WAY of DIALOGUE, On these following
Questions; I. Whether an Oath of Allegiance may be taken to a King or Queen de
facto, or for the time being. II. What is the Obligation of such an Oath,
whether to an actual defense of their Title against all Persons whatsoever, or
else to a bare submission to their Power. III. Whether the Bishops who refused
to take the Oath of Allegiance to their present Majesty's, could be lawfully
deprived of their Bishoprics.


Collected out of the Best Authors, as well Ancient as Modern.

The Thirteenth and last Dialogue.

LONDON, Printed for R. Baldwin in Warwick Lane, near the Oxford-Arms, where
also may be had the First, Second, Third, Fourth; Fifth, Sixth, Seventh,
Eighth, Ninth, Tenth, Eleventh, Twelvth, and Thirteenth Dialogues. 1694.

Authors most commonly used in this Discourse, and how denoted in the Margin.

A Discourse concerning the signification of the word Allegiance, as it is made
use of in this New Oath of Allegiance. D. A. Animadversions on the Modern
Explanation of the Statute of the 11th of Henry the Seventh, Chap. 1. A. 11th,
H. 7th. An Enquiry into the Nature of Legal Rights, etc. E. L. R. The Case of
Allegiance, etc. C. A. An Essay concerning Obedience to the present Powers.
Having not the Treatise called the Title of a King in Possession by me at the
Writing of this Discourse, I could not quote it; yet all the chief Arguments in
it being either the same that are made use of by the Authors of the two first
Treatises above mentioned, are answered in this Discourse, either by my self,
or the Reverend Author of the Case of Allegiance.

ADVERTISEMENT.
BY the first Day of March next, will be published a General Title Page, with a
large Alphabetical Index to the whole Work.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
HAving in the two last Discourses considered the Lawfulness and justice of
King James' Abdication, as as also of the late Conventions place King William
and Queen Mary in the Throne; it might have seemed needless to add any thing
farther on this Subject, had it not been for the satisfaction of so many of the
Clergy, as well as Laity, who not being satisfied with the rightfulness of
their Majesty's Title, nor with the Declaration of the said Convention, whereby
they are Recognized to be of Right, and by the Laws of this Realm, King and
Queen of England, etc. have taken an Oath of Allegiance to them only as King
and Queen de facto, or for the time being.

For the justification of which, it was necessary to consider all that can
reasonably be said upon this Question, according to those several Heads set
down in the Title Page of this Discourse; for the performance of which, I shall
only tell you, that it is a Collection out of the best Treatises that have been
written on this Subject, and from the best Reasons that I could gather by
discoursing with diverse Learned Men who have refused this Oath; who if they
have done it out of Conscience (as we ought charitably to believe they have)
are infinitely to be preferred in the Opinions of all honest men, before diverse
others, who I doubt have taken the Oath with dissastisfied Consciences, for
mere gain, or the consideration of worldly advantages, and with a design to
return to their former Allegiance to King James, as soon as with safety they
may; and who, though they have taken this Oath themselves, yet do more highly
applaud and favor the refusers, than those that have taken it with truly
satisfied Consciences, and intend to keep it when they have done.

But though I confess I have here urged all the cogent Reasons I could Collect,
either from the Law of the Land, or that of Nature, for the taking this Oath to
their present Majesty's; I must also acknowledge, that though I have taken some
answers out of a Learned Drs. Case of Allegiance, yet I must confess I
absolutely waved entering into the defense of that Hypothesis, upon which that
Treatise is built; since it would not only be tedious, but unnecessary;
tedious, because it would be too long for such a short Discourse as this, to
repeat all the Arguments he has made use of, together with all the answers that
have been made to it in so many Treatises that have been written against it;
unnecessary, not only because I take a different Method from his, and have ran
into all those dark Labyrinths of Law and History, which he sedulously avoids;
but also because his Hypothesis of making Allegiance due to the mere possession
of Power, as to the Ordinance of God, let the Possessor come by it which way he
will, (and that without any Election, or Recognition of the People,) is that
which satisfies no party of Men concerned in the present Dispute; not the
Jacobite, for he cries out, that it is but the same Argument new vamp'd, which
John Goodwyn, and Ascham set up for Obedience to Oliver, and the Rump; and that
upon this ground, the Great Turk, should he once Conquer England, would have as
much right to our Alegiance as King James himself; whilst those who have acted
out of a Principle on the behalf of their present Majesty's, say, that by his
thus setting them up with an absolute irresistible Power; we do but change
hands, and it is no thanks to his Hypothesis, if we fall not into the same
Arbitrary Government, which by King James's Abdication we have so wonderfully
escaped.

I have therefore confined my self in this Discourse only to such Arguments as
can be deduced from Reason, History, or the Law of the Land; since I must
freely confess, that the Arguments that Reverend Author has made us of from
Scripture, for the support of his Opinion seem to me a much darker Labyrinth
than what he endeavors to shun.

But as to point of time, I have resolved to look no farther than the first six
Weeks of their Majesty's Reign, to avoid either the arraigning or defending any
thing that has happened since that time.

And though I have taken no notice of this present Parliaments Recognition of
their Majesty's Title, as being done after the time to which I limit this
Discourse; though what was done by the former Parliament, may be sufficiently
defended upon the grounds I have laid down in this, and the former Discourse;
yet do I not deny, but that the solemn Recognition of a free Parliament
summoned in their Majesty's Name, has taken away those Obejections which were
made against the Conventions declaring them to be rightful King, and Queen, and
then Voting themselves a Parliament, when they were not Summoned by Writs
issued in the Name of the King, or Queen, according to the usual form.

Only I must confess I have made bold in one Point to look beyond the time
prefixed; and that is, in relation to the late Schism began by some of our
Clergy, and carried on by some of the Laity who refused the present Oaths: but
since I have made use of some Reasons against it, which have not (as I know of)
been yet hit upon by any former Writers on this Subject. I wish they may prove
for their satisfaction; but if not, since I write only to discover truth, I
desire that any of the present new Dissenters will show me my mistakes; and I
shall take it kindly, not only for my own sake, but that of others, who may
otherwise be misled by my Arguments.

I have only one thing more to add, in relation to somewhat I promised at the
end of the Preface to the last Dialogue, concerning the late Revolutions being
different from the last Civil War, and Murder of King Charles the First; which
though I have finished, and thought to have inserted into this Discouese, yet
since it proves rather too long without it, and that the Bookseller urges for
its speedy Publication; I have thought fit to omit it; since also the greatest
part of it relates to matter of fact, which is variously stated by those who
write the History of those times, yet I shall make bold to give you the heads
of those inquiries I have made, and shall leave you to satisfy, your self in
these Points following; first, if after King Charles the first had not only
passed all Bills for redressing those Grievances the Nation lay under at the
beginning of the Parliament in 1640. but had also passed the Bill to make it
not to be Prorogued, or Dissolved without their own consents; I say, whether
there were then any such violations of our Religion, and fundamental Laws which
should require the Parliament and Nations putting themselves in a posture of
defense against the King's Arbitrary Power. Secondly, whether the fears and
jealousies of Popery and Arbitrary Government which (notwithstanding all that
the King had done) still troubled many Men's minds, were a sufficient ground for
the two Houses to demand the put^ing the whole Militia of the Kingdom out of
his own Power, into such hands as they should nominate and appoint. Thirdly,
whether upon his refusal of their Adresses for the Militia, their going about
to take it out of his hands by force, and particularly their shutting him out
of Hull was not an actual making War upon the King when he was as yet un^armed,
and had given out no Commissions to raise Men, or Arms. Fourthly, when the War
was begun, whether the King did not in all his Messages to and Treaties with
the Parliament, propose and seem to desire Peace upon equal and reasonable
terms. Fifthly. Whether the two Houses did not instead of complying with those
reasonable Proposals, still insist upon higher Terms, as their Victories and
Successes over the King increased. Sixthly, when the King was delivered up by
the Scots, whether the Parliament and Army did not keep him as good as a close
Prisoner, and vote no more Addresses to be made to him, merely because he
refused to pass whatever Bills they brought to him. Seventhly, When at last he
was forced by necessity to grant them at the Isle of Wight almost whatever they
demanded, whether he was not hurried away from thence by Cromwell's Army; and
for the major part of the House of Commons, who had Voted the King's
Concessions satisfactory, excluded the House by force; till the far less Party
had reversed all that the rest had done, and then Voted the King should he
called to an account for making War upon the Parliament, and for Treason
against the Kingdom. Eighthly, Whether in pursuance of this, they did not
appoint Judges to Try the King, who upon his refusal to own their Authority,
Condemned him to death, and cut off his head before the Gates of his own
Palace. Ninthly, Whether this fag end of a Parliament did not alter the whole
frame of the Government both in Church and State, destroying both Monarchy, and
Episcopacy, and Voting the House of Peers useless, and dangerous; and setting
up a Democratical Commonwealth, or rather an Oligarcy in their stead,
consisting of about fifty or sixty Men, wholly governed and awed by Cromwell,
and the Officers of the Army.

Now let any Man but impartially consider all these Transactions with the late
Revolution, and read what has been said in the three last Dialogues, and then
let him tell meingenuously, whether he thinks this Revolution has been begun
upon the like grounds, and carried on by the same violent Courses, or has ended
with the same direful effects as the late Civil War, and Murder of King
Charles the First.

I have no more to propose on this Subject, but only to wish that these
Discourses written with a real design for the public good and peace of my
Country, may be read with the like affection with which they were written, and
may really promote that end for which they were designed; but if not, that they
may at least serve as an Impartial History to Posterity of those Principles and
Opinions on which this late great Revolution has been brought about in
England; and also those on which it has been so violently opposed by the
dissenting Party.

THE Thirteenth Dialogue BETWEEN Mr. MEANWELL a Civilian, AND Mr. FREEMAN a
Gentleman.
F. SIR, I hope I do not interrupt you by coming too soon, for the truth is,
since I intend that this shall be the last Dispute I shall ever have with you
upon this Subject, I was very desirous to have it dispatched as soon as I
could, that when I have once discharged the duty of an old Friend and
Acquaintance, my mind may be at rest which side soever you take.


M. Dear Sir, I thank you, and though I intended to go abroad this Evening upon
an Appointment, yet I will not put it off, that I may enjoy your better
Conversation, therefore pray begin where you left off, and prove to me that I
may lawfully take this new Oath of Allegiance to King William, and Queen Mary.


F. I cannot see any reason why you may not safely do it, since our best Common
Lawyers are of this Opinion; for my Lord Coke in his Third institutes in his
Notes upon the Statute of Treason, P. 7.
the 25 th of Edward the III d gives it for Law, that this Act is to be
understood of a King in possession of the Crown, and Kingdom; for if there be a
King Regnant in possession, although he be Rex de Facto, and non de Iure, yet
is he Seignior Le Roy within the purview of that Statute, and the other that
has Right, and is out of possession is not within this Act, etc. And if it be
Treason to Levy War against him, or to Conspire his Death as long as he
continues King, it can only be so, because the Subjects Allegiance is then due
to him, for that all Men have either taken the Oath of Allegiance, or else are
supposed to have done it.


M. I must beg your pardon, if I cannot come over to your Opinion, neither in
point of Law or Reason; for as long as I am persuaded in my Conscience that
King James is King de Iure, so long must the obligation of my former Oath last;
and I suppose that you will grant that it is as impossible to owe Allegiance to
two Kings at once, as it is to serve two Masters, and therefore you must pardon
me, if I suppose that my Lord Coke depending too much upon the commonly
received sense of the Statute of the Eleventh of Henry the VII th, which he
quotes in the Margin, may be mistaken in this Great Point, and may have also
given occasion to diverse others of his profession to fall into the same Error.


F. I doubt not but my Lord Coke, and others of his profession who maintain the
same Opinion, may very well be defended, as well from that Statute, as other
Authorities; but to pass by that at present, I shall first discourse with you
upon this point, of the lawfulness of taking this Oath to their present
Majesty's King William and Queen Mary, and therefore you misunderstand me, if
you believe that I think this Oath does require from you the performance of all
those duties of Allegiance and Subjection which I my self am obliged to, who am
fully satisfied of their Title, and therefore must venture my Life and Fortune
in their quarrel, to the utmost of my power against all Persons whatsoever; but
all that I think can be required of you is, that whereas King William and Queen
Mary are actually in possession of the Regal Power so long as they continue
thus possessed of it, you may I think Swear that you will be so far true and
faithful to them, as not to enterprise any thing against them, but that you
will pay them that obedience and submission which may be lawfully paid to an
actual Sovereign; not engaging hereby to uphold them in the possession of the
Throne against King James, and without debarring your self from exerting that
Allegiance you have sworn to him upon any emergent safe opportunity for the
recovery of his Right.


M. I must beg your pardon, if I cannot assent to take this Oath in this low
and qualified sense that you would now put upon it, since besides the
signification of the words themselves, I am very well satisfied that the
imposers of this Oath do intend something more than a bare negative obedience
to the present Power, since it is the only Oath which is required from those
who take Employments either Civil or Military, and from whom certainly, not
only a passive Obedience or Submission, but also an active obedience and
assistance is required in defending the Crown and Dignity of the present King
and Queen de facto, with their Lives and Fortunes, against all Persons
whatsoever; or else how could the present Government ever trust them? and all
this cannot be sworn to, without a breach of that Oath they had formerly taken
to King James; and therefore if I should take it in this sense (as the Oath
itself seems to employ) I should be perjured; besides, by these words of being
true and faithful, I should look upon my self as obliged to reveal all Plots
and Conspiracies which I may any ways happen to know of against King William
and Queen Mary, which I think would be derogatory to my Allegiance to his
Majesty, since I should thereby discover and accuse such of his good Subjects
as endeavored to restore him, and should thereby hinder him as much as in me
lay, from being restored again to the Throne.

But if we consider the word Allegiance, it is yet more strict, and if I should
Perform it to King William and Queen Mary, according to the true intent and
legal sense of that word, I think it could no ways consist with that Oath of
Allegiance I have already taken; since Allegiance is thus explained in the next
following words of the Oath I have already taken; and him, and them; viz. (the
King, and his Heirs) I will defend to the utmost of my power against all
Conspiracies and Attempts whatsoever, that shall be made against his, or their
Persons, Crown, and Dignities. Now what kind of assistance is here meant by the
word defend, may be understood from all the Writers of our feudal Laws, D. A.
p. 15.
who expound the jus defensorium, by telling us that the word protegere implies
a necessity of defending by Arms as due from the Supreme Lord or Sovereign; and
further, that Subjects are in the same sense reciprocally bound to defend the
Honor and Dignity of their Sovereign: and these words Allegiance, and the
defense that follows it may be likewise understood from our feudal Laws,
whereby the Vassals were bound by their Oath of Allegiance, as also by virtue
of the tenure of their Lands to a military defense of their Supreme Lord the
King, from whom all the Lands in England are held, and this is according to
Glanvil, and all our old Lawyers; and though I grant that military tenures are
all now taken away by a late Statute, yet am I still obliged to the like
defense of the King and his heirs, not only from the words of this Oath, but
from the municipal Laws of this Kingdom also; which oblige all the Subjects
that are capable, to take up Arms for the King, when need shall require.

Which my be thus further proved; first, from the Ancient Laws of Edward the
Confessor, Ib. P. 14. Vid. Lambardi, L. L. Edwards and L. L. Will. I. c. 52.
and William the Conqueror, by both which, all the People or Freemen of the
Kingdom were to affirm upon their Faith and Oath, within the whole Kingdom, and
without, that they will be faithful to to their Sovereign Lord King William,
and every where preserve his Lands and Honors with all fidelity, Stat. 51 Ibid.
and with him will defend them against all his Enemies. To this, succeeded
that, which the Lord Coke calls legal Ligeance, Calvin 's Case. Cowel's Inst.
l. 2. tit. 3. 14.
or the Common-Law-Oath of Allegiance, which he cites out of Britton (who wrote
under Edward I.) which all the Subjects were obliged to take at twelve years of
age at the Sheriffs-Court, and at the Leete, and without the taking of which,
they had no warrant to abide in the Kingdom; and the form of it was this
effect: You shall Swear, that from this day forward you shall be true and
faithful to our Sovereign Lord the King, and his Heirs; and truth and faith
shall bear of life, and member and terrene honor, and you shall neither know
nor hear of any ill or damage which you shall not defend, (that is, oppose) to
the utmost of your power.

And my Lord Coke also here informs us, that five things were observed by all
the Judges from this Oath in the debate of Calvin's Case. First, that for the
time of its obligation, it is indefinite; and without limit. Secondly, two
excellent qualities were required, that is, to be true, and faithful. Thirdly,
to whom? to our Sovereign Lord the King, and his Heirs. Fourthly, in what
manner? and says and troth shall bear of life and member; that is, until the
letting out the last drop of our dearest heart blood. Fifthly, where, and in
what place? in all places whatsoever; for you shall neither know nor hear of
any ill which you shall not defend; such is the Ligeance which the Law has
prescribed in that ancient Oath, which is still in force; it is neither
circumscribed by time, nor place; it is unconditionate, and unreserved; it is
not a lazy passive Allegiance, requiring nothing but pure submission, but an
active and vigorous Loyalty, exacting all that is in the sphere of moral
possibility, and engaging us to spend our dearest blood in the defense of our
Sovereigns Person, and the preservation of his Crown and Dignity.

For it is to be observed, that by the Law, this Allegiance is due to the Kings
Person; so the same Author says it was then resolved by all the Judges, that
that Ligeance was due to the natural person of the King, (which is ever
accompanied with the politic capacity; and the politic capacity as it were
appropriated to the natural) and not due to the politic capacity only.

To conclude, if my former Oath of Allegiance to King James does still continue
(as I am satisfied in my Conscience it does) I cannot take a new Oath of
Allegiance to King William and Queen Mary, since I should thereby be obliged by
the force of these words in the Oath ( viz.) I will be faithful, and bear true
Allegiance, to yield it as much to those that are not my Lawful Sovereigns, as
I am to those that are so, which will be contrary to my first engagement; for
though I grant that there is no express Declaration of the Right of the present
Possessors of the Throne, and that I have heard that the word rightful (which
was at first inserted into this Oath was struck out) because as many as could
be might be drawn in to take it; yet as long as the words that remain import
the very same thing, it is all one as if the word rightful were there; for
though the deliberate omission of the word rightful, does necessarily infer
that we are not obliged in this Oath to a recognition of their right to the
Crown, yet it does not infer, that we are not obliged to pay as high a degree
of Allegiance as to any rightful King whatsoever; that omission indeed is an
Argument that the word King in the Oath does not necessarily signify a King de
jure; D. A. p. 24.
but it is no argument, that true allegiance does not signify true Allegiance,
that is an obligation to adhere to the King against all his Enemies; for there
was no debate, that we know of, about the sense of the word Allegiance, neither
is there the least intimation given that they designed to restrain it to a
lower signification, though it was plainly necessary to do it, if they intended
to alter the commonly received meaning of it; wherefore, as the striking out of
the word rightful would not have proved, that they did not intend to oblige us
to an active assistance of King William, against all men living; if those words
had been expressly inserted in the Oath; so neither will it prove that the same
duty is not now required of us, if the word Allegiance do, as I have proved in
terminis import it; and that as fully, as if it had been in express words
required in it.

And that this word Allegiance implies something more than a bare passive
submission or neutrality from all Subjects, as well as Magistrates and
Officers, appears by that passage in the Statute of the 11th of Henry the
VIIth, which you have now cited; where it is plainly and expressly declared, that
every Subject by the duty of his Allegiance, is bound to serve and assist his
Prince and Sovereign Lord at all seasons when need shall require; this is so
express and authentic a Declaration of the true duty of Allegiance, that no
Art or Sophistry can possibly evade it.


F. I confess you have argued this point of taking this new Oath of Allegiance,
not only like a Civilian, but a common Lawyer also; and I cannot deny the force
of what you have said, that this Oath must extend to an active obedience, and
defense of their present Majesty's in their right to the Throne, and not only
to a bare sluggish submission, or a lukewarm Neutrality. And therefore I
cannot say but you are justly scrupulous in not taking this new Oath, until
you are satisfied of their Majesty's Right as well as present Power; but if you
will please to observe the purport of this Act of the 11th of Henry the VIIth,
(which you now mentioned) you will there find it as good as expressly declared
that Allegiance is due to him who is lawful Sovereign, and the King for the
time being is still to be looked upon as such; for the words in the Statute
are, that no Man shall suffe for assisting the King for the time being, without
specifying by what Title he holds the Crown, whether by an hereditary Right, or
by Conquest, Election, or the solemn recognition of his Title by all the
Estates in Parliament; so that by this Act, all that Allegiance that was once
due to the former King de Iure becomes thereby wholly transferred to the King de
facto.


M. I grant what you now say would go a great way to satisfy me, could you
once prove that this Statute is now in force, and is not now either, abrogated,
or expired; or else (which I rather incline to believe) is not absolutely void
in it self. In the first place therefore I hope to show you that this was not
Law before this Statute was made, and therefore not declaratory of what was
Law, but endeavors to make that to be Law, which was not so before; so that
the King for the time being there mentioned, must be a King de jure, or at
least one that was presumed such; because at that time the Constitution knew no
other, Ib. A. 11. H. 7. p. 2.3.
for that Possession was not a sufficient Title before the 11th of Henry the
VIIth, will evidently appear from these following Remarks. First, that all the
Kings of the House of Lancaster are declared in the Statute of the first of
Edward the IVth, to be Kings in Deed, but not of Right, and pretended Kings,
and particularly Henry the VIth is said to be rightfully amoved from the
Government, and his Reign affirmed to be Intrusion, and Usurpation, and himself
Attainted for being in Arms against Edward the IVth. Secondly, all Patents of
Honor, Charters, and Privileges, which were granted by the House of
Lancaster; all Acts of Royal Authority which the Kings of England have a right
to execute by virtue of their sole Prerogative, (nay, Acts of Parliament
themselves, particularly those relating to Shrewsbury, and some others, which
by parity of Reason supposes the rest in the same Condition,) all Acts of this
nature were confirmed by the first of Edward the IVth, which is a good Argument
that this Parliament believed the Authority by which they were performed to be
defective and illegal* for we never find any such general confirmation as these
pass upon the grants of the King de jure.

Thirdly, in the first year of Henry the VIIth, Richard the IIId was Attainted
of High Treason in Parliament, under the the name of Duke of Gloucester; from
whence it is plain, that as there was no Statute, so neither was there any
Common Law to support the Title of a King de facto, Vid. Lord Bac. Henry VIIth.
for Treason is an attempt against the Kings Person, his Crown and Dignity, but
no Man can commit Treason against himself; therefore if Richard the IIId had
been a King in the sense of this Law, we may be sure he would not have had such
an infamous censure past upon him after his death. Bradshaw, and his High Court
of Justice, were the first that were so hardy as to pronounce a King of England
guilty of Treason.

Fourthly, If this notion of a King de facto had been allowed in the 11th of
Henry the VIIth, the Principal Assistants of Richard the IIId could not have
been attainted; for Richard being actually in the Throne, he was according to
your Modern way of arguing, Ibid. p. 4.
Rightful King; and consequently the People ought to own him as such, and
defend him against all opposers; and if so, certainly they ought not to be
condemned as Traitors for doing their duty, as we find many of those were who
fought for King Richard.

Fifthly, at the end of this Parliament, Henry the VIIth granted a General
Pardon to the common people who had appeared against him in the behalf of
Richard the IIId, now Pardon supposes a fault, and the breach of a Law, which
they could not have been charged with, if the plea of a King de facto had been
warranted by the Constitution.


F. I must freely tell you, that you do not argue so much like a Lawyer in this
Argument as you did in your former, and you have in that forgot to what end
those Statutes you mention were made, and what is the purport of them, or else
some body has misinformed you; for though I grant that all those hard
expressions you mention, are given of the Kings of the Lancastrian Line in
those Statutes of the 1 st of Edward the IVth, yet do none of these expressions
prove, that they were not true and legal Kings in the eye of the Law all the
while they Reigned; since diverse Persons were attainted for High Treason
against them, whose attainders were never reversed, but stand good to this day;
as in particular the attainder of the Earls of Kent, Salisbury, and of
Huntingdon, who were all attainted by Act of Parliament, in the second of Henry
the IVth, and also the Earl of Northumberland, and his Son the Lord Piercy,
attainted in the 5th of this King, all which attainders were never reversed: So
likewise Richard Earl of Cambridge was found guilty of Treason by his Peers,
and his Attainder confirmed by Act of Parliament in the second of Henry the
Vth, and though it is true this Attainder was afterward reversed in the first
of Edward the IVth, because the said Richard was not only his Grandfather, but
was also Condemned for endeavoring to make Edmund Earl of March his
Brother-in-law King of England, from whose Sister King Edward the IVth claimed
the Crown; yet the very reversing this Attainder by Act of Parliament, declares
it to have been good until that Repeal, since it was not declared void; all
which are plain and evident proofs, that Treason may be committed against the
King de facto, and consequently that Allegiance is also due to him, and not to
the King de jure.

I have likewise also proved that all those Statutes which were made by those
Kings, and are not repealed, stand good at this day without any confirmation by
King Edward the IVth; and this you have no way to answer, but by instancing in
Patents of Honor, or Charters of Privileges granted by those Kings, and
confirmed by Edward the IV th, from whence you would infer, that some other
Acts of like nature were in the same condition; which, let me tell you, in no
good argument against them; for if you please to read that Statute of Edward
the IVth you mention, and you will there plainly see, that the Grants, Patents,
and other things there confirmed, or either judicial Proceedings in the Courts
of Justice, or else such Charters, or Patents which being thought to the
prejudice of the Crown were ex abundanti cautela, thought necessary to be
confirmed by those particular Persons, Religious Houses, and Corporations who
thought themselves concerned, nor were all others of like nature who were not
so confirmed, thereby void, since they hold good at this day; and if you
understand any thing of our Law, you cannot but know, that no Grants of the
King can be made void by implication; and to show you farther, that the Letters
Patents made by Henry the VIth were looked upon as good in the Reign of Edward
the IVth, appears good from Bagot's Case in the Year-Book of the ninth of that
King; where a Patent of Naturalization granted by Henry the VIth, P. 1.2.
though it were not confirmed by that Statute of Edward the IVth, was by the
greatest part of the Judges held to be good, and the reasons there given for it
are very remarkable; since it was urged by the Council in behalf of the
Plaintiff, that King Henry was then King in Possession, and it behooves that the
Realm should have a King, and that the Laws should be kept and maintained; and
therefore though he was in only by Usurpation, nevertheless every judicial Act
done by him, concerning Royal Jurisdiction shall hold good, and bind the King
de jure when he returns, etc. So likewise a Charter of Pardon of Felony, and
Licenses of Mortmain shall be good, and also the King that now is shall have
the advantage of every forfeiture made to the said King Henry, etc. and mark
this farther, it is there also held that a Man shall be Arraigned for Treason
done against the said King Henry in compassing his death; and the reason is
very remarkable, because the said King indeed was not merely a Usurper, for the
Crown was entailed upon him by Parliament; and this being not at all
contradicted by the Court, is still taken for Law; and upon this report, and
not only upon the Statute of the 11th of Henry the VIIth, did my Lord Coke
found his Opinion I now mentioned, that a King de facto was within the Statute
of the 25th of Edward III. and though now it is true, that the farther arguing
of this Case of Bagots adjourned to a farther day, when the Justices did not
argue, but the Sergeants and Apprentices at Law, (that is the Baristers as we
now call them) yet it seems to have been allowed by the whole Court, that if
King Edward who was then King, had made his Charter before he was declared so,
it should be void at that time; for every one who shall make a Charter of
Pardon, ought to be King in Deed, at the time of the making thereof.


M. Pray Sir give me leave to reply to what you have now said against my first
two Arguments, before you go on to answer the rest; for I confess the
Authorities you bring seem so express against me, that if I cannot take them
off, there will be no further need for your answering the rest; I will not
therefore deny, but that all public Acts and Proceedings at Law, which are for
the public good and safety of the Kingdom, do hold good though made under
Usurpers, and that for this Reason; because such Acts being for the public
benefit, it is to be supposed that the King de jure did give his tacit consent
to them; for (as it is well observed in the Case you have now cited) that it
behooves the Realm should have a King (that is some Civil Government) and that
the Laws should be kept and maintained, but then those Laws can extend only to
such things as are for the public good, and do not tend to the disinheriting
of the King de jure, or barring him or his Heirs of their Right, as did that
Act of the 7th of Henry the IVth, whereby the Crown was entailed upon himself,
and his Sons, which was declared to be void by the 39th of Henry the VIth; so
likewise this Act is void for the same reason, since it would give a Right to
the Subjects to defend the King for the time being, though an Usurper against
the true and lawful King, who would be thereby not only defeated of his Right
himself, but also his right Heirs would be so too, which would be directly
contrary to the intent of the said Statutes of the 39th of Hen. VI, and 1 st of
Edw. IVth but now mentioned, but also to the Act of Recognition of King James
the Firsts Title.

And therefore I must still maintain that my Lord Coke is mistaken in supposing
a King de facto to be within the intent of the Statute of the 25th of Edw. the
IIId, for sure it would seem a very odd question for any one to ask touching
the Laws that are made in any settled Monarchy for the defense of the Kings
Person, Crown and Dignity, who is meant by the King in those Laws; whether the
Lawful and Rightful King of that Realm, or any one that gets into the
possession of the Throne, though he be not a Rightful King, but an Usurper.

So likewise as to that Clause in this Statute, which makes it Treason to
Conspire the Death of the Kings Eldest Son and Heir; it could be never intended
for the Son of a King de facto, since that would be to own him for right Heir
of the Crown for ever, and thereby intail it upon his Family, to the prejudice
of the Right Heir of the King de jure; and therefore, though I grant some of
the Judges and Lawyers held the Law to be so as you have cited it in Bagot's
Case, and that a King de facto may enjoy those Prerogatives in some respects,
yet cannot this be extended to the prejudice of the King de jure, and his Right
Heirs; and though I also grant that diverse Acts of Parliament made by Kings de
facto, have for the most part held good without being confirmed by any
subsequent Statute of the King de jure, yet have they been also repealed
sometimes; merely because made whilst the King de jure was alive, as I shall
prove more at large by and by.


F. I shall also take the boldness to reply to these answers of yours, before I
proceed to answer the rest of your Arguments; in the first place, let me tell
you that this notion of a tacit consent in the King de jure supposed to be
given to all Statutes made for the public good is to serve upon all occasions,
when those of your Party cannot tell how otherwise to answer the Arguments that
are brought against them, and you may as well tell me that they do also give
their tacit consents to all other Acts that Usurpers may do; and I may as well
suppose that Queen Elizabeth the Wife of Henry the VIIth, the Lawful Heiress of
the Crown, did in the person of her Husband give her tacit consent that this
Act of the 11th of Henry the VIIth should hold good for ever, since it is so
much for the public good and peace of the Nation, that the Statute declares it
to be against Law, Reason, and good Conscience, that Subjects should suffer for
fighting for the King for the time being; but I very much wonder if this
supposed tacit consent were given to all Acts of Parliament by the Kings de
jure, why upon their return to the Government, he did not also express this
consent by confirming all those Acts which were made by his Predecessors the
Kings de facto, or else declare them void: but since they neither did the one
nor the other, it is plain it was because even they themselves looked upon it
as altogether needless.

Nor is your reason at all satisfactory, why a King de facto cannot be intended
by the Statute of the 25th of Edward the IIId, because that makes it Treason
to Conspire the death of the King's Eldest Son and Heir, which say you can only
be meant of the Eldest Son of a King de ^ur^, which is to beg the question; for
though it is true, this Clause in the Act was intended for the preservation of
the King's Eldest Son, yet it does no where determine that this must be the
Eldest Son of a King de jure; for though I own this Clause was made to preserve
the Crown in the Right Line from Father to Son, yet does it make no difference
between the Son and Heir of a King de facto, and one de jure; nor have you yet
answered the Authorities I have brought from the Acts of attainder of those
Lords, who Conspired against the three Kings of the House of Lancaster, which
stand unreversed unto this day: and which also confirm the Opinion given in
Bagot's Case, where it is said expressly, that a Man may be arraigned for
Treason committed against the King de facto, by the King de jure; and therefore
I think my Lord Coke may very well be justified in his Opinion, notwithstanding
the question you put, whether the Statute could mean him who is lawful and
rightful King, or any other who gets into the possession of the Throne? Now
this seems to me no such odd question; for when the Law only mentions the King,
and the Lawmakers certainly knew that Kings without an hereditary right had
often ascended the Throne, if they had intended to except all such Usurpers,
they should have expressly said so. But indeed that distinction of a King de
facto, C. A. p. 56.
and a King de jure, was not known 'till many years after, being first heard of
in the Reign of Edward the IVth; for a King de facto (as the late Chief Justice
rightly asserts) is Seignior Le Roy, within that Statute, and there is no other
King but he whilst he continues so. For King signifies that person who has the
Supreme Government in the Nation; and a King de jure, is he who should have the
Government, but has it not; that is, who of right should be King, but is not;
and the Statute of Treason tells us what is Treason against him who is King,
not against him who should be, but is not King; and reason good it should be
so; for it is not merely a legal Title by descent, E. L. R.
but a legal investitute, and recognition by Parliament that makes a legal
King, or a King in Law, as it makes a legal Magistrate; and then all Kings de
facto, who are placed in the Throne by a Legal Authority, and with all Legal
and acustomed Ceremonies, are legal Kings, and as such, may require a legal
Allegiance: so that all those hard words in the Statute of the first of Edward
the IVth, that call those Kings of the House of Lancaster, Kings in Deed, and
not of Right or pretended Kings, mean no more than this, that they were Kings
for the time being, and according to the Laws which had made them so, though
not according to that hereditary Right of Succession which those Statutes
require: If you have any thing to reply to this, tell me, or else I will
proceed to answer your two other Arguments.


M. I will not at present say more to this than I have done, and therefore you
may proceed if you please.


F. Your two next Arguments are from the attainders of Richard the IIId, and
his principle Assistants which were by Act of Parliament, as to that Prince
himself, as also his adherents, the attainders of Kings de facto, and their
Assistants in after Parliaments, do not prove that Subjects cannot be guilty of
Treason against a King in possession; nor does the Statute of Treason relate to
a King de jure only, for that Statute was not made to secure Princes Titles,
but the quiet of their Government whilst they sat upon the Throne; for though
a King, if he be an Usurper, when ever the Rightful King regains the Possession
of his Throne, if he were a Subject before, may be attainted of Treason for his
Usurpation, as was Richard the IIId, for Treason against his own Nephew King
Edward the Vth; yet this does no way prove that Richard the IIId was no true
King during his Usurpation; but only shows the Parliaments abhorrence of his
Treason, and to deterr others from falling into the like, attainted him, and
several of his Accomplices who had assisted him in his said Usurpation; for
that they were not barely attainted for defending King Richard's Title, appears
from this, that the Earl of Surrey Son to the Duke of Norfolk, and diverse other
Noblemen and Gentlemen who fought for King Richard at Bosworth-Field were never
attainted at all. But as for the Pardon that you say passed in that Parliament
of the 1 st of Henry the VIIth, you are very much mistaken in the purport of
it; for if you please to look upon it again, you will find, that it was not a
General Pardon for the Common People who had fought on the behalf of Richard
the Third, Vid. 1 Hen. VII. Cap. 6.
but of all those who had come over with Henry the VIIth himself, or who were
with him in the Field against Richard the Third, for all manner of Murders,
Spoils and Trespasses committed by them, in taking part with King Henry against
his Enemies; so that you see the assisting of a King de facto was not only
justifiable, but those that had fought against him, thought themselves not safe
till they had their Pardons.

Nay, farther, that Attainders passed in Parliament, are no proof that the
Princes against whom they were passed were not lawful Kings, appears from
hence; that when Edward the Fourth was driven out of the Kingdom and
dispossessed of the Throne, the next Parliament under Henry the Sixth, passed
an Act of Attainder against him, and his Adherents. But as for the Attainder of
Henry the Sixth, you are very much mistaken to suppose, that it was for any
Treason committed against Edward the Fourth, but it was for breach of the
agreement made with his Father the Duke of York, and in making War again upon
him; for had he not done this, he had continued lawful King during his life, by
the Duke of Yorks own consent; for in the Parliament Roll you your self have
already cited, it is thus expressed; That considering the possession of the
said King Henry the Sixth, Rot. Parl. Edw. IV. 39 Hen. VI. n. 18.
and that he had before this time been named, taken, and reputed King of
England, and France, and Lord of Ireland; the said Duke is content, agrees and
consents, that he be had, reputed and taken for King of England, and of
France, with the Royal Estate, Dignity and Pre-eminence belonging thereto, and
Lord of Ireland, during his life natural; and for that time, the said Duke,
without hurt or prejudice of his said Right and Title, shall take, worship and
honor him for his Sovereign Lord: So that you see that by the Judgment of the
Parliament, and by the express consent of the Right Heir of the Crown, a King
de facto was to be owned by this Right Heir for his true and lawful Sovereign,
and therefore could not be attainted for detaining the Crown from him, or his
Son.


M. I will not dispute this point any further; but yet methinks though Treason
might be committed against the King de facto, whilst he continues King; yet this
is not for any Allegiance due to him, but because such Treason being against
the due order of Government, and the common peace of the Nation, such actions
are therefore Treason from the presumed or tacit consent of the King de jure.


F. I grant indeed, that such Acts are against the Order of Government, C. A.
p. 58, 59.
and very destructive to it, which is the only reason why they are made Treason
by Law; and this is as good a reason why the Law should make them Treason
against a King de facto, as against a King de jure, for they ere equally
against the order of Government, and destructive to it, whoever is King; and
that is the only reason why they made it Treason at all. Now this presumed or
tacit consent of the King de jure is a very pretty notion, and serves you for a
great many good turns, it makes Laws, and it makes Treason, and gives Authority
to the unauthoritative Acts of a King de facto; that is to say (or you say
nothing) that the presumed consent of a King de jure, invests the King de facto
at the time with his Authority; for if he have no Authority of his own, unless
what the presumed consent of the King de jure give him, that cannot make any
Treasonable Act done against him to be Treason; for it cannot alter the nature
of things, nor make a Man guilty of Treason against any person to whom he ows
no duty of Allegiance. And if the presumed consent of the King de jure can
invest the King de facto with his Authority, it must transfer the Allegiance of
the Subjects too; and then Subjects are as safe in Conscience, as if the King
de jure were on the Throne; for it seems there is his Authority and tacit
consent, though not his person.

But indeed, this is all mere trifling, the King de facto has Authority, or
else none of his Acts of Government can have any; for that which is done by a
person who has no Authority, can lay no obligation upon us; whence then has he
this Authority, since he has no legal Right to the Throne? not sure from the
presumed consent of the King de jure, which is nonsense to suppose, but from
the possession of the Throne, to which the Law it self, as well as the
Principles of Reason, have annexed the Authority of the Government.


M. I am so far of Bishop Sanderson's Opinion in his Case, concerning taking
the Engagement, that when Usurpers or Kings de facto have taken upon them the
Government, they are obliged to administer it for the common good, and safety
of the People; and as far as that comes to we are also obliged to live
peaceable under them, and to yield obedience to them in things absolutely
necessary for the upholding civil Society within the Realm, such as are the
defense of the Nation against Foreigners, the furtherance of public Justice,
the maintenance of Trade and Commerce, and the like. But sure this is no
argument for transferring our Allegiance from the lawful King and his Heirs
whilst they are alive; and therefore I must still suppose that this Statute of
the 11th of Henry the VIIth can do no service to the present Government,
because its vertually repealed by several Statutes; as first, by the 28th of
Henry the VIIIth, concerning the Succession of the Crown, wherein it is
expressly provided, that if any of his Children should Usurp upon each other, or
if any of those to whom he should bequeath the Crown by his last Will, or
Letters Patents, should take the Crown in any other manner than what should be
thereby limited, that such Children or others should be guilty of Treason for
so doing. Now it is plain such Treason must only have been committed against
the right Heir, and consequently the person so taking the Crown, was not to be
looked upon as King de facto. It is also vertually repealed by the Statute of
1o Elizabeth, by which we are obliged to swear to be true to the Queen, her
Heirs, and Lawful Successors; ( i. e. those who have a right to the Crown by
proximity of Blood) as also by the Oath of Supremacy, Enacted in the 4th of
King James, by which we are likewise sworn to bear true Allegiance to his
Majesty, his Heirs, and Successors; from which Oaths I argue, first, that if we
are sworn by Act of Parliament to pay Allegiance to the Heirs of a King de
fure, who never were in possession, than a fortiori to a King de jure; who
besides the legality of his Title, had been actually recognized as Sovereign,
and enjoyed an uncontested administration of the Regal Power. Secondly, If our
Laws oblige us to swear subjection to the Heirs etc. of a Rightful Prince, than
by undeniable consequence we are bound not to translate our Allegiance to those
who are unjustly set up by the People; for without all question the words Heirs
and Lawful Successors, were made use of on purpose to secure the hereditary
Rights of the Monarchy, and to prevent all Usurpations upon the direct Line.
And since by virtue of that Statute which framed the Oath of Allegiance and
Supremacy, we are not to acknowledge any pretended Governors to the prejudice
or disinherison of the Heirs of the King de jure, then most certainly we ought
not to do this in opposition to the King de jure himself; so that now we can
have no pretense to make Right the necessary consequence of mere possession of
the Crown, any more than in private Estates.


F. In the first place, I agree with you in what you have said, that Kings de
facto are to be obeyed in all things tending to the public good of Society;
but then it will also follow, that Allegiance is due to them, from that great
Law of prosecuting the same public good, since it were much better that Kings
de jure should lose their Right, than that a Nation should be involved in a
long and cruel War to the weakening and impoverishing thereof, and to the
destruction of so many thousands of ordinary as well as Noble Families; as was
seen in the long Civil Wars between the Families of Lancaster, and York; so
that I cannot but think it would have been much better for this Nation, if that
Family had continued to Govern us unto this day, rather than that Edward the
IVth should have obtained the Crown with so great a destruction of the People
of this Nation, and so great cruelty as was then exercised upon King Henry the
VIth, and the Prince his Son, as you may read in the History of those times.

But I come now to answer the rest of your Arguments, whereby you will prove
this Statute of the 11th of Henry the VIIth to be vertually repealed; and here
by the way I must tell you, Gentlemen of this Opinion, that I cannot but admire
your wondrous sagacity, in discovering this Act to be repealed, when my Lord
Coke, and all the rest of our Lawyers do still suppose it to be in force; but
indeed, the reason you give for it is not urged like a Common Lawyer, and
therefore I think it will signify little; for though I grant that an Act of
Parliament may be vertually repealed by a subsequent Act, yet it is only in
such Cases where they are absolutely contradictory, and inconsistent with each
other; but if they are not so, an Act of Parliament can never be said to be
vertually repealed: and therefore I shall now show you, that notwithstanding
the Statute of Henry the VIIIth, and the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance you
have now mentioned, this Statute may very well continue in force, and
unrepeal'd. First, as to the Statute of Henry the Eighth, whereby it was
declared Treason for any one of his Children, upon whom the Crown was settled,
to Usurp upon each other; yet that part of the Statute which makes this
Treason, 1 Sess.
was repealed by the first of Edward the the Sixth, and by the first of Queen
Mary; or admit it had not been so, Chap. 12.
yet this Clause in the Statute of Henry the Eighth would have been absolutely
void in it self against any such Usurper when actually possessed of the Crown,
since it was held by all the Judges in the Case of Henry the Seventh, who at
the time of his coming into England stood attainted by Act of Parliament, that
this attainder need not be reversed, since Possession of the Crown takes away
all precedent defects.

But as to the Statutes of the first of Queen Elizabeth, and the fourth of King
James, by which the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy were Enacted; I conceive
neither of these Oaths can amount to a vertual repeal of this Act, for though I
grant one end of these Oaths may be to secure the right of the King or Queens
Heirs by lineal descent, yet it will not therefore follow, that a King de
facto, or for the time being may not be legally defended in the Throne; for as
for that part of the Oath which was taken to King James himself, it can hold no
longer than whilst he continued King: If therefore the Estates of the Kingdom
have adjudged him to have forfeited or abdicated the Crown, the whole Nation
ought to take this as to have been legally done, since it was done by the
judgment of the highest Authority in the Nation, when King James had deserted
the Throne; the like I may also say for the other part of the Oath of
Allegiance, whereby we are obliged to his Heirs and Lawful Successors, for
since there has been a dispute concerning the succession of the Crown between
the Princess of Orange and your Prince of Wales, if the Convention who are the
sole proper Judges in this Case, have thought fit for the reasons I have
already given you at our last Meeting, to declare King William and Queen Mary
the lawful King and Queen of England, all the Nation ought to accept them for
such, since it was done by the highest Authority at that time extant in the
Nation, and the only proper Judges of that right; and if disputes about legal
rights (of which certainly that of succeeding to the Crown is of the highest
importance) ought to be decided by Law, and not by the Sword, (which is not the
decision of civil Authority but of force) the sentence of competent Judges must
end the dispute; E.L.R. p. 8, 9.
and if the Estates of the Realm be not the proper and legal Judges of such
Disputes that concern the right to the Crown, there can be none; and if they
be, Subjects must acquiesce in their Judgments, or it is all one as if there
had been none; for if Men may pretend Conscience, and adhere to their own
private Opinions as sole Judges, the dispute must end in blows, which is
contrary to the reason and nature of humane Societies, which were instituted to
prevent Civil Wars, and to end all Controversies by a legal Judgment without
the Sword.

And to let you see farther, that as to the Allegiance of the Subjects it is
all one in respect of us who are Subjects, whether the Convention have judged
right or wrong in this case. Let us suppose a Person who has only a pretense,
but no true right to an Estate, should commence a Suit of Law for it, and at
last obtain a Verdict of the Jury, and also a Judgment of the Court of
King's Bench for his Title; can any Man deny, but that the Sheriff is by virtue
of this Verdict and Judgment obliged to put this Abator into possession of this
Estate, notwithstanding he may know of his own knowledge, that the person who
has obtained this Judgment has no true right to the Estate, or will any Lawyer
doubt whether all the Tenants of the Manor are not obliged to swear homage
and fealty to this supposed Lord if they are required by him so to do. Now
though the true Heir or owner has the legal right to the Estate, yet by the
supreme Law of all Societies, which refers the decision of all personal rights
to a legal Authothority; he who by a legal judgment is possessed of it, has the
legal right in the Estate, Ibid. p. 19, 20.
against all other claims, and legal Authority must desend him in it; and all
who will submit to Laws and Legal Authority, must acquiesce in it.

And thus it must be with respect to the Rights of Princes, as well as of
Subjects, the right to the Crown has been often disputed, as we all know, and
to say that when such disputes happen, there is no Authority in the Nation to
decide them, is to say that Princes have no rights to their Crowns by the Laws
of that Nation; for there can be no Civil Rights of which there neither are nor
can be any Civil Judges; for no man, no not a Prince can be judge in his own
Cause, and if Princes have no legal rights, they can lose no legal rights when
they lose their Crowns; and I doubt their natural rights swill affect the
Consciences of very few Subjects: Therefore every independent Civil Society
which is not wholly governed by the Sword, must from the nature of such
Societies, and the reason of their institution, have authority within it self
to decide all Controversies which may arise about the rights of every member of
that Society, and to preserve it self from falling into a state of War, which
is a dissolution of all Civil Government; and if there ought to be such an
Authority in every Civilized Nation, when this Supreme Authority has given
sentence in such Disputes, this must also determine all the Subjects, and ought
likewise to have the same effect upon the contending Princes themselves, and no
right, or pretense of right ought to affect the Conscience after such a final
Judgment; unless Civil Rights can oblige Subjects to dissolve Civil
Governments, and to dispute Civil Rights, not by the Law, but by the Sword;
which is to overthrow all Civil Rights, and put an end to the Authority of Laws.

I hope this may serve to show you how much you are mistaken to suppose that
there can be no King in an hereditary Monarchy, but the next lineal Heir; and
though I grant no Allegiance can be due or ought to be paid to him who is no
King; yet will it not follow that none can be due to any Prince if he be not
the next heir; for that no obedience can be due to him who is no King I readily
grant, but yet he may be a legal King in this Kingdom who is not the next Heir
by blood, as almost half of the Kings of England since the Conquest were not,
and yet have been always owned and obeyed as legal Kings.


M. I confess what you say would go a great way to satisfy me, could you
prove, that there was no difference between the succession to Crowns and
private inheritances, where I grant that the judgment of the Supreme Court of
the Nation is to determine not only the possession, but the right too, in
respect of the person who loses his Estate by an unjust verdict, or illegal
judgment; whereas it is otherwise in the Title of Crowns, to which Princes have
a right, as well by the Laws of God and Nature, as also by the received settled
Laws and Customs of the Kingdom concerning the Succession by descent, which is
called in the 13th of Queen Elizabeth, in the Statute (we have so much debated
at our last Meeting) the Common Laws of this Realm, and it is there declared,
that it ought to direct the right of the Crown of England; and it is there made
Treason during the Queens life to affirm the contrary; and this course of
lineal Succession at Common Law was also declared by solemn judgment in
Parliament, in the case (I have so often urged of the Duke of York's Title to
the Crown against Henry the VIth,) that it could no way be defeated by Act of
Parliament; and therefore I must still tell you, that you go upon a wrong
ground, when you suppose that there can be now any dispute who is rightful King
of England, since I have often told you, that he can neither abdicate or
forfeit his Right to the Crown, and that no Parliament whatever (much less a
Convention) could have any power to declare he had abdicated the Government,
and that thereby the Throne was become vacant; for though I grant the judgment
of the Estates of the Kingdom when legally assembled, ought to be received with
great submission and respect; yet must it be only in such matters which they
have a legal cognizance of, and which they are empowered by the Laws and
Constitutions of the Kingdom to determine; but since their Voting him whom you
your self cannot deny to have been their lawful King, to have abdicated the
Throne (when indeed he had not) and then not only to declare the Throne vacant,
but also to place those therein, whom you your self dare not affirm to be the
next Heirs by blood, are things quite out of their Element, and beyond the
Sphere of their Authority; and though I grant that they may sometimes judge
concerning the Succession of the Crown, and who is next heir to it, yet is this
only to be understood as far as they judge according to the Common Laws of the
Succession already laid down at our last Meeting, and not when they go quite
contrary to them; and therefore, though I own the Parliament might justly
declare Henry the VIth to be an Usurper, and consequently might be deposed, yet
does it not therefore follow, that they had a like right to declare Edward the
IVth an Usurper, and to pass an Act of Attainder against him, as I confess they
did after that Prince had held the Crown for ten years together, since that was
beyond their power to enact or declare by the fundamental constitution of the
Government.


F. I am sorry your answer can afford nothing new but only the repetitions of
the same false Principles and Arguments that have been already so often
answered in our former Conversations; for in the first place I have
sufficiently proved that neither the Laws of God nor Nature have ordained any
such thing as a lineal Succession of Kings, or any irresistible or
unforfeitable power in them which they can never fall from let them act never
so tyrannically; for I think I have sufficiently proved, that not only in
absolute Monarchies, but also in limited Kingdoms, where the King has not the
sole Supreme power, a King may not only be resisted, but may be also declared
to have abdicated or forfeited his right to Govern in case of any apparent
obstinate violations of the fundamental Constitution in those great points that
make that Government to differ from a despotick Monarchy, and that if they had
not this right, all their liberties will signify nothing, and their Lives,
Liberties, and Estates, would lie wholly at the Kings mercy, to be invaded and
taken away when ever he pleased. I am forced to repeat this, to remind you of
the Reasons upon which those Principles are founded, and therefore you do but
fall into your old mistake, when you affirm, that by the fundamental
constitution of the Government, the Great Council of the Nation (which was but
the same with our late Convention) had no power to declare the King to have
broken the Original Contract between him and his People.

Therefore what you say concerning the want of Authority in this Great Council,
to declare the Throne vacant is altogether precarious, unless you could also
prove that it is against the fundamental constitution so to do: whereas I have
so far proved the contrary, that the Throne has been declared vacant no less
than eight times since the Conquest, which makes up almost a third part of the
Successions of all the Kings and Queens that have Reigned since that time; so
that if the custom and practice of Great Councils or Conventions (and those not
condemned by any subsequent Statutes) can be the only Rule or Guide for the
Consciences of all the Subjects of this Nation, we have certainly had that as
solemnly declared now, as in any other Great Council or Convention that has
been ever held in this Kingdom; but as to what you say concerning the want of
power in those Councils, to declare or recognize who are the right Heirs to the
Crown, but not to make them so, is very pleasant: since that were all one as if
two Men who contended for an Estate, should bring the matter before the House
of Peers, and when that was done, and the Case solemnly heard by Council on
both sides, that party who had lost the Cause, should declare that this Court
(though the highest in the Kingdom) had no power to judge in prejudice of
himself, who had an undoubted right to the Estate, which were only to give the
Lords power to give judgment only for one side; and why the other Party if the
judgment had been given against him should not have made the like Plea, I
cannot understand: So that such a Judgment would be altogether in vain.

Therefore to apply this to our purpose, though the Parliament being prevailed
upon by the strength and faction of the Duke of York, did as I granted (at our
last Meeting) declare that his Title could in no wise be defeated, yet Henry
the VIth being then in the Throne, they might have certainly given a contrary
judgment if they had pleased, and then I suppose the Title of the House of
York might have been so defeated as that the Nation had never been troubled
with it again; and so also, when by the power of Edward the IVth, a Parliament
met, and declared him to be lawful King from the time of his Fathers death; yet
when the said King was driven out of the Kingdom by the Earl of Warwick, and
King Henry the VIth restored to the Throne, a Parliament was summoned in the
49th of this King, wherein Edward the IVth was declared an Usurper, Rot. Claus
49. H. VI. m. 6.
and himself attainted and to which Parliament the Duke of Clarence, Brother to
King Edward the IVth is first Summoned, as well as the Archbishop of
Canterbury, with all the other Bishops, Temporal Lords, and Judges, (of whom
Littleton the Author of the Book of Tenures was one) so likewise upon King
Edwards recovery of the Crown the year following, Rot. Claus. 11 Ed. IV. m. 1
King Henry was again deposed, and a Parliament called, wherein all the Dukes,
Earls, and Barons, with the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, and most of
the rest of the Bishops Swore to Prince Edward, after called Edward the Vth, as
Right Heir of the Crown.

Now I desire to know what other Law or Rule there was then for the Subjects
Allegiance, but the solemn judgment or declaration of the Estates of the
Kingdom assembled in Parliament, since their Acts and Judgments were in this
dispute directly contradictory to each other; so that it is evident from the
constant practice of those times, that the King de facto was always owned as
Lawful Sovereign, and had Allegiance still paid him by all the People of this
Kingdom, except those who being the heads of one or the other Party were either
attainted, or else forced to ^lye the Kingdom.

But as for all others, though different and contrary Oaths of Allegiance were
imposed upon the People, sometimes by the one, and sometimes by the other of
those Kings, according as they got possession of the Throne; yet I can no where
find, that ever any body suffered for barely swearing Allegiance to the King
then in Being, for it was always taken for Law, that Allegiance was due to the
King de facto, since ordinary Subjects are not supposed to understand the legal
right or justice of the Kings Title.


M. I must still say that there was some color for the Peoples thus acting (as
you say they did) during the contest for the Crown between the two Families of
York and Lancaster, when I grant it was somewhat a difficult matter to judge
which of the two had the best right to the Crown, by reason that the House of
Lancaster had held it for three descents, as also from the speciousness of
their Title, since it was founded upon a pretended claim by right of blood,
upon supposing that Edmund, Surnamed Cronch-back (who was one of the Ancestors
of this House of Lancaster) was the Eldest Son to Henry the Third, which had it
been true, would have given Henry the Fourth a good right to the Crown, not
only against Richard the Second, but his own Grandfather Edward the Third
likewise (had he been then alive;) and this descent falling out long before the
memory of any man then living who could confute the falsity of this pretended
Pedigree. The People of England might very well be excused for owning an
Usurper, and paying Allegiance to him, since they did not know but his claim
might have been right, especially since it was approved of in full Parliament
without any contradiction, as I have already shown you at our last Meeting.

But what is all this to the matter now in debate between us, when the Lineal
Succession of the Crown has been so often declared to be the only means of
acquiring a just Title to it; and every one knows very well who was owned for
lawful King of England within these three Months, and also who was prayed for
in all our Churches as his Son and Heir apparent; and therefore I must still
tell you, that your parallel between those Kings de facto of the House of
Lancaster, and those Princes whom the Convention have now voted to fill the
Throne does not at all agree, since every Subject of this Kingdom who has but
sense enough to go to Market, can very well tell (if they will deal sincerely)
to whom their Allegiance is due.


F. As to what you have now said, it is no more than a repetition of what you
have already urged to evade the force of these clear Authorities; but indeed it
was all one when a Prince had been once recognized for Lawful King by Act of
Parliament, whether the People knew his Title not to be good by right of blood
or not. And this I have plainly proved to you from the instance of Richard the
Third, who though both his Elder Brothers Children were then alive, and the
Eldest of them had been Proclaimed King, and also owned for such by himself,
and whose Title he had also sworn to maintain in his Brother King Edwards life
time, as appears by the Clause Roll of the 11th of Edward the Fourth; yet when
he had once deposed him, and had called a Parliament which recognized his
Title, his Acts and Judicial Proceedings stand good at this day; and though he
himself was attained, and declared a Tyrant and an Usurper, Mem. 1.
yet all the Subjects who acted under his Authority, and had taken an Oath of
Allegiance to him, never needed an Act of Indemnity for so doing; whereas those
that came over with Henry the VIIth were sain to have an Act of Pardon past to
Indemnifie them for fighting against Richard the Third (as I have now showed
you.) And though this Parliament of the first of Henry the Seventh agreed to
repeal diverse Acts which the King found fault with; yet as for all other
Statutes made in the Reign of King Richard the Third (which have not been since
repealed) they are still in force without any confirmation; likewise when Henry
the Seventh had prevailed over Richard the Third, and that he was slain in the
Field, though all the Nation very well knew that Henry the Seventh could not be
Heir of the House of Lancaster, because his Mother was then alive, and had
never formally given up her right, if she had any, as certainly she could have
none, as being descended from John Earl of Somerset, who was base Son to John
of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, by Catherine Swinford, whilst his Wife was alive;
and though I grant after his Marriage with the said Catherine, the Children
born of that Bed were made legitimate by Act of Parliament in the 20th of
Richard the Second, yet that legitimation only respects such private
Privileges and Inheritances which they might enjoy or succeed to as Subjects,
and not in respect of the Crown; the Succession of which they were expressly
declared incapable of by that very Act of Legitimation, Vid. the Act Printed at
large in Bucks History of Richard the IIId.
still to be seen upon the Parliament Roll. But for all this, when Henry the
Seventh had called a Parliament, and was therein recognized for their Lawful
Sovereign, and that the Crown was settled by Statute on the King, and Heirs of
his Body (without any mention of the Princess Elizabeth, who ought to have been
Queen by right of blood) yet none of the Subjects of this Kingdom (as I can
find) ever scrupled to swear Allegiance to him, before ever he married that
Princess; though they as well knew that he could have no right by blood as you
can suppose, that the People at this day can know whether King James has
abdicated or forfeited the Crown or not, or whether your Prince of Wales be his
true and lawful Son; for since they are both nice and difficult Points, and
having been determined by the Convention, the Supreme Judges in this Case, in
favor of their present Majesty's, and that they also recognized their Title
after they became a Parliament; I can see no manner of reason why all the
Subjects of this Kingdom may not as well justify their taking this new Oath of
Allegiance to them, notwithstanding their former Oath of Allegiance to King
James, and his Right Heirs, as well as the People of England could justify
their taking an Oath of Allegiance to Henry the Seventh, notwithstanding their
former Oath to Edward the Fourth, and his Right Heirs, before ever Henry the
Seventh had Married the Princess Elizabeth, the Heiress of the Crown;
especially since this Act of the 11th of Henry the Seventh (which we are now
disputing about) was made expressly to secure and indemnitie all those who
should attend upon the King for the time being, and do him true and faithful
service of Allegiance, etc. And therefore it lies upon you still to prove, that
this Statute is either expired, or else void in it self; otherwise (besides the
constant practice of former times) we have here an express Act of Parliament
declaring it every Man's duty to pay Allegiance to the King for the time being,
and then certainly he is as much obliged to Swear it too.


M. I doubt not but I shall prove to you that this Statute expired with Henry
the Seventh, A. 11. H. 7. p. 5.6
from a Clause in the Act it self; for if you please to read immediately after
those words you have now cited, that all those who do the King for the time
being true and lawful Allegiance, etc. [it follows thus] shall be secured from
all manner of forfeitures and molestations relating to their Persons or Estates
( but mark) provided always that no person or persons shall take any benefit or
advantage by this Act, which shall hereafter decline from his or their said
Allegiance: now we know a proviso is an exception or restraint upon the
latitude and comprehensiveness of the Law, and that all Statutes are perfectly
null so far as the proviso reaches. Having premised this, I shall endeavor to
prove that this Act was designed only for the security of that Reign in which
it was made, and cannot be stretched any farther. To make this appear, let us
now suppose a competition between the King de jure, and Henry the Seventh (that
is one de facto) and that the Subject engages for the latter; in this case if
the King de facto prevail, there is no need of the assistance of this Statute;
for we cannot imagine any Prince could be so impolitick as to punish those who
have ventured their All to maintain him in his Government; this besides the
ingratitude of the action, would proclaim the injustice of his Cause, and would
serve only to ruin his interest.


F. Notwithstanding this objection, you have now made, I doubt not but this
Clause will bear a very fair and legal interpretation, and that not in respect
of the Allegiance that might be due to the King de facto, but to the King de
jure; since if it were not for the indemnity provided by this Statute, the King
de facto would have been obliged to have punished them for opposing their
lawful Prince.


M. This is easily answered, for pray do Kings de facto always perform that
which the Law requires; if so, they never would have been Kings de facto, since
they could not make themselves Masters of the Sovereign power without
dispossessing those who are supposed the right owners of it. Secondly, the
possessour would not so much as seem obliged to punish his adherents upon a
competition, except he owned himself to be no more than an unjust Usurper, but
we have neither example nor reason to expect such singular concessions as
these, for no Usurper will own himself in the wrong, so long as he intends to
enjoy the advantages of his injustice: upon supposition therefore, that the
Victory had fallen on the side of a King de facto, the Act would be wholly
superfluous.


F. But why may we not also suppose that this Clause was inserted, not only to
secure those who had assisted the King de facto against your King de jure, but
also to debar all those who had fallen from their Allegiance to the King de
facto, from receiving any benefit by this Act if ever they should plead it in
their own justification, after the King de jure had prevailed, and was again
settled in the Throne.


M. You may take it in this sense if you please, but if you do, it will not at
all mend the matter, for though those that stood by the King de facto, Ibid. p. 6.
will have great occasion for an Act of Indemnity, yet this Act will be as
helpless to them now, as it was needless before; for either they must submit to
the King de jure or not; if they do not submit, it is easy to imagine the
Consequences, how a Victorious and irresistible Prince will treat the obstinate
and rebellious opposers of his just Title if they do submit (as of necessity
they must) then they can claim no manner of privilege and indemnity from this
Act; for they cannot come into the Party of the King de jure, without deserting
that de facto; i. e. without declining their Allegiance to him, who was King
when this Statute was made; by declining which Allegiance, the proviso expressly
excludes them from all manner of benefit or advantage by this Act. In this
condition the Law would have left the de facto Party, if the Sovereignty had
been disputed between Henry the Seventh, and the House of York; and that the
Prince de jure of the House of York had been successful: from whence it is
undeniably plain, that neither the design nor words of this Statute can be
drawn to such a monstrous construction as to enact bare possession to be a good
Title, and make Might and Right the same thing. The only design of this
Parliament was to continue the Crown to Henry the Seventh during his life;
which both by the body and proviso of the Act was effectually done as in them
lay, for diverse reasons that might then prevail with the two Houses to consent
to a temporary alteration of the Succession to the Crown, such as these, that
though Henry the Seventh had no just Title in his own right, yet in the right
of his Wife he had, which he did no way disavow by this Act; and you must also
remember that at this time Henry the VIIth had several Children by his Queen,
viz. Prince Arthur, Henry, etc. So that now the contending Families of York
and Lancaster being thus hapily united, there was no reason to sear, that a
security (though an unusual one) to the present possessor, could be prejudicial
to the right Line, especially since the force of that Act was confined to the
Reign of that Prince, as has been already proved.


F. You may fancy if you please, that you have proved this Act to be expired,
but I think if you better consider of it, you will find your self mistaken, for
though I may very well suppose that the King and Parliament to deter men from
falling from their Allegiance to the King for the time being, might insert this
Clause upon a supposition that the next King whoever he was, whether by right
of blood, or only de facto, would out of a generous aversion to Traitors and
Deserters hinder them by virtue of this Clause, from enjoying any benefit by
this Act; yet I shall not longer insist upon it, whether it be insignificant or
not, and therefore will at present grant it to be so, but what then? Will a
void Clause vitiate or render expired an Act of Parliament which is made
indefinitely, without fixing it to any time, or person? the words in the Act
are, the King for the time being; which must certainly extend to any other King
as well as Henry the VIIth; for I suppose that an Act of Parliament, and a Deed
agreed in this, that an unnecessary Clause can by no means render the whole
void.

But as for what you say in relation to this Acts being a security for the
Title of the Queen, and her Children (whom you suppose to be the right Heirs of
the Crown) this rather serves to strengthen the Act than otherwise; for if this
King had a good Title in her right, then it may be also very well supposed that
she gave her assent to this Act in the person of her Husband, and that not for
the benefit, but to the prejudice of her own Issue, since if after her death
(which happened some years before his) her Son Henry Prince of Wales had set up
his present Title to the Crown in the right of his Mother, and so would have
dethroned his Father as an Usurper; I suppose no reasonable Man will deny but
that this Act would have indemnified all those who had taken up Arms in defense
of King Henry the VIIth against his Son, though (in your sense) King de jure;
and if it would justify the Subjects then, I cannot see why it may not do the
same thing now in their swearing Allegiance, nay, fighting for the King in
possession, against him whom we will for the present suppose to be King de jure.


M. Well, however I think I can prove that this Act was no more than temporary
from the judgment of the Judges in the Case of John Duke of Northumberland, A.
11. H. 7. p. 56.
who when he was Tried for Treason, for leading an Army against Queen Mary, to
settle the Lady Jane Gray in the Throne, desired to be informed by the Judges,
whether a man acting by the Authority of the Great Seal, and the Order of the
Privy Council (or Princes Council, as Stow and Heylin word it) could become
thereby guilty of Treason; to which, all the Judges answered, that the Great
Seal of one that was not lawful Queen, could give no Authority or Indemnity to
those that acted by such a Warrant, upon which the Duke submitted; though
without question he did not want Lawyers to enforce his Plea with this Statute
likewise, if his cause would have born it; from whence I infer against Sir
Edward Coke, that Treason lies against a King de jure, though out of possession;
for it is plain by all our Historians, that Queen Mary was so far from being
possessed of the Crown when the Duke of Northumberland acted against her, that
the Lady Jane was not only Proclaimed Queen in London, and most of all the
Cities and Great Towns in England, but the Tower of London, with all the Forts
and Naval Forces were under her Command; and she had also Allegiance sworn to
her by the Privy Council, and by the Lord Mayor, and Aldermen, and she had also
the Seals in her power, by which all Patents and Commissions were granted and
issued in her Name; and if all this be not sufficient to constitute her Queen
de facto according to this Statute of Henry the VIIth, I know not what was.


F. Yet I can tell you what was yet wanting, which because she had not, she was
certainly neither Queen de jure, nor de facto, and that was a solemn
Coronation, and Recognition of her Right by Parliament; which legal investiture
since she never had, she was not the Queen for the time being, and consequently
not intended within this Statute of the 11th of Henry the VIIth; for though it
is true, she was appointed Successor of the Crown-by the Letters Patents of
King Edward the VIth, yet since she could not claim by right of blood, there
being so many before her, all the Kingdom looked upon it as an Usurpation, and
an artifice of the Duke of Northumberland (whose Son she had Married) to get
the Government of the Kingdom into his sole power: so that it was no wonder if
the greater part of the People were so averse to her Title, and that those of
the Nobility who took her part, so quickly revolted from her, when once the
fear they were in of the Duke of Northumberland's power was removed; for had
this Bequest of the Crown to the Lady Jane held good, this Kingdom instead of
being Hereditary, would have become wholly Testamentary, and disposable by the
last Will or Letters Patents of the King or Queen for the time being, without
the consent of the Great Council of the Nation, which is contrary not only to
the then received Laws of Succession, but also to the ancient constitution of
the Kingdom, as well before as after the Conquest.

But notwithstanding all this, I doubt not but that if the Lady Jane had so far
prevailed against Queen Mary as to have been able to call a Parliament, and to
have had her Title owned and recognized therein, as it was in the Case of
Richard the Third, and Henry the Seventh, but that she would have been true and
lawful Queen according to the intent of the Statute we are now discoursing of,
and then the Duke of Northumberland must likewise (if he had fair play) have
been indemnified for taking up Arms in her defense against Queen Mary, since
Queen Jane would have been then within the letter of this Statute, as much as
King Henry the Seventh himself.


M. You must pardon me, if I cannot be of your opinion in this matter, since if
the bare Coronation and recognition by Parliament could confer a legal right to
the Crown upon one who had no hereditary right to it before the consequence of
it would be, that the Crown would be so far from being Elective (as you suppose
it to have anciently been) that it would be in the power of every bold Usurper
or Rebel who had but the confidence to call himself King, to gain a legal
Title to be so, according to your Principles: and then if Oliver Cromwell could
have found a Party strong enough in the Army to have declared him King, and had
called a Parliament in his own name, who had recognized him for their Lawful
Sovereign, he would then have had as much right to our Allegiance as King
Charles the IId, which certainly was not only contrary to the settlement of the
Crown upon Henry the VIIth, and the Heirs of his body, but also to that solemn
recognition of King James the Firsts Title, as lineally descended as right Heir
to the said King Henry, which I insisted on at our last Meeting.

And therefore if you will have my sense of this Act, it is either expired (for
the reasons I have already given) or else was void ab initio; since it is not
only contrary to the settled course of Succession of the Crown according to the
Laws of lineal descent for diverse hundred years last past, but also to those of
justice and right reason, for an Usurper not only to seize the Throne by force,
but if he can once get himself solemnly Crowned, and then recognized by an Act
of Parliament of his own calling, (which your self cannot deny but to have been
ever too obsequious to the will and power of Usurpers, as appears by those
instances you have given me in Henry the IVth, Henry the VIth, and Richard the
IIId,) the consequence will then be, that the whole Nation would not be only
bound to swear Allegiance to him, but would be also obliged by this Act to
desend him in his Tyranny and Usurpation to the utmost of their power, and it
would also indemnifie them for so doing; which would be to establish iniquity
by a Law, and would destroy all the settled foundations of right and wrong,
which I affirm God himself is not able to alter, without departing from those
great attributes of immutability and Justice, so essential to his Divine Nature.


F. It will not be very difficult to reply to these Arguments, since they are
grounded on such false Principles as are already answered. As first, that this
Kingdom is by the fundamental constitution of it an Hereditary Monarchy, and
that consequently none but he who has a right by inheritance can require our
Allegiance, but pray tell me where you can find this fundamental constitution?
for I think I have sufficiently proved that there never was any such thing
known in England till between four and five hundred years since that King
Edward the First succeeded to his Father Henry the Third, without any Bequest
of the Crown by his Testament, and before any Election, or Coronation, since he
was then in the Holy Land. But suppose it now to be an Hereditary Monarchy, C.
A. p. 57.
it does not therefore follow, that the Monarchy should continue always in such
a Family, for that may sail, or may be changed by Conquest or Usurpation, as
has often been, and the constitution continue. So that the most that can be
said is, that when any particular Family, by the Providence of God, and the
consent and submission of the People, is placed in the Throne, of right the
Crown ought to descend to the Heir of that Family; but suppose it does not,
must we pay Allegiance to no other person though p^ssessed of the Throne? Pray
Sir, show me that fundamental consti^ution; for its being an Hereditary
Monarchy does not prove it, and according to the Judgment of the best Lawyers,
the Laws of the Land require the contrary; viz. that we must pay our Allegiance
to him who is actually King, not to him who ought to have been King, but is
not, and to think to confute this, by pretending this fundamental constitution
of an Hereditary Monarchy, is to take that for granted, which is still to be
proved.

And therefore I am not at all frighted at the dreadful consequences which you
suppose must follow if this Statute of Henry the VIIth should be Law, ( viz.)
that it would be in the power of every Rebel and Usurper who could get himself
Crowned, and then owned to be King by a Parliament of his own calling to have a
legal right to our Allegiance, and that Cromwell if he could have got himself
once Crowned, and recognized, might have been defended in his unjust Usurpation
against King Charles the Second. But, admit this to have been so; yet it is
still to be understood, that at this Coronation he had taken the Oath anciently
taken by our Kings, and that the Parliament he had summoned to recognize his
Title, had consisted of the ancient Lords and Commons, consisting of Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses, which never was observed in any of those
Mock-Parliaments which Cromwell called; had all these Conditions been observed,
I believe he would have been as legal a King within this Statute of Henry the
VIIth, as he himself ever was before he Married with the Princess Elizabeth,
which was not till near half a year after he had the Crown settled upon him by
Act of Parliament. So that though upon every translation of the Crown from one
Family to another, the first Prince of that Family could have no Hereditary
Right to it, yet we find such Princes to this day taken for Lawful Kings; thus
your William the Conqueror, King Henry the IVth, and King Henry the VIIth, are
each of them looked upon as true and lawful Kings (according to our
constitution) as if they had been right Heirs of the Crown by lineal descent;
and though you may say, that as to William I. he had a good right by Conquest;
that is, only gratis dictum, since I have already proved that he could be
really no Conqueror. And if the English Saxon Monarchy was hereditary before
the Conquest (as the Gentlemen of your opinion suppose) he could be no other
than an Usurper upon Edgar Athling the right Heir of the Crown by blood; and as
for Henry the IVth, and Henry the VIIth, though they both pretended a feigned
Title to the Crown as Heirs by blood, yet it is plain by the very Acts of
Recognition I have cited, that they durst not insist upon that Title, since I
have already proved there is no such thing mentioned in that Act of Parliament
wherein the Estates of the Kingdom unanimously agreed that Henry Duke of
Lancaster should Reign over them, nor yet in the subsequent Act, whereby the
Crown was entailed upon himself, and his four Sons successively; so likewise
the Statute of the first of Henry the Seventh, it is only drawn in general
terms; declaring that the Inheritance of the Crown of England, etc. shall rest,
remain, and abide in the Person of King Henry the VIIth, and the Heirs of his
Body lawfully coming, etc. Nor is there indeed any breach made upon this
Statute (as you suppose) nor yet upon the Act of Recognition of King James,
which you so much insist upon, since the Crown is certainly settled upon two
Princes, who are not only lineally descended from them, but who are also to be
looked upon as right Heirs unto them, since the Great Council of the Nation,
who are the Supreme Judges have declared them to be so.

But as for the rest of your Speech, whereby you would prove that this Act must
needs be void, because contrary to the Laws of Justice and right Reason; this
also depends upon your former error, in supposing that Princes have a Divine
or Natural Right to their Crowns* antecedent to the municipal Laws of their
respective Kingdoms, which is already sufficiently confuted; so that though I
grant it is not in the power of God himself to alter the natural foundations of
right, and wrong, just, and unjust; yet it is likewise as certain that the
Civil Rights of Princes, as well as those of Subjects, can no ways be accounted
for according to those Natural Laws; since all Civil property, as well in
Crowns, as other Possessions, must depend upon the particular Laws and
Constitutions of each Kingdom and Nation, as I have already sufficiently made
out.

And therefore though I grant that all Legal Authority ought still to go
according to just or rightful Titles, E. L. R. p. 25, 26.
yet since God makes no Kings at this day. ^ut those who are made Kings by some
humane Acts, and have a legal right to Kingship by some humane Laws: Now how
can you prove from hence, that in England none can have a legal right to
govern, but those who have the rightful Title of a Lineal Succession? for if
the Title alone does not conferr the the Authority, but that the Law says a
legal investiture by Coronation and Recognition by Parliament shall also
conferr it, it is evident that an Hereditary Title, and a Legal Authority, may
be separated, and yet the Authority continue Legal still; for Legal Authority
must be conveyed in such manner, and by such forms as the Law has prescribed,
or appoints to that purpose; for there is no other way of conveying it; and
then that Authority which is so given in form of Law (and that only.) is the
Legal Authority. If then the Estates of the Realm, who are the only proper
Judges of such Disputes, have adjudged the Crown to one, whom we will at
present suppose to have no antecedent legal Title to it, yet he thereby becomes
legally possessed, not only of the external force and power, but of the legal
Authority of the Government also; and therefore he may challenge as his due,
all Legal Obedience, (which is the true notion of Allegiance, for nothing more
than Legal Obedience can be due to a mere Legal Authority) so that because he
is invested with the Legal Authority, the Crown is his Legal Property, against
all other Claims, and his Subjects must defend him in it, as the Legal
Properties of private Persons being once determined by Judgments of inferior
Courts of Law, are also to be defended by the Civil Power against the force of
him who perhaps may have the better Title to the Estate by right of blood. And
if God makes Kings by humane Acts, I hope it is no injustice in God to make him
a King, whom the Law makes a King* and to enjoin our Obedience to a Legal King;
which Legal Authority may be said to be annexed to the Legal Title, while there
is no Legal Judgment against it: which was not the Case of Queen Mary, and the
Lady Jane her Competitor; nor yet of King Charles the Second, and Oliver
Cromwell: since neither the one' or the other were ever Crowned or acknowledged
as Lawful Queen, or King by Parliament, and therefore could obtain no Legal
Title against the Right Heirs; but on the other side, when one is solemnly
declared King or Queen, being Crowned or placed on the Throne by the Estates of
the Realm, he is then Legal King, and has the Legal Authority, as the Royal
Estate and Dignity, was owned to be in Henry the VIth, when the Duke of York
claimed the right to the Crown.


M. I am not yet convinced I am mistaken in this matter; for waving at present
any Natural or Divine Rights of Princes, I think this Act of Henry the VIIth,
(if supposed to be now in force) is no ways to be reconciled with the former
declared Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom; much less can this last pretended
Act of Recognition of King William and Queen Mary reverse the Statute of
Recognition made to King James the First, whereby the Parliament does not only
own him for true and lawful King by descent from Henry the VIIth, and Edward
the IVth, but also engaged themselves and their Posterities to his Majesty, and
his Royal Progeny for ever. And they do likewise conclude in these words (I
have not yet mentioned) which [Act] if Your Majesty shall be pleased (as an
argument of your gracious acceptance) to adorn with your Majesty's Royal
Assent (without which it can neither be complete and perfect, nor remain to all
Posterity according to our most humble desires, as a Memorial of your Princely
and tender affection toward us;) we shall add this also to the rest of our
Majesty's unspeakable and inestimable benefits. Here they plainly acknowledge
these two things. First, that the Crown descend^ by proximity of blood, and
that immediately, even before any Ceremony of Coronation, or otherwise; so that
there can be no inter-regnum, or vacancy of the Throne; and accordingly it is a
maxim in Law, that Rex non meritur. Secondly, That the Assent of the King is
that which gives the life, being, and vigor to the Laws, without which they
are of no force; therefore I shall plainly prove these Acts to the contrary to
be void. It is a Maxim in our Civil as well as your common Law' that every
S^natus-Consultum, or Decree of the Senate as also every Statute or Act of
Parliament must be abrogated and repealed by the same Authority by which it was
made; since therefore that Act of the first of Edward the IVth, whereby he was
declared to be Lawful King, as descended from L^^nel Duke of Clarence, third
Son of Edward the Third, by Philippa his Daughter, and Heir; and that Henry the
Fourth, and Henry the Sixth, who had successively held the Crown were Usurpers,
and only pretended Kings; it would necessarily follow, that none can after this
so Solemn Law and Declaration, lawfully succeed to the Crown of this Realm, but
such as have a true and just right as Heirs by blood, according to the course
of descent allowed of by the common Laws of this Kingdom; and therefore Henry
the VIIth being an Usurper, and enjoying no more than a Matrimonial Crown,
could not join with a Parliament in making any Law contrary to that of the
first of Edward the IVth, which had been so solemnly past, and settled in
Parliament by a King whose Title was by descent indisputable.

So likewise in the matter now in dispute between us, I can never apprehend how
a pretended Statute made in a Convention, and not in a Lawful Parliament
summoned by the King, can first declare the Throne vacant, and then appoint
those to fill it, who certainly can have no just Title to it, according to that
Act of Recognition of King James; which expressly declares, that they themselves
could not have made that Act to be complete and perfect to remain to all
posterity, without his Royal Assent; which being once past into a Law. by a
King whose Title was indisputable, can never afterward be altered (if ever it
can be at all) but by a Parliament as legally called, and that by a King whose
Title is also as Legal as that of King James the First's; this Objection,
though I have often urged in other words, yet could I never yet obtain a
satisfactory answer from you.


F. Though I have already in part answered this Objection at our last Meeting,
and have also partly done it already in this; yet since I see you so much
insist upon it, and do also urge it again in other words, with a fresh addition
of new arguments; I hope you will not think me tedious, if I am also
necessitated to repeat the same things again, and put you in mind of what I
hayh already proved; which when I have done, I doubt not but this argument of
yours will signify very little. Your first mistake therefore is, that King
Henry the VIIth being an Usurper, had no power to alter the course of
Hereditary Succession, settled by the Statute of the first of Edward the IVth
whereby he was declared lawful King; in answer to which, I must put you in
mind, that this was the first time that ever this Point was so settled before,
and that not till after a long War, and that by subduing all those that held
with the House of Lancaster, he had made such a perfect Conquest of all that
opposed him, that there was no Lords or Commons in this Parliament but what
were entirely of his Party; yet we see that when Henry the VIth got the upper
hand again, and his party reversed this Statute of Edward the IVth, and
declared the Crown to belong to Henry the VIth, and his Heirs, which Act was to
reversed again by the next Parliament, in the eleventh of Edward the IVth; when
he again recovered the Crown by another Battle against Henry the VIth, so
evident it is, that whoever is once seated in the Throne, and is recognized by
Act of Parliament though of his own summoning, all his Acts till they are
repealed do hold good, though he were declared an Usurper, and himself
attainted by Act of Parliament; and therefore admitting that Henry the VIIth
was an Usurper at the time when this Act we now discourse of was made, yet
would it not render this Act void as you suppose, since it was never yet
repealed by any subsequent Statute.

But indeed, Henry the VIIth was no Usurper at the time when this Statute was
made; for you your self have already granted that he had a good Title in right
of his Wife, which he never renounced, or disavow'd; and therefore we may very
well suppose that she, though Queen de jure, gave her tacit consent to this Act
in the person of her Husband; and if so, I cannot see any reason why it should
not stand good, not only against her self, and her own Children, (...) also
against all others who should claim under her Title; but if you say she could
not do this in prejudice of her own right Heirs, because the Crown had been
already declared by Act of Parliament to be Hereditary, and not to be acquired
by Usurpation; this is to beg the question, and to suppose an Hereditary
descent to have been the fundamental Law, and constant practice of the
Succession of the Crown before that time; whereas I have already proved, that
till the Reign of Edward the First, the Crown was partly Hereditary, and partly
Elective; and ever since that time, though it has been still claimed as
Hereditary, yet has it been always believed to be the right of the Parliament
to declare who was Lawful King: and that whosoever was so declared and
recognized, has been always looked upon in the eye of the Law as the only
Rightful and Legal King, to whom the Allegiance of the Subjects was due, and
whose Statutes are obligatory at this day.

This being so (as it cannot be denied) your Argument from the Act of
recognition to King James the First may be easily answered, though I should
grant at present (for discourse sake) that their now Majesty's King William and
Queen Mary are only King and Queen de facto, for if all the Statutes of these
three Kings of the House of Lancaster, and of Richard the Third (nay even those
Statutes by which themselves were declared to be lawful Kings, and the Crown
settled upon them and their issue) have at all times held good, till they were
lawfully repealed I desire you would show me any sufficient reason why the late
Act of Recognition of their present Majesty's Title, and for the settlement of
the Crown upon their right Heirs of the Protestant Religion, should not have
the like force and effect in respect of our Allegiance to them, as it had been
to all other Kings de facto, who have hitherto sat upon the Throne, though
perhaps it may derogate from the intent of that Statute of Recognition of King
James the First; nor does it make any difference, though we suppose that this
Act was made by a King by descent, and that we now discourse of only by a King
and Queen de facto, and a Parliament called or owned by them; since the Law
allows no difference as to their Legislative Power between Acts made by a King
de facto, and one de jure.

And therefore, though I grant that those conclusions you draw from this
Statute are true, that there is no inter-regnum or vacancy of the Throne. And
Secondly, that the assent of the King is that which gives the life, being, and
vigor to the Laws; yet as for your first conclusion, that there can be no
vacancy of the Throne, it is only to be understood, that ordinarily, and
according to the common course of Succession there can be none, and yet
extraordinarily there may, as you your self must grant: since upon the death of
Queen Elizabeth there might have happened a contest between King James, and the
then Earl of Hartford, as Heir to Mary the French Queen, second Sister to King
Henry the VIIIth, upon whose Heirs the Crown was settled by Henry the VIIIth's
Will, as I have already mentioned at our last Meeting; and if it had been a
doubt whether this Will had been rightly made, or not, could have been no
otherwise decided but by War, or else the solemn Judgment and recognition of
Parliament of that Title they had judged to be best; and he who had been so
declared, would certainly have been lawful King, and all the Nation had been
obliged to swear Alleglance to him. Apply this to the present case, admitting
King James to have truly Abdicated the Throne, and see whether it be not
exactly the same; supposing (for once) your Prince of Walts to have been indeed
the Son of the late King and Queen; and though it is true, he is not yet
declared an Impostor, yet is he neither acknowledged as their right Heir, for
the Reasons I have already given.

But as for your next conclusion, that it is the assent of the lawful King that
gives force and vigor to a Law; from whence you would infer, that the late Act
of Recognition and Settlement is void, because not made by those who were
lawful King and Queen at the time of the making this Act; this is also to beg
the question; for though it is true the Act of Recognition to King James
declares this Act could not be complete without his Majesty's Royal Assent, yet
it is not there said, that no other King but he who claims by descent (as King
James did) could pass an Act that should be good in Law; since we find by the
whole Course both of Law, and History, that the Statutes made by Kings de
facto, are as truly and as much Laws, as those made by your Kings de jure; and
Attainders for Treason committed against them, have been so far from being
declared void, that they could not be reversed by any other means than by
particular Acts of Parliament made for that purpose, as I have already shown
you from diverse instances, both from History, and Records. Nor is your
exception against the present Parliaments not being called by the Kings Writ of
any force, since I have already proved at our last Meeting, from the example of
the Great Council that assembled to recognize and ordain Edward the first to be
King when he was in the Holy Land; as also by the Parliaments of Edward and
Richard the Second, by which they were deposed, and Edward the Third, and Henry
the Fourth declared to be their Successors: That those Parliaments could not be
summoned by those Princes whom they so recognized, and therefore though they
were called by the Writs of the former Kings; yet their Authority determined as
to be the Parliament of that King that called them, upon his ceasing to be
King; and therefore must owe their sitting longer, wholly to the Authority of
him they had already declared King, whose Presence and Authority was then
looked upon as sufficient to give them power to sit and make Laws with the
succeeding King, though they were never summoned by him.

To these Parliaments I may add that of the first of King Charles the Second,
which called home the King, and after his return, made several Statutes both
public, and private, which stand good to this day; so that to conclude you
have no reason either from Law or History to maintain that there can be no
vacancy of the Throne, or that none can be declared King or Queen, but in a
Parliament summoned by the Writs of that Prince, whose Title they are to
recognize.


M. I shall not deny the matters of Fact to have been as you lay them, as to
the Great Councils or Parliaments you mention; but in answer to this, you may
remember, that as for those Parliaments called in the name of Edward, or
Richard the Second, there is no Procedent to be drawn from them, because they
served only to depose their Lawful Kings, and to set up those who had no right,
at least as long as they lived; and you very well know, that any coersive power
in the two Houses of Parliament over the King, is expressly renounced and
declared against in the Parliament of the thirteenth of K. Charles the Second,
as I have already shown you; but as for the Convention which was called in the
first year of that King, I have also given you my judgment of it; that though
they might lawfully meet to vote the return of their Lawful Sovereign, and to
recognize his Title, yet were they not for all that a lawful Parliament, as to
the raising of Moneys or making of Laws; and therefore what ever they did to
both these, they were fain to be confirmed by the Parliament of the 13th I now
mentioned.

But indeed I cannot but admire as this mungrel hodge podge course of
Succession which you now suppose to take place in England; for you cannot deny
but the Crown is hereditary, and has been always claimed as such for near 500
years; and yet for all that, when ever an Usurper and a Parliament shall agree
together, he to take the Crown by force, and they to recognize his Title as
soon as he pleases to call them, he must then be looked upon as a lawful King,
and the just and rightful Title of the true King, or lawful Heir of the Crown
shall be so far destroyed, as that Allegiance must be due to this Usurper,
though perhaps he obtained the Crown by the most horrid vilanies in the World;
as the deposing and murdering of his Lawful Sovereign, as Henry the IVth did,
and which would also have been the case of Oliver Cromwell, had he ever taken
upon him the Title of King; so that is to set on foot at once two contrary
legal rights, a legal right and title to the Crown by descent of blood, without
a right to exercise the Authority belonging to a King, and a legal right to
wear the Crown, and exercise the authority belonging to it, without any
antecedent legal right to the Crown it self; which would indeed render the
legal authority in England to be like the right that men have to those
Creatures that are ferae naturae, which belong to him who can get them into his
power; for as to the consent or recognition of Parliament, I look upon that as
a mere ^auble, since your self cannot show me any Usurper since the Conquest,
though never so wicked and notorious, who ever failed to have his Title so
recognized and confirmed by Parliament, as you your self cannot deny, which
methinks is a high derogation from the Dignity of a true Hereditary Monarchy,
such as ours either is, or at least ought to be.


F. I shall reply but this once upon this head, since I see there can be
nothing new said upon it: and therefore you your self are for^ed to repeat what
you have already ^urged at our last Meeting; only you strive to support it by
fresh Authorities; therefore as to the Parliaments which deposed King Edward
and Richard the Second, I cannot blame you for denying them to be lawful
precedents, because they make directly against your opinion; but you say
nothing to that of the first Great Council or Parliament of Edward the First,
which not only ordained he should be King, but also appointed all the Great
Officers of the Kingdom which were to govern it in his absence; but you may
deny the authority of those Parliaments of the first of Edward the Third, and
first of Henry the Fourth, as much as you please in a Chamber, but if you
should do the like at Westminster Hall against any Act of Parliament, because
made whilst Edward or Richard the Second were living, you would soon be
overruled, and told that those Laws had still continued in force, and
unrepeal'd, and it did not belong to private men to question those Acts that
have been hitherto received for Law.

But as for what you have said against the authority of the Acts of that
Parliament that brought in the King, I have already proved that they were only
confirmed (...) cantela, and that they had been good without it, appears by
this, that all their private Acts, though never confirmed in the following
Parliament, are still in force. But if the solemn Recognition of a Kings Title
by Parliament be such a bauble, and so easily obtained (as you suppose,) I may
say the same of that Act which recognized King James the firsts Title; that it
was done merely out of flattery upon his Accession to the Crown; nor can you
reply that they might do this, because he was the only right Heir, this is to
beg the question, since if he had not been so, it would have been all one, as
you your self confess.

As for the rest of your Arguments which you draw from the different means
which our Law allows for Princes succeeding to the Crown, which you call a
mungrel hodge podge course of Succession, and that it derogates from the
Dignity of a true Hereditary Monarchy; to which I shall only say, if now our
Law has established it so, no private Man ought to judge otherwise; for nemo
debet esse sapientior legibus, is a maxim as old as true; but indeed, though
our Laws do establish a legal right in the present Possessor of the Crown, when
once Crowned, and Recognized by Parliament, since they will not allow the
Parliament to judge of or examine the Kings Title. or by what means he attained
the Throne; yet this does not to alter the ordinary hereditary course of
Succession for the Law still looks upon the Crown as Hereditary, and the change
of the Person or Royal Family does not make the Crown cease to be so; and
therefore whoever has possession of the Crown, has an Hereditary Crown, and as
such, may leave it to his Heirs as long as they can keep it; as is plain from
the example of the three Henry's who succeeded each other, and who had not only
Allegiance sworn to them, but they who acted contrary thereunto, were judged
and executed as Traitors; so that the Law did all it could to maintain the
Crown in the right line of Succession; and if any Kings have gained it by
Usurpation, though the Parliament have owned the Authority of such an Usurper,
yet have they not thereby approved the action; and you your self must
acknowledge a great difference between these two, since you have more than once
acknowledged that an Usurper, or King in possession, has a good Title to a
Crown, in case all the right Heirs are extinct, or by their not claiming it for
any long time, are supposed to have made a ^acit cession of their right; since
it is not so much to the Person as to the Authority (which we grant to be from
God) that we pay our obedience.

But let us also for once suppose that there may be a legal Title to a Crown
without a right to exercise the Authority belonging to it; and a legal right to
wear the Crown, and exercise the Authority belonging to it, without an
antecedent legal Right to the Crown it self; this is no such absurdity as you
suppose, E. L. R. p. 18.
if you please to consider that allowed distinction between jus ad rem* and jus
in re, with the reason of it; for it is an approved distinction in Law, that one
may have a right to a thing, and another a right in it; the one is a right of a
legal claim, the other of a legal possession: and that this may and must be in
all Civil Governments, and mere legal Rights, appears from the different Laws
and Customs on which such different rights are founded. This I have hinted
before, but must now explain it more particularly; in all Civil Societies there
must be particular Laws to determine personal and particular Rights; and
whatever is due to any Man by such Laws, is his legal Right. But yet we know
these Laws can determine no controversy without a living Judge; for if every
Man were to judge for himself, every Man will make the Law to be on his side,
and then we had as good have no Laws at all; and therefore the Fundamental Laws
of all Societies, which is superior to all particular Laws, is this, That the
last and final Judgment of Authority, shall be taken for Law, and that shall be
every Man's right as to all the Effects of Law, which is thus adjudged him;
whoever calmly considers these things, will find that it is impossible it
should be otherwise without overturning all Civil Governments. And this I have
proved to you from the Example of a right owner of an Estate, when outed of his
Possession by a Verdict of a Jury and an unjust Judgment in one of the King's
Courts, that no Man ought to restore him by force to his Possession, till he
has again reverst that unjust Judgment given against him.


M. Though I grant this is true in the Case of private Persons, and their
Inheritances, yet is it not so as to Princes who hold their Crowns by a Title
superior to the ordinary Municipal Laws, and therefore are not only Kings by
Law, but by Divine Right, and a Fundamental Constitution of the Government; and
so cannot have their Title adjudged by Parliament, as you suppose; for our best
Divines have unanimously concluded out of Scripture, that all lawful Kings and
their Royal Power is from God, by Divine right, and is not from the People, no
not in Elective Kingdoms, (such as Poland, for Example;) for even there, the
conferring of the Royal Authority is from God, and not from any Law made by the
People, and neither they nor their Representatives have any thing to do to
judge of it; for I would gladly know who made that Law which made the King,
certainly the King did not make it, for that Law which made the King, must (of
necessity) precede and be before the King, who had his Royal Power and Kingly
Office from that Law.


F. I see you are very hard put to it, since you are again forced to fly back
to your old Covert of a Divine Right in Kings, which is, not to be derived from
any Law made by the consent of the People, and if this be true, I desire you
would show me, how Kings can at this day owe their Crown^ immediately to God,
and not to the Law, since God does no longer confer Kingdoms by any express
Designation of the Person, but by the ordinary course of his Providence; and
then pray tell me, why all Princes whatsoever, when they are once seated in the
Throne, let them come by it which way they will, must not derive their power
alike from God? and consequently, Kings by an unjust Conquest, or Usurpation,
are as much from God, as those who ascend the Throne by the Consent or Election
of the People; for if the Peoples consent, do no more then design the Person,
but that it is God alone which gives him his Authority, then which way soever
he obtains this power of the Sword, which is the only sign of God's conferring
this Authority, it will be also the Ordinance of God, and consequently their
present Majesty's being once seated in the Throne are upon, these principles as
much to be obeyed as the Ordinance of God; as King James or any other
Hereditary Monarch whatever.

But if you do not like this Doctrine, and tell me of a legal Successive right
which King James and his right Heirs have to the Crown, according to the
Fundamental Constitution of the Nation; this is plainly to own the King to be
so by the Law of the Land, though in words you deny it; for every hereditary
right is either a continued Usurpation by force, which can give no right at
all; or a right by Law, which is by the consent of the People to entail the
Crown on such a Family, which certainly is to make a King by Law, that is, by
the consent of the People. But if you will suppose that it was the Authority of
the first King alone who thus entailed the Crown upon himself, and his right
Heirs, I desire you would show me how the Crown could be so entailed without
the consent of the People, so as that his Successor may not alter it, and give
it by his last Will or Testament to which of his Sons or Daughters he pleases;
since Sir Robert Filmer himself acknowledges that a testamentary heir to a
Crown in an absolute Monarchy, is as much by Divine right, as if he had come in
by Succession, as appears by the instances he gives in Seth, who could have no
right to succeed his Father Adam in the Government of Mankind, while Cain his
Elder Brother was alive, by the Will of Adam his Father; the like I may say of
Solomon, who by his Fathers Crowning him King in his life time, and thereby
making him his Successor, gave him a right to Rule over Adon^jah his Elder
Brother; so that I may very well ask you, if the present Law of the Land did
not proceed from the free consent of the People testified by long Custom, or
express Declaration of the People by their Representatives in Parliament; I
desire to know why the King of England cannot as well settle the Crown by his
last Will upon which of the Blood Royal he pleases, as that it should be Lawful
for the English Saxon Kings to exercise this Prerogative, as Dr. Brady supposes
they did before the Conquest, without the consent of the Great Council of the
Nation? So that I think I may much better ask you what that Law was, and who
made it, which you suppose to make Kings prior to, and independent from the
consent of the People; since if there be any such Law, it is either as yet
unknown to Mankind, or else all those who are once possessed of Kingdoms, have
an equal Title to them by Divine Right? But indeed, it is only some Divines who
were more scrupulous than knowing in Politics, who first started this
question, whereas indeed there is no such great Mystery in it; for that Law by
which the first King of England for Example was Elected, was not in being
before the King was made, nor yet was the King in being before that; but when
the first King was made so, by the consent and election of the People, the
King, and the Law that made him so, began both together; that is, the People by
choosing of him to Govern upon certain Conditions, and he by accepting the Crown
upon those Conditions, was that Law by which he then took the Crown, and by
which it has been held ever since that time. So that if the Crown ought to be
enjoyed according to a legal right, and that there must be some Judges
appointed of this right, when ever any Disputes may happen about it, either
every pretender to the Crown must judge for himself, and then he will be both
Judge and Party in his own Cause, or else it must be left to the conscience of
every individual Subject in England to side part with what Party he pleases,
that may thus pretend to it: and so there may be a dozen Competitors for the
Crown at once, and all with equal right as for ought that any body knows; or
lastly, this right must be left to the determination of some Civil Judges to
judge whose Right it is; and who can these Judges be who shall thus judge what
are the ancient Laws of Succession, and Rules of Allegiance, but the Great
Council of the Nation? therefore, if they have already declared and recognized
King William and Queen Mary to be lawful King and Queen of this Realm, I think
every Subject of the same may very well justify their Swearing Allegiance to
them; not only by virtue of this Statute of the 11th of Henry the VIIth, which
requires Allegiance to be paid to the King in being, but also from the equity
and reasonableness of the thing it self, to hinder the Nation from falling
together by the ears, and to entail Civil Wars from Generation to Generation,
if the Subjects were obliged by their former Oath of Allegiance to the King de
jure, to endeavor to restore him by force of Arms; and therefore the Preamble
to this Statute very well and truly sets forth, that it is not reasonable, but
against all Law, Reason, and good Conscience, that the Subjects going with
their Sovereign Lord to the Wars, any thing should lose or forfeit for doing
this their true duty and service of Allegiance to the King for the time being.


M. But pray tell me, is not this very strange and unjust, and that by your own
showing, that a Prince should have a legal Right and Title to the Crown,
without a right to exercise the Authority belonging thereunto; for they must
now pay Allegiance to the King in being, let him be never so great an Usurper;
so that indeed the preamble to this Act is expressly false, since I think it is
very unreasonable, nay against all Law, Reason, and good Conscience, to Swear
Allegiance to an Usurper; since by that means, not only all good Subjects would
be put out of a capacity of endeavoring to restore the King de jure to his
Throne, though never so unjustly deposed, or driven out, as in duty they ought;
but also those who were instrumental in this Rebellion, and in depriving the
Lawful Prince of his just Rights, may not themselves endeavor to restore him,
which would put them out of all possibility of making amends for the wrong they
have done him, and of making restitution, by again restoring him to his Throne.


F. If this be all the difficulty that is left upon your mind, I doubt not but
to prove to you, not only from the Law of the Land, that Allegiance may be
lawfully Sworn in this Case, but also that it is for the common happiness and
peace of the Nation, which is the main end of all Government that it should be
so; and therefore I shall first freely grant, that though it is Rebellion
unjustly to deprive a King and his right Heirs of the Crown, and that those who
had a hand in it, are bound in conscience to endeavor to restore him or them
to their just rights again; yet this must be done by no other methods but what
are consistent with the public peace and safety of the Common wealth; for if a
King de facto, has once got possession of the Throne, and has been Crowned and
Recognized by Parliament, from what has been already proved, I think it is very
plain, that they ought to obey him, not only from the very letter of this Law,
but also, because I have now said, all private Persons ought to submit their
Judgments in this matter to that of their Representatives, who if they have
judged falsely, are (...) bear the blame, but yet their Judgment for all that
is to be held for good, 'till it be reversed in the same way in which it was
given, since if after such a recognition every private person should still be
free to pay his Allegiance to him whom he supposed King de jure, E. O. p. 57.
it would certainly follow, that the Civil Society or Commonwealth must of
necessity fall into Civil Wars, which is against the nature of Civil Societies,
and inconsistent with the duty of self-preservation, which obliges men not to
expose their Lives and Fortunes, but to obtain a greater good than both those,
which can only be the public good of the Community, and not the single
interest of any one person or Family; and though I grant it is a great sin in
those who are instrumental in raising Rebellion, and who are thereby guilty of
a very enormous Crime, yet that which made it so, was not barely the injury
they committed against the Prince to whom (if alone considered) the breach of
an Oath, (in withdrawing their Allegiance, could be no greater a Sin than the
breach of an Oath to another person) but indeed the fatal mischief and
irreparable damage they did the Commonwealth, is that which aggravates the
Sin; and if a new commotion to restore the King de jure, would in all
probability, prove yet more destructive, and a Nation by being so much weakened
by a former Civil War, be less able to bear a new Civil War, which may happen
so far, to the weakening of it, as to expose it to the Invasion and Conquest of
a foreign Nation, who may be Enemies both to our Religion and Civil
Constitution in such a case I cannot think it our duty to restore a Prince by
force, though never so unjustly driven from his Throne. And therefore if I had
been then a man, though I should have been as much for bringing home King Charles
as any body ought to be, yet I should have been only for it in the way in which
it was brought about, and should never have desired it, if it could not have
been done but by an Army of French or Irish Papists; and the like I say now, as
to King James, as long as he is joined with the Interest of France, and is
already gone into Ireland on purpose to renew the War, by the Arms and
Assistance of those, whose Fathers, as well as several of themselves, did all
they could to destroy, not only the Royal Power, but also the English Religion
and Government in that Nation.

And therefore I must freely tell you, that if even Rebels have put it out of
their power to make reparation for all the wrongs they may have done by
Rebelling against their Lawful Prince, because he in possession is too powerful
to be driven out again without a violent Civil War, and a general concussion of
the whole Commonwealth; This reparation to the injured Prince being not to be
made without a greater evil than that they endeavored avoid, it ought to be
omitted till it may be done with more safety to the Nation, or else not at all.
I say, if there be no other way to make reparation to their injured King, but
by engaging the Nation in fresh Civil Wars, they ought not to attempt it by
such unlawful and destructive means.


M. I confess the Discourse you have now made, carries the greatest appearance
of truth, of any thing you have yet said; since it is drawn from the public
Good of the Nation, which I grant to be comprehended under the common good of
Mankind, and you have done well to own it to be Rebelion, to deprive a lawful
Prince and his Heirs of the Crown; yet that it is unlawful to restore them
again to it, if we think it cannot be brought about without a general
Subversion of our Religion and Civil Liberties, may be a question; I grant
indeed, if we could be absolutely certain of this, there would be some color
for this Argument: but since future things are not capable of Demonstration, if
the restoring our lawful Prince be a Duty incumbent upon every good Subject,
we ought to endeavor it, though with some Danger and Hazard of what ever is
dear to us; for God will either protect us both in our Religion and Civil
Liberties, for thus honestly performing our Duties (according as we are bound
by our Allegiance) or if he has called us to suffer for the Truth he will
either find us Patience to bear it, or else provide us a way to escape; this I
speak in Relation to the French and Irish, whose Conquest and Malice you are so
much afraid of, in case the King should happen to be restored by their
assistance; but indeed, I think this a needless fear, since I suppose the King
will be too wise to bring over so many of either Nation, as shall be able to
make an entire Conquest of this Kingdom, least thereby both he and his Crown
may lie wholly at their Mercy, when the Business is done; nor do I think it
either in the power of the French, or Irish, to perform these dangerous things,
not of the former, because (as I now said) I suppose the King will never bring
over more of them along with him, than what may serve to make a stand against
the Prince of Orange's Forces, till his Good and Loyal Subjects can come in and
join with them to his Assistance; and as for the Irish, they are also the
King's Subjects, and though Ignorant they are, very inveterate against the
Protestant Religion, and the English Nation and Interest; yet they may be so
governed, and overruled by the King, as not to be able to do us any
considerable Damage

But as to the King of France, I do really believe he is far from intending to
make an entire Conquest of this Kingdom for himself, much less desiring to make
the King as Absolute a Monarch here, as himself is in France, for us to the
form^, he has too much consideration of his own Glory, and Reputation in the
World, to seize upon the Kingdom of a near Kinsman and Allie of his own
Religion, and who had been driven from his Throne chiefly for being too much in
his Interest; and besides all this, he may very well fear, that if he went
about any such thing as an entire Conquest of this Nation, all Parties may join
against him as a common Enemy, and drive him out again, as the English Barons
did Prince Lewis in the time of King Henry the III d. nor can it be the French
King's Interest to make our King Absolute here; for then having the Persons and
Purses of his Subjects wholly in his own Power, King Lewis might justly fear,
that either this King, or his Successors may prove as dangerous Enemies to the
Crown of France as ever they have been in former Times, if ever our Kings
should go about to revive their ancient pretentions to France or Normandy, or
make War upon some other Quarrel; and thefore I think it will be more far the
Interest of France, to leave us our Laws, Liberties and Privileges as we now
enjoy them; nay, to make an express Capitulation for them, and when he has done
to foment those Jealousies and Disputes, that are still like to arise between
the King and Us about them, thereby to hinder us from joining against him; then
by rendering the King Absolute to take them quite away, and put the sole power
of the Purse as well as of the Sword wholly into his Hands.

To Conclude, you do also very much misrepresent the matter in supposing, that
though the King cannot now be restored without falling into a new Civil War,
yet that, does it not therefore follow, that such a War is not to be desired
for the Public Good of the Nation; since we shall thereby not only restore the
Crown to its right Owner, and the Succession of it to the lawful Heir; but
also shall restore Episcopacy in Scotland, and prevent the Church of England
from falling into a dangerous Schism, by depriving the Arch Bishop of
Canterbury, and as many other of the Bishops, who are so Honest as not to take
the new Oath for standing out against it, by the Temporal Power of a pretended
Parliament, without the Judgment of a Lawful Convocation, who are the only
proper and legal Judges.

You likewise as much mistake, in supposing that this War can no ways be
finished, but by so great a Concussion as shall so much weaken the Kingdom, as
to render it exposed to the Invasion^ of Foreign Enemies, in which you may be
very much deceived; for who can tell but the hearts of this Nation may come to
be so inclined to receive their lawful King, and his right Heir, and may be so
weary of the present Usurpation, as upon his first appearance in England, with
an Army sufficient to defend those who shall come into him; so many of his
Subjects will take this advantage, as will be more than enough to restore him
with as little Bloodshed, as when he was driven out, and then I think no
indifferent Man but will acknowledge that such a War would prove for the best,
since it will not only setle the Government upon in ancient Foundation of a
lineal Succession, but will also extinguish those fatal causes of War, not only
from among our selves, but also from Foreign Princes, as long as the King, and
the Prince of Wales, and his lawful Heirs shall continue in being, which I hope
will be much longer then those upon whom your Convention has settled the Crown,
either in Present or Reversion.


F. I doubt not but to show you, that all you have now said, is either built
upon false Principles, or else deduced by very uncertain Consequences; for in
the first place, though you doubt my Principle, that the People of this Nation,
are not bound to restore King James to the Throne, if it cannot be done without
the evident Destruction both of our Religion and Civil Liberties, which
certainly is true (granting it to be never so much our duty to restore him,
when with safety we may;) for if the obligation of all Moral Duties whatsoever,
is only to be judged of according as they more or less conduce to the Happiness
or Destruction of the common good of Mankind, (whereof this particular Nation
makes a part) it will necessarily follow; that this Duty of restoring King
James, is not to be practiced, if it cannot be brought about without the
Destruction of our Religion and Civil Liberties, since it is only for the
maintenance of those, that even Kings themselves were first ordained in this
Nation; and it is evident, that this Kingdom may be sufficiently Happy and
subsist in the State it is now in, though neither King James nor your Prince of
Wales be ever restored to Reign over us.

So that then all the Difficulty that remains, is, That since his Restoration
being not otherwise to be brought about without the assistance of great numbers
of French or Irish Forces, whether it be not only so small a hazard as you make
it, but twenty to one, that his coming in upon these Terms will produce those
dreadful Effects, which I say, will certainly happen from it? and though I
grant that future things, especially, in the Revolutions of Government are not
capable of Demonstration as Mathematical Propositions, yet if all the
circumstances of Time, and the Temper and Disposition of the King himself, and
those who are to join with Him in bringing Him in again be considered, it shall
appear, that Morally speaking nothing less then the evident Destruction of our
Religion and Civil Liberties will follow. I think I may still positively
affirm, that we are not obliged to restore Him till this Temper of Mind be
altered, and that he can be restored without these Fatal Consequences I now
mention; and if these cautions are not observed, I deny that God has any way
promised to protect either our Religion or Civil Liberties, or that he is bound
to provide us a way to escape as you suppose; if to perform this supposed Duty
of Allegience thus unseasonably, we slight the only means God has ordained for
our Preservation. But as for the patience under those Sufferings that may then
happen, that is a very sorry reason to embrace them, since God may give us that
Grace, if he pleases, as the only Comfort we can have left us, when by our own
Folly and mistaken Notions of Duty, we have brought all those Evils upon our
selves.

I shall therefore now proceed to show you, that these Evils I speak of, must
necessarily happen to us, in Case King James be restored by the French or Irish
Papists. In the first place therefore, it is very falsely supposed, that this
Alteration can be brought about without an entire Subduing, or Conquest not
only of their present Majesty's, but the whole Nation, is apparent since none
but the Papists and some few of the Clergy, Nobility and Gentry desire his
Restoration, and who if they were put altogether, will not I believe amount to
the hundredth Man, who would be either willing or capable to come in to his
Assistance with Men or Money; and therefore it is a vain Supposition to believe
(as you do) that this new Revolution can be brought about without any more
Dificulty or Bloodshed then the last, as long as the present King and Queen
continue to Govern us according to the Declaration they subscribed upon their
acceptance of the Crown, and the Coronation Oath they have since taken; which I
hope they will always do, since nothing but following King James's Example, as
well as to Religion, as Civil Liberties can ever make this Nation willing to
receive Him, or your Prince of Wales with so little difficulty, as you are
pleased to imagine.

Since therefore the Business must be wholly done by force, I shall in the next
place consider all those Suppositions you have laid down, as well in respect of
the French as Irish, who are the only Hands that I see likely at present to do
this Work. First, as to what you say, that the King would be too wise then to
bring over along with him so great numbers of the French and Irish Nations, as
shall be able to make an entire Conquest of this Kingdom, least thereby both he
and his Crown, may lie wholly at their Mercy, when the Business is done: you
have hereby granted as much as I desire. For if their Majesty's are never like
to be without an Army in England, of at least Fifteen or Twenty Thousand Men as
long as this War lasts, and that the Militia of this Nation, which are almost
totally against King James's Interest, and do amount altogether to above a
Hundred Thousand Men, I think you your self will grant that King James cannot
attempt coming over hither with an Army of less then 30 or 4000 Veteran
Soldiers of the French and Irish Nations, though you should reckon the Papists
and others who should come into his Assistance at 20000 more, who if they
should be (altogether) able to beat not only King William's standing Army, but
the Militia of the Kingdom to Boot; I desire to know what shall hinder them
from making as perfect a Conquest of this Nation, as ever Cromwell's Army did,
either of England or Scotland? And consequently, of seting up what Religion or
Government they please in this Kingdom; which, that it will not be, that which
is now exercised either in Church or State; I think any unprejudiced Man will
easily grant me.

But your next Suppositions are altogether as Precarious, that it is not either
the Design, or Interest of the French King, to make an entire Conquest of this
Kingdom for himself, nor yet to make King James an absolute Monarch here, one
of these I must needs believe will happen; for though perhaps that King may at
present stand so much upon his Glory, as not Seize the Kingdom of a Kinsman,
and an Allie wholly to his own use and benefit; yet it is most likely, that he
will retain French Garrisons in all or most of the strong places of England,
not only for the security of the Charges he will have been at to place King
James in the Throne; but also as a tie upon us that we shall never endeavor to
drive him out again, let him use us as he pleases; so that though I grant, he may
not make an absolute Conquest of us now, yet it may be in his or his Sons power
to do it hereafter, if ever King James his Son shall go about to shake of that
Yoke when once the present Obligation is forgot, or the near Relation between
the two Kings shall be farther removed: nor is what you say less Precarious,
that it will not be for King Lewis's Interest to destroy our Liberties and make
King James an absolute Monarch, because the Kingdom will be then weaker and
more divided-then it is now, by those Jealousies and Disputes we shall then
maintain with the King about our Civil Rights, which is indeed so far true, if
he Governs when he returns in the same Arbitrary manner as he did before; but
if he Govern according to Law (which no wise Man can expect) there needs be no
more Divisions among us then was for a great while after King Charles the
Seconds coming in; but that the French King should fear, if he once made the
King of England an absolute Monarch, and put the whole power of the Purses as
well as Swords of his Subjects in his Hands, he might then become so formidable
as to be an equal Match to France it self, and to be able to demand either the
whole Kingdom, or any part of it, is yet more pleasant, since France is now in
comparison with England, not only in respect of Men, but also the Revenues
belonging to the King as Ten to One; and I think I may very well maintain, that
if England should once come to be Governed as France is, it would be so far
from growing Richer, or more Powerful thereby, that from the Intestine
Grieviances, and Discontents that such a violent course of Government would
cause in the minds of the People, of all Sorts and Conditions by those
excessive Taxes and Oppressions, that would follow from such an Arbitrary
Government the Kingdom would quickly diminish and decay, as well in People as
Trade and Riches, and so consequently in power too; which is but the product of
both these, notwithstanding whatsoever the fair appearance of an outwardly
Magnificent Court, and a great standing Army may produce in the minds of those
that do not truly consider or understand the true Grandeur and Safety of the
Prince, and Happiness of the People.

But granting all this to be as you suppose, pray tell me what shall become of
our Religion and Civil Liberties, not only (...) respect of the French King,
but of King James himself; (...) believe, that either of them will cease to be
instigated by the Jesuits their Confessors to destroy the Northern Heresy (as
they term our Religion) as well in England, as it has been in France? No, the
poor Vaudois in Savoy have been too recent an Example, that the King of France
would carry the Persecution to the same degree here, as he did there, and that
King James being wholly in his Power, will not be able to withstand his
Commands; besides, the constant Solicitation of his Confessors of the (...)
Order and Principles of those of the French King, to which Holy Fathers, the
Protestant Religion in France and Savoy do chiefly owe its Destruction.

To Conclude, let us suppose that King James shall now prevail in this War by
the help of the Irish Army, now raised by the Earl of Tirconnel, can we ^^pect
better Quarter if the King prevails by their Arms and Assistance, then if they
were entirely French? For having once Conquered this Nation, it will not be in
the King's Power to Govern them so easily as you expect, but being inve^^^te
Enemies to the English, they will not only possess what Estates they please of
the English Nobility and Gentry in Ireland, but in England too, which will be
declared forfeited by their Owners opposing of King James, and then I will
leave it to your self to Judge in what a Condition we shall be in, both as to
our Religion, and Civil Liberties, when the King shall come to be managed by
Men who are declared Enemies to both; neither will it be in the power of those
few moderate men, either of the Popish or Protestan^ Religion, who take King
Iame's part, to hinder it, since the other Party will by means of the Priests
and Jesuits, and the interest of France, run down all sober Councils, and they
will be but looked upon but as Trimmers (at best) that oppose it.

But as for King James himself, I desire to know of you what trust there can be
put in him, or what assurance he can give us for the maintenance of our
Religion, and Civil Liberty, more than the renewing of those Promises, and that
Oath which he has already broken; this being most likely to be the consequence
of things, if King James prevail. I shall leave it to your self, or any
indifferent person to judge, if what I have undertaken to prove, be not as
clearly made out as future things are capable of, and are sufficient to deter
any Man that loves his Religion or Country, from joining in such pernicious
Designs.


M. I confess you have made a long and tragical Narration of the dreadful
consequences that may follow both upon our Religion, and Civil Liberties, if
the King prevail by the present assistance of the French or Irish Arms; and
were I sure of all this, I should so far agree with you as to this point, as
never so join with them for the Kings return, and yet for all that I can never
look upon my self as freed from that Allegiance I owe the King, as well by
being born his Subject, as from the Oath I have already taken to him and his
Heirs, as long as they are in being; for I think I have already proved as well
from Law, as Reason, That first the Bond of Allegiance (whether sworn, or not
sworn,) is in the nature of it perpetual and indispensable. Secondly, that it
is so inseparable from the relation of a Subject, that although the exercise of
it may be suspended by reason of a prevailing force, whilst the Subject is
under such force, ( viz.) where it cannot be imagined, how the endeavor of
exercising it, can be effectually serviceable to restore the Sovereign power to
the right owner, for the establishment of that public Justice and Peace
wherein the happiness of Commonwealths consists, yet no outward force can so
absolutely take it away or remove it, but that still it remains vertually in
the Subject, and obliges to a vigorous endeavor (whenever the force that
hinders it is over) and to the actual exercise of it for the advantage of the
party, to whom of right it is due, and the advancement of the common good
thereby, upon all fit occasions. Thirdly, That no Subject of England, that
either has by taking the Oaths of Supremacy or Allegiance, acknowledged, or
that not having taken either Oath, yet otherwise knows, or believes that the
true Sovereign power in England to whom natural Allegiance is due, is the King,
his Heirs, and Lawful Successors, can without sinning against his Conscience,
take any new Oath, or do any other act whereby to transfer his Allegiance from
the King or his Heirs, to any other party who have no right to it, and thereby
put himself into an incapacity of performing the Duties of his bounden
Allegiance to his Lawful Sovereign, when it may appear to be useful and
serviceable to him. This is the express Opinion of the Learned Bishop Sanderson
in his case of Conscience concerning the lawfulness of taking the Engagement;
which though he did not think absolutely unlawful, because it might be
interpreted in a dubious and qualified sense, without abjuring the Kings lawful
right to the Crown; yet cannot this new Oath be taken in the like doubtful
sense, because (as I have already proved) the words in the Oath being to bear
true Allegiance to King William and Queen Mary, would be indeed a transferring
of our Allegiance from our lawful Prince, to others, which is absolutely
unlawful.


F. I am somewhat pleased to see you are so far come off from your bigotry, as
not to think your self bound to assist for the restoring King James, as long as
it is no otherwise to be done but by the evident destruction of our Religion,
and Civil Liberties; but yet you say you cannot take the Oath, because it is
Bishop Sandersons Opinion, as well as that of our best Lawyers, that Allegiance
is perpetual, and untransferrable to another, whilst the King or his Heirs are
in being. Which let me tell you (speaking as a Lawyer) since it may well be
proved from this Statute, as from the constant practice before that time; that
Allegiance was due to the King de facto, and that by the judgment of all the
Judges in the Reign of Edward the IVth; but to speak of this matter, either as
a Civilian, or a Divine, I think we are freed from the former Oath both by the
Law of Nations, as well as the Law of God. For as for natural Allegiance, by
which you suppose a man is indispensably Subject to the King in whose
Territories he is born, and that as long as he lives, I can by ^o means
understand, that being born in a Country, makes one a Subject for all his life
to the Government of that Country; or why being when born in a Country, it,
should make one become a Subject, more than being in the same Country at
another time. E. O. p. 49.
Besides, common experience shows this to be false, because whoever is born in
a Country, where his Parents are Foreigners, may, (as it is allowed by all)
leave that Country when he pleases; but perhaps i^ may be said, he is a
Subject to that Prince where his Parents were born; but what if they were born
under the same Circumstances? or suppose his Parents are of different
Countries, as if a Dutch Woman, and an English Man have a Child in France,
since France does not pretend to him, which of the Nations can claim him for
their Subject? or must he be divided? So that I can see nothing at all in this
notion of natural Allegiance, that can oblige any body in Conscience to observe
it.


M. If then Natural Allegiance signifies nothing, p^^y tell me is no body
obliged to obey the King, or not to plot against him until he has taken an Oath
of Allegiance to the contrary? this would make mad work indeed, and upon these
Principles no man were bound to obey the King or his Laws, and not to conspire
against his Person, or Government, until he had taken the Oath of Allegiance;
so that three parts of four of the Kingdom would be absolutely free from this
great duty.


F. No, Sir, you are very much mistaken, since I think I can found Allegiance
to the King and Government upon a much firmer foundation than that of being
born his Subject, that I am so far from supposing that our obligation commences
from our taking the Oath of Allegiance, that though I think it may serve to
enforce our former obligation to our King and Country, yet does it not
super-induce any new obligation thereunto; for indeed our obligation to any
particular Government may be made out from much surer Principles, viz. That
every person though he be born free, yet is he for the sake of his own safety,
obliged to part with his liberty, and put himself under the protection of some
Government; Ibid. p. 49.
nor can he be secure in what he enjoys but by it; nor can he have a right in a
Country (that is already possessed) to property, but by owning the Government
of that Country; and when by enjoying the Rights and Privileges of the
Subjects of that Commonwealth, he has owned himself a member of it, and a
Subject to its Government, he is then bound to maintain this Government, and
also the King that administers it, from a double obligation: the one particular
in respect of himself, and that protection he receives from him; the other more
universal proceeding from that duty which is incumbent upon every particular
Subject to maintain the peace and happiness of the Commonwealth, as long as he
continues a Member thereof. So that he is bound never to disturb it as long as
the main ends of Government can be had and enjoyed therein; and this is the
only means that I know of, by which any man (except by express Oaths and
Promises) can consent to become Subject to any single person, or Government:
Now this tacit consent of particular persons being separately and singly given,
unthinking people take no notice of it, and suppose they are as naturally
Subjects as men; and consequently that they have no more right to free
themselves from their Subjection, than from their Humane Nature; nay, must
suffer themselves to be destroyed rather than endeavor it, let the Government
oppress them never so unmercifully; which is indeed to reduce men to the
condition of brute Beasts, who belong to this or that Owner; because he either
bought them with his Money, or else because they happened to drop from their
Dam^ upon his ground.

From what has been here spoken, I think we may deduce this general Conclusion,
that every ordinary Subject who enjoys the common benefits and protection of
any Government, i^ bound in gratitude, not only to obey it; but also to be true
and faithful to it during the time he lives under it, and is bound likewise not
to conspire against it; and therefore that Oaths do not alter the nature of
Allegiance, or make it due where it was not before, or any ways extend it, but
only add a new tie to pay that Allegiance which is due upon the account of
protection. He that lives under a Government, though he has not sworn to it,
ow^ it the same Allegiance as he that has; and if he should deny his Allegiance
to it, would be equally guilty of Treason, though not of Per^ury. It is evident
by the universal practice of Mankind, that no Subjects ever thought themselves
obliged by those Oaths of Fidelity (which all Governments have constantly
imposed on them) when they could not be protected by them, and that this
failure of Protection did not proceed from any fault in the whole Nation, or
People themselves. And this may be proved by the common and constant practice
of all the Subjects of Europe; for who does not know that the Subjects of the
King of France's last Conquests in Flanders, have been forced to swear
Allegiance to him, though they were satisfied that his Title was unjust, and
that their Natural Sovereign the King of Spain, to whom they had formerly sworn
Allegiance, is still living? We have had also a late Example of the Subjects of
the Duke of H^ls^ein Go^torp, who having both his person taken Prisoner, and
his Territories unjustly seized upon by the King of Denmark, in time of Peace,
the Subjects of the said Duke were forced to swear Allegiance to the King,
notwithstanding their former Oath to their Master; nor do our Modern Casuists
as I know of, blame them for so doing. And why the People of England should be
tied to harder terms than all the rest of Europe, I wish you could give me a
sufficient reason; since the Legislative Power of England (wherein it is
certain the People have a share) are presumed to recede as little as possible
from natural equity, and therefore design by imposing such Oaths, Ibid. p. 55.
only the good and preservation of the Civil Society; whose interest it is,
that they who have the public Administration of Affairs should not be
disturbed; but it is not at all material to that end, whether this or that Man
has this power provided they are well managed; nor can it without the greatest
absurdity be supposed, that such numbers of Men as Societies are composed of,
who are by nature equal, should oblige themselves by the most solemn ties to
become most miserable by living without protection; nay, to lose even their
lives, rather than own the Government that can and does protect them; for no
other reason, but such an extraordinary fondness to this or that Person, or
Family, as to fancy to be inseparable from him: not to the necessaries or real
conveniences of life but only an Office (for Government is no other) which is
but an imaginary happiness; I grant therefore, that People should be true to
those that have the present administration of Civil Affairs, is all that all
Oaths of Fidelity require; and it is evident from the intent of it, that the
late Oath of Allegiance required no more, and to extend it farther than the
King in Being, is not reconcilable with the reason, end, and design of paying
obedience; which is the peace and happiness of the Civil Society; which can
never be maintained, if people may, for the sake of a single person disturb him
that has the administration of their common Affairs; and it would require
impossibilities; because private persons are incapable of paying Allegiance to
a King when out of possession of the Government.


M. Notwithstanding what you have said, I think I am able to convince you of
diverse great mistakes you have now committed in this Discourse of Natural
Allegiance, as also in the obligation we are under by the Oath of Allegiance to
King James. For first, as to Natural Allegiance, you are very ^old to suppose
there is no such thing, when all your Law Books hold so expressly that there is;
I am sure this is to be guilty of the fault for which you have already reproved
me of being wiser than the Laws; you are also much mistaken to suppose that
this Natural Allegiance merely springs from hence, D. A. p. 15.
that the persons obliged by it are only such as are born within the Kings
Dominions; for persons born without the Realm may be also his natural Subjects,
as are the Children of Ambassadors born beyond Sea, and the Children of Aliens
born within the Kingdom are not therefore Natural Subjects of the King; so that
the mere circumstance of Birth does not alone entitle any one to the
privileges of a Natural Subject, nor consequently bind him to all the duties
of Natural Allegiance: But it is therefore called natural in our Laws, because,
as the best Lawyers have affirmed, it is ^ounded upon the Law of Nature, which
gives the Sovereign power a right to the Allegiance of every one who is Born
under the Jurisdiction of it. As every Son is born a Subject to his Parents,
and is by the law of Nature obliged to Honor, Obey, Assist and Support: So
also is he born a Member of the body Politic, and by consequence a Subject to
the Sovereign of it, and accordingly by the same eternal Law, is bound to pay
all faithful Service and Obedience to him, when he in a capacity to perform
them.

But your next Mistake is yet worse, when you confound that common Obligation
of a Foreigner or mere Denison to be true and faithful to the Common Wealth
wherein he lives, with this Natural Allegiance of every English Subject; for
though I grant the taking the Oath of Allegiance does not enforce any new
Obligation upon him that takes it, more than he was subject to before; yet for
all that, I think you will not deny, but that there is a great deal of
difference between that common Obedience or Submission which such a Foreigner
pays to the King, and his Laws in a Country where he Sojourns, and that more
perfect Allegiance arising either by Birth or from such a strangers being
naturalized, and by taking the Oath of Allegiance, becoming as true and perfect
a Subject as a natural English Man; and hence it is, that in all Wars declared
between Neighboring Princes, whatever Subjects of theirs shall presume to stay
and reside in each others Dominions after once they are recalled home, may be
justly Executed as Traitors when ever they shall be taken; and therefore though
I grant that every Person now living in England, and of ripe Age, is obliged to
obey your King and Queen, de facto, in all ordinary and lawful things which
tend to the public Benefit and Defense of the Civil Society or Commonweal,
and which being for the benefit of the King de jure, and his liege People; it
is to be morally supposed they have his Tacit consent for what they do as long
as it tends only to this end; yet does it not therefore follow, that the bare
protection of this usurpt Government, and the enjoyment of the common
privileges of a Subject, should give such a King de facto, or Government a
right of exacting an Oath of Allegiance to them, since I have already proved
from the true signification of being true and faithful, as also from the legal
signification of the word Allegiance, that no true Subject can lawfully take it
without renouncing his Allegiance to his natural Prince; since not only a bare
Neutrality or Obedience in not transgressing the Laws, is thereby required of
them, but also an Active Obedience and Duty in performing the King de Facto's
commands, and the de^ending him when ever there is occasion in his ill-gotten
power.

But since the only difficulty is, how a strict observation of this Oath can
consist with the quiet and happiness of the Subjects, when ever a new Oath of
Allegiance comes to be imposed by the King de facto, since the Subjects may be
all ruined that do not take it, if it be once offered to them. This difficulty
might be easily removed, if the whole Nation would ^lick firmly to the Duty
required by their former Oath of Allegiance, and resolve never to take a new
one, for then the numbers of the refusers would be so great* as that they would
be more than could be made to suffer for their refusing it. I speak of such
Subjects as are in our case, and who are not forced by a Prince, who either has
the Right or Power of a Conqueror to compel them by force, and therefore your
instances of the Subjects of the King of Spain, or of the Duke of Holstein, who
were conquered, or else as good as conquered by the power of France and
Denmark; whereas, we are only over-awed by an inconsiderable number of Dutch
and Germans and might set our selves free, if we would give but a vigorous
Effort toward it: For that King William is a Conqueror over the whole Nation,
I think you dare not affirm. And without he were so, he could challenge no
right to our Allegiance as such; and therefore I must still believe, that the
Oath of Allegiance I have taken to King James and his Heirs is perpetual,
unless you could show me, that their Right is determined which you have not
done by any thing you have yet said; and therefore I cannot be of your Opinion,
that the bare protection of an usurpt Power, can justify our Swearing
Allegiance to it, either in Law or Conscience, for then all Men had been
obliged to pay as firm an Allegiance to the Rump Parliament, and also to Oliver
Cromwell, as to King William and Queen Mary, since both the former protected
the People as much in their Religion, Civil Liberties and Properties, as the
latter I fear will ever do.

And that the bare protection of a Government does not give it no absolute
right to the Allegiance of all those that enjoy their protection, I think may
be sufficiently proved from the instance of a Frenchman, or any other
Foreigner: who though by his living here, and enjoying the common protection of
the Government, I grant he is obliged to be obedient to its Laws, and is not to
Act or Conspire against it, yet this does not discharge him from his natural
Allegiance which he still owes to his former Prince, so as to do any thing
which may prejudice that Allegience he owes to him, either by Conspiring, or
Fighting against him. And this was solemnly declard to be Law by the Judges of
the King's Bench, in the case of Dr. Story, in the 13 th. Year of Queen
Elizabeth; He being a violent Papist, fled over into Flanders to the Duke of
Alva, and there conspiring with him, to invade this Kingdom, and being
afterward taken and brought over Prisoner, was Tried as a Subject of England,
though he refused to plead as such, because he said he had Sworn Allegiance to
the King of Spain, notwithstanding, which Plea he was Executed as a Traitor, as
you will find at large in my Lord Chief Justice Dyers's Reports; 13. Eliz. p.
303. b. l. 2.
which Judgment is also confirmed by the Lord Chief Justice Coke in Calvins's
Case, where he expressly Asserts, That a Person born under the Dominion of the
King of England, owes him perpetual Faith and Allegiance, and this by virtue of
the Law of Nature, because Iura naturalia sunt immutabilia; from whence will
also appear the falsity of your Conclusion, that Oaths of Allegience extend no
further then to the King in Possession, or to that Government to which we do at
present owe our common Protection, and therefore that our Law has a much higher
consideration of this inherent Allegi^nce that belongs to a King de Iure, as to
his particular Person, and his Heirs; so that it cannot be indifferently paid
to any body else who can by seizing of the Government, force us to owe our
Protection to them. Which appears by what my Lord Coke has also laid down, to
have been agreed by all the Judges upon this Oath of Allegiance, in Calvins's
Case as I cited it to you at the beginning of this Evenings Conversation; so
that I confess, I much wonder, considering what he has there said, how he can
so positively maintain as he does (in the place you have also quoted) that
Allegiance is due to the King de Facto, and not to Him de Iure, whilst the
former is possessed of the Crown, since it seems a flat contradiction to me how a
Subject is to pay Allegiance as long as he lives to the King and his Heirs, of
life and member; that is, until the letting out of the last drop of our dearest
Hearts-blood, and that in all places whatsoever. And yet that this Obligation
should last no longer, then whilst the King de Iure is in actual Possession of
the Throne, and therefore I think I have still very good reason to maintain
that we are still obliged by our former Oath of Allegiance to King James, so as
not to take a new one to any other King, unless we had been constrained to it
by an absolute Conquest, which you your self will not maintain to be our
present Case.


F. I confess, you have now argued this point very stiffly, and I confess, what
you have said, carries with it the greatest appearance, both of Law and Reason
of any thing you have yet urged upon this Subject; and therefore, if I can
fairly answer it, I hope you will come over to my Opinion, and take the Oath
which is now required of you. In the first place therefore, I cannot deny, that
all you have said concerning a natural Allegiance due by Birth to the King, is
true according to our Laws, and I do my self allow the thing, viz. That
Allegiance is due to him, though not for the Reasons upon which our Lawyers
have founded it, but upon those I have already given; and therefore though
granting it was held to be Law in the Case of Dr. Story, that his Plea of his
becoming a Subject to the King of Spain, was overruled by the Judges, and he
refusing make any other Plea, was condemned upon a Nihil Dicit. Yet this being
only a Penal Law, I think obliges the Subject to the penalty if he be taken,
but does not oblige him in Conscience never to change his Prince or the
Government he was born under without their consent, let his Circumstances
become never so uneasy under it; and that this is so, I need go no further
then the late Case of the French Refugees, who thought they are strictly
commanded by their King, not to stir out of France whatsoever persecution they
may suffer, yet I think no Man of Sense, can blame them if being persecuted
there, they remove themselves into other Countries, and become perfectly
Naturalized Subjects or Denisons at least in that Government whereunto they
remove; and this is so known a thing, that no Casuist as I know of, thinks it a
sin in such Subjects of England, as finding it for their advantage go over into
another Country, to settle and make their Fortunes, or are there Naturalized,
or made free Denisom in those Kingdoms or Commonwealths whereunto they remove;
nor are such Persons obliged in Conscience, to return Home upon the Command or
Summons of that Prince, to whom you suppose them to be Subjects by Birth; nor
is your Argument at all convincing, that because a Man's owes a duty to his
Parents by the law of Nature, and by being Born their Child, that therefore the
subjection to the Prince under whose Government he is Born, must be alike
perpetual, since the ground upon which you found this Consequence is altogether
false, since I have already proved at the first meeting we had to discourse of
these matters; that a Man's being Begotten, and bred up by his Parents, does
not make him become their Subject or Servant in the state of Nature as long as
he lives, so that he may never withdraw himself from their subjection without
their leave.

But in the next place, I think I am as little mistaken in my Notion of
Allegiance, which I suppose every Person who is a true and perfect Subject of
the Government, owes to the King or Sovereign Power thereof; for though I grant
there is a great deal of difference between that imperfect Allegiance or bare
Submission which every Foreigner owes the King or Government under which he
resides, and that more perfect Allegiance which every Subject owes the King,
who enjoys all the Rights and Previledges of a true English Man; yet to let you
see that this distinction proceeds not from the bare protection of his Person
and Goods by the Government under which he lives, but by his being Naturalized
and becoming thereby a perfect Member of this Civil Society, is plain from your
own showing; and therefore whosoever not only enjoys the common protection of
an Inhabitant, but also all the Rights and Privileges of a true English
Subject is bound to swear Allegiance if required to the King or Queen de facto,
without enquiring into their Right or Title; for if they are strangers, or have
never taken any Oath of Allegiance before, they cannot be under any former
Oath; and as for natural Allegiance, I have already proved it to be a mere
legal Notion, and this Allegiance I have also proved to to be due to the King
and Queen de facto, not only from the Opinion of the Judges in Bagots's Case,
but also from my Lord Cokes interpretation of the Statute of Treason, which
though you suppose to be contradictory to what he had before laid down in
Calvins's Case; yet if you please better to consider of it, you will find it
not to be so; for though it is true, the Judges do there assert, That the
Obligation of the Oath of Allegiance is indefinite and without Limitation, as
being made to the King and his right Heirs; and also that it extends to the
venturing of life and members, and to the letting out of the last drop of our
Blood; yet is this still to be understood only of such a one, and his Heirs who
still continues to be King in a legal Sense, which can be only he who is King
for the time being, as he is styled in this Statute of the 11 th. of Henry the
7 th. and only during the time that he continues in actual Possession of the
Throne: And therefore the word King or Majesty being indefinite and without
having any respect to his Title, whether by descent of Blood, or else by his
being Crowned and Recognized by Parliament; it is no contradiction to suppose
this Allegiance is only due to the King in this limited Sense, according to
this Statute of Henry the 7 th. where pray take Notice that I have made this
Allegiance to be only due to Kings and Queens de facto, because they only are
within intent and letter of this Statute, as also of that of Treason, according
to the legal Government of this Nation by the Fundamental Laws thereof, and can
no ways be extended to any other Powers under other Titles, such as the Rump
Parliament under the Title of a Commonwealth, or Oliver Cromwell under that of
a Protector; who though they took upon them to Protect the People after a sort
in their Lives, and Estates, yet since it was not according to the true Rights
and Privileges of the Subjects of this Nation, which they highly violated, and
in some points quite destroyed; and that they also took upon them this
protection without the free consent of the lawful Representatives of the Nation
Assembled in a full and lawful Parliament; I can by no means allow them to have
given the People such a true and legal Protection as the Law requires to
constitute a true and perfect Allegiance, or can make them to be the Supreme
Power of the Nation, and within the Statute of the 25th of Edward the Third; so
that this Statute, and that of the 11th Henry the Seventh, must be our Rules in
this Case.

But I cannot but smile at the expedient you have found out to hinder the
People of this Nation from being ruined if they do not take the Oath of
Allegiance to their Majesty's. which is by a general and absolute refusal of
it; and this you suppose, if unanimously agreed on, would hinder them from
suffering any thing by this their refusal; and you think they are also strong
enough to oppose it, because the King has only a small Army of Foreigners which
he still maintains here, and this you think may lawfully be done, because their
Majesty's do not claim by Conquest, but by the Election of the Convention; and
therefore that this Case does not come up to that of the Subjects of Flanders,
and Holstein; in which Argument I doubt not but to show that every one of your
suppositions are false, for though the Nation is not Conquered, yet it is
certain that all priva^^ Subjects are under as great a restraint by this legal
change of the Government, as if they were in the power of a Conqueror; for to
resist would be equally fatal to them in both cases, and there is no visible
Power nor Authority that can defend them against the present Power, in case
they should go about to refuse this Oath when it is offered to them; and
therefore though I grant the King's standing Army of Foreigners is but small,
in Comparison of the whole Nation, since he does not intend to keep us in
Subjection by force, but only to hinder any sudden Insurrection of those of
your Party; yet besides all this, God be thanked, their Majesty's have the main
body of the Common People of the Nation on their side, who are sufficiently
able to destroy all those that shall go about to make those vigorous efforts
you so much desire; so that you have nothing else to plead, but that which I
hope never to see, that we are not under a force, because we still entirely
enjoy our Religion, Liberties, and Properties; and though the King out of his
great goodness and modesty, did not think fit to insist upon his Title by
Conquest over King James, and his Adherents, yet I think I have already proved
at our last Meeting, that he may as justly claim by Conquest, as his Namesake
William the First, since he came not over to Conquer the Nation, but to
vindicate his former right, and after his Conquest of King Harold, could have
no just Title to the Crown, till he had been solemnly elected and recognized
for King, according to the Laws and Customs used at that time: and why the
Nation might not do the same thing now for their Deliverer from King Iame's
Arbitrary Power, I should be glad if you could show me a sufficient reason; but
if the whole Nation should have been as pevish and discontented as those of
your Principles, and should not look upon the King as their Lawful Sovereign,
because he does not claim by Conquest, it would be altogether as grateful and
reasonable, as if a Woman having by the assistance of an honest Gentleman, been
rescued from being ravished, and he afterward falling in love with her
himself, should Court her to Marry her, she should refuse him, because he had
not ravished her when he might, or at least have forced her to Marry him
whither she would or no; apply this Comparison to the Case in dispute, and see
if it does not hold; and therefore I must still maintain that the parallel
Cases of the Subjects of Flanders, and Holstein, are still good, as to those of
your Opinion, who have no notion how Allegiance can be transferred, unless by
perfect force, and Conquest; since if you please to desire it, I Will undertake
the Government shall seize upon your Estates, and Imprison your Persons, till
you do take the Oaths, as the Kings of France, and Denmark, did those that
refused to swear Allegiance to them.


M. I have heard you a great while upon this Subject, and I wish I could say I
were fully satisfied with your Reasons; however, since it grows late, I will
not dispute this Point any farther, but will take time to consider what you
have now urged, but only I must needs tell you thus much; I could wish that
Princes could find some other way of securing themselves of their Subjects
Fidelity, besides this test of an Oath of Allegiance, which serves as a snare
to many pious and conscientious Men; whereas those of none, or at least of very
loose Principles, will swallow any Oath that can be imposed upon them; and I am
sorry to see so many of those, who I know are in their hearts of my Principles,
prevailed upon to take it, not out of Conscience, but mere Worldly interest,
and advantage; and whom I am satisfied will never serve this Government the
more heartily or sincerely for having taken it; and therefore to tell you the
truth, I begin very much to incline to Grotius's Opinion, that promissary Oaths
are absolutely unlawful; yet considering the several changes and turns of
Government which we have seen in England for above forty years last past, I am
so far for the good and happiness of my Country, as to think every true English
Man obliged so far to obey the Powers in being, as may tend to the common good
and defense of the Nation, by the administration of Justice between Man and
Man, and in the punishment of Offenders, and for defense of the Nation against
Foreign Enemies. But, sure methinks this might very-well be done without the
imposing any Oath at all, either upon Magistrates, or Officers, and much less
upon ordinary Subjects; since if they are persuaded in their Consciences that
it is Lawful to act under this present Government, let them do it if they will;
but a for the Common People, I confess they are so stupid, that they have
seldom any other measures of the justice or lawfulness of any Government, or
Princes Title, than the ease or advantage they find by it; and therefore upon
the whole matter, I think it were much better for the Government in the
unsettled state it is in, to follow Cromwell's Example, and to impose no Oaths
of Allegiance at all, since the Government may be as secure without it, (as for
all that I can see) they can be with it; and as it is now managed, I see little
it can serve for, but to distinguish and divide us one from another; and
besides, its being a snare to the Consciences of so many that take it, it is
like also to prove the ruin of diverse of our Bishops, and other honest Men,
both of the Clergy, and Laity, who will certainly rather lose their Dignities
and Employments, than ever take it; which will also cause a great Schism in the
Church, as I doubt you will find when it is too late; whereas if these men
might have held their Bishoprics, and all other Preferments and Offices
without having this Oath imposed upon them, I doubt not but they would serve
both the Church and State in their several stations, according to their duties,
and as far as lawfully they could.


F. I cannot deny but you have spoken very honestly, and like a good English
Man, in many things you have now said, in case your intentions toward the
present Government were real, as your words are fair; and therefore I cannot
wonder that you have been formerly a stiff asserter of the lawfulness and
necessity of the Oath of Allegiance, should now be for taking it quite away,
now it grows too hard for you self, and those of your Opinion to digest. As if
to oblige Subjects to defend their Governors, were a necessary security for
your rightful Princes, but were unnecessary for those whom you shall think fit
to suppose to be Usurpers. And though I confess I must very much pity the
over-nice Principles of those of your way, who are truly peaceable, and
conscientious, and are like to be ruined by their refusal of it; yet for all
that, I very much doubt whether it would be for the best to take this Oath
quite away, since it would make a strange alteration in the Government, to
admit all persons into ordinary Charges, much less into Employments of Trust
and Profit without taking any Oath at all. Your only Objections against it are
these: First, that you doubt that it is unlawful to impose promissary Oaths,
and the next is, that it will not perform the end for which it is intended (
viz.) to distinguish those who will serve the Government faithfully, and those
that will not; since you confess that a great many who are not at all satisfied
in their Consciences, will for interest, not only hold their old Employments,
but will also take new ones under it, which I grant is not to be avoided, if
men will venture to be damned. So likewise on the other side, I must tell you,
that the quite taking away the Oath of Allegiance will not at all mend the
matter, but make it much worse; since then, not only those whose Consoiences
will give them leave to take the Oaths, but also those who think they ought not
to take them, will be alike capable of Employments; and when they are in them,
though I grant they may be both alike free to act as they please against the
present Government, and for restoring of King James; yet I must needs tell you
for all that, that I am much more fearful of the ill will or malice of those
who think themselves obliged in Conscience to overthrow the present settlement,
and who continue stiff to their first Principles, than of those who will so far
comply with this present Government and their own interest, as to take the new
Oath of Allegiance in whatever sense they please: for I am very well satisfied,
that such men, though they are not so right for the Government as I could wish
them, yet either fear of punishment, or else the consideration of their own
self-interest, will always make them desire to retain those Employments they
have already got, since they can never be assured of bettering their Condition
under King James, and a Popish Government, should he ever return; whereas those
that are bigoted to Principles, will always think it their duty by virtue of
this notion of a Natural Allegiance, as well as their former Oath, to endeavor
to restore him by all the ways and means that can ever lie in their power: But
as for the unlawfulness of a promissory Oath, since you your self speak
doubtfully of it, and few Casuists, except Grotius, have been of that Opinion;
I think it is not safe to quit our ancient Laws, which particularly prescribe,
that not only all Magistrates, and Officers, but also all other of the Kings
Subjects, should take the old Oath of Fidelity or Allegiance (as we now style
it in the Court Leet, or Sheriffs Torn, when they come to the Age of fourteen
years; which Oath as appears by what we can find of it in Edward the
Confessors, and King William's Laws) which we have already recited) as also you
may find it in Sir H. Spelman's Glossary, (Tit. Fidelitas) was made to the King
as their Liege Lord, of Life, and Limb; and which implies an active Obedience
to defend him against all his Enemies, without any exception of such as may
claim by Inheritance, or right of Blood.

Now this being so, I cannot be persuaded that the Government ought to quit any
lawful means whereby it may preserve it self, and distinguish those who would
really serve it, from those who will not; and though perhaps the Government may
find it self mistaken in its account, in some Men whose Consciences are large
enough to swallow any Oath whatsoever, yet I think I may still safely maintain,
that it is still in less danger from a few such Libertines, than from those of
your Opinion, who would not only keep their Places under this Government, but
will also continue in a perfect state of War against it, let them be treated
never so kindly; and therefore, as to those dreadful Consequences of Schisms in
the Church, and the lessening and dividing our Party; as to the former, we must
run the hazard of it, since it was never heard of, that the Bishops, who are in
some respects Temporal Barons, held their Bishoprics under any King since the
Conquest, without owning his Authority: And I can also show you, that the King
and Parliament have either actually deprived, or else declared such Bishops
Traitors to the Government. So that if any such a Schism be made, it will
proceed from a scandal unjustly taken by some scrupulous Men, and not by the
Government. And as for the other inconvenience, I think it is much safer for
the Government to employ fewer Men then by not knowing who are Friends or Foes
to trust all promiscuously, though perhaps notwithstanding their utmost care,
some Men of little or no Consciences will places in this as well as they have
done formerly, which can by no other means be prevented as I know off, but by
chus^ing Men of honest Principles, and sober Morals, and of a quiet different
Interest, to those employed in the two last Reigns; and therefore I am so far
from taking away the present Oath of Allegiance, that I rather wish that there
were a new one more strict and full then the present ordained to be taken by
all those who shall take Offices, and Employments of Trust or Profit, whereby
they should not only declare their present Majesty's to be true and lawful
King and Queen of this Realm; but also, that they will defend them against all
their Enemies, King James himself not excepted.


M. I confess I cannot expect so great a Tenderness from this Government, which
has been introduced by so much Artifice, that they should absolutely take away
all Oaths of Allegiance whatsoever, since I doubt not but it will assume to it
self all those advantages which any former usurped Power could pretend to; yet
this much I must needs tell you as a Friend, the depriving those Bishops and
Dignified Clergymen who shall refuse this new Oath, will be highly ungrateful;
since many of them have been as violent opposers of Popery and Arbitrary
Government as any Men in England, as appears by their late Petition to the
King; if therefore the Archbishop of Canterbury, and those other Bishops I
know to be so averse to this Oath, should be deprived upon the refusal of it,
since it will be done uncanonically, by the Temporal Power of an Act of this
Convention, without the Sentence of the two Houses of Convocation, I doubt that
it will be thought by many to be a sufficient Cause of departing from the
present Church Communion, and of seting up distinct Congregations by those who
will be deprived, and turned out of their Livings for refusing this Oath, and
what the consequence of that may prove God knows.

But whereas you think this present new Oath not full enough, and therefore
wish there were another made, declaring the present King and Queen to be
lawfully and rightfully so, etc. since this would amount to as good as an Oath
of Abjuration of King James, and his Title, I doubt it were better let alone;
for I do not think the present Government will get any thing by it, since the
intent of the Oath you propose, can only serve, either to gain the present
Government more new Friends, or else to fix the old ones faster to it, or else
to discover secret Enemies; now if I can prove it will not serve for any of
these three ends, I suppose you will grant that it were better to let it alone;
now that it will be so far from gaining it more Friends, that it will rather
serve to drive away a great many from it, is apparent; since many men are now
in Offices and Employments, who think they may lawfully take this new Oath of
Allegiance, as long as the present King and Queen are not therein declared to
be lawfully and rightfully so, and I believe may serve them faithfully enough
in their several stations, who if they should come to be put to it, to declare
and swear that they were rightful and lawful King and Queen, would rather lose
their places than take it; neither will it fix those that are for this
Government faster to it, since those that are zealous for it, will be so
whether they took any Oath or not; and I have already proved, that by the word
Allegiance in this Oath, it is implied, that the present King and Queen are to
be defended as lawfully so, by the Swearer to it, which is the main reason,
that I, and those of my Opinion, can by no means think it lawful to take it.
Nor lastly, will it discover any secret Enemies to your Government; since those
who being rightly instructed in the true sense of this Oath, and what is
thereby required, shall notwithstanding, take it against their Conscience, will
I doubt take any Oath whatever the Convention shall think fit to impose; since
nothing but the fear of losing their present Employments, or else the desire of
getting new ones, could have made them take the Oath as it is, since to my
knowledge, it has been taken by many now in Places much against their own
judgment; and I doubt the conviction of their Consciences too.

I speak this only in relation to some of loose Principles, but as to my self,
and many more of my Acquaintance, who refuse this Oath, we should be so far
from taking any Place of Trust under this Government, that we should not do it
though no Oath were at all required of us; since I think it not only wicked and
dishonorable for any honest man to serve a Party only to watch an opportunity
to betray it; but I also believe my self obliged by my former Oaths, as well as
the duty of a natural Allegiance which I owe the King and his right Heirs, not
to serve those whom we look upon as Usurpers of their just Rights.

But if you would also have this new Oath to be an absolute abjuration of the
King and his Title, it will not only be unjust, but impossible; since who can
tell but either by the help of a foreign Force, or the general consent of the
Nation, tired out by a long expensive War, either his Majesty, or the Prince of
Wales may be again placed upon the Throne; and then sure, whenever they shall
call a Parliament to recognize their Title, they will be even according to your
own hypothesis, more lawful and rightful Kings than King William, and Queen
Mary; since they will not be only Kings de facto, but de jure too; and
therefore I believe it was out of this Consideration; that in all those long
and various Contests which so often happened between Competitors for the Crown,
they never presumed to proposed to the Parliament the passing any Act to impose
an Oath to abjure the Title or Person of the Rival Prince. Thus in all the long
Wars between King Stephen, and Maud the Empress, as also between the two Houses
of York, and Lancaster, each of whom, as they prevailed in their turns, were
very well contented to make the Subjects take the ordinary Oath of Fidelity to
themselves, without abjuring each others Title; and even in the later times of
the Rump Parliament, when the most violent and hotheaded Commonwealths-Men
would have imposed an Oath of Abjuration of Charles Stuart, and all his Family,
(as they then termed his late Majesty) the most Wise and Moderate Men among
them, such as Lenthal their Speaker, and others, stiffly opposed it, saying it
would be a fighting against Providence, to take an Oath never to own his
Majesty for their King, if once he should come in again without their
assistance; and I think there is as much, if not more reason now against such
an Oath of Abjuration, as ever there was then.


F. I cannot deny but you have spoken like an honest Man, in absolutely
refusing to act under this Government, though without an Oath, unless you could
be satisfied of the lawfulness of the Powers to whom it is taken. And I must
acknowledge, that you therein act with much more Sincerity and Honor, then
diverse of your Party, who tho they have been, and are of your Opinion, as to
the Justice of King James's Title, yet think they may take this Oath well
enough in that looser and more qualified Sense you grant they put upon it; and
therefore to answer in the first place, what you have said against the imposing
any more explicit or stricter Oath of Allegiance, then what is already
appointed, though I think I can very well answer all the Arguments you have now
brought against it: Yet to let you see I am a fair Adversary, I will show you
how far I agree with you, and wherein I must differ from you.

In the first place therefore let me tell you, That you very much mistake me,
if you believe, that by this new Oath I propose, I'do design an express
Abjuration of King James, or the Prince of Wales, in Case that King should ever
happen to recover the Throne, and call a Parliament who shall again Recognize
him for lawful King, and the Prince for the Right and Undoubted Heir of the
Crown. I am too sensible of the frequent Alterations that have happened in this
Nation, even to desire or propose any such thing, since a Man may as well
abjure the having a Feavour, or the Small Pox. Change of Government, and
consequently our submission to it, when ever it happens, being no more in our
power to prevent then the having those Diseases; all therefore that I intend by
a stricter, and more explicate Oath of Allegiance, is, only for Men who shall
undertake any employments of Trust and Consequence, either Spiritual, Civil or
Military in the Commonwealth, since I grant the Oath as it is now worded may
be sufficient for all ordinary Subjects, from whom a passive Submission, and
true Obedience is a sufficient performance of their Duty; but as for all others
that either now have, or expect to enjoy Places of Trust, I could wish a
stricter Oath asserting their present Majesty's to be lawful and rightful King
and Queen of this Kingdom, and that the Taker will defend them in the present
Possession of it, to the utmost of their Power against all Persons whatsoever,
King James and the Prince of Wales not excepted; and this I must think
necessary, not only from that Low and qualified Sense of this Oath, which I
gave at the beginning of this Nights Conversation, and in which Sense you
cannot deny, but that many if not the greater part of those, who still hold
such employments have lately taken it, and as long as they do so, how they can
ever think themselves obliged to defend their Majesty's against King James,
nay, or any French or Popish Forces that shall act by his Commission, I cannot
understand; for since they now look upon the present King and Queen, to have no
other right to the Crown than what their bare Power and present Possession of
it gives them, no wonder if such Men take the first opportunity to Revolt, and
join with King James as soon as ever he Lands with an Army, or appears upon our
Coasts with any Fleet formidable enough to oppose ours, and (must also, if they
are true to their Principles) in the mean time do all they can to protect, and
indemnifie those who being of tender Consciences, cannot stretch it as far as
themselves, and who underhand do Act as far as they dare for King James's
Interest; and though it is true you have very solidly proved, not only as a
Civilian, but like a Lawyer that the word Allegiance inserted in this Oath,
does of its own Nature imply, not only that the King or Queen to whom it is
taken ought to be rightly and lawfully so, but that more than a bare
Neutrality, viz. a real and vigorous defense of them, and their right against
all their Enemies is required, and employed by it, and that is one great Reason
why you say you cannot take it. Now though I confess the Reason you have given
are very weighty, and convincing, yet since the words are in themselves too
general, and doubtful for every Person that takes or holds such Offices or
Employments of Trust, to understand it in that Sense, I could be glad there
were another more plain and explicit Oath to be administered to those who
expect to keep or hold such Employments. Since the present Government cannot
well be safe without it, as long as such Persons are employed, who can take the
Oath with a Mental Reservation of serving King James as soon they safely may by
virtue of that former Oath of Allegiance they have taken to him.

This being the Case, I shall now answer all the Objections you have brought
against it, which indeed are rather framed to keep those Men in places that
they may serve your designs when ever they are able; than to do any service to
tender Consciences. First then I think I may maintain, that such an Oath will
notwithstanding what you have now said, have contrary effects than what you are
pleased to allow; for in the first place, it will gain the present Government
more new Friends amongst these Neuters, who steer their Allegiance to it only
from its present Settlement, and the hopes of its Continuance when they find
that none can be employed in places of public Trust, who will not take an Oath
to acknowledge their present Majesty's to be Lawful and Rightful King and
Queen, and who will also Swear to Defend their just Right, which will for the
most part put Place^ of Trust into their Hands, who will think themselves
obliged faithfully to perform what they have Sworn. Secondly, it will also fix
the old Friends of this Government faster to it, when they see none but
themselves, or those who will really come into the Government upon their
Principles admitted to such Places of profit and trust; and whoever will take
this Oath, are to be presumed to take it willingly and wittingly, and
understanding what they do, since the words will be of themselves so plain and
evident, that they will admit none of those loose, and doubtful Senses in
which so many have taken the present Oath of Allegiance; but your main
Objection against this is, that a new Oath will not discover secret Enemies to
the Government, because that most of the same Persons that have taken the
former Oath will take any other that can be required of them; which I suppose
is not so, since you your self do grant that such an Oath would be a snare to a
great many, who if it were not for that, would serve this Government faithfully
enough, that is to say, as long as there is no necessity of showing their
Good Will to King James, or have no opportunity given of returning to their
former Allegiance to him with safety to themselves: and you your self cannot
deny, but according to their Principles they must needs perform it when ever
they think they may; now certainly it were very well to be rid of such false
Friends (if it were possible to discover them) by such an Oath, then to keep
them where they are, only to take an opportunity not only of doing a Mischief,
but of serving this Government very carelessly and lukewarmly, whilst they are
in those places they enjoy; as also of favoring and assisting those that are
the declare Asserters of King James's Right as far as they dare; so that then
all the dispute remains about those who having Consciences large enough to
swallow any Oath whatever, provided it will suit with their present advantage;
no Oath can tie them, or serve to discover their private Sentiments; as I
cannot deny but that there too many Men of such large Consciences as you
describe, and could heartily wish they were fewer, yet though I grant an Oath
alone will not keep them out; yet it might be in great part prevented, if the
King would take a true Character of the Men fit for public Employment, from
those about him of whose Worth and former Intergity he is already fully
satisfied; but admitting, some such Men shall get into Places, and consequently
when they are in, manage things for their own Advantage, (that is, Vilely and
Corruptly;) yet even these will not prove half so fatal to the Government as
those Men of half Consciences, who think they may take this Oath in their Own
Sense, and for their own present Advantage, and also believe it no Breach of it
to assist King James whenever safely they may, because they hold their present
Oath to be only Temporary, but their former to have a perpetual Obligation upon
them. Whereas those of no Principles at all never Espouse any Interest longer
then it serves their own turns; so that as long as they can make their Fortunes
under this Government, they will never desire to change it for another, in
which they cannot but expect a much less free enjoyment of their Liberties, and
Properties, which are things that all Men (as well those who have no
Principles, as well as those that have) desire to to enjoy. And lastly, some
even of these Men that have been formerly notorious Asserters, of, and advanced
in the Arbitrary Government of King James out of shame and as well as fear of
the loss of their Credits with those of their own Party (which they are not
assured but may again prevail) will stick to take this stricter Oath, though
they do not this that is now enjoined, since they can find an Evasion for the
one, but will scarce be able to do it for the other.


M. But pray tell me, will not this new Oath declaring King William and Queen
Mary to be Lawful, and Rightful King and Queen of this Realm; and that all
Men that take it shall assist them against all their Enemies, prove an employed
Oath of Abjuration of King James, though not in express Words, and you have not
yet showed me that such an Oath has ever been Administered during all the
various Contests that have been for the Crown since the Conquest.


F. I grant that such an Oath would be a Vertual, and implied Abjuration of
King James's present claim to the Crown, and would also oblige all Persons to
fight against him, and hinder his regaining it^ which though I grant to be the
design of it; Yet would not such an Oath oblige us at all to abjure the obeying
King James, should he ever by an irrestible Providence be again set over us,
since it is not abjuring of a Future, but a present right which I now contend
for; and that, all the Ancient Oath of Fidelity or Allegiance (as it is now
called) were of the like Nature, and taken in the same Sense with this I
propose: I shall show you from the form of the Oath of Fidelity, which all
Freemen were to take at Fourteen Years of Age, as appears by King William the
Firsts Law which I have so often cited, Cap. 5.
Whereby all Freemen were to affirm upon Oath, that within the Realm and
without, they will be True and Faithful to King William their Lord, and
preserve his Lands, and Honor with all Fidelity; together with his Person, and
defend them against all his Enemies. So likewise in the ancient Oath of Homage,
which was taken by all the Earls, Barons, and Tenants in Capite in England, at
the Coronation of our Kings: It was in these words, Vi Spelmans's Gloss. f. 23.
H.
I N. N. become your Leigeman of Life and Limb, and earthly Honor, and Faith
and Troth to you shall bear to live and die, so help me God; and in the latter
Oath of Fidelity or Allegiance, which Sir H. Spelman gives us out of the
Customary of Normandy, the words were much the same, only the person is there
sworn to be True, and Faithful in the King and his Heirs (which they were not
before Edward the Firsts time.) And also what they would hear of no Evil or
Damage against them, which they would not hinder to their Power; now pray tell
me, were not all these Oaths taken to the King for the time being, as Lawful
and Rightful King? and since they were thereby to yield him Life and Limb,
that is, were to defend him with their Lives against all his Enemies, then
certainly all others who might pretend to, or claim the Crown were included
within this number; and though it is true in these ancient Oaths, there is no
Swearing to the present King, as Lawful and Rightful King, yet these words
were needless in that Age; when (as I have proved at our last meeting) there
was no difference between a King de Iure, and one de facto; and whoever was
crowned King, and Elected, or Recognized by the great Council of the Kingdom,
was looked upon as Lawful and Rightful King, and as such, was to be defended
against all his Enemies; so that it was till that distinction was broacht, that
there might be a King de de facto, different from the King de jure, (which I
have proved was not elder then Edward the IV ths. Reign.) There was no need of
any mention of such words in the Oath of Allegiance as lawful King, and
lawful Heirs, which are first found in the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy,
prescribed by the Statutes of Queen Elizabeth and King James; in the latter of
which, (it is needless to recite it Verbatim) it is first sworn, That the
King's Majesty is Lawful and Rightful King: secondly, There is an express
abjuration of the pretended Authority of the Bishop of Rome, which shows that
the Abjuration of the Temporal as well as Spiritual Right of a Foreign Prince
(who claims it ever since King John's Resignation) is no new invention; and
lastly, there is an express abjuration or Engagement to defend the King's
Person to the utmost of the Swearers Power against all Conspiracies at Attempts
whatsoever, and why the same words may not be inserted into this new Oath, as
well as it was in those. I can see no Reason since they are only Declarative
and Persuant to the late Act of the Convention, whereby after the Declaration
of the Rights and Liberties of the Subjects, King William and Queen Mary are
Declared, That they were, and of Right ought to be by the Laws of this Realm,
our Sovereign Liege, Lord and Lady, and King and Queen of England, etc.


M. Well, it is late, and besides to no purpose to argue this Point any longer,
since it concerns not me, nor any of my Principles what new Oaths you make and
impose upon those whose Consciences will never permit us to take them. What I
have said, was only to show you the Folly, and Weakness of such Oaths, and
Consequently, that they can be subservient to no other end then a renewal and
aggravation of the Sin of Perjury among us, which God forgive this sinful
Nation, among the many crying Sins it now growns under. Yet give me leave still
to mind you, that you have not given any answer to the Objection I have made
concerning the Schism that is like to follow from the depriving of all such
Bishops and Clergy that shall refuse to take the new Oath by such a time, which
Deprivation being uncanonically ordained by the mere lay power of the
Convention, without the authority of a Convocation or Synod; such proceedings
are sufficient cause for all of our way to break off all Church Communion with
you, as soon as the Arch Bishop of Canterbury, and those other Bishops shall
happen to be deprived and new ones put in their Places, since all Church
Communion wholly depends upon the lawfullness of the Bishops, who are the
supreme Pastors of our Church.


F. I forgot to say any thing of this, because I said so much to answer
concerning the new Oath I proposed as sit to taken by those in places of Trust;
but since you desire it, I shall say somewhat though not so large as I could
speak upon this Subject, First, I must tell you it is altogether a new Notion,
and contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of England, whereby it is declared
that the Kings of this Realm have the same Power with Persons in the Church, as
the Kings of Judah and Israel had among the Jews; therefore you must either
depart from the Doctrine of this Canon, or else the King and Parliament, (who
are certainly as much the supreme Power of the Nation, as the Kings of Judah
were to that of the Jews) may as well deprive the Arch Bishop of Canterbury
(for Example) for Treason, or Disobedience to the Government, as Solomon did
Abiathar for Anointing his Brother Adonijah King; and besides this, I can show
you many Examples of the like power exercised by the Roman and Greek Emperors,
in depriving and banishing not only Bishops, but Patriarchs; for the matters of
State without any Sentence or Judgment of a Synod, or general Council of other
Bishops; if your Doctrine were true, the poor Greek Church would be in a sad
Condition and all her Members in a perpetual Schism for some Ages past; that
there has been scarce any Canonical Elections or Deprivations of the
Patriarchs of any of the great Seats, viz. Constantinople, Antioch, and
Alexandria, but they are all nominated, and put in and out at the Grand
Seigniors, nay, Visiers Will and Pleasure, as any Man who will but pe^u^e Sr.
Paul Rycauts account of the Greek Church may easily see.

But indeed you fall into this Error for want of considering the original of
Bishop-pricks in England, and the true meaning of this intended Deprivation;
for pray take Notice, that though Episcopacy was settled in England in the time
of the Britains, yet all the Seas, and Jurisdictions of the Bishops of this
Realm, in respect of such and such Diocesses, have been wholly oweing to the
bounty of our Kings, and the Authority of our Great Councils, which were also
confirmed by the Popes Bulls; and since the Reformation to the Authority of the
King and Parliament, as were all the Bishop-pricks erected in Henry the VIII
ths. Reign; so that let the Bishops mere Spiritual Power of Ordaining,
Excommunicating, etc. be derived immediately from Christ if you please; yet the
Exercise thereof as limited and appointed to this or that Precint or See, is as
mere a temporal Institution, as that of Parishes which was not introduced till
long after Christianity was settled in this Island. So that the Exercise of
this Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within the Sea of Canterbury (for Example)
being a Civil Institution, it has anciently belonged to Supreme Powers, not
only to confer this Power, (as appears by their ancient Investitures of our
Bishops per Baculum and Annulum) but also to take it away, for Treason or
Disobedience against the State; since the King and Parliament do not pretend to
deprive them of their Spiritual Character, or Episcopal Orders, but only of
their right to exercise it within such Sees, or Diocesses; thus, although the
Archbishop of York and the Bishops of London and Wichester, with the rest of
the Popish Bishops, were deprived by Act of Parliament in 1o th. of Elizabeth,
for not taking the Oath of Supremacy; the Queen and Parliament never took upon
them to degrade those Bishops of their Episcopal Orders, but only to forbid
their acting as Bishops in their former respective Diocesses, and therefore I
doubt not, but that notwithstanding this Depriviation, those Bishops might (if
they had pleased) have ordained Priests, and confirmed Children, and that such
Ordinations and Confirmations, would been good even in our Protestant Church,
if such Priests or Children had afterward turned Protestants; since it is very
well known that the Church of England ownes the orders of the Church of Rome to
be valid which is more then we do for the ordinations of mere Presbyters coming
from those Protestant Countries where there are no Bishops at all; the like I
may say for their Confirmations too.

But pray Sir, consider how upon your Principles, this Schism can be so
Universal as to influence and involve all England in it, for if the Arch Bishop
of York (for example) will rather take this Oath then suffer Deprivation, and
that the rest of the Bishops of his Province should be of the mind (as I am
credibly informed they will;) pray tell me how the People of that Province
(being a distinct Church, or body Ecclesiastical from that of Canterbury, as to
all Spiritual matters, as having a distinct Convocation of their own,) can ever
be involved in this Schism, by the deprivation of the Arch Bishop and Bishops
of the Province of Canterbury?

And pray also tell me in the next place, how all the Members of the two
Universities can ever be involved in this intended Schism, since they owe no
Canonical Obedience to the Archbishops of Canterbury or York, nor to any other
Bishop, but only to their Chancellor and the Vice Chancellor as his Deputy,
who exercise all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within the said Universities; and
therefore their Church Communion cannot depend upon the Canonical or
Uncanonical deprivation of any Bishops in England I desire you to consider
these things as a Canon-Lawyer, and give me your answer if you can, against the
next time we meet, and then tell me whether the causes of this threatened Schism
be so just and apparent that it is like to involve so many of the Wisest, and
most Considerate of the Clergy and Laity into open separation from the Church,
as you suppose it will; not but that I will grant there be many of the Clergy
of this Opinion; who as well out of Conscience, as for their own interest, will
be contented to set up and encourage such a separation, thereby to make
themselves heads of separate Congregations, when they shall be deprived of
their present Benefices and Employments, upon their refusal of this Oath.


M. I must confess I never heard so much said upon this head before; and if you
could make out to me all the matters of fact you have now instanced in, I know
not but that I may come over to your Opinion; though let me tell you, this is the
first time that ever you can show me that any Bishops were deprived in England
by the mere Lay Authority of the King, and a Great Council or Convention of the
Laity, whilst they continued of the same Church Communion with those Bishops;
for as to your instance of the Popish Bishops deprived by Parliament in the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth, I doubt you will find it does not come up to the
Point in question, since the Queen and Parliament having then newly declared
themselves Protestants, did not own them for true and Orthodox Bishops, and
consequently thought they might justly depart from their Communion, and upon
the same account might deprive them, and the Queen might then nominate others
of their own Religion in their Places.


F. I cannot but differ from you in the matter of fack as you now relate it;
Vid. Dr. Burnet' s Hist. of the Reformation. 2d Part.
for Queen Elizabeth, and the Parliament were when they made this Act, so far
from being separated from the outward Communion of the Church of Rome, that
Mass was then said, and the Romish Priests still continued in all the Parishes
and Churches of England, and yet they still maintained an outward Communion,
though their Bishops were deprived by the Civil ^ower, and others ordained in
their stead. So that it is plain, the Papists themselves had then no notion of
this new cause of Schism, by reason of their Bishops being Uncanonically
deprived; nor indeed can we well vindicate the Honor or Legality of our
Reformation, if the Protestant Bishops who succeeded in the places of those who
were thus deprived by Act of Parliament, could not be Canonical, because their
Predecessors deprived by the Lay Power, were still alive.

But admit this was the first time that ever it had been thus practiced, yet if
it were then reasonable, and done upon good grounds; I cannot see but when the
necessity of the Church and State require it, and that the Clergy in
Convocation are so wilful, and wedded to some old false notions, as not to
consult the peace and safety of the Church and Kingdom; why the King and Queen
(who are acknowledged to be Supreme over Ecclesiastical as well as Temporal
Persons) may not together with the two Houses of Parliament make the like Law
now, as was done in the first of Queen Elizabeth, for a less matter; for none
of those Popish Bishops, though they believed Queen Elizabeth to have no better
than a Parliament Title to the Crown, yet ever denied her to be their lawful
and rightful Queen; only they would not own her Supremacy in Spiritual Matters.

But leaving the farther discussion of this Point, to those who better
understand it, I would gladly know of you what you intend to do, and what you
would have us do, who are like to be made Deputy Lieutenants and Justices of
Peace; for if as you your self allow, there be a necessity that some Civil
Government be maintained during King James's absence, I desire to know of you
how it can be managed, and who shall manage it, in case all the Gentlemen of
England were of your Principle, and should positively refuse the Oath of
Allegiance to their present Majesty's; for if King James be never so much our
lawful King, it is not now possible for us to be Governed by him, since he is
go^e, and God knows whether ever he may return again; since then you cannot
have him if you would; and that there is a necessity we should be Governed by
some body. And since it is also as certain, that those who actually Govern us,
will exact this, or the like Oaths of Allegiance from us, as were due to their
Predecessors, and that no man must expect to enjoy or execute any Place or
Office, not only of profit, but of burden and charge, for the necessary
execution of Justice, and the maintenance of Civil Government (without which we
cannot live or subsist) without taking this new Oath of Allegiance, as the only
means to qualify them for it; if then the end ( viz.) Civil Government, be
absolutely necessary, and the taking of this Oath is the only means allowed of
to qualify men for it, this seems as evident to me, that taking of this Oath
is not only justifiable by Law, but by Reason, and good Conscience; since it is
done for the highest and noblest end; ( viz.) the public good of the whole
Nation, or Common wealth; which you grant cannot subsist without some kind of
Civil Government amongst us.


M. I will say something in answer to what you have now alleged concerning the
necessity of taking of the Oath, in order to the maintenance of some Civil
Government, without which I grant the Kings good Subjects cannot subsist till
his return; since I confess this is the strongest Argument you have yet
brought; all I can say to it at present, it, that if all your Country
Gentlemen, and all the Lawyers in England, would be so firm in their Loyalty to
his Majesty, as unanimously to declare that they cannot take this Oath with a
safe Conscience, the consequence then would be, that either the present Usurped
Power must be forced to give up the Government to the right owner, or else they
must at least desist from pressing this Oath upon you.


F. You know well enough this is altogether a vain supposition, since you
cannot but be sensible that their Majesty's have not only a sufficient force
both of Native Englishmen, and Foreigners on their side, who can force those
that should make any opposition to the taking it; and that there are also many
Fanatics, and Commonwealths Men, who not looking upon themselves as at all
obliged by your notions of Natural Allegiance, and the obligations of any
former Oath of Allegiance, will get into all the Offices and Employments of the
Kingdom, to the great prejudice and destruction, not only of the Church, but
the Monarchy it self, which is as yet preserved, tho the Person that
administered it is altered; so that it would conduce nothing to King James's
Affairs, if all the Gentry and Lawyers of the Kingdom should go about to refuse
this Oath, which, as I have already proved, they are also obliged to take by
the Law of the Land, and also that greater Law of prosecuting the public good
of the Nation, to the utmost of their power-


M. Well, since I cannot expect so great firmness of mind and courage from your
Country Gentlemen, and especially the Lawyers, who have been always but too
forward to comply with all Governments, how unlawful soever, and since you, who
think that you may lawfully take this Oath, not only by the Law of the Land,
which you have interpreted to countenance your Opinion, but also from a higher
and nobler Law (viz.) that of the common good of the Nation, or Civil Society,
which I grant must be maintained during the Kings absence, since you say there
is a necessity for it, though I am not fully satisfied of the lawfulness of it,
so far as to take it my self, yet will I not absolutely condemn you or any
other sincerely and honest men, who do only take it out of a good intent, to
maintain some Civil Government amongst us, and also to keeping out the
Phanaticks from having any share in it; so I hope the Government will excuse
me, if my Conscience will not give me leave to take it my self, since there are
enough of you who are free to do it without us; so that if I cannot keep that
small Employment I have without taking this new Oath, I will freely give it up,
since as long as I am not satisfied in my Conscience of the lawfulness of it,
and whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin, as the Apostle has truly defined it.


F. I confess you speak very honestly, and charitably in this matter, and I
could wish all those of your Opinion had the like moderation, and that they
would not condemn of wilful Perjury so many good Bishops, Noblemen, Gentlemen,
and others, both of the Clergy, and Laity, who have been persuaded that they
might take this Oath with a safe Conscience, and therefore pray, however we
differ in Opinion about these matters, let us maintain the same Friendship for
each other as we had before.


M. Sir, I readily embrace so fair and kind an offer, and as I hope you will do
me what kind offices you can whilst you continue to act under this Government,
so I will promise to do the same for you, when ever the King shall come to be
restored to his Throne again.


F. I willingly and thankfully accept the proposal of the continuance of your
Friendship, since I look upon your dissenting from me, not to proceed from any
wilfulness or obstinacy, but out of a tender Conscience, and too great and high
a sense of your duty, which I must still confess are errors on the right hand;
and therefore now taking my leave of you, shall only desire you to believe me
your real Friend, and humble Servant.


M. I hope you think I have the same esteem for you, and therefore must always
own my self yours.


FINIS.
A General Alphabetical INDEX, OF THE MATTERS and QUESTIONS Debated in the
Thirteen Dialogues OF Bibliotheca Politica:

LONDON, Printed for R. Baldwin in Warwick Lane, near the Oxford-Arms, where
also many be had the First, Second, Third, Fourth; Fifth, Sixth, Seventh,
Eighth, Ninth, Tenth, Eleventh, Twelvth, and Thirteenth Dialogues. 1694.

A General Alphabetical INDEX of the Matters and Questions debated in the
Thirteen Dialogues of Bibliotheca Politica.
The Reader is desired to take notice, that these Dialogues being written
discursively, and not determinatively, this W. signifies the Question, by the
word Whether. Note, D. signifies Dialogue, P. Page.

A
ABEL W. Subject to his Brother Cain by Divine Institution. D. 2. p. 67. to 70.
Abesses often present in Saxon and French Great Councils. D. 6. p. 393. Abbots,
W. all that were anciently summoned to Parliament held in Capite, D. 8. p. 556.
and how many came to be by degrees omitted, Ibid. Abbots, and Abbesses
sometimes granted aids by themselves, D. 7. p. 447. Abdication of the
Government, W. a King can do it any other way, than by some express Act, D. 11.
p. 813, 815, 832, to the end. Abuses of Governors, their several kinds, D. 3.
p. 161. to 164. Kings Acts Illegal, W. also Inauthoritative, D. 9. p. 644. to
649. Acts of Parliament W. they to hold good, though not called by the King, D
12. p. 894. to 896. Adam W. he had conferred on him by God the Dominion of the
whole Eaath, and of all Creatures therein, D. 1. p. 37. to 39. W. By being a
Husband, and Father, he was also absolute Lord over Eve, and all her Posterity,
Ib. p. 12. to 25. Adel, and Adelman, their signification among the Saxons, and
Danes, D. 6. p. 374. Alderman, its signification among the same, Ib. p. 375.
Aldermen of Countries, who. D. 5. p. 370. King Alfred his Testament, D. 10. p.
721. St. Albans Borough P^tition to King Edw. the Second, D. 8. p. 576 to 578.
Allegiance W. due by Law to a King de facto, D. 13. p. 905. to the end. The
word Alij in ancient Statutes, and Records, W. it signifies only the lesser
Tenants in Capite, D. 7. p. 491, 493 518. 523. Archbishop of Canterbury has
been sometimes Elected in the Great Council of the Kingdom, D. 8. p. 570, 571.
Standing Army in time of Peace, against Law, D. 9. p. 638, 639. Great Assembly
at Runne-Mead, W. it was a Great Council of the whole Kingdom, p. 453, 454.
Attainders of Treason against Kings de facto, have always held good till
repealed, D. 13. p. 910. Authority of Parliament, the Phrase how ancient in our
Statute-Books, D. 5 p. 334. to 340.
B
Babel when Built, D. 2. p. 76, 77. Banneret, its ancient signification, D. 7.
p. 540. Baro. the Title. W. it anciently signified no other Person than a Baron
of Parliament, D. p. 402. to 407. Barons Angliae, W. Tenants in Capite only,
Ib. p. 394 p. 406. to 411. Barons Comitatus, who they were anciently, D. 10.
p. 743, 744. Barnstaple Borough, its ^lea to send Burgesses to Parliament, by
grant from King Athelstan, D. 8. p. 605. Bishops W. they derive their right of
sitting in Parliament from the Saxon Kings, D. 5. p. 366. to 368. They
sometimes granted Aids by themselves, D. 7. p. 447. Seven Bishops W. their
Petition to King James, against his Declaration, and his Commitment of them,
were justifiable by our Laws, D. 12. p. 823. to 830. Bishoprics, and Abbeys,
anciently con^erred by the King, per Annulum, and Baculum, D. 5. p. 36. 38.
Eldest Brother, W. Lord of all Brethren, by the Law of God, or Nature, D. 2. p.
65. to 89. Bracton, that passage in his Book interpreted. viz. Rex habet
Superiorem Deum, and Legem, D. 10 p. 701. Buroughs, W. any of them send
Members to Parliament by prescription, D. 6. p. 382, 383. D. 8. p. 580, 581. W.
All Buroughs that sent Members anciently held in Capite of the King, D. 8. p.
557, 578. W. They sent such Members by an inherent Right. or at the Discretion
of the Sheriffs, Ib. p. 593. 604.
C
Cain W. he forfeited his Birthright by the Murder of his Brother, D. 2. p.
67. W. His Eldest Son was a Prince over his Brethren, Ib. Canons of 1640. their
validity discussed, D. 4. p. 284. to 286. King Charles the Firsts pretended
Commission to Sir Philim. O Neal, considered, D. 9. p. 636, 637. Great Charter
of King John^ W. it was the sole Act of that King, or else made by the advice
and consent of all the Freemen of England, D. 5. p. 324. D. 7. p. 455, 456.
Great Charter of Hen. the Third, W. all the Copies we have now of it were his,
or else Edward I. his Charters, Ib. 461. Children how far, and how long bound
to be subject to their Parents, D. 1. p. 45. to 52. Christians W. as much
obliged to suffer for Religion now, as in the Primitive Times, D. 4^ p. 230. to
234. Chester its County, W. the Earl thereof could charge all his Tenants in
Parliament, without their consent, D. 7. p. 501. Church of England, W. Passive
Obedience be its distinguishing Doctrine from other Churches, D. 4. p. 292,
293. Cities and Buroughs more numerous in the Saxon times than now, D. 6. p.
379. to 400. W. They had any Representatives in Parliament before the 49th of
Henry the IIId. D. 5. p. 565, 572. Whether Cities and Buroughs had not always
had Representatives in the Parliaments of Scotland, D. 7. p. 505. Clerici
terras habentes quae ad Ecclesias non pertinent, who they were, D. 7. p.
450.451. Clergy a part of the Great Council of the Kingdom in the Saxon Times,
and long after, D. 8. p. 544, to 550. W. None of the Clergy but such as held in
Capite, appeared at such Councils, Ibid. W. The Inferior Clergy had their
Representatives in Parliament, different from the Convocation, Ib. 546, to 558.
Commandment Vth, in what sense Princes are comprehended under it, D. 2. p. 106.
to 109, and 111. Communitas Regni, W. that Phrase in ancient Records, and Acts
of Parliament, does not often signify the Commons as well before the 49th of
Henry the Third, as afterward, D. 7. p. 412, to 415. W. That Phrase does not
also signify the whole body of the Kingdom, consisting of Peers, and Commons,
D. 6. p. 416. The Drs. proofs to the contrary considered, 417, to 423. W. It
does also often signify the Commons alone, D. 8. p. 572. to 574. Their
Declaration to the Pope in the 48th of Edward the Third, D. 8. p. 581, to 582.
Their Petition to Henry the Fifth. Their Protestation in Parliament in Richard
the Seconds time, 584. Commons of Cities and great Towns had their
Representatives in the Assemblies of Estates of all the Kingdoms in Europe,
founded by the ancient Germans, and Goths, Ibid, 607, to 612. Commons their
request, and consent, when first mentioned in Old Statutes, D. 5. p. 329. W.
Ever summoned to Parliament, from the 49th of Hen. the Third, to the 18th of
Edw. the First, D. 7. p. 522. Commons W. part of the Great Council before the
Conquest, D. 5. p. 369, 372. The words Commune, de Commune, and les communes,
do frequently signify the Commons, before the 49th of Henry the Third, D. 6.
423. D. 7. 423, to 484. Common Council of the whole Kingdom, W. different from
the Common Council of Tenants in Capite, D. 7. p. 437. to 474. Communitas
Scotiae, W. it always signified none but Tenants in Capite, Ibid. p. 505. to
508. Conquest alone W. it confers a right to a Crown, D. 2. p. 128, 129. W. It
it gives a King a right to all the Lands and Estates of the Conquered Kingom,
D. 3. 168. to 170. W. Any Conquest of this Kingdom was made by King William the
First, D. 10. p. 715. to the end. Constitutions of Clarendon* their Title
explained, D. 6. p. 430, 431. Contract Originel, W. there were ever any such
thing, D. 10 p. 695, to 709. D. 12. p. 809, 8^3. Convention, W. its voting King
James to have abdica^ed the Government be justifiable, D. 11. p. 809, to 834.
W. Its Declaration of King James's violations of our fundamental Rights be well
grounded, Ibid. p. 816, 832. W. Its voting the Throne vacant, can be justified
from the ancient constitution of the Government, D. 12. p. 839, to 883. W.
Whether its placing K. W. and Q. M. on the Throne may be also justified by the
said Constitution, Ibid. p. 883, to 894. W. Its making an Act, excluding all
Roman Catholic* Princes was legal, Ibid. p. 894, to the end. Convocation Book
drawn up by Bishop Overal, its validity examined, D. 1. p. 6, and 8. Copy
Holders, why they to have no Votes at Elections to Parliament. D. 5. p. 513.
Great Councils or Convention the only Judges of Princes Titles, upon any
dispute about the succession or vacancy of the Throne, D. 12. p. 895. D. 13. p.
917. to 919 924. Council of the King in Parliament, what it was anciently, D.
5. p. 334. Great Council, or general Convention of the Estates of the Kingdom,
W. legal without the Kings Summons, D. 5. p. 353. D. 12. p. 894. to 898. Curia
Regis, what i^ anciently was, and W. it consisted of none but Tenants in
Capite, Ibid. 368. Crown, W. it can by Law be ever forfeited, D. 12. p. 833,
834.
D
Defense of a Man's self, in what case justifiable, D. 3. p. 148, 149.
Declaration of the Convention setting forth King James's violation of the
fundamental rights of the Nation, W. justifiable, or not, D. 11. p. 816. to the
end. Private Divines, their Opi^nions about Passive Obedience, and Resistance,
of what Authority, D. 4. p. 291, 294. W. Many of them have not quitted the
ancient Doctrine of the Church of England declaring the Pope to be Antichrist,
vid. Append. Dispencing Power, W. justifiable by Law, D. 12. p. 119, to 828.
Dissolution of all Government, W. it necessarily follows, from the Conventions
declaration of the vacancy of the Throne, D. 12. p. 890, 891. Durham, W. its
Bishop could lay Taxes in Parliament on the whole County Palatine, without
their consents, D. 7. p. 501, 502.
E
Earls of Counties, their ancient Office and Institution, D. 5 p. 363, to 370.
King Edward the Second being deposed, W. any vacancy of the Throne followed
thereupon, D. 12. p. 158, to 861. Queen Elizabeth, W. she had any Title to the
Crown but by Act of Parliament, Ibid. p 872, 873. England, when first so
called, D. 5. p. 362. Englishmen, W. they lost all their Liberties and Estates
by the Norman Conquest, D. 10. p. 753. to the end. English Bishops, Earls, and
Barons, W. then all deprived of their Honors, and Estates, Ib. 756, to 762.
English Saxon Laws, W. confirmed, or abrogated by K. William, D. 10. p. 760.
Estates of the Kingdom the only Judges of all Disputes about the Succession of
the Crown, D. 2. p. 891, to 892. D. 12. p. 893. D. 13. p. 917, to 919, 921.
Eve, W. by being subject to Adam, all her Posterity became so likewise, D. 1.
p. 14. to 25.
F
Fathers, W. by right of generation, or of education, Lords over their Children
in the state of Nature, D. 1 p. 13, 14. W. Any such power was given by Divine
Grant to Adam, and in him to all other Fathers, Ib. p. 26, 30, to 36. W.
Fathers of Families have power of life and death over their Children by the Law
of Nature, Ib. 19. to 26. W. They may sell their Children, Ib. 26. to 31. W.
They may be resisted by their Children in case of any violent assaults upon
their lives, Ib. p. 41. W. Perpetual Masters over their Children as long as
they live, Ib p. 45. to 51. Fideles, the signification of the word before the
Conquest, D. 6. p. 390, 391. D. 7. p. 448. to 451. Sir R. Filmers Principles,
W. they do not rather encourage Tyranny, than Fatherly affection in Princes
toward their Subjects, D. 2. p. 118. W. They do not also favor Usurpers, Ib.
125. to 128.
G
Common Good of Mankind the main design of all Government, D. 1. p. 55. to 61.
Civil Government the end of its Institution, D. 1. p. 11. 19. 21. W. There had
been any necessity of it, if Man had never sinned, Ib. p. 11. What it is, and
its Prerogative, D. 3. p. 173. W. it can be settled without liberty, and
property in Estates, Ib. 174. Government of Families and Kingdoms, its
Original, and Necessity, D. 1. p. 10. to 12. Supreme Governors, in what cases
they cease to be Gods Ordinance, D. 1. p. 41. Government among the ancient
Germans and Saxons always by Common Councils, D. 5. p. 365. to 369. Grands, or
Grants in Parliaments, what those words signify in ancient Statutes, and
Records. W. The Lords alone, or the Commons also, D. 6. p. 369. vid. Append.
Guards of the King, when when first set up, D. 9. p. 639.
H
K. Harold, W. William of Normandy had a just cause of making War upon him, D.
10 p. 718. What Title he had to the Crown, Ib. p. 720. Haereditamentum, its
derivation, Ib. p. 721. Hengist, and all the rest of the Kings who founded the
Saxon Heptarchy, W. so by Election, or Conquest, D. 5. p. 357. to 362. King
Henry the IVth, W. his Title to the Crown were by right of blood, or Election
of the Estates in Parliament, D. 12. p. 861. to 863. King Henry the VI. W. his
Son were not unjustly disinherited by the Duke of York, and himself unjustly
deposed by Edward the IVth, Ib. p. 863. to 867. King Henry the VIIth, W. he had
any Title to the Crown by right of Inheritance, Ib. p. 868. to 870. King Henry
the VIIIth, W. the several alterations he made as to the the Succession, were
legal, D. 12. p. 871, 872. Homage, W. it rendered the Prince, or Lord
irresistible, D. 10. p. 727.728. Homines Liberi, its signification in English
Histories, D. 6. p. 428. to 430. Homilies of our Church, the the chief passages
therein, against all manner of Resistance of Governors considered, D. 4. p.
287.288. W. It be Heresy or Schism to deny their Authority in any point there
laid down, Ib. 289.290. vid. Append. Mr. Hookers Opinion concerning the
Original of Civil Government, D. 12. p. 129.130. W. The two Houses of
Parliament, or the whole People of England have any coercive Power ove the
King, D. 9. p. 634. W. The Two Houses have on the behalf of the whole People,
renounced all right of self-defence in any case whatsoever, Ib. p. 636. to 658.
I
King James the Firsts Speech in Parliament, against Tyranny, D. 3. p. 148. The
Act of Recognition of K. James's Hereditary Right, how far it obliges
Posterity, D. 12. p. 871, to 874. King James II. W. he violatid the fundamental
constitution of the Government before his desertion, D. 9. p. 673. to 685. Or
W. he had amended all those violations before his departure, p. 685. to 689. W.
His setting up a standing Army, and putting in Popish Officers, and Soldiers,
were an actual making War upon the Nation, Ib. p. 683.687. W. He abdicated the
Government by his breach of the Original contract, or else by his deserting it,
D. 11. p. 790. to 799. W. He might have been again safely restored to the
Government upon reasonable terms, Ib. p. 801. to 807. W. He really intended to
redress all the violations he had made upon it, p. 805. to 807. W. He resumed
the Government upon his return to London, from Feversham, Ib. 802. to 806.
Jesus Christ did not alter Civil Government, neither by taking away the
Prerogative of Princes, nor yet by abridging the Civil Liberties of Subjects,
D. 4. p. 216. to 220. Jews often rebelled, and sometimes killed their Kings, D.
3. p. 203, to 205. Their resistance of Antiochus considered, Ibid. p. 208. to
the end. Jewish Government before Saul, W. Aristocratical, or Monarchical, D.
p. 93. to 101. Judah, and Thamar, the History considered, D. 1. p. 33. Judges
over Israel, their Power W. Monarchical, D. 2. p. 95, 96. W. Some of them were
not Judges of some particular Tribes, p. 96, 97. Judgments Divine, W. they may
be removed by humane means, or force, D. 4. p. 259, 260.
K
Kings, W. to be reputed Fathers of their People, as the Heirs or
Representatives of those who were once so, D. 2. p. 65. W. They derive their
Power from God, or from the People and Laws, D. 11. p. 773. to 780. D. 12. p.
936, to 938. Saxon Kings of England, W. absolute, or limited Princes, D. 5. p.
349. W. They were endued with the sole Legislative Power, Ib. p. 338, to 345.
Kings of the English Saxons, Elected, and often deposed by the Great Council,
Ibid. p. 365. The same done also in other Kingdoms of the Gothic Model, Ib. p.
365. Kings of England ever since King William I. W. they derive their Title to
the Crown from Conquest, or some other Title, D. 10. p. 713. Their Concessions
to Subjects do no ways derogate from Royal Prerogative, D. 10. p. 715.716.
Kings of the Roman Catholic Religion, W. many of them have not observed Magna
Charta, and their Coronation Oath, D. 12.882.888. King by Sir R. Filmer's
Principles above all Laws, and alone makes them, D. 2. p. 123.124. In what
sense he is head of the Politic Body of the Commonwealth, D. 11. p. 803. to
805. W. He could have anciently by his Prerogative Taxed all the Tenants in
Capite at his discretion, D. 7. p. 495. to 499. W. He could call, or omit to
summon to Parliament what Earls, Lords, and Tenants he pleased, Ibid. p. 505,
to 511.523. W. He could also summon those Knights of Shires who served befere,
without any new Election, Ib. 537. W. He could by his Prerogative discharge
what Knights of Shires he pleased, after they were chosen, Ibid. p. 539.540.
King, how far Gods Lieutenant, D. 9. p. 663. W. His Authority is different from
his Personal Will and Commands, Ib. p. 645. to 648. His Person how far Sacred,
and Inviolable, Ibid. p. 638.651. to 657. Kings Commission, how far, and in
what cases resistible, notwithstanding the Declarations of of the two first
Parliaments of King Charles the Second, Ib. p. 636. to 655. W. He has any
Authority to act against Law, Ib. p. 644, to 649. Kings Commissions, how far
good in Law, Ib. p. 640. Kings since the Conquest W. endued with the sole
Legislative Power, D. 5. p. 338, to 345. D. 9. p. 650, 651. has no Peer or
Equal in the Kingdom, D. 5. p. 354. His presence, W. it will authorize all
illegal actions, so as to render them irresistible, D. 9. p. 653, 654. His
Officers in what, case resistible, Ib. The Kings being irresistible, how far
different from being unaccountable, D. 9. p. 644, 645. Kings of England, W.
absolute, and unaccountable, or W. limited by Law, D. 10. p. 693, to 698. Most
High in their State-Royal when they appear in their Great Councils, or
Parliament, D. 9. p. 643. The first Eight Kings after the Conquest never were
so styled till after their Coronations, D. 12. p. 840. to 858.895. King, though
he have no Peer, yet he had anciently Comites, or Companions, D. 5. p. 364,
365. W. He can at this day abdicate or forfeit his Crown by the wilful
violation of our fundamental Laws, D. 10. p. 694, to 709. D. 11. p. 832, 833.
Kingly Power, the end of its Institution in this Kingdom, D. 5. p. 349. King de
facto, or for the time being, W. within the Statute of the 25th of Edward the
Third, and whether Allegiance be due to him by the Statute of the Eleventh of
Henry the Seventh, D. 13. p. 905. to 940. What constitutes a legal King in
England, D. 12. p. 889, 890. Kingdoms of Judah and Israel, W. when given by
Gods appointment, it gave the issue of that King a like Divine Right to
succeed, D. 2. p. 99, 100. Kingdoms Patrimonial, and Hereditary, their
difference, Ib. 84, 85. Knights of Shires frequently styled Magnates, and
Grantz in Ancient Records, D. 6. p. 424. vid. Append. W. They were anciently
chosen out of the Tenants in Capite, and none others, p. 425. Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses, W. the first Writs of Summons of them that can be
found, is the 49th of Henry the Third, D. 7. p. 519. W. This was the first time
that they were summoned, Ibid. p. 525, to 530. W. They were summoned no more
till the Eighteenth of Edward the First, Ibid. p. 522. to the end. D. 8. p.
559. to 563. p. 571, to 576.
L
Lancaster, W. that Families pretended Title to the Crown, claimed by
Inheritance, D. 12. p. 861, 862. Laws, how far they oblige Princes, according
to Sir R. F's Principles, D. 2. p. 120, 121. Laws Imperial of all Go^vernments,
W. they require a Passive Obedience, or Non-Resistance in all cases whatsoever,
D. 3. p. 149.154. Law of Nations, W. it differs from the Law of Nature, D. 1.
p. 26, to 31. Laws of English Saxon Councils, the Titles to most of them, D. 5.
p. 314. to 319. Laws of Normandy, W. the same in most things with those of
England, D. 10. p. 752.753. Laws fundamental of the Kingdom, W. there are any
such things, and where to be found, D. 9. p. 666. to 669. D. 10. p. 704. D. 11.
p. 810. to 814. Law of Edward the Confessor, concerning the Kings ceasing to
be so, if he prove a Tyrant, and W. it be genuine or not, D. 10. p. 705. to
712. Private League with France, what Reasons there are for and against its
reality, D. 11. p. 800. to 802. Liberi Homines, and Liberi Tenentes mentioned
in Ancient Statutes and Records, who they were anciently, D. 6. p. 419.426. to
431. W. They were only Tenants in Capite, or chose by Military service to them,
D. 7. p. 449. to 453.514.
M
Magna Charta, W. obtained by Rebellion, D. 3. p. 186. Magnates, W. the Commons
were not sometimes comprehended under that Title, D. 6. p. 372.396, 397. Queen
Mary, W. she had any Title, save by the Statute of Henry the Eighth, D. 12. p.
872. Our present Queen Mary, W. she has a right to succeed upon her Fathers
abdication, Ib. p. 853. 884. Maud the Empress, why she never styled her self
Queen of England, notwithstanding fealty had been sworn to her, D. 12. p. 846.
Several Maxims in the Civil Law considered, and explained, D. 1. p. 17, 18,
21.30. The ancient Members of the German Diets or Great Councils, D. 6. p. 375.
The Milites mentioned in ancient Statutes and Records, who they were, D. 6. p.
431, 432. W. They were only Tenants in Capite, or any other Tenants by Military
or Socage service, D. 7. p. 481.489, 490. Mischiefs that may befall a People
from their resistance of the Supreme Power considered, D. 3. p. 184. to 189.
Monarchy, W. of Divine Right from any Precepts, or Examples in the Old or New
Testament, D. 2. p. 130, 131. Or from Adams Patriarchical Power, D. 1. p. 19.
to 26. Monarchies or Commonwealths which are most Tyrannical, D. 2. p. 110.111.
Mixed Monarchy, W. it be a Contradiction, D. 5. p. 345. to 348. Sim. Montfort.
W. he first called the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses to Parliament, in the
49th of Henry the Third, D. 8. p. 596.597. Moses and Joshua, W. Monarchs over
the Children of Israel, and Successors to the Patriarchical Power, D. 2. p. 92.
to 100. Multitudo Cleri. and Populi, the signification of those words in our
ancient Histories, D. 8. p. 569. to 571.
N
W. A whole Nation may resist the Supreme Power in some Cases of extremity, but
not particular Persons, D. 3. p. 146. to 150.161, 162. D. 4. p. 236. to
239.272. to 275. Negative voice, W. the two Houses of Parliament have it not in
some Cases as well as the King, D. 5. p. 341. Noah, W. he was sole Proprietor
of the Earth, or else was Tenant in common with his own Children, D. 1. p. 74,
75. W. His Grandsons were all alike Princes over their several Families, Ib. p.
75. to 81. W. from Noah's Seven Precepts may be deduced the Law of Nature, D. 1.
p. 36, 37. Nobilis, and Nobilitas, the several significations of those Titles,
D. 6. p. 374, 388.410. W. Mere Commoners were not often comprehended under the
Title of Nobiles, Ib. 396, 397. Non Obstantes, the Clause when first inserted
in our Kings Charters, D. 11. p. 820. Non Resistance, W. the Doctrine tend to
make Princes better, or else more Tyrannical to their Subjects, D. 2. p. 116,
117. Normandy, W. its Dukes were absolute, or limited Princes, D. 10. p. 727.
O
Oath of the King at his Coronation, how far obliged according to Sir F's.
Principles, D. 2. p. 122.123. Its ancient form, according to the Mirour, D.
5.364. W. The taking the Coronation Oath renders the Crown forfeitable, if it
be not observed, D. 10. p. 699. The form of the Oath since the Conquest, Ib. p.
711. Oath of Allegiance its interpretation, D. 5. p. 350. Oaths in the Acts for
the Militia, of the 13th, and 14th of King Charles the Second, their true
intent and meaning considered, D. 9. p. 631. to 635.659. New Oath of
Allegiance, W. it may be taken to their present Majesty's as King and Queen de
facto, without acknowledgment of their right, D. 13. p. 903. to 909. How far it
obliges the takers, Ibid. p. 907.908. W. Due to the King in Possession by
reason of his protection, Ib. p. 949. to 954. Promissory Oaths, W. lawful, or
not, Ib. 954. to 956. W. Any other stricter Oath be necessary, Ib. p. 957. to
963. Obedience Passive. W. it be not a Bull, D. 1. p. 41. The necessary
consequences of that Doctrine, Ib. p. 4. to 9. Officers and Soldiers who
deserted King James W., justifiable in so doing, D. 11. p. 785, to 787. Omnes
de Regno, mentioned in Magna Charta, W. only Tenants in Capite, D. 7. p. 490,
to 494. W. The Oppressions of Princes, or the Ambition and Rebellion of
Subjects, have caused the greater disturbances, D. 3. p. 182, 183. Optimates,
its ancient signification in Histories discussed, D. 6. p. 372, to 376. W. It
ever signifies mere Commoners, 397. Orange, W. that Princes making War upon
King James was justifiable, D. 11. p. 781. to 789. W. All his other carriage
toward the said King were as it ought to be, Ib. p. 789. to 798. Original
Contract, W. there were ever any such thing, and where to be ^ound, D. 10. p.
704, 705. D. 11. p. 813.814. W. Broken by King James, Ib. 809, 810.813.814.
P
Pares Baronum, or Alii Magnates, who they anciently were, D. 7. p. 509.511.
Parliaments or Great Councils, W. they are as ancient as the Government, or owe
their Original to some Kings favor, D. 5. p. 358, to 365. How often anciently
held, D. 9 p. 668, D. 5.363. Its power when met, Ib. 364. No Laws to be made,
or Taxes to be raised without it, D. 9. p 668. To have freedom of speech, and
not to be bribed, or awed, Ibid. Paternal Power not to be acquired by Conquest,
etc. D. 2. p. 105, 106. Patriarchs before the flood, W. Lords of all Mankind,
or or Masters of their own Families, D. 2. p. 70. to 72. St. Paul's Epistle to
the Romans, when written, D. 4. p. 248, to 250. Peers, their Power in
Parliament, W. derived from he King, or the institution of the Government, D.
5. p. 366. to the end. Persons of Princes, W. they may be resisted without
resisting their Authority, D. 4. p. 240. to 244. Whether so in England, D.
10.653. to 657. People, W. the Original of Civil Power asserted by Fortescue.
D. 11. p. 779. Power R^gal, W. Paternal, D. 2. p. 101. to 104. People, W. they
can judge when their fundamental Rights are invaded, D. 9. p. 669 670. W. If
they may judge, they may also resist, D. 11. p. 780, 781. What numbers required
to justify this resistance, D. 9. p. 669. to 671. Power Oeconomical, W. of the
same kind with Civil, Ibid. p. 59.62.64. Power over men's lives whence derived,
D. 1. p. 35. to 39.61. Power Civil, whence derived, W. immediately from God, or
from the People, D. 11. p. 773. to 780. Power Legislative, W. in the King, and
Parliament, D. 5. p. 312, 313. Power of dispencing with Penal Laws, W. it be an
inherent Prerogative of the Kings, D. 11. p. 816. to 830. Supreme Powers, W.
irresistible, because ordained by God, D. 4. p. 452. to 460. Plebs and Populus,
what those words anciently signified, D. 6. p. 386. to 391. D. 8. p. 359. to
364. Primitive Christians, W. Men are now obliged to the same strict Rules of
Non-Resistance, as they were in the Primitive Times, D. 4. p. 272, to 277.
Diverse of their resistances of the Roman and Greek Emperors instanced, 280 to
282. Primogeniture as a Power over Brethren, W. of Divine Right, D. 2. p. 81.
to 83. Princes, W. bound to treat their Subjects like their Children, D. 2. p.
105. to 110. Princepes Regni, its signification anciently, D. 6. p.
372.377.395.396. W. All the Privileges and Liberties English Subjects now
enjoy, were owing to the favor of our former Kings, D. 2. p. 112. D. 5. p.
320, to 322.356.361, 362. Prelates and Peers claim their places in Parliaments
by Prescription, D. 8. p. 559, to 564. Prescription beyond time of memory, how
high it goes, Ibid. 583, to 593. Proceres Regni, its ancient signification, D.
6. p. 376. W. the Commons were not often comprehended under that Title, Ib.
395, 396. D. 8. p. 572. Protection of the Government, how far it may require
Allegiance to it, D. 13. p. 946, to 952. Civil Property, W. derived from Adam,
or Noah, D. 2. p. 133. to 136. Provincia, its ancient signification, W. a
Province, or a County, Ibid. 565, to 569. Punishments for Offenses, W. altered,
and new ones ordained by King William the First, D. 10. p. 759.
Q
Queens often present in English Saxon Councils, D. 6. p. 393.
R
Rebels, W. bound to make their lawful Prince amends by restoring him to the
Throne, D. 13. p. 939. to 944. Records in the Tower, and elsewhere, cited in
these Dialogues. Rot. cart. 5 Johan. D. 6. p. 386. Rot. clause 17. Edw. II.
ibid. 396. Rot. Parl. 7 Rich. II. ibid. 397. Rot. claus. 24, and 26 of Hen.
III. ib. 432. Rot. claus. 19 Hen. III. D. 7. p. 445. Inter Com. brevia, Mich.
42. Hen. III. ib. 446. Rot. Pat. 15. H. III. Rot. claus. 4. H. III. ib. 447.
Rot. Pat. 15. Johan. ibid. 449. Rot. cl. 42. H. III. ibid. 449. Rot. cl. 28. H.
III. ibid. 454. Rot. cl. 26. H. III. ibid. 461. Rot. Pat. 42. H. III. p. 472.
Rot. Pat. 48. H. III. Rot. cl. 49. H. III. Rot. Pat. 51. H. III. ibid. 475.
Rot. cl. 28. Edw. I. ibid. 477. Rot. Par. 12. Edw. 2. p. 478. Rot. Par. 1. Edw.
III. Rot. Parl. 12. Rich. II. ib. 478. Rot. Pat. 30th Edw. 1. Rot. Fin. 20.
Edw. III. ib. p. 420. Rot. cl. 34. Edw. 1. ib. p. 483. Rot. cl. 19. H. III.
Rot. Pat. 48. H. 3. ibid. p. 491. Rot. Pat. 48. H. III. ibid. p. 493. Rot. cl.
16. H. III. ib. p. 494. Rot. cl. 19. H. III. 495. Rot. cl. 11. H. III. Rot. cl.
33. H. III. Rot. cl. 52. H. III. ib. p. 496. Rot. Pat. 3 Edw. I. Rot. Pat. 20.
E. 1. ib. p. 501. Rot. Pat. 17, 18. Ed. I. ib. p. 50^. Rot. cl. 6. Johan. 26.
H. III. 38. H. III. ib. p. 516. Rot. Pat. 48. H. III. Rot cl. 49. H. III. ib.
519. Rot. cl. 24. Edw. I. ib. p. 526. Rot. cl. 3. Ed. III. Rot. cl. 49. H. III.
ibid. p. 527. Bundel: Brev. 18 Edw. I. p. 530, 531. Rot. cl. 23. E. 1. ib. 53.
Rot. cl. 28. E. I. Rot. cl. 45. Ed. III. ib. 537. Rot. Stat. 25. E. 1. D. 8. p.
552. Rot. cl. 23. E. I. ib. p. 554. Rot. cl. 31. Ed. III. ib. p. 555. Rot. Pat.
54 H. III. ib. 573. Rot. Wall. 11. Ed. I. ib. 574.575. Rot. cl. 28. E. I. Rot.
Pat. 8. Ed. II. ib. 576. Rot. Pat. 52. H. III. ib. p. 578. Bundel Brev. 5. Ed.
II. Rot. Pat. 40. Ed. III. ib. p. 581. Rot. Pat. 2. H. V. ib. p. 582. Placit.
Parl. 18. E. I. Rot. Parl. 18. Ed. III. ib. p. 584. inter Com. brev. in Scac.
34. Ed. I. Prins. Par Reg. p. 26.28.30. Ed. I. ib. p. 586. Parl. Reg. 8. Ed.
II. 887. Rot. cl. 15. E. II. Rot. cl. 2. E. III. Rot. cl. 50. E. III. p. 588.
Rot. Pat. 42. E. III. p. 599. Rot. Pat. 17. Ed. III. Rot. Parl. 51. E. III. p.
605. A Regency, W. legal, or practicable in England* upon King James's
departure, D. 12. p. 877. Religion, in what Cases we are bound to suffer for
it, without any resistance, D. 4. p. 222. to 235. The Remedies against Tyranny,
the People of England can have without Resistance, considered, D. 4. p. 262. to
664. Resistance of Fathers, Husbands, and Masters, by their Wives, Children,
and Servants, W. ever lawful, D. 1. p. 41. to 44. to 52.60. Resistance of the
Supreme Powers, in what cases absolutely lawful, D. 3. p. 146. to 149* D. 4. p.
270. In what cases absolutely unlawful, D. 3. p. 176, 177. All the evil
Consequences of such Resistance considered, D. 4. p. 261. to 264. D. 9. p. 649,
659 to 666. W. All resistance be forbidden by God in the Old Testament, D. 3.
p. 190. to the end. W. Forbidden by the word of God in the New Testament, D. 4.
p. 220. to 264. W. Contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of England, Ib. p.
283. Resistance of the King, and those in Commission by him, W. absolutely
^orbid by the Statute of the seventh of Edward the First, against bearing of
Arms, D. 8. p. 612. W. Contrary to the 25th of Edward the Third, concerning
Treasons, Ib. to the end. Resistance of Arbitrary Power in our Kings, W. lawful
both before, and since the Conquest, D. 9. p. 615, to 637. Such Resistance
granted to be lawful by some of our Kings themselves, D. 9. p. 617.620.622.
Rights and Liberties of the Subject, what they are. D. 9. p. 666, to 669. Rolls
Clause, how many wanting in the Reigns of King John, and Henry the Third, D. 7.
p. 517, 518.
S
Sapientes, its signification in Ancient Histories, D. 6. p. 377. Late Schism
upon the Deprivation of the Bishops, W. justifiable, D. 13. p. 963, to 966.
Scotland, W. its ancient constitution were the same with England, D. 7. p. 503.
to 505. D. 8. p. 559. W. None but Tenants in Capite ever appeared at the Great
Councils of the Kingdom, Ib. to 510. Scutage Service, W. different from a
Scutage Tax, D. 7. p. 439. to 440.479. to 481. Sermons for the Kings Absolute
Power, censured in Parliament, D. 1. p. 5. Servants, and Sons, W. all one in
the State of Nature, D. 1. p. 54. Sheriffs Pardoned by Act of Parliament, for
holding above one year, D. 12. p. 821. States General of the United Provinces,
W. their making War upon King James the Second were justifiable, D. 11. p. 781,
782. Ancient Statutes, W. the three Estates have not always given their Assent
to them, as well as the King, D. 5. p. 330. to 348. Notwithstanding the
different forms of Penning them, Ibid. D. 7. p. 484, 485.525.528, 529. Statue
of the Eleventh of Henry the Seventh, Cap. 1. W. still in force, D. 13. p. 909.
to 933. Statute of the Thirteenth of Elizabeth, Chap. 1. W. still in force, D.
12. p. 894. to 898. All Statutes though made by Usurpers, W. they hold good
till repealed, D. 12. p. 909, 911, 912. Doctor Stories Case, D. 13. p. 950.
Subjects, how different from Slaves, D. 4. p. 251. to 261. W. Particular
Subjects may resist the Supreme Powers for satisfaction of their own private
injuries, D. 4. p. 252. Succession to Crowns, no certain procepts to be found
about it in Scripture, or the Law of Nature, D. 2. p. 89. to 90. Succession to
the Crown of England, W. always Hereditary since the Conquest, without any
vacancy of the Throne, D. 12. p. 839, to 875. Sufferings of Christ, how far an
Example to us, D. 4. p. 227. to 233. Suffering for Religion without Resistance,
when necessary, Ib. p. 231.
T
Tenants in Capite, W. they were all Barons, D. 6. p. 399.400. W. They could
anciently Tax, the whole Kingdom at their pleasure, as well the Lands held of
them, as what was not, D. 7. 440.479. to 483.500. W. They, or else Tenants by
Knights service, were anciently the only Persons who served upon Iuries, D. 10.
p. 741. to 746. W. They represented all their under Tenants in Parliament, D.
7. p. 512. Tenants in S^^age, W. they were bound by the Acts of those of whom
they held their Estates, D. 6. p. 420. Tenants in Demesne claimed to be
discharged from the Knights Wages by prescription, D. 8. p. 588, 589. Tenure by
Knights service, W. in use before King Will. I. D. 10. p. 750, 751. A new Test
Oath opposed by a great party of the Poe^s in the Reign of King Charles the
Second, D. 9. p. 659. Testaments, W. valid in the mere State of Nature, D. 2.
p. 86, 87, 91. The several Texts of Scripture made use of for, or against
absolute Non-resistance, examined; viz. in the Old Testament, D. 3. p. 190. to
the end. Texts of Scripture out of the New Testament, urged for the like
purpose, D. 4. p. 220. to 279. Thanes, the ancient signification of that Title
discussed, D. 6. p. 374. to 379. The diverse sorts of them amongst the English
Saxons, D. 5. p. 370. Treason against the Kingdom, anciently as well as against
the King, D. 5. p. 344. Trials by Combat, W. in use before the Conquest, D.
10. p. 758. Trust committed by the People to the Supreme Powers, W.
unaccountable, and irrevocable, D. 3. p. 152.154. Insupportable Tyranny, W.
worse than the State of Nature, Ib. 155. Tyrants, W. Ordained of God, D. 4.
245, 246.
U
Vavasors, or mesne Tenants, W. anciently reckoned as part of the Baronage of
the Kingdom, D. 6. p. 405, 406. Universitas Baronagii Angliae, and Regni, what
it signified, and W. the Commons were comprehended under that Title, D. 6. p.
408, 409, 415, 416. Universitas Communis, the meaning of that Phrase in Matthew
Paris, D. 7. p. 470. W. It comprehended no more than the less Tenants in
Capite, Ib. 471. Primate Ushers Opinion in his Treatise of the Power of the
Prince, and Obedience of the Subject considered. D. 4. p. 271, 272. Usurpers by
Sir R. Filmers Principles, to be obeyed before the Lawful Prince, and his
Heirs, D. 2. p. 126, 127. When Usurpers may be obeyed before the Lawful Prince,
and his Heirs, D. 4. p. 246. Usurpation, W. it gives a rightful Title after
three Generations, D. 2. p. 128. Vulgus, what that word signified in the Latin
Translation of the Old CoronationOath, D. 8. p. 560. to 563.
W
Wales, W. its Titular Prince be really Son to King James the Second, and Queen
Mary, D. 11. p. 784 to 789. W. He ought to have been received as the true Son
and Heir of the said King, D. 12. p. 875. to 877. and that, let the
consequences be what they will, Ib. p. 879. to 881. Wardship, Marriage, and
Relief, W. wholly derived from the Normans, D. 10. p. 750.751. Its advantages
and inconveniences considered, Ib. A Wife, W. she can ever be discharged from
the Power her Husband has over her in the state of Nature, by any means, but
by his express consent, D. 1. p. 43. King William the First, why styled the
Conqueror, D. 5. p. 325. W. He claimed to be King of England by Donation of
King Edward the Confessor, or by Conquest, D. 10. p. 715.718, 719. W. He was
ever Elected, and took the same Coronation Oath, as the English Saxon Kings had
done before, D. 10. p. 716.722. to 737. W. He might justly have seized all the
Lands in England to his own use, D. 2. p. 171. W. He gave most of the Lands of
England to his followers, Ibid. p. 721, to 729. and to 747. W. He altered any
thing in the fundamental constitution of the Government, D. 5. p. 320. to 322.
W. He altered all the Old Laws of England, or confirmed those of King Edward,
D. 10. p. 737. to 760. His Second Oath upon the Relics of St. Alban, Ib. 761,
762. His Laws concerning all Freemens exemption from Taxes upon their finding
Arms, D. 6. p. 426, 427. W. He and his Son William Rufus made Laws, and imposed
Taxes, without the consent of the Great Council, D 10. p. 744, 755. King
William the Third, W. he has any Title by Conquest over King James, or else
from his Marriage with the Princess, and the Act of the Convention, D. 12. p.
883. to 899. His Religion, and Principles vindicated, Ib. 886, 887. Wites, or
Wisemen in the English Saxon Councils, the true signification of that term, D.
6. p. 373. to 378. Wittena a Gemots, or Great Councils among the English
Saxons, W. they consisted of more than the higher Nobility, Ib. p. 381. Wives,
how far obliged to be obedient to the Commands of their Husbands, D. 1. p. 40.
Writ of Summons to the Commmons, of the 49th of Henry the Third, W, it was the
first of that kind, D. 7. p. 519. to 521. W. Any Writs of Summons of Bishops or
Lords, to Parliament, are to be found before that time, Ib. p. 516. Writ of the
19th of Henry the Third to the S^eriffs, to levy two Marks Scutage upon Tenants
by Knights Service, holding of Tenants in Capite, Ib. 445* Writ of the 24th of
Henry the Third, commanding all Men holding a whole Knights Fee of whatsoever
Tenure to be Knighted, D. 6. p. 432. Writs of Summons to Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses, to Parliament at Shrewsbury, in the 11th of Edward the First, D. 8.
p. 574. Writ of Summons to Knights of Shires (cited by Dr. B.) in the 18th of
Edward the First, W. it was to a Parliament, D. 7. p. 530. to 536. Writ of the
22d of Edward the First, W. a Summons to Parliament. D. 7. p. 533, 534. Writ of
the 30th of Edward the First, commanding the Levying of Forty Shillings upon
each Knights Fee, which had been granted ever since the Eighteenth, Ibid. p.
479. W. The Commons Granted that Tax, Ibid. Writs of the 28th of Edward the
First, and 45th of Edward the Third, W. of Summons to Parliaments, Ib. 537.
Writs for Expenses to Knights of Shires, how ancient, D. 8. p. 589. to 591.
Y
Duke of York, Richard his Title declared in Parliament, D. 12. p. 863. Edward
Duke of York, Recognized by Parliament, to be lawful King, from the Death of
his Father, Richard Duke of York, Ib. p. 865. Duke of York James, W. he was not
entirely in the French Interest, and Designs, before he came to the Crown, D.
11. p. 802.
AN APPENDIX, Containing some Authorities sit to be added, for farther
confirmation of some things laid down in the foregoing Dialogues.
TO be added to Dialogue the Fourth, p. 290. at the end of F -- s Speech,
[after these words] no particular Church can, read thus,

And that diverse of the most Eminent Divines of our Church have used the same
freedom with several other Doctrines contained in these Homilies, may appear
from Dr. Hammonds, Dr. Heylins, and Dr. Tailors, with several other Eminent
Writers, expressly denying, that the Church of Rome is guilty of Idolatry, or,
that the Pope is Antichrist; though both these Doctrines are as plainly laid down
in the Vide 2d Vol. of Homil. 1st, 2d, and 3d part of the Sermons against
Idolatry, especially the last, p. 156.162, 163.
Homilies, as the Doctrine of Non-Resistance. And yet none of these Men are
ever taxed by those of the Church of England, for quitting her Ancient Orthodox
Doctrines; and I desire you to give me a good Reason (if you can) why it is
more lawful and excusable to part with the former of these Doctrines, than the
latter?

The like I may say also for the Doctrine of Predestination; which tho expressly
asserted in the 36 Articles of the Church of England, as interpreted by all the
Bishops, and Writers, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and King James, as also
the Bishops and Divines sent as Delegates from our Church, to the Synod of
Dort, who joined in the interpretation of that Article, in the strict
Calvinistical sense; you find in all the determinations of that Synod against
the Doctrines of the Arminians, which then began to prevail; yet since the time
that Archbishop Laud had the nominating of what Persons he thought fit to be
made Bishops, Deans, etc. not one in ten of them but have been Arminians in all
those Points, wherein they wholly differ from the Doctrine of Calvin, which is
but the same with that of our 36 Articles so interpreted; yet none of the
Divines of our present Church, who hold these Opinions, are branded with
Apostasy from its Ancient Doctrine; but if any well meaning Divine, out of love
to his Country, and to prevent Popery and Slavery from breaking in upon us,
have but Preached or Published any thing in derogation to these Darling
Doctrines of Passive Obedience, and Non-Resistance, he is straight branded with
Apostasy from the Church, in quitting its main distinguishing Character; and we
have lately seen Degrading, nay, the most cruel Whipping, and Imprisonment
thought too little for such a Man; but one may say of some Men with truth
enough, Dat veniam Corvis, vexat censura Columbis.


So Dialogue the Sixth, p. 397. at the bottom, [after these words] in those
times, read this,

But that the House of Commons were anciently often comprehended under the
style of Grantz (which is the same with Magnates in Latin) pray consult the
Parliament Rolls of Edward the Third, N. 6.
where you will find in the 4 th of that King, this passage; and est assentu,
and accord per nostre and Seigneur le Roy, and tous les Grantz in pleyn
Parliament; (that is, in full Parliament, where both Lords and Commons were
present) that the Proceedings of the Lords against those that were no Peers
should not be drawn into Example, etc. Now pray see the Commentaries of the
most Learned and Reverend Author of the Grand Question, P. 115.
upon these words in this Record; This has all the formality of an Act of
Parliament, and therefore all the Estates were present, so likewise in the same
year; in the next Roll but one; N. 8.
Accord est per nostre Seigneur le Roy, and son Counsel in Plein Parliament;
which was an Act of Parliament, concerning those that had followed the Earl of
Lancaster. N. 10.
So in the 5 th of this King, we have the particular mention of the Bishops, as
some of those who make a full Parliament; Accord est per nostre Seigneur le
Roy, Prelates, Counts, Barons, and autres Grands de Roia^me in pleyn
Parliament. N. 5.
So in the 6 th of Edward the Ill d, the Archbishop of Canterbury made his
Oration in pleyn Parliament, which is thus explained, en le presence nostre
Seigneur le Roy, and tous les Prelates, and autres Grantz. And in another Roll,
si est accord and assentu per tous in pleyn Parliament; N. 9.
and who these were, we are told in the same Roll; viz. les Prelates, Counts,
Barons, and tous les autres Summons a misme Parliament.

Now this is the clearest explication of these words in full Parliament, viz.
in the presence of all those who were Summoned; so that if the Commons were
then Summoned to this Parliament, (as certainly they were) they must have given
their Assents under the Title of Grantz; since the Prelates, Earls, and Barons
were particularly mentioned before.

To Dialogue the 10 th, p. 706. after these words, be Reformed by them, or not,
read thus,

And that King James the First, himself was satisfied of this Original
Contract, may appear by his own words, in a Speech to both Houses of
Parliament, 1609. where he expressly tells them, that the King binds himself by
a double Oath to the observation of the fundamental Laws of his Kingdom,
Tacitly, as being a King, and so bound to Protect, as well the People, as the
Laws of his Kingdom; and expressly by his Oath at his Coronation; so as every
King in a settled Kingdom, is bound to observe that paction made to his People
by his Laws, in framing the Government as agreeable thereunto, according to
that paction which God made with Noah after the Deluge, etc.

To Dialogue 12. p. 874. after their Successors, add this.

So that all the Modern Acts of Parliament for intailing the Crown, being made
and ordained by the Counsel and Assent of the Lords, and Commons, are so many
plain declarations, and evident Recognitions, what the Fundamental Constitution
of the English Government was in that grand Point.

To Dialogue the 12 th, p. 898. after the words of the said Parish, read thus;
and that not only all the Private Acts of that Parliament, but some Public
ones also, though never confirmed in the following Parliament of the 13th of
Charles the Second, are yet held good in Law, appears by these that follow, viz.

12. Car. 2. c. 3.
1. An Act for Continuance of Process, and Judicial Proceedings, Continued.

By which, all Writs, Pleas, Indictments, etc. then depending, were ordered to
stand, and proceeded on, notwithstanding want of Authority in the late
Usurpers; and therein it was farther ordained, that Process and Proceedings in
Courts of Justice, should be in the English Tongue, and the general Issue be
Pleaded, till August 1. 1660. as if the Acts made during the Usurpation, for
that purpose, had been good and effectual Laws.

And upon this foot only, stand many Fines, Recoveries, Judgments, and other
Proceedings at Law had and passed between April 25, 1660, and August 1. 1660.

12. Car. 2. c. 17.
2. An Act for Conforming and Restoring of Ministers.

This Act is usually to this day, set forth and pleaded in Quare impedits, though
it was said to be refused upon debate to be confirmed in the House of Commons,
13th of Car. II. when diverse other Acts of the same time were confirmed; 13.
Car. 2. c. 17. etc.
yet both these Acts having no other Authority but from that Convention (as you
call it) have been Judged and Constantly allowed to be good Laws, for above
these 30 years.

To Dialogue the 13 th, p. 966. after these words, were still alive, read this,

And to show you that the King and Parliament have deprived even Bishops of
their own Communion, and that such deprivations have been held good, and that
the King has nominated new Bishops upon the vacancy, 148. P. 123.
you may see in Dr. Burnets History of the Reformation, and in the Appendix to
it, where you will find a memorable Act of Parliament of the 25 th of Henry the
VIII, (before his departure from his obedience to the Sea of Rome) whereby
Cardinal Campegio, and Hieronimo de Ghinicci were deprived of the Bishoprics
of Salisbury, and Worcester, which they had held for near 20 years, and
Campegio had without doubt been installed in it when he was in England.

The Act it self being so remarkable, I shall give you some passages out of it
verbatim; first the Preamble sets forth, that whereas before this time the
Church of England by the Kings most Noble Progenitors, and the Nobles of the
same, has been founded, ordained, and established in the Estate and degree of
Prelacy, Dignities, and other Promotions Spiritual, etc. (which sufficiently
confirms what I but now asserted, that all the Bishoprics were founded by our
Kings, with the consent of their Grand Councils, or Parliaments) and then it
proceeds to recite, that whereas all Persons promoted to Ecclesiastical
Benefices, ought to reside within the Realm, for Preaching the Laws of Almighty
God, and keeping hospitality; and since these Prelates had not observed these
things, but lived at Rome, and carried the Revenues of their Bishoprics out of
the Kingdom, contrary to the intention of the Founders, and to the great
prejudice of the Realm, etc. in consideration whereof, it is Enacted by the
Authority of this present Parliament, that the said two Sees, and Bishoprics
of Salisbury, and Worcester, and either of them, henceforth shall be taken,
reputed, and accounted in the Law to be void, vacant, and utterly destitute of
any Incumbent, or Prelate, and then follows a Clause enabling the King, his
Heirs, and Successors, to nominate and appoint Successors (being the Natives of
this Realm) to the said Sees, and the King did nominate Successors according to
the said Act.

A Table of ERRATA.
THE Authors Occasions not permitting (...) Town whilst most of these Dialogue*
were in the Press, begs pardon for the many Erratas in some of them, and
desires you to Correct such gross ones, that alter or disturb the sense, viz.

Dial. 1. p. ^0. l, 24. for Author, r. Authority. p. 52. l. 37. for 4th, r.
5th. p. 36. l. 38. for Rights, r. Rites. Dial. 2. p. 80. l. 25. del. hundred, r
thousand, p. 80, l. 22. d. Greek. p. 84. l. 1^, 14. d. Trogus Pampilus, r.
Justin, p. 85. l. 19. after to be, r. Heir. p. 90. d. thought, r. got. p. 92.
l. 6. for Durate. l. ^6. after exercised, r. not. p. 101. l. 43. after no, r.
other. p. 124. l. ^1. for Valentino, r. Valentiniano. p. 134. l. 4. this whole
Paragraph is misplaced, as no where said, and which should be inserted. p. 130.
l. 46. after the words absolute Monarchy. ^ 112. l. 32. d. Paul, r. Peter. p.
134. l. 12 d. but as for the other. p. ^^^. l. 10 after us that, ^. in the time
of p. 136. l. 28. d. I would readily do it. D. 3. in Advertizement works, r.
words. p. 1^1. l. 1. d. but, ^. by. D. 4. p. 224. l. 13. d. ends, r. hands. D.
5. p. 364. at l. 18. d. M. r. F. D. 6. p. 179. l. 1^. d. is plain by, r. is may
be. p. ^^0. l. 18. part of c^^^erunt, r. percu^^erunt. p. 418, l. 35. for soli,
r. solido^. p. 429. l. 35. d. which I now cited, p. 43^, l. 1. which, r. of
which. D. 7. p. p. 600. d. M. r. ^. p. 527. after equivocal, r. words p. ^^2.
l. 40. d. other matters, r. of Summons. D. 9. p. 66^. l. ^0. d. Government, r.
Go^t. ^. ^7^, for the Judges, ^. some of the Judges. D. 10. in the Preface. p.
2. l. i^. d. pretended. ^. late. p. 601. ^. 17. for Monarcho^, r.
Monarchomachos. p. 6^3. l. 43. for volu^tas, r. volunt^^ p. 906 l. ^ule ^. so
Kings. 9. 709. l. 10. d. as r. for which. l. 11. after our r. Norman Kings. p.
7^^. l. 10. ^ r. that ib. l. 39. after English, r. Saxon. ib. their r. the ib.
after An^^^fter. r. of our Kings, 712. l. 14. indefensible, ^.
indefeasibleness. p. 714. l. 11. d. power. p. 712. Gemminicen^^s, r.
Gemeticensts. p. 721. l. 16. after hereditary, r. right. p. 7^^. l. 26. after
these. d. of p. 7^7. l. 19. d. not. lr. r. resistible. p. 731. l. 11. d. not
only gone through, but. p. 712. l. 2. there, r. who there. p. 733, l. 36. d.
but that a residue of the English. ib. l. 37 after signified, r. something. p.
734. Chalow^, r. Chalices. l. ulr. hiberasque r. liberas^* p. 735. Albi^^, r.
Albint. p. 736, l. 18. Dreugari^, r. Drungarii. Dreuch^^, r. Drenches, l. 19.
r. Drenges. p. 737. l. 14. after leaf, r. observes. p. 739. l. 92. ordinal, r.
(...). p. 740. l. 8. d. that. r. it so. p. 743. l. 15. Tests, r. Teste^. l. 41.
d. by virtue of p. 746. ^ a that, r. then that. l. 4. were, r. who were. p.
750. l. 10. ^. not. p. 7^1^ l. ^. d. that we may in ^. of l. 41. d. so as, r.
these. p. 42. d. provided, r. reserved. p. 7^^. l. ^. d. as well as, r. thus.
lb. the work, r. this work. p. 755. l. 31. d. Peptilo, r. weregild, ib. after
A^^^sta^, (...), ^. thus, after that time, instead of Fines. Corporeal
Punishments came in use. p. 7^9. l. 13. d. either. p. 760. l. 26. d. that, r.
falfity. D. 11. p. 782. l. 21. after you, r. affirm, p. 807. d. decrees, r.
duresse. p. 821. l. 34. d. Act, r. first. D. 12. p. 886. l. ^5. d, VI, r. IV.
p. 888. l. to after a^, r. as well as D. 13. Preface, p. 5. l. 23. for, r.
(...) p 913. l. 8. d. their, r. his.


