

THE General History OF ENGLAND AS WELL Ecclesiastical as Civil. From the
Earliest Accounts of Time, To the Reign of his Present Majesty King WILLIAM.
Taken from the most ANCIENT RECORDS, MANUSCRIPTS, and HISTORIANS. Containing
the LIVES of the KINGS, and MEMORIALS of the most EMINENT PERSONS both in
CHURCH and STATE: With the Foundations of the NOTED MONASTERIES, and both the
UNIVERSITIES.

VOL. I.

By JAMES TYRRELL, Esquire

LONDON, Printed for Henry Rhodes in Fleetstreet, John Dunton in (...), John
Salusbury in Cornhil, and John Harris in (...) MDCXCVI

Collegium Emmanuelis Cantabrigiae
Emmanuel College coat of arms or blazon

To the Right Honorable THOMAS Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery; Baron Herbert
of Caerdiff; Lord Rosse, Par, Marmion, St. Quintin and Shurland; Lord
Privy Seal; Lord Lieutenant of the County of Wilts, and South Wales; and One of
his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
MY LORD,
IT having been usual to dedicate Works of public Use and Benefit to great
Persons, eminent for Virtue, Learning and Nobility, I think my self happy under
the Obligation of that Custom; since it somewhat excuses, as well as encourages
my Presumption, to lay this Performance at your Lordship's Feet.

I am sure it could not be honored with a more agreeable Name:

A Name so universally known, that all Men acknowledge your Lordship to be
signally endued with those excellent Qualities, which render you not only a
great Master in the most useful Parts of Learning, but likewise incline you to
a generous Encouragement of all those who have any pretense to them. Which
Favor, your Lordship having been pleased to confer on me, among several others
of greater Merit, gives me the more Confidence to address this first Volume of
our English History to your Lordship's Patronage: for as no Person has been
more conversant in things of this Nature than your self; so I know none more
able to make a right Judgment of them.

And tho I will not affirm this to be an Exact History according to the strict
Rules of Art, yet if I were conscious to my self, that it was wholly unworthy
your Acceptance, I should derogate very much from that Respect which is so
justly due to your Lordship's Character.

But if the not Writing any thing which I did not believe to be true, nor the
concealing any thing useful to the World, that is so, might qualify me for an
Historian, perhaps then I may have some pretense to that Title. However, your
Lordship will here meet with a faithful Account of all the chief Actions and
Revolutions, that have happened in this Kingdom down to the Norman William. As
first, the Conquest the Romans made of that part of Britain we now call
England; then their quitting it after a long Possession, in order to secure
their Empire at Home from the Insults of so many barbarous Nations: after which
followed the calling in of the Saxons to assist the Britains. And lastly, from
the formers quarrelling with the latter, ensued their total Expulsion out of
the best and most fertile parts of this Island.

As for the Invasions by the Danes under King Cnute, and by the Normans under
King William, commonly called the Conqueror; though it must be granted, that
these Princes were victorious by their Arms, yet was not this Nation subdued by
either of them so entirely, as that its Submissions could properly be styled
Conquests, but rather Acquisitions gained by those Princes upon certain
Compacts between them and the People of England; both Parties standing obliged
in solemn Oaths, mutually to perform their parts of the Agreement, as will be
clearly seen in the Sequel of this History.

Yet I doubt not but in these great Revolutions, your Lordship will take
notice, that the People of this Kingdom were never overcome by Strangers, till
their Luxury softning their warlike Tempers, and producing a careless
Administration of their Affairs, had made them an easy Prey to their Invaders:
This I observe not to reproach, but to warn our Nation, lest by the like
Miscarriages they should incur the like Punishments.

I have now no more, but to beg your Lordship's Acceptance of this Dedication,
as a Tribute justly yours, by reason of those great Obligations, for your so
freely communicating to me some part of your uncommon Knowledge, whenever I have
had the Happiness of your excellent Conversation;

An Honor, which engages me to own my self, with the utmost Respect,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most humble and most obedient Servant, James Tyrrell.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THO it has been a general Complaint of the most Learned and Judicious Men of
this Nation, that we have extremely wanted an exact Body of English History in
our own Language, for the Instruction and Benefit of our Nobility and Gentry,
together with others who would be glad to understand by it the Original
Constitutions and Laws of their own Country; yet since perhaps some ordinary
Readers may be inclined to think this Work unnecessary, because it has been
already performed by so many different Hands; I shall therefore in the first
Place say somewhat to obviate and remove this seeming Objection.

THOSE that are any thing conversant in our Historians, do know that the
Writers in English, especially of this Period now published, are not many. As
for Caxton, Fabian, and others of less Note, (who are very short, and now read
but by few) I shall pass them by, and only mention Grafton and Hollingshead,
the former of whom lived in the Reign of Henry VIII. and the latter in that of
Queen Elizabeth. And of these I need not say much: for tho they contain a great
deal of Matter, very curious and fit to be known, especially relating to the
Times wherein they lived, yet not only their dry and uncouth way of Writing,
and dwelling so long on the exploded Fables of Geoffrey of Monmouth, but the
stuffing of their Histories with diverse mean and trivial Relations unworthy the
Dignity of their Subject, have rendered their Labors tedious, and in a great
measure unuseful to their Readers.

BUT as for Stow and Speed, who wrote in the time of King James the First, it is
true the former of them is not so long and tiresom in Geoffrey's Stories, as
those abovementioned; and it must be confessed that Mr. Speed was the first
English Writer, who, slighting Geoffrey's Tales, immediately fell upon more
solid Matter; giving us a large Account of the History of this Island during
the Time of the Roman Emperors, and English Saxon Kings; and had he not, by
making his Reader follow those Emperors in all their Foreign Wars and
Expeditions, wherein Britain was no way concerned, he had rendered his Work less
Irksome, and more Profitable than now it is.

BUT notwithstanding both these Writers had many choice Collections of Noble
Manuscripts relating to our English History, and might have had the View of
several others if they would have been at the Pains of seeking after them; yet
it must be owned they did not make that Improvement of those Opportunities as
might have been expected from such great Assistances; there being not much to
be found material (...) either of them, but what was in the other Histories
before published: though this must be allowed in their Commendation, that they
are both of them (especially the former) commonly right in their Ch^onologi^^,
and the latter has given us a choice Coll^ction of the Ancient C^ins of the
Roman Emperors, as well as of the English Saxon Kings; an^ has been also more
exact than any other Writer, in his Account of their Wives and Issue.

AND as for those who wrote in the Time of K. Charles the First, viz. Mr.
Daniel, and Sir Richard Baker; the Relations they have afforded us of those
Kings, are rather short Abstracts of their Reigns, than just Histories, it not
being their Design to write at large of that Period we here treat of.

BUT since the Restoration of K. Charles the Second, there are several who have
undertaken this Province, the first of whom was Mr. Milton; and it must be
acknowledged, that he wrote this English Saxon History with Judgment, though
not with that (...) and ^^^ctness as we may see he did his other Works of a
different Nature; since either through want of Opportunity to consult Ancient
Manuscripts, (several of which have been published since he wrote) or else by
not making use of those Authors he might have had, and by confining himself too
much to the relating of Military Matters, and almost wholly neglecting
Ecclesiastical Affairs, or looking into those things which he by way of
Contempt called Cathedral Registers; as also by omitting the giving us any
Account of the An^ient Saxon Laws, and Original Constitutions of this Kingdom;
he has thereby rendered that Work much more dry and imperfect than otherwise no
doubt it would have been from such a Pen as his.

THE next that succeeded him in this Labor was Mr. Sammes, who had a fair
Opportunity of improving his History, by amending Mr. Milton's Omissions; but
instead of this, by indulging himself too much in the Relation of, and giving
Credit to Geoffrey of Monmouth, and White (that called himself Basingstoke)
their old Stories, and by making long and unnecessary Excursions on the
Antiquity and Original of the Greeks, Romans and Saxons, as likewise of their
Religion and Manners (things altogether foreign to this Subject) tho he has
shown a great deal of Reading, yet having been all the while very short in that
which ought to have been the main Business of his History, he has thereby
spoiled a Noble Design.

IT IS true, the Learned Dr. Howell, in the second and third Volumes of his
General History, has given us a faithful Account of the Affairs of Britain,
from the Coming in of the Romans, as far as the Norman Conquest; and has also
a very elaborate Discourse of their Civil Policy and Laws: and had that Work
been done by it self, and not involved in such large Volumes, (but written in a
more Chronological Method) and had he not laid the History of each Kingdom of
the English Saxon Heptarchy separately and apart, which makes him often guilty
of diverse unnecessary Repetitions; that Work would have proved much more useful
than now it is: which being observed by many others besides my self, has
caused a certain Clergyman (as I hear) to undertake the Epitomizing of that
whole Work, which would be very useful to those ordinary Readers who cannot
well purchase these larger Volumes.

BUT since these Learned and Ingenious Authors have in some Point or other here
mentioned been deficient in this Undertaking, I found it requisite (for the
making a full and complete History of the Affairs contained in this Volume)
rather wholly to erect a new Edifice, than to be at the Trouble of altering of
theirs; and therefore have thought it necessary to draw this Work afresh from
the same Originals from which they had taken theirs. To which I have also added
several other material Passages, that either they wanted the Happiness of
seeing, or else would not be at the Pains and Expense I have been at to peruse;
not but that I must own my self much beholding to them for diverse Choice
Remarks and Observations; which, not to be thought guilty of Plagiary, I have
noted in the Margin by the Initial Letters of their Names; and have likewise
sometimes taken their Translations of a few diverting Legends or Stories, to
spare my self the Trouble of making them anew: and even these I have also
compared with the Originals, and corrected the Style, as well as the Sense, in
diverse Places.

BUT I cannot here omit taking notice (among other Writers) of the first Part
of Dr. Brady's complete History of England, which, tho it comprehends the same
Period of Time as this we now present you with; yet seeing he has there rather
chosen to give us an Account of the Political Government, and Laws of the
German and English Saxons, than to write an Entire History of those Times; I
beg his Pardon, if I do not take it as to that part for so complete a History
as he is pleased to entitle it: however, it must be confessed he has taken
much Pains, and shown a great deal of reading in that Volume; and I could have
wished I might have been able to say, he had been also as careful of the just
Rights and Liberties of his Country, (which he has done all he can to depress)
as he has been in asserting an Imaginary Right of Lineal Succession in our
Kings long before the Conquest; and that before that time as well as after, the
Commons had no Representatives in Parliament; both which Assertions we shall
make bold to examine in our ensuing Introduction. And (tho I have otherwise a
great Value for his Learning, yet) I hope neither he himself, nor any one else
who has a real Concern for the public Good, will take it amiss if I differ
from him, where the Truth of our History, as well as our Ancient Laws and
Constitutions will justify me, in contradicting some Assertions, which he has
with so great an Assurance published to the World.

AND thus having acquainted you with the Defects of these Writers in their
several Undertakings, and the Reasons why it was necessary to compile a new
History; I shall now show you what Method I have followed, and what Authors I
have made use of, in the Performance of it.

AS for the first Book, it is no other than an Epitome of Geoffrey of
Monmouth's pretended British History; and if it had not been more for the
Diversion of the younger sort of Readers, and that the Work would have been
thought by some others to be imperfect without it, I should have been much
better satisfied in wholly omitting it; yet I hope it will neither prove
tedious nor unuseful, since it may sometimes be of Advantage to know Legends as
well as true History; or else which way can one tell how to pass a just Censure
on them?

NOR can we positively affirm, that every thing contained in that Book of his
is absolutely false; for he, being a Person well versed in the History of his
own Country, could not but give us all he knew concerning it, though
interspersed with so many notorious Fables of his own, which he seems to have
interwoven, the better to connect those broken Remains of old Times: But since
no Man can easily at this distance distinguish Truth from Falsehood, he ought to
be dealt with as we do with those who would impose counterfeit Coin upon us; in
refusing the whole Sum, where the greatest part of it is so plainly discernable
to be false.

HERE by the way I must ingenuously own a small Mistake I have committed in the
first Book of this Volume; where speaking somewhat in Defense of this Author,
that he was not the first Inventor of the Story of Brutus, it being also found
in Nennius who lived long before him, and from whom I then supposed Henry of
Huntingdon to have borrowed it; I now perceive upon better Information, that
Geoffrey and H. Huntingdon were not only Cotemporaries, but the latter in that
part of his English History still in Manuscript, (viz. in the Second of his
Epistle, dedicated to one Gwarin a British or Welsh Nobleman) confesses, that
in his Journey to Rome, staying some time by the Way at the Abbey of Bec, he
there found a large Book of this Geoffrey's, (whom he also calls Arthur) who
had copiously and diligently wrote the British History; though in the common
printed Copies we find no more, than that traveling to the Place
abovementioned, he had there met with a certain Volume, in which were diverse
things relating to the British History not before known, but yet without naming
the Author.

THIS I thought good to advertise the Reader of, because those Sheets were
wrought off before ever I was sensible of my Mistake.

AS for my second Book, I can only tell you it is a true and just Translation
of the British History from all the Greek and Roman Authors I could meet with
that have treated of it; from whom also I have given you a Description of the
Manners and Customs of the Ancient Britains: and tho I grant this has been
already attempted by one Daniel Rodgers, whose Papers are in the Cottonian
Library, and is fully performed by Mr. Camden in his Introduction to his
Britannia, and likewise by Mr. Speed before his History; yet I have my self
compared them with the Originals, and added some Remarks, which I thought were
further necessary to be known.

I have begun this Part with Caesar's Relation, as I found it in his
Commentaries concerning his two Expeditions into Britain; and have ended with
the last of the Greek and Roman Historians, viz. Zosimus, Orosius, and Aurelius
Victor.

AND whereas others who have undertaken this Province, have used the Liberty of
Epitomizing or enlarging those Passages they have cited from the Greek and
Latin Authors; I have thought fit faithfully to translate them, except in some
of their long-winded Orations; which, to avoid Prolixity, I thought it better
to abridg, as not believing those Orations to have been delivered in those
Circumstances in which they are now dressed.

AND tho I do not pretend to have added much to what Mr. Camden and Mr. Milton
have already collected from those Writers relating to the History of Britain;
yet I hope I have from several Verses of the Poet Claudian, as also by the
Assistance of those great Masters in Antiquity, the Lord Primate Usher, the
Reverend Dr. Stillingfleet, now Lord Bishop of Worcester, and Dr. Lloyd, now
Lord Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, not only illustrated, but settled
diverse things relating to that part of our Ecclesiastical, as well as Civil
Affairs, not commonly taken notice of before.

IN the beginning of the third Book, I have from Mr. Sheringham's Treatise De
Origin Gentis Anglorum, as also from other Authors, given you, in order to our
English Saxon History, a more Exact Account of the Original of those Nations,
which (when they came over into England) were comprehended under the General
Name of Saxons, than has been hitherto published in our own Language.

AFTER which I have given you a Relation of the Manner of their coming over
hither, and the Ground and Occasion of their quarrelling with the Britains,
from Gildas, Bid and Nennius.

BUT as for the Time of their erecting themselves into an Heptarchy, since it
is not to be learnt from Bid, who is wholly silent of what the Saxons did here
from their first entrance to the Propagation of Christianity, which he made it
his Business chiefly to treat of; I have taken it from the Saxon Annals, as
well as other later Authors that have mentioned any thing of it; though as to
the whole Period of Time contained in this Book, it must be confessed it was
when Letters were not in use amongst them, and therefore could only be conveyed
down by Tradition, which makes us here be beholding to the Annals
abovementioned, or to some Ancient Memoirs, which tho now lost, were certainly
seen by those Writers, who have gathered from them.

INDEED I was somewhat perplexed what Method to take in digesting the History
of seven concurring Kingdoms; since, which way so ever I engaged, I found it
attended with some Inconveniences.

WILLIAM of Malmesbury, and several other Authors, as well in Latin as English,
I know thought it best to give us this History digested under each respective
Kingdom apart; but then there is this Exception against that way of Writing,
that without Chronological Tables, or frequent turning backward and forward,
one cannot understand the Synchronisms of the several Kings Reigns, or the Time
wherein they lived, so as to compare them with others their Cotemporaries.

BESIDES which, there is also a necessity of an unnecessary Repetition of the
same Wars or Transactions, as well under the History of the King that made, as
of him who suffered that Invasion; this appears in Speed, and Dr. Howel. It Is
true, Mr. Speed thought of a good Method to help this, by supposing so many
successive Monarchs to have been always in England, from the Time of Hengest to
K. Egbert, under whose several Reigns he also reduces whatsoever Actions
happened in the rest of all the other subordinate Kings then Regnant. This I
confess had been a very good Expedient to avoid the Difficulties
abovementioned, were it as just as it seems specious: but upon Examination it
will be found, that tho Bid as well as the Saxon Annals, have given us a
Series of all those Supreme Kings, whom some of the Modern Writers are pleased
to call Monarchs; yet, as I have sufficiently shown in this ensuing History,
they could by no means deserve that Title; since it may be clearly seen by any
one who will peruse Mr. Speed, that there were sometimes Intervals of ten or
twenty Years, before such a victorious Prince could make all the rest by the
Terror of his Arms submit themselves to him; which yet they never all did till
the Reign of King Egbert, without preserving entire all their Royal Rights and
Prerogatives over their own Subjects.

AND besides, this Power owing its Original wholly to Force, and not to a
Lineal Succession or Election over the rest of those Princes upon whom it was
usurped, was without any Just or Legal Right, and consequently lasted no longer
than the Success, or at farthest the Lifetime of such a Conquering Prince; and
then it was for a time Extinct, until some other of the Seven by the like
success of his Arms, could set up for the same Power and Greatness.

SO that at length we found, that the best way of Writing this History was to
follow the plain and natural Method of our Saxon Annals, not only as the most
easy for our selves, but also for the Reader.

AND tho perhaps an Objection may be made against this Method, viz. That the
crowding of so many different Actions done in several Places, and under several
Kings, renders the Work perplexed and difficult to be remembered, which I grant
is in part true; yet to obviate this, I have at the end of each of the ensuing
Books (except the last) presented you with exact Chronological Tables, not only
of the Names of all the Kings contained under each Period, but also in what
Year of our Lord they began and ended their Reigns; so that the Reader by
casting his Eye upon any one of them, may easily find what Kings lived and
reigned together, and consequently in which of their Reigns any Action related
in the History was performed. And now,

TO come to the fourth Book, Bid being the most ancient Author that gives us
an Account of what was done in this Period, and out of whom the Saxon Annals
themselves have borrowed almost the greatest part of what they relate,
concerning those early Times of Christianity; I have therefore wholly confined
my self to him, without having recourse to these Annals, or any other, unless
it be where I find they relate any Action of which he has been wholly silent.
But in this Period, I cannot but mention Stephen Eddi, or Heddi, a Monk; who,
as Bede tells, was one of the first Masters for Singing in the Northumbrian
Churches; and having been invited by Wilfred Archbishop of York out of Kent for
that purpose, had so great a Veneration for his Memory, that he wrote his Life
in Latin, in a Style somewhat better than could be expected from that Age: this
Treatise having continued in Manuscript in the Library of Sir Jo. Cotton, and
also of that of Salisbury, has lately been published by the Learned Dr. Gale,
in his last Volume of English Writers; and to which I must own my self
beholding for many choice Passages relating to the Ecclesiastical, as well as
Civil State in those Times: this Author flourished cotemporary with Bid, in
the Reign of Osric King of Northumberland, and died about Anno. Dom. 720.

BUT indeed as for the last forty Years, or thereabouts, viz. from the Time
when Bid ceased to write, which was Anno Dom. 637. we have been forced to make
use of the Annals, or else of those of later Writers that have made any
Additions to them.

WHICH Annals, since I found them the Storehouse, or Repository, from whence
most (if not all) of our Latin Historians, as well those that wrote before, as
since the Conquest, have borrowed the earliest Accounts of our English Saxon
Affairs; I have by the advice of Persons of much greater Learning and Judgment
than my self, rather chose to translate and give you them almost entire, as I
find them in the Edition lately published, than to (do as most other Writers)
cite them at second Hand; not that I have omitted setting down whatsoever any
other Authors have added to these Annals by way of Improvement or Illustration.

WHEREFORE to avoid stuffing my Margins with unnecessary Quotations, I desire
my Reader once for all, to observe, that wheresoever he shall find the Lines
Comma'd, (unless they be before some Speeches or Laws) they always denote the
Saxon Annals, whether expressly mentioned or not, as also in all other places,
tho not Comma'd, where no other Writer is cited.

BUT if some think I have inserted too many Names of Authors into the Body of
this History, and that it had been better omitted there, and put into the
Margin, or bottom of the Pages; to this I answer, that intending faithfully to
translate these Annals, and to make such frequent use of them as I have done,
there could be no way to distinguish them from other Writers, but either by
Letters in the Margin, or else by setting them in a different Character. But as
the former would have been a constant and unsightly clog to the Margin, so the
other would have looked as unhandsome in the Body, and especially at the latter
end of the Work, where these Annals alone take up several whole Pages.

AND tho in my Citations of Authors I have seldom quoted the Page, yet having
taken what I write from those who have wrote in a Chronological Method, the
Reader by turning to the Years of our Lord, may easily find what he looks for,
making some small allowance for different Accounts; and where other Authors
have not taken that Course, I have there quoted the Chapter or Book, and in
matters of greater Moment the very Page.

BUT that even the Annals themselves do vary from each other in Account of
Time, often one, and sometimes two or three Years, that is to be ascribed
either to the fault of the several Amanuenses, or else to the different
Calculations of those Monks, who drew them up in the Form we now have them, as
any may easily perceive that will give himself the Trouble to compare the
various Readings of the several Copies of these Annals, lately published at
Oxford by the Ingenious Mr. Edmund Gibson.

IN the fifth and sixth Books, as I have endeavored faithfully to translate
the same Annals, so I have also used that Liberty, as not slavishly to confine
my self to the very Words themselves, when either the Obscurity or Vncouthness
of the Phrase would not bear a literal Translation, but I thought I could give
them a better turn.

AND here, as also in the two preceding Books, I have often added by way of
Illustration to the Text, the present proper Names of Places in a Parenthesis
immediately after the obsolete Saxon ones, as also the Titles of the Ealdormen,
or Earls, Bishops and Abbots, out of Florence of Worcester, and other Authors,
where the Annals have only given their bare Names, without telling us to what
Places they belonged; and here likewise I would note, That in all Saxon words,
where the Letter (C) is made use of, it is always pronounced like (K), there
being no K in that Language. And as for the Saxon Names of Men made use of in
the Annals, I have as near as I could faithfully kept to the Saxon Original,
tho they often differ very much in their way and manner of spelling them from
that of those Latin Authors that translate them.

HAVING thus given you a short Account of the several Books into which I have
divided this Volume, I will now proceed to acquaint you with the rest of my
Authors from whom I have collected it; nor will I give you only their Names,
which has been done by so many already, but a brief Censure of them and their
Works, and in what Time they wrote, being such as lived either before or after
the Conquest: Of the former sort there are but few, since from Bid to Asser.
Menev. there flourished no general Historian; for William of Malmsbury himself
confesses, that after Bid, all liberal Studies more and more declining, those
that followed spent their Lives in Idleness or Silence: yet during even that
Period, there were some Writers of this kind, viz. certain Monks in the greater
Monasteries, whose business it was to set down in short, by way of Annals, the
most remarkable Passages of their own Times in their own Language; nay,
Learning was in that King's Reign fallen to so low an Ebb, Vid. Append. 3. ad
vit. Alfredi.
that even King Alfred tells us in his Preface to the Saxon Version of
Gregory's Pastoral, That in the beginning of his Reign, there were few on this
side Humber who could understand their own Prayers, much less turn a piece of
Latin into English, and where then were our supposed flourishing Universities?

AND I shall here begin with Asserius Menevensis, who was so called because he
was a Monk of Menevia or St. David's. This was he who being sent for by King
Alfred out of Wales, assisted him in his Studies, and besides taught his
Children, and others of the Nobility, Latin: after this King Alfred sent him
with others to fetch Grimbald out of Flanders into England; Vid. Gorcelin in
vit. Grimbaldi.
and after the Schools were opened at Oxford, the latter there professed
Divinity, and the former Grammar and Rhetoric, as you may find in the Annals
of Hyde, cited in the ensuing History.

THIS Monk, being Learned above the Age in which he lived, first wrote the
Annals that go under his Name; which having long continued in the Cottonian and
other Libraries in Manuscript, have been lately published by the Learned Dr.
Gale, in his last Volume of Historians printed at Oxon. After these Annals, it
is certain Asser also wrote the whole History of King Alfred's Life, under the
Title of de Gestis Regis Aelfredi, which were first published by the Reverend
Archbishop Parker, in Saxon Characters, according to the Copy now in the
Cottonian Library, and was also again put out by Mr. Camden in another Edition
at Frankford. But it must be confessed there is some difference between these
two Copies concerning the University of Oxford, which is taken notice of in
this Work in its proper Place; but that the Annals abovementioned were written
before his History of King Alfred's Life, Page 491. Edit. Camden.
is plain, for he there refers you to those Annals, which he has also inserted
in the Life almost word for word. But tho the former of these is continued to
the Death of King Alfred, and the latter as far as the 14th Year of the Reign
of K. Edward the Elder: yet it is evident that he himself wrote neither the one
nor the other after the Year 893, being the 45th of King Alfred's Age; and this
appears from the Life it self, in which the Author particularly mentions it,
nor could he extend the Annals any farther, because they were written before he
wrote the Life. This I observe to let the Reader understand, that whatever he
finds farther in the Annals or Life, (the Substance of both which I have given
him in this Volume) were continued by some other Hand; and as for the Annals
they sufficiently declare it; for toward the latter end, under Anno Dom. 909.
you may meet with this Passage, hoc Anno Asserius Episcopus Scireburnensis
obiit, which was no other than our Author himself: yet this must be farther
observed of him, that he was so extremely negligent in his Account of Time,
that he begins the first Year of King Alfred's Reign, sometimes at one Year of
our Lord, and sometimes at another, so that no Man can tell by him when it
commenced.

BUT why he left off Writing so many Years before King Alfred died, and never
finished his Life though he survived him nine Years, I confess I know not;
unless being preferred, about the Time when he had finished it, to the
Bishopric of Shireburne, he left the King's Service, and going to reside at
his own See had other Business on his Hands than Writing. And that the same
Asser who taught King Alfred, was also by him made Bishop of Shireburne,
appears from this King's Preface to the Saxon Translation of St. Gregorie's
Pastoral, in which he tells you, he was assisted by Plegmund his Archbishop,
and Asser his Bishop, to whom the said King in his Will, (after the Archbishop
and some other Bishops) bequeathed a 100 Marks, by the Title of Asser Bishop of
Shireburne: from whence it is manifest, that the same Person who was King
Alfred's Instructor, was also Bishop of Shireburne; which Bishopric was
certainly bestowed on him after he had done Writing, since tho he mentions the
Abbeys of Banwell, Ambresbury, and Exceter, to have been bestowed upon him by
the King, yet he is utterly silent of his being made Bishop, which he would not
surely have omitted, if he had been then so preferred; but how long he held
this Bishopric we can say little positively, because we do not find when it
was first given him; but as for the time of his Death, not only the Annals that
go under his Name, but the Saxon Chronicle also, places it under Anno 909. So
that I think there can be no reasonable cause to doubt of that.

BUT what should lead such a careful Chronographer as Florence of Worcester
into so great a Mistake, as to place this Bishop's Death under Anno 883, I know
not, unless he had some other Copies of the Saxon Annals by him than are now
extant, but the Fasti of the Saxon Kings and Bishops published by Sir H. Savil,
at the end of William of Malmesbury, and other Writers are guilty of the like
Mistake, making this Asser to have succeeded Sighelm Bishop of Shireburn, and
to have died Anno 883; whereas it appears from our Annals, that Sighelm (whom
William of Malmesbury makes to be the same Person with the Bishop
abovementioned) this very Year carried King Alfred's Alms to Rome, De Gest.
Pon^. lib. 2.
and afterward went himself as far as India: however this Mistake of Florence,
as also the pretended Authority of our Welsh Chronicle, has (as I suppose) led
diverse other Learned Men (and particularly Bishop Godwin, and Archbishop
Usher) into a Belief of two Assers both Bishops, the one of whom died Anno 883,
and the other to have been Archbishop of St. David's, and to have succeeded
Novis: who (according to the Chronicle of that Church published in the 2d
Volume of Anglia Sacra) died Anno 872; and there immediately follows under Anno
909, Asserius Episcopus Britanniae fit, which must certainly be an Error in
the Monk that wrote this Chronicle; for Asser himself in his Life of King
Alfred, tells us of Hemeid Prince of South Wales, That and Nobis Archiepiscopum
Propinquum meum and me expulit, viz. from the Church of St. David's: which word
Nobis, the Learned Dr. Gale reads Novis, and so makes it good Sense, that
otherwise seems Nonsense in the printed Copies. The false reading of which
Word, as well as this Chronological mistake of Florence abovementioned, Script.
Britan. Cent. 2. cap. 25.
led Bale into the belief that the Archbishop abovementioned must have been
that Asser, whom Caradoc's Chronicle (published by Dr. Powel) makes to have
died Anno Dom. 906. and which Authority led the Lord Primate Usher into that
small Mistake in his Index Chronologicus, at the end of his Britan. Eccles.
Antiquitat. of supposing this Asser to have been the Author of the History of
King Alfred, and not he who was Bishop of Shireburn.

AND the right reading of this word Nobis in Asser, also proves the falsehood of
that Welsh Annal but now mentioned: for if Novis was expelled his Bishopric
not long before Asser was sent for by King Alfred, which was about Anno 885.
then Novis could not be dead in Anno 872. as that Chronicle makes him; nor yet
could Asser succeed Novis, Anno Dom. 909. for then there would have been a
Vacancy of near 40 Years in that See, whereas the Saxon Annals rightly place
the Death of our Asser Bishop of Shireburn under this very Year.

SO that upon the whole Matter, it is the Judgment of the Reverend and Learned
the now Lord Bishop of Litchfield and Coventry, That there never was but one
Asser, who was also Bishop of Shireburn; and that as for this Asser Bishop of
St. David's, he had never any Being in Nature, but in the Brain of some ignorant
Monks, who would for the Honor of their Church have made this Asser to have
been Bishop, not only of St. David's, but of Britain, contrary to the Truth of
all Chronology, as well as Matter of Fact.

I have no more to remark of this Asser, but that Ingulph not only says he was
Bishop of Shireburn, but also Abbot of Bangor, which I find not related by
Asser himself, nor by any other Author; and therefore I look upon it as a
Mistake either in Ingulph or his Transcriber, in writing Bangor instead of
Banwell, which was one of those Abbeys that Asser says King Alfred bestowed
upon him.

FROM this Asser to Ethelwerd, who calls himself Quaestor, (i. e. Treasurer)
and wrote in the beginning of the Reign of King Edgar, being descended from the
Saxon Blood Royal by King Alfred his Great-Grandfather, there flourished no
Historian; nor are we indeed so much the better for him as I could wish, for
unless it be in the right settling of the Reigns and Deaths of some of our
Saxon Kings, who lived not long before him, (about which the several Copies of
the Saxon Annals do differ) there is not much to be learnt from him but what is
in the Annals themselves, or else in the last mentioned Author: from both which
one may perceive that he had borrowed the most part of what he there writes. So
that partly from the affected Obscurity of his Style, and partly from the bad
Copy from which it was printed, (being that which is now in the Cottonian
Library) in many Places we do not understand his meaning; but as far as we are
able to do it, we have given you a true Account of what he has added to this
History.

BUT either from the Laziness or Ignorance of the Monks, who were almost the
only Writers of that Age, from the Time that Ethelwerd left off, to some Years
after the Conquest, we meet with no Historians, except Osbern and another Monk,
that is Anonymous; the former of whom writing the Lives of St. Dunstan and St.
Alphege, has afforded us some Passages relating to this History, as has also
the latter in his Life of St. Dunstan, which is still in Manuscript in the
Cottonian Library: But as for Osbern, he is published in the first Volume of
Anglia Sacra. And from these that Age gives us none, unless the Author (whose
Name we know not) that wrote that short Account of the Times immediately
preceding the Reign of Edward the Confessor, called Encomium Emmae, until
Ingulph Abbot of Croyland finished the History of that Abbey about the latter
end of the Reign of William the First. And tho he did not take upon him to
write a History of more Affairs than those of his own Monastery, yet he has by
the by interspersed many considerable Passages relating to the Public
Transactions of this Kingdom, which I likewise have here inserted.

FROM him to Eadmerus we find no Historian; and He, only relating the
Ecclesiastical History during the Reign of William the First, and his Sons
William Rufus and Henry, is of no use to us in this Volume here published.

IN the beginning of the Reign of Henry the First, we find a most Laborious and
Diligent Chronologer, viz. Florence of Worcester, who continuing and enlarging
the History of Marianus Scotus, has among the various Transactions of the rest
of Europe, given us at the end of almost every Year out of the Saxon Annals, an
exact Account of the Affairs of England; to which he has also added diverse
very curious Memoirs and Illustrations of his own: and besides what is printed,
there is also in Manuscript in the Bodleian Library, a fair and perfect Copy of
this Author, which once belonged to the Monastery of St. Edmundsbury, to which
I have been much beholding, not only for some things concerning that Abbey, but
also for several choice Passages relating to this our History, which are
neither to be found in the printed Editions of this Author, nor any where else
that I know of; therefore wherever the Reader shall meet with any thing cited
from Florence which is not found in Print, he may be assured it is in that
Manuscript, under the Year there set down in the Margin: this I mention, that
the Reader may not be startled, if he does not find the Passage I cite in the
printed Copies, since I had not always time to compare them together.

FLORENCE was immediately followed by Simeon of Durham, who did not only Copy
from him, but also added several Remarkable things particularly relating to the
Northumbrian Kingdom, as well before as after it came under the Government of
Earls. Tho Mr. Seldom in his Preface to the Decem-scriptores, will not allow
this Simeon to have been the Author of this Work, but that he was a Plagiary,
and stole it from Turgot a Monk of the said Church, who was also afterward
ordained Bishop of St. Andrews in Scotland; and Simeon only adding some things
to it of his own, took the whole Honor to himself: his History reaches no
farther than 1129. but was continued by John Prior of Hagulstad to Anno 1154.

TO whom we may adjoin Richard (a Monk of the same Monastery) his History of
the Church of Durham, who has interspersed many excellent Passages concerning
the same Northern Story. Here likewise we may add the Chronicle of the Abbey of
Mailross, which tho wrote by the Abbot of Dundraimon, was certainly collected
out of some much antienter Annals of that Monastery which was then destroyed;
and these together with the last mentioned Authors, have helped us to make up
the Succession of the Northumbrian Kings after Eardulf, that was expelled his
Kingdom Anno 806. from whom our common Writers suppose there was an Interregnum
for the space of above sixty Years, tho by those abovenamed it appears to have
been otherwise, as you may see in the Tables at the end of the last Book.

AFTER these flourished William of Malmesbury, who finished his History in the
Reign of King Stephen; but certainly he began it long before, viz. in the Reign
of Henry the First. To which Learned Monk, being one of the best Writers both
for Judgment and Style of that Age, I must own my self obliged for the best and
choicest Passages in this Volume.

TO him succeeded Henry Archdeacon of Huntington, who wrote a History of the
Kings of England, as well before as after the Conquest, and retiring to Rome
lived there for some time for that purpose. He deduced his History almost to
the end of K. Stephen, and writing most commonly by way of Annals, transcribed
many things out of Florence of Worcester; and was of that great Reputation,
that Geoffrey of Monmouth, who was his Cotemporary, recommends the English
History to be written by his Pen, as he does the British to be continued by
Caradoc of Lancarvon, who wrote a Welsh Chronicle as far as his own Time; the
Substance whereof I have here likewise given you, as it was put out by Dr.
Powell, to which I have also added several remarkable Passages that were
designed in a new Edition of the same Work, to be published from the
Manuscripts of the Learned Antiquary Mr. Robert Vaughan, by Mr. Ellis late of
Jesus College in Oxon, but which were never finished. And I have likewise
inserted diverse choice Notes, that I gathered from another Manuscript of the
same Author's, relating to the Chronology and Actions of the British Princes,
which he wrote for the Satisfaction of the Lord Primate Usher, and from him is
now in my Possession. And I suppose no Ingenious British Antiquary will think
this Performance unnecessary, since he will here find the Substance of all that
is contained in Caradoc's Chronicle, together with a great many considerable
Additions from the Manuscripts abovementioned, as also some others gathered
from two MS. Copies of the Chronicles of Wales, the one in the Cottonian
Library, the other in the Exchequer, written at the end of one of the Volumes
of Doomesday; for the perusal of which I stand obliged to the Reverend Dr. Gale.

H. Huntingdon was followed by Rog. Hoveden a secular Priest of Oxford, and was
Domestic Clerk or Secretary to Henry the Second; he seems to have chiefly
transcribed from Simeon of Durham, as to the Affairs before the Conquest, as he
does from William of Malmesbury and other Authors, as well as his own
Observations for those that occurred afterward to his own Time, continuing his
History to the beginning of King John's Reign.

THE next we come to, are those Authors contained in that noble Volume, called
the Decem-Scriptores, such as Ailred, Abbot de Rievalle, who wrote concerning
the Kings of England so far as King Henry the 2d. in whose Time he lived; as
also concerning the Life and Miracles of Edward the Confessor, from whom I have
taken diverse memorable Passages relating to the Life of that King, as well as
to his Predecessors, omitting his Fables and Legends in which he does too much
abound.

AFTER him follows Radulphus de Diceto Dean of St. Paul's, London, who
flourished in the Reign of King John, about the Year 1210. he was esteemed a
very accomplished Historian, and an indefatigable Collector in his Time of
things not only before, but after the Conquest.

I have also taken some few Passages from William Thorn a Monk of Canterbury,
who wrote an entire History of the Affairs of his own Monastery of St. Augustine
down to the beginning of King Richard the Second, in whose Reign he lived.

AFTER whom we had for a long time no printed Historians of the Times before
the Conquest, till that in the Decem-Scriptores, which goes under the Name of
John Brompton Abbot of Jorvaulx in Richmondshire; tho Mr. Seldom has shown us
in his Preface to that Volume, that he was rather the Purchaser, than Author of
this Chronicle, which he left to his own Abbey: he is supposed to have lived in
the time of Edward the Third, but the History concludes with the Death of
Richard the First.

BUT the said Reverend Dr. Gale farther observes of him, That he intended to
continue Geoffrey of Monmouth, as appears in the Preface, and in Col. 1153. as
also that he took much from Benedictus Abbas (still in Manuscript in the
Cottonian Library) and not from Roger Hoveden; for where a Fault or Omission is
found in Benedictus, the same is here found also, but not so in Hoveden: e. g.
Benedictus wanted the Seal of the King of Sicily, and so did Bromton, till it
was added from some other Copy, and not out of Hoveden, for the Seals differ,
and some Copies of Hoveden have it not at all. And tho the Compiler of this
History seems to have lived in the Time of Richard I. as himself seems to
intimate, yet Col. 967. it mentions Richard the Third, which must have been
added to continue down the Genealogy of our Kings, as is often done in ancient
Chronicles by some later Hand. But the Learned Doctor farther supposes this
Chronicle to have been written by one John Brompton, who (as the Doctor found
in an old Manuscript Year-Book, or Collection of Reports of the Reign of King
Edward the First) was a Justice Itinerant about that Time; which Conjecture is
also confirmed by his careful inserting the Ancient Saxon Laws into this
Chronicle: This as it was not done by any before him, so neither does it savor
of the Monk.

THIS is the more worthy taking notice of, because Sir William Dugdale has
omitted this John Brompton in his Catalogue of Judges Itinerant, at the end of
his Origines Juridiciales.

TO this Historian succeeds Henry de Knyghton Canon of Leicester, who wrote his
History de Eventibus Angliae, beginning with King Edgar, and ending with the
Reign of Richard the Second.

BUT the Reader may be pleased to take notice, that in these two last Authors
are found many Passages which are in none of the more Ancient Writers; and
since most of them relate to Customs and Terms that had their Original after
the coming in of the Normans, therefore they may with good Reason be suspected
to have been borrowed from some common Stories or Traditions that then passed
up and down for current.

NOR can we here omit several other Pieces of less Bulk and Note, published
since that Volume last mentioned, containing the Chronicles and Histories of
diverse Cathedrals and Abbeys, such as are the Annals of the Abbey of
Winchester, etc. which have been published from the Cottonian and other
Libraries, in Monasticon Anglicanum, and the first Volume of Anglia Sacra,
lately published by the late Learned and Industrious Mr. Wharton.

TO these likewise may be added the Histories of the Monasteries of Ely and
Ramsey, as also of Glastenbury, by William of Malmesbury, from whom we have
taken several Things, not only relating to that Abbey, but the General History
of England: nor can I omit the History of John of Wallingford, whom Matthew
Paris mentions in his Lives of the Abbots of St. Albans; as the 21st Abbot of
St. Albans, he wrote the History of the Kings of England as far as the 42d of
King Henry the Third; the first Part of which down to the Norman Conquest, has
been published in the aforesaid last Volume at Oxford by the Learned Dr. Gale.
From all which last mentioned, tho mingled with abundance of Monkish Trash, we
have here and there excerpted several excellent Remarks.

WE have also sometimes made use of Ranulph Higden his Polychronicon, who was a
Monk of Chester, the first Part of which is published also by the said Dr. Gale
as far as the Conquest; and Matthew a Monk of Westminster, his Flores
Historiarum: these Authors being Cotemporaries, and collecting to the Reign of
Edward the Third, from all the rest of the Ancient Writers abovementioned, I
have seldom used but as subsidiary Helps, when the Passages they relate are not
to be found any where else, several other Authors they borrowed from, being now
lost, or very rare to be met with.

HAVING now done with our printed Authors, I proceed to those that continue
still in Manuscript, in the Bodleian and Cottonian Libraries; and also in those
of Lambeth, Gresham's College, and the Heralds Office; such as are John of
Tinmouth his Historia Aurea, Johannes Castorius (in English, Beaver) his
History of the Kings of England, and John Rouse of Warwick his Collections on
the same Subject; together with above forty or fifty nameless Authors which I
have perused, to see what I could find in any of them that had not been taken
notice of by others: but how little they have answered in my Expectations, the
small Additions I have made from them I hope will satisfy the unprejudiced
Reader; and for any that are otherwise, if they please to take the same Pains
that I have done, I wish their Labors may be better requited.

BUT as for the Extracts of Ecclesiastical Canons and Laws, which I have
inserted at the end of diverse King's Reigns, I have faithfully transcribed them
ou^ of Sir Henry Spelman's first Volume of British Councils, and Mr. Lambard's
Archaionomia, under their respective Years; and have also compared and
corrected them in a great Part from the Manuscript Notes of the Learned Junius,
at the end of the Cambridg Edition of Bid, which is in the Bodleian Library;
or else by another Latin Manuscript Version of the Industrious Mr. Somner's.
And I do not know of any other Saxon Laws, unless there be some of King
Cnute's, which remain as yet in Manuscript untranslated in the Bodleian
Library, as also in the Hands of Dr. Gale, as I am well informed: I hope they
may be one day added to a new Edition of Mr. Lambard's most useful Work.

THVS having gone through all the chiefest English Historians, both in Print
and Manuscript, that I know of, relating to the Times before the Conquest,
which I think are as many, and of as good Credit as any Country in Europe can
show in the like space of Time; it may be expected I should say something in
their Vindication, since I find they have been attacked in a post-humous
Treatise, long since written by a Learned Civilian, Sir Thomas Craig, Vid.
Hollinshea^. Lib. 1.
in Latin, in answer to what Mr. Hollingshead has published concerning the
Homage that was due from the Kings of Scotland to those of England; and is
lately translated into English by the Ingenious Mr. Ridpath: and as I shall
here faithfully give you his Arguments against the Antiquity and Credit of our
Writers, so I hope I shall return such Answers to them as will satisfy all
impartial Readers.

HIS first Objection is, That from the Death of Bid, (whose Credit, he says,
he will every where preserve entire,) the English have no certain History nor
Writer to the Reign of King Henry the First, except that Fragment of
Ethelwerd's; Scotland's Sovereignty asserted, p. 39, 40.
for (says he) I do not acknowledge that Fragment of Ingulphus, who preceded
Ethelwerd twenty Years, as an History; nor Asserius Menevensis, who wrote only
concerning the Transactions of his own King Alfred. And lest he should be
thought to affirm any thing rashly, Lib. 1. fol. 23.
He brings William of Malmesbury to witness the Matter, saying, That all the
Memorials of Transactions from the Death of Bid to his own Time, which was in
the Reign of Henry I. about 1142. were utterly lost; nor was there any who
followed that Study, or endeavored to pursue the thread of History till
himself.

NOW to give an Answer to this Learned Advocate, and take him Point by Point as
he goes on; in the first Place I am sorry to find a Person, otherwise every
ways Able and Skillful in his own Profession, so ignorant in our English
Historians, since if he had not been so, he could not have committed almost as
many Mistakes as he has wrote Lines: for in the first Place he calls Ingulph
and Ethelwerd two Fragments, whereas if he had been pleased to have looked upon
either of them, he would have found them entire Pieces so far as they went,
(and we call Polybius, Diodorus Siculus, Salust, Livy, Historians, not
Fragments, although each of them be imperfect) only the Edition that was then
published of Ingulph wanted the Laws of William the Conqueror, Vid. Vol. 1.
Script. Ang. Edit. Oxon.
and some few Sheets at the Conclusion, which have been since added.

AND whereas he says, that Ingulph preceded Ethelwerd twenty Years, he is so
far from being in the right of that, that the direct contrary is true; for
Ingulph lived and wrote above one hundred Years after Ethelwerd had finished
his History with King Edgar's Reign, whose Eulogy he only gives us in barbarous
Verse.

AND as for what the Advocate says concerning William of Malmesbury, he much
misrepresents the Sense of this Author, who does not affirm that there were no
Memorials from the Death of Bid to his Time, but the contrary; for he mentions
the Saxon Annals in his Proem in these words, Sunt sane quaedam vetustatis
Indicia, patrio Sermon, and chronico more per annos Domini ordinata: also in
his Book de Antiquitate Glastoniae (published by Dr. Gale, as above) he cites
them as good Authority, Tradunt Annals bonae credulitatis, etc. Nay, Sir
Thomas Craig himself (I suppose through Forgetfulness) has allowed no less than
three Writers of part of our History, who lived before Malmesbury, as you may
see above: and therefore he must also be understood only in this Sense, that
till himself there was none had undertaken an entire Latin Body of English
History; for he, distinguishing between an History and Annals, did not reckon
(it seems) these Saxon Annals as such, though he often mentions them by the
Name of the English Chronicles; being, as I said before, the Groundwork upon
which that Author, as well as others that followed him, built their History:
and these Annals remaining in Manuscript till long after Sir Thomas Craig's
Death, gave him perhaps occasion to affirm in the same Place, That there is
nothing of certainty to be found in the British History from 734. which was the
Year of Bede's Death, to the Year 957. but all things were founded upon the
Rumors of Ancient Men, and it may be old Wives Fables, which being collected
together into one Book, and put in a Latin Dress, made up as it were the shadow
of a History, from whence Hollingshead does nevertheless bring most certain
Arguments to establish his fictitious Homage.

THIS Point concerning the Homage I shall not take upon me here to decide: but
tho I confess there is no express mention of it in the Annals, Florenc. An.
Dom. 921.943.
yet I must needs say there is somewhat to be met with in them that comes very
near it; for under Anno 924. they relate thus of King Edward the Elder, That
the King and whole Nation of the Scots chose him in Patrem and Dominum, in the
Latin Version, i. e. for their Father and Lord; which is word for word the same
with the Saxon Original, which I omit because not commonly understood or read
in that Character. But because he supposes that Florence of Worcester was the
first Author that wrote this Homage and Fealty, Craig. ubi supra. p. 47.
therefore he must be the first that ever mentioned the Submission of the
Scottish King to the King of England: I desire those of Sir Thomas his Opinion
to tell me, tho the formal Ceremonies of Homage and Fealty (which in different
Ages and diverse Countries, even where the Feudal Law was obtained, were very
different) were not brought up till after the Norman William came hither; yet
what could those words in Patrem and Dominum signify, but such an
Acknowledgment or Dependence upon a Superior Lord as was tantamount? And it is
the more remarkable, because this is mentioned above 20 Years before. The same
Annals relate, that King Edmund the Younger, Son to King Edward, bestowed
Cumberland upon Malcolm King of Scots, viz. Anno 945. on condition, that he
should serve him in his Expeditions by Sea and Land, for which alone the
Scottish Writers will allow this Homage to have been due.

AND in the Year following we find in the same Annals, that K. Eadred, Brother
to Edmund, having reduced all Northumberland into his Power, (which then took
in almost all the Low-Lands of Scotland, as far as Edinburgh) thereupon Scoti
etiam ei juramenta praestiterunt, sese velle qui^quid is vellet, i. e. the
Scottish Nation (by which I suppose must be understood the King as well as the
People) took an Oath to King Eadred to perform whatsoever he should please to
command them. But that Florence of Worcester understood this to be an Oath of
Fealty, appears by his Paraphrase of these words in the Annals thus, and
Edredus a Scotis, ut sibi fideles essent, juramentum accepit.

BUT that, if not Homage, yet somewhat very like it, was rendered in that Age
by the Kings of Scotland to those of England, for the best part of what is now
called the Lowlands, may appear from the Testimony of John of Wallingford, Page
545.
who in his History relates, that Keneth King of Scots received Lothian from
King Edgar under the Condition of doing Homage to himself and his Successors:
which, if it had not then the direct Ceremony of Homage, which perhaps came in
with the Normans, yet that it was somewhat very near it, Lib. 4. cap. 24.
John Fordun the antientest Scottish Historian, acknowledges in these words,
That King Edmund (viz. of England) gave the Province of Cumberland to Malcolm
King of Scots, sub fidelitate Juramenti; and it was afterward agreed between
the said King Edmund and King Malcolm, that Prince Indulf his next Heir, and
all the future Heirs of Scotland successively, should pay to King Edmund and
his Successors for the same, Homagium, and fidelitatis Sacramentum: so that if
our English Writers have been mistaken in calling that Submission, which the
Kings and Princes of Scotland then paid to England, Homage, you may here see
the most Ancient Scottish Historian guilty of the same Error: which was indeed
an Oath of Fidelity, if not the same, yet very like what the Scottish Kings
afterward took when they did Homage to our Kings of England after the Conquest.

HAVING said thus much, I shall now leave it to the Reader's Judgment, when he
has gone through our Annals, to consider, whether this Author's Censure of our
English History, from the Year 734. when Bid ended his, to the Year 957. be
just, that they were only things, as he says, founded upon the Rumors of
Ancient Men, and it may be old Wives Fables, and so being collected together in
one Book, dressed up in Latin, made up as it were the shadow of a History.

AS also whether what Florence is cited by the Author to say, That after Bede's
Death the English History ceased, and that for his own part he had left things
to Posterity, either as he found them in the Text of the English Chronicles, or
as he had them from the relations of Men worthy of Credit, Idem. pa. 41.
or heard and saw them himself; deserves that rash Censure, not only concerning
these Annals now published, but of Florence himself, viz. as to what concerned
the Text of the English Chronicles, he mentioned them that he might deceive his
Reader with the greater Facility: whereas Florence was accounted always a
Writer of unquestionable Diligence and Veracity, as appears by the several
Testimonies of Learned Men before his History.

BUT the reason of this Author's Triumph before the Victory, was, that he did
not believe any such thing as a Saxon Chronicle could be found; for says he
immediately after, Id. ibid.
If there were any Chronicles of those Times, seeing Florence lived about the
Year 1148. they must still remain in the Archives, which hitherto no English
Author did ever alledg, or has been able to demonstrate; for that Chronicle,
as is observed by the Prologue, did only set down the number of Years. And so
he proceeds to invalidate the Credit of Florence of Worcester, as if he had had
no Voucher to warrant his Chronicle.

BUT I hope this Translation I here present you with, will satisfy all ordinary
Readers, that the Saxon Annals do contain much more than the bare numbers of
Years, and the Edition first published by Mr. Wheelock in Saxon and Latin from
two Copies in Sir Robert Cotton's, and Bennet College Libraries, have long
since convinced all Learned Men, that we really had such Monuments in our
Archives, which have been also farther confirmed as to the Truth of it, from
two other Manuscript Copies, given by Archbishop Laud to the Bodleian Library
at Oxford, and lately published together with those abovementioned, by the
aforesaid Mr. Edmund Gibson; most of which Copies belonged to several ancient
Monasteries, and I doubt not but many more of them were lost at their
Dissolation in Henry the Eighth's Time, or carried over Seas; for we find
Lazius in his Book de Migratione Gentium, quotes several of them. And it is
evident that our Annals sometimes follow not Tradition only, but also old
written Histories, and perhaps Latin Writers, as may appear by the Actions of
Athelstane and Eadmund, An. 938, and 942. But for the support of their
Authority I refer the Reader to this Author's own Countryman John Fordun,
where he tells us in his Prologue to his Scottish History, He had heard it was
very well ordered in England, that every Monastery of Royal Foundation should
have its particular Writer, who was Chronologically to set down all the
Memorable things which happened in each King's Reign, either in their own or
Neighboring Kingdoms; and that at the next Great Council after the Death of
every respective King, each of those Chronographers met there, and produced
whatsoever they had so remarked; and that some of the most discreet Persons in
the said Council who were best skilled in such Matters, being chosen for that
purpose, should examine those Memorials, and by comparing them together should
extract a brief Chronicle from them all, which was to be preserved in the
Libraries of those Monasteries, as Authentic Annals to be relied on by
Posterity, that so the remembrance of those public Affairs of the Kingdom
might not be lost, or devoured by the Rust of Time.

WHICH Passage had Sir Thomas Craig but carefully considered, he would have had
no reason to doubt whether we had had any Chronicles of those times remaining
in our Archives, and whether William of Malmesbury, and all the rest of our
Historians, have blindly followed Florence of Worcester into an Error, Id. p.
47.
as Cattle do their Leader that break over a Ditch.

BUT if our Saxon Annals were not a good Foundation for succeeding Historians
to build upon, I desire to know what Credit the Ancient Greek and Roman Authors
can claim with Men of that scrupulous Temper, since they had nothing but such
short Annals or Chronicles preserved in their Archives, (besides Traditions,
and the common Fame of their Ancestors) from whence to compose the particular
Histories of those Commonwealths they treat of; such as were the Libri Lintei
preserved in the Capitol, from whence Livy drew the most ancient Memorials for
the writing his Roman History.

AND tho there is some difference to be found between the several Copies of
these Annals as to the Calculation of Years, and some particular Matters that
are sometimes inserted in one, and omitted in another; yet the Ingenious Author
of the Preface before it, has given the World a satisfactory Answer as to this
Matter, which is, That as to the general Affairs of the whole Kingdom they all
agree well enough, tho indeed as to foreign Transactions, or some few Passages
relating to their own private Monasteries, there may be some Additions that are
not to be met with in the rest; as may be observed from those called the
Canterbury and Laudean Copies in the Bodleian Library.

SO I shall leave it upon the whole Matter to the Reader to consider, whether
the Author has made good his Challenge, viz. That the English were not able to
produce one approved Writer of their own Country, who composed any Story or
History from the Death of Bid, to the Time of Henry the Second, tho I suppose
he meant the First, however it is unluckily printed twice the Second in one
Page.

BUT to come to this Author's second Objection against our English Historians,
the substance of which is, That the Writers as well before as after the
Conquest were Monks, who being dead to the World, have no right of giving a
Legal Evidence, it being expressly forbid by the Canon Law to concern themselves
in secular Matters; and also that by reason of their solitary Lives, they ought
very seldom to be entrusted in public Affairs, seeing they are no competent
Judges concerning them: for it was not very probable that either the Secrets of
Princes, or things belonging to the State, were ever communicated to them,
otherwise than by common Report, seeing they were kept at the greatest distance
from all manner of Action, and do oftentimes embrace things doubtful as
certain, and Fictions for Matter of Fact; and that therefore this feigned
Homage must of necessity fall to the Ground, for which there is no better
Evidence than that of a Monk; for it will not be admitted as a good Conclusion,
that because a Monk says so, therefore it is true.

THIS Argument may as easily be retorted upon him thus, That as a thing is not
true because a Monk writes it, so neither is it false for that reason alone;
for tho Monks are by the Canon Law forbid meddling with Secular Affairs, and may
not perhaps be admitted for good Witnesses in Civil Causes, yet is this but a
mere Cavil as to the Point in Question, since that was not the intent of the
Canon to forbid them the writing either of Civil or Ecclesiastical Histories;
and Bid himself (whose Credit this Author says he will not impair) was a Monk,
as were also Marianus Scotus (whom he allows and would have to be taken for
his own Countryman) Sigebertus, Hermannus Contractus, and almost all the
Famous Chronographers of those Times, who flourished in our Neighboring
Nations as well as our own; and that they were not of such retired Lives as not
to have Memorials sent them of public Actions, appears by the aforesaid
Citation out of Fordun, concerning the manner of writing our English Annals in
the Monasteries, which, as he tells us, were supervised afterward by some
appointed of the Great Council of the Kingdom. And that some of the Monks after
the Conquest were in great Reputation for their faithful Accounts, appears by
the great Credit given to Florence of Worcester and William of Malmesbury in
those times; the last of whom dedicated his History to Robert Earl of
Gloucester Natural Son to King Henry the First: and Matthew Paris was of so
great Esteem, that we learn from himself, that King Henry the Third gave him
particular Directions for inserting into his History several considerable
Passages relating to his own Reign: so far were the Princes of that Age from
being of this Author's Opinion, that Monks were no wise fit to write History,
nor to be credited when they had done.

BUT if no Credit must be given to the Memorials of Monks, I desire to know,
what will become of the so much talked of Scottish Annals that were kept in the
Isle of Jona or Ilcomhil, and of their famous Book of the Abbey of Pasely, from
whence Hector Boethius pretends to have derived the principal Matters that make
up the first part of his History? Nay, what will become of their most
creditable Writer John Fordun, who bottoms much of his History on the Legends
of S. Brendane, and others?

NOR is there any difference that I know of between these Books now mentioned
and our Saxon Annals, but that these are to be seen (I mean the Originals) in
our Libraries, and are also published both in Saxon and Latin, and are here
translated into English in this ensuing History, whilst theirs are not; and if
Hector Boethius ever saw them, is more than we can be sure of, since a most
Reverend Doctor (and now Bishop of our Church) has produced very good Reasons
to render it highly suspicious, Vid. Dr. Stillingfleet Antiq. of the British
Church. Pref. page 39, 40.
that there never were any such Books at all; and if so, I wonder what will
become of the Credit of all their Ancient Scottish History, and their long
Bedroll of Kings before Fergus the Second.

AS for the rest of this Author's Objections, I shall be very short in my
Answers to them.

THE third of which is, that our Authors are not to be credited, because they
are Englishmen. If this were of any weight, I might turn his own Cannon upon
him, and tell him, no more are his Writers who deny this Homage, because they
are Scots-men: and if neither are to be believed, I would fain have any Learned
Gentleman of that Nation to show me a Foreign Historian who lived near those
Times, that denied there was any such thing.

AS for his last, that they were Enemies, it is yet more trivial; since I have
here made use of no Authorities but what were written before the Conquest, when
there was no War at all between the two Nations, but rather a strict Amity or
League against their Common Enemy the Danes; or else from Florence of Worcester
and William of Malmesbury, Authors that lived and wrote (as has been already
shown) in the very Times when those Homages they mention were done; which
whether they were for Scotland it self, or else for Northumberland and
Cumberland, which they then held of the Kings of England, shall be further
considered in my next Volume, if God shall permit me to finish it.

BUT I desire the Reader to take notice, that finding the English-Saxon
Chronicle to be very dry in many places, it giving us only an account of the
Succession of their Kings, and the Battles they fought against one another,
without ever telling us what were the Grounds of their falling out; the Monks
of those Times, for want of Civil Affairs, or (as we call them) those of the
Cabinet, filling up their Annals only with Fighting and Devotion, I saw it
necessary for me to pursue in great part the Method that Bid had laid down
throughout the whole Work, and to insert some things relating to Ecclesiastical
Affairs, to make this History more useful, as well as diverting, to all sort of
Persons.

AND therefore being sensible of the near Conjunction of the Civil with the
Ecclesiastical State, which were often united into one Mycel-Synod, or Great
Council of the whole Nation, wherein were made not only Civil Laws, but also
Ecclesiastical Canons or Constitutions, respecting Religion and Discipline, as
well as Reformation of Manners, I have set down both the one and the other
whenever I thought they contained any Matter of more than ordinary Notice: and
as for those Synods or Councils which were wholly Ecclesiastical, though I have
not always expressly given you all the Canons they made, yet I have not failed
to refer the Reader for his farther Satisfaction, to that rich Treasury of this
kind of Knowledge, Sir Henry Spelman's first Volume of Councils.

TO which I have likewise not only added the Succession of some Bishops, and
Abbots, as far as I have found them in the Saxon Annals, but have inserted from
William of Malmesbury and other Writers, whatever I could find relating to
them, or any other of the same Order, remarkable for Learning or Piety;
especially the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, whose Successions I have
often supplied from other Authors, wherein the Annals were silent.

NOR have I omitted the Foundations of the greater Monasteries, as I met with
them in the Annals, no more than the other Foundations of the same kind set
down in Monasticon Anglicanum, yet still confining my self to such of them as
were valued at 500 l. per annum or more, at the time of their Dissolution. And
I hope no Man that is a Lover of Antiquity, or the Honor of his Nation, will
look upon this as needless, any more than the Foundations of our two famous
Universities, of which I have here given you the earliest Accounts I can find.

NEITHER do I suppose it will prove tedious, if I have here likewise put down
the Stories of some Miracles related by Bid and other Monks, since I have done
it with Moderation, and where the Contexture of this Work would have seemed
Lame and Imperfect without it; and I only give them you just as I find them,
leaving every one to make what Judgment he pleases of them.

I confess I am not satisfied that diverse of those Relations swallowed by Bid
and other Authors of Note, are true, they having been since discovered by Men
of great Learning and Judgment, to carry evident Marks of Forgery along with
them; such as is that of Joseph of Arimathea his Preaching the Gospel in
England, which has been examined with great Accuracy by the Reverend and
Learned Dr. Stillingfleet, now Lord Bishop of Worcester, Chap. 1.
in his Origines Britannicae; so that though I have both from him, and others,
said somewhat upon that Subject, yet I must still refer the Reader to the Book
it self, if he desires farther Satisfaction either in gratifying his Curiosity,
or informing his Judgment.

BUT to the foregoing Relations, I must needs here add that of the Martyrdom of
St. Alban, which though the Learned Author last named, in his second Chapter of
his said Book, has with great Learning proved it, if not true, yet at least
probable; I hope he will not take it amiss if I farther examine the Certainty
of this Story: for notwithstanding it be set down in the old Roman
Martyrologies, and his Suffering here is also mentioned by Constantius,
Presbyter, who lived above one hundred Years before Bid, from whom I have
borrowed this; yet I must Ingenuously confess, I do not see how it can consist
with the Ecclesiastical or Civil History of those Times, Lib. 1. c. 6.
in which it is supposed to have happened. Forbid places the Suffering of St.
Alban during the Persecution of Dioclesian, and after the Recovery of Britain
from the Usurpation of Allectus.

WHEREAS it is evident from Chronology, that Carausius the Usurper, having Anno
Dom. 286. rebelled against the Roman Emperors, held Britain under his Power for
near seven Years, and then was murdered by the Usurper Allectus, who also
governed near three Years longer, till about the middle of the Reign of the
Emperor Dioclesian; who having constituted Constantius Chlorus, Caesar, sent
Asclepiodotus as his Lieutenant into Britain, (being then part of his Share, as
were all the Provinces on this side the Alps) in the Year 295. and he having
slain Allectus in Battle, governed here some short Time, till Constantius
himself coming over in Person, reigned as Caesar or Augustus so long as he
lived: During all which Revolutions we do not read of any Persecution in
Britain, as the Learned Mr. Dodwell in his Dissertationes Cyprianae has very
well observed, Dissert. Cypr. 11. de paucitate Martyrum,. 75.
and consequently St. Alban could not suffer Martyrdom between the Years 303.
and 305. or at any other Time where the Roman Martyrologies place it.

AND this I think is clear from the Testimonies of two Author of unquestionable
Credit, who lived in the very Time when this (if at all) must have happened.
The first of these is Eusebius, Cap. 13.
who in his eighth Book of Ecclesiastical History, giving a Character of
Constantius the Emperor, has these words, viz. He always showed himself most
benign and affable toward all Men, which appeared by this, that he was no ways
partaker of the Persecution raised against us (i. e.) Christians: but having
preserved the Worshippers of the true God free and unhurt from all Accusations,
and not having so much as destroyed the Buildings of our Churches, or acted any
thing against those of our Religion, he at last attained a quiet and happy End.
To which we may also add another Passage in his first Book, cap. 8. but it
being more tedious, and not so express and full as the Place now cited, I
therefore omit it.

TO whom we may also subjoin Lactantius, who in his Treatise de Mortibus
Persecutorum, differs indeed from Eusebius about his demolishing the Christian
Churches, yet he agrees with him in the main, that no Christians suffered Death
in Constantius his Division or Share of the Empire. This Author's words I have
thus translated. But Constantius, lest he should seem to dissent from the
Edicts of the greater Emperors, tho he permitted the Meeting-places of the
Christian Assemblies, that could be rebuilt, to be pulled down, yet he still
preserved the true Temple of God, which is in the Bodies of Men, safe and
inviolate. Lib. 1.
And this is farther confirmed by Optatus de Schismate, as also by Zozomen in
his Ecclesiastical History, Lib. 2.
who both reciting the Address of the Donatists to the Emperor Constantine, do
acknowledge that his Father never shed the Blood of any Christian.

AND even this small difference between these two Authors may be thus
reconciled, by supposing that tho he connived at the destroying of the
Christian Churches by the vulgar Pagans, yet he no ways commanded it, much less
approved of it when it was done. So that there could be no Persecution in Gaul
or Britain, (both which were part of his Province) during the Time that he
continued either as Caesar or Emperor, and the Persecution ceased Anno Dom.
308. not long before his Death.

BUT since a Learned and Ingenious Frenchman, Theodorus Ruinartus, in his
Preface to a late Treatise, entitled, de Actibus Martyrum, put out with a new
Edition of this Work of Lactantius in Holland, has endeavored to justify the
Martyrologies against this Opinion of Mr. Dodwell's, I think it very convenient
to take some notice of what he there alleges; and his chief Argument against
these plain Authorities, is, that the Emperor Maximian was in Gaul during some
part of this Persecution, and that then the Power of Constantius being only as
Caesar, was suspended by the Presence of the Emperor himself; and consequently
the Persecution was carried on in that part of the Empire, notwithstanding
Constantius his private dislike of it, or perhaps opposing it as much as he
durst.

BUT in return to this seeming Argument, we shall first observe, that neither
Eusebius nor Lactantius, mention any Persecution in Gaul or Britain during all
this Time, which it is highly probable they would have done, had it been
carried on with the like Fury in these as it was in the other parts of the
Empire. So that I do not find this Author clearly makes out, that the Emperor
Maximian was in Gaul during this Persecution, by any other Testimonies than
those Martyrolgies themselves, whose Credit we have just reason to question.

BUT suppose I should admit there was a Persecution in Gaul at the same Time as
he affirms, what will this concern Britain, where it is certain from the
Authority abovementioned, that the Power of Constantius was never abrogated, or
suspended by any of the other Emperors? But if it appears there was no such
Persecution in Gaul as he pretends, can one with reason believe that there
should be any at that Time in Britain, which lay so much more remote, and out
of the View or Notice of those persecuting Emperors? But Michael Alford in his
British Annals, being sensible of the great Improbability of this Persecution
between the Years 303, and 305. when upon Constantius's being declared Emperor,
all Authors agree the Persecution ceased all over the Empire; he therefore
antedates the Time of it to the Year 287, when he supposes that St. Alban,
after he had been kept six Months in Prison, suffered Martyrdom, viz. in the
beginning of the Reign of Dioclesian and Maximian; and for this he cites an
ancient Manuscript Copy of Bid which he had seen, as also the Authority of
Matthew Paris in his History, An. 1257. An. 794.
and Matthew Westminster, who both follow an old Martyrologist cited by
Capgrave, as much antienter than Bid.

TO this Opinion we reply, that in the first place it does not appear by any
Authority, but this Writer's bare conjecture, that there was any Persecution in
Britain or Gaul at the beginning of the Emperors Reigns above mentioned, but
rather the contrary, since Eusebius expressly tells us, that Dioclesian was so
far from persecuting, that he favored and employed the Christians in all
Offices both Civil and Military, till after the Persian War, which was toward
the latter end of his Reign. Nor indeed could this Persecution have happened
under the Usurpations of Carausius and Allectus here in Britain, seeing they
were always engaged in defending themselves against the Roman Emperors, and
therefore could not be at leisure to persecute Men for Religion during such
unsettled Times.

AND as for the Authority of these Martyrologies which this Author urges for
the Truth of this Persecution, viz. That they are some of them very Ancient,
the Originals of them being about 900 Years old: I doubt this will be so far
from supporting their Credit, that it will rather be instrumental to destroy
it, since it is very well known that it was about the end of the fifth, or
beginning of the sixth Century, that this trick of forging the Lives and
Sufferings of Saints came first in Fashion, and so was carried on in those dark
Times for near 500 Years following, as the Reverend Dr. Burnet (now Bishop of
Salisbury) has learnedly proved in his Preface to his Translation of the
aforesaid Treatise of Lactantius.

NOR did the Monks fail of finding their Account in this Design, since nothing
contributed more than this and such like Legends, to the worshipping of the
Relics of Saints, and going on Pilgrimages to their Tombs: Which
Superstition, how much it advanced the worldly Power and Grandeur of the Clergy
of those Times, he must be a great Stranger to the Ecclesiastical as well as
Civil History of those Ages, not to understand.

HAVING now, I hope, gone through all those things I thought necessary to
advertise the Reader of, I have little else remaining, but to ask his Pardon
for not adding in the Margin some short Notes or Contents of what is in the
Body of the Work; which tho I confess several Historians have done, yet I
thought it might very well be spared here: First, Because in my Opinion it
spoils the Beauty of the Margin; and besides, this Volume being written in an
exact Chronological Order, it will be very easy for the Reader, (if he will but
please to remember near the Year about which any thing he would find, happened)
to satisfy himself in the Matter he would know, by turning over but two or
three Pages: and further, the Years of our Lord standing in Roman Figures in
the Margin, do in many Places fill that Space which those Contents usually take
up. But if these Reasons by some may not be thought sufficient, a good Friend
of mine has been at the Pains, for your sake, as well as my ease, to make an
exact Table to the whole Work, by which I am confident you cannot miss readily
finding out any thing whatsoever you have a desire to be satisfied in, that is
contained in this Volume, either as to Persons, Places or Things.

I have endeavored to make this History as diverting as I could by variety of
Matter, as also by inserting into it whatsoever Relations I met with in our old
Historians, that were not utterly improbable; and therefore I hope the Reader
will not be uneasy, because all the parts thereof are not kept up alike
pleasant and agreeable, since the dryness of the Matter, and the barrenness of
those few Authors I find in some Periods, will not always equally afford it;
any more than it can be expected, that in a long Journey it should be alike
pleasant Traveling through dark and narrow Lanes, as over a free and open
Champaign.

THERE is one thing more I must needs stand obliged to you in for your Pardon,
and that is, the many Errata's you will find in the first four Books; for being
out of Town when near half of it was wrought off, I could not supervise it my
self: and though I committed the Correction of those Sheets to a Person on whom
I could (as I have done before) safely rely for his Ability and Faithfulness in
the discharge of that Trust; yet no Man is able to judge of the Author's Sense
so well as himself, nor consequently to mend it, if any where too Obscure or
Mistaken; and I cannot, as I would, answer so well for the Care of my
Amanuensis in his Writing or Pointing: and I must add this also, that some
Printers are not always so careful as they should be to amend their own Faults,
tho never so exactly Corrected by those to whom their Sheets were entrusted for
that Purpose.

THE General Introduction TO THE Whole Work.
SINCE the late Learned Doctor Howell and Doctor Brady, the former in his
Second and Third Parts of his General History of the World, and the latter in
his General Preface, and First Book of his Complete History of England, have
given us a large Account of the Political Government and Laws in this Part of
our Island we now call England, during the time of the Roman Emperors, as also
of our English-Saxon Kings, as far as the Norman Conquest; this Undertaking of
Mine would look very imperfect, if I should not in some measure follow their
Method, and prefix before it something of the like nature.

I have therefore made bold to borrow from Mr. Seldom, and those other Authors
who have written on this Subject, whatsoever I thought was necessary to carry
on the same Design; and also added those Things that I found they have either
omitted or mistaken, and which required more largely to be treated of, in order
to render this Work as useful as possible I could for a matter of so great
Importance.

TO begin then with the Government of the Britains before the Arrival of Julius
Caesar into this Island: Of which we have scarce any Account but what can be
gathered from Geoffrey of Monmouth, which is so uncertain and fabulous, that
there is little reliance upon what he says, save that in the general it was
governed by Kings, and often cantoned into several Kingdoms: for that it was
ever under one Monarch, as he frequently affirms, I have very good reason to
doubt; it being not only contrary to the Genius and Custom of the British
Nation, (where all the Male Issue inherited alike) to suffer the Eldest Son to
go away with the whole Inheritance, but likewise it is directly opposite to
Caesar's Account of this Island when he came first hither, which he says he
found divided into several distinct Principalities and States.

BUT if any Part of Geoffrey's Relation be true, that is most likely to be so
which he gives us of the Laws of Molmutius, viz.

THAT the Temples of the Gods had this Privilege, That whatever guilty Persons
should fly to them, they should be secure from their Prosecutors; because we
find that Custom very ancient, not only amongst the Greeks and Romans, but
indeed all other Nations, the Jews not excepted.

NEXT, That the public Ways leading to the said Temples, and the Cities
wherein they were, should be free and safe. And,

LASTLY, That such a Proportion of Land should maintain so many Ploughs for the
Encouragement of Husbandry; which was very natural in a Country, where not
only the Soil, but the Laziness of the Inhabitants, rendr^d it more apt for
Grazing than Tillage

BUT I cannot forbear observing how little stress is to be laid on Geoffrey's
Account of the Laws of those British Princes, since he has the Confidence to
tell us of another Set of Laws supposed to be made by Queen Martia, which, he
says, being afterward translated by King Alfred out of the British Lang^age,
were by him inserted into his Body of Saxon Laws, under the Title of
Me^rchen-Lage. The Falsehood of which Derivation Mr. Camden has very well
discovered, by showing, That this Word had not its Original from Queen Martia,
but from the Saxon Word Mearc, signifying a Limit or Boundary; from whence the
Mercian Kingdom had its Name, and was so called from its Situation, as being
circumscribed by the other Kingdoms of the Heptarchy.

BUT as for the British Government that succeeded upon the Romans deserting of
this Island, we can say no more of it, than that it was Regal; but that it was
all subject to one Monarch, I no where find. For tho it appears from Gildas and
Nennius, that Vortigerne was made King not long after the Romans leaving it,
yet does it not follow from thence, that there were no more Kings than he at
the same time; since it seems very unlikely, that all Britain (properly so
called) which in the time of the Romans was divided into so many distinct
Provinces, each of which had their particular Praefects or Deputies, should so
unanimously agree in the Choice of this Vortigerne, whom Geoffrey
preposterously relates to have been then Count of the Gewises, when indeed
there were no such People of that Name in Being, till the erecting of the
West Saxon Kingdom; those People being then (and not before) so called from one
Gewis, an Ancestor of Hengist. And Gildas, who lived within fourscore Years
after the Reign of this Vortigerne, tells us of no less than four distinct
Kings reigning together in this Part of the Island, and mentions not a Word of
its ever being otherwise.

BUT that the Titles of those Kings who reigned here during the first Wars
between the Britains and the Saxons, were oftener by Election than Succession,
may appear not only from Geoffrey himself, but also from Gildas and Nennius,
who are Authors of better Credit; and they relate Vortimer the eldest Son of
Vortigerne, to have been elected upon his Father's Deposition, King of the
Britains; and after his Death, and the second Desertion of Vortigerne, that
Aurelius Ambrosius was elected first General, and some time afterward King of
the Britains.

NOR can we believe that these Kings were Absolute or Despotick Monarchs, since
we find that Government unsuitable to the Temper of the British Nation, both
then, and in succeeding times; having not only frequently cast off the
Government of the Roman Emperors, but also of their own Kings, for their cruel
Tyranny and Oppression.

AND that this way of the Election of one supreme King over the rest, was after
often used by the Britains, you will find in the History it self; not but that
it must be confessed, that the several petty Kingdoms o^ Principalities which
the Britains still possessed, and that go under the Name of North and
South Wales, did commonly descend, and were divisable among the several Sons of
the deceased Prince, tho it was with great Inequality and Confusion; which
often produced frequent Civil Wars between the Contending Competitors, and
became the Ruin of them all at last.

BUT to pass from these British Princes, and the manner of their Government, as
well before the coming in, as after the Desertion of the Romans, and which (tho
not in its due order of Time) I have here put together, that the Reader might
have a full View of it all at once. I proceed now to the Civil and Military
A^ministration of the Romans whilst they continued Masters of this Part of
Britain.

JVLIVS Caesar, when he had rather viewed than conquered this Island, left it,
upon the Delivery of some Hostages, and the Promise of sending over more into
Gaul, together with a certain Tribute to the Senate and People of Rome, neither
of which the Britains ever performed; but during the Civil Wars, which not
longer after ensued, they recovered their ancient Liberty, which for diverse
Years they enjoyed, till the Emperor Claudius, at the Instigation of one
Bericus a Fugitive, and upon a Pretense of their denying the Romans to trade
here, sent over first Aulus Plautius as his Lieutenant, and then following
presently afterward himself in Person, made the Britains (I mean the greatest
part of them) partly by Force, and partly by Fear, submit themselves to his
Empire; tho in a great measure under the Regiment of their own Kings, who only
paid Tribute, and received Roman Garrisons, and suffered them to erect Colonies
where they pleased: during which time the Government of the Romans was rather
Military than Civil, the People living after their own Laws.

NOR were the Britains wholly subdued by them, till upon their Insurrection
under Queen Boadicia in the Time of Nero, when Paulus Suetonius being Legate or
Lieutenant here, reduced them (tho with great difficulty) under the Roman Yoke.

BUT the Civil Wars that afterward happened upon the Death of Nero, hindered
their entire Conquest, until such time as the Emperor Vespasian sent over that
famous Commander Agricola to be his General here; who in a few Years, having
laid aside their petty Kings, brought it into the Form of a Province under the
Roman Governors, sometimes styled Presidents, sometimes Consulares, and
sometimes Legati or Procuratores, as the Emperor's Commission, or the various
Appellations of the Roman Historians are pleased to entitle them.

AND then it was, I suppose, this Part of the Island was first divided into
several Praefectships or Governments, tho how many they were, cannot be
ascertained; only we find from the Breviary of Sextus Rufus, that in the Reign
of Constantine it was parcell'd into these four for its better Administration,
viz. Britannia prima, De ^is Nomini^us, vid. Pancirol. ad Not. imperii
Occident. and Camden. Brit.
which is conjectured to have been that Part of the Country lying from the
Gallic Sea to the River Thames and the Mouth of the Severn; Britannia secunda,
which reached from the Severn to the Irish Sea; Flavia Caesariensis, which was
enclosed by the Rivers Thames, Severn and Humber; and Maxima Caesariensis,
lying betwixt Humber and Hadrian's Wall; to which was afterward added by
Theodosius the Elder, the Province of Valentia, so called from the Emperor
Valentinian; and which, having been taken out of Maxima Caesariensis, lay
betwixt the Wall of Hadrian, and the Friths of Glotta and Bodotria, which now
are those of Edinburgh and Dunbritton.

EACH of which Provinces were under their particular Magistrates, some whereof
had the Title of Consulares, and others of Praesides: all which, according to
the Notitia Romani Imperii, were by Constantine's new Constitutions, made
subject to the Vicarius of Britain, as he was to the Praefectus Praetorii of
Gaul, who was one of the Four Praefecti of Constantine's Erection.

THIS Vicar of Britain had also several inferior Officers under him for the
Civil Administration; as first, he had his Princeps or Lieutenant out of the
Agentes in rebus, that is, from the Chief of the Agents, Solicitors, or
Attorney-Generals: he had also from the Ducenarii, or Society of the Emperors
Pursuivants, a Cornicularius, i. e. one that wrote and published the Sentences
and Decrees of the Presidents and other Magistrates, and had his Name from
Cornu a Horn, by the sounding whereof he is supposed to command silence in the
Court; then two Numerarii, i. e. Clerks Accountants, who did set down all the
Sums of the public Revenues; then a Commentariensis, i. e. the Jailor or
Keeper of the Prison, and was so called from the Commentaria, or Kalendars
which he kept of the Prisoners, and delivered to the Judges: then certain
Officers called ab Actis, who were Public Notaries, that wrote Testaments,
Contracts and other Instruments, which were signed before by the Judge or
President, and attested by him, that so after the Death of the Party they might
remain Authentic: then other Clerks or Secretaries de Cura, or de Cura
Epistolarum, who wrote and sent the Letters and Dispatches of the Governors of
Provinces to the Emperor, or to each other.

BESIDES whom, the Vicarius himself, (and, I suppose also, each of the
Presidents) had his Adjutorem, i. e. his Coadjutor, in case of Sickness, or
necessary Absence; as likewise Subadjuvas, Under-Assistants, or Assistants to
the Adjutor: and, in short, certain other Officers called Singulares, from the
particular Civil Employments they had, who seemed to have been Prosecutors,
Informers, or Sergeants; not to mention others of more inferior Rank, as
Apparitors, Summoners, or Messengers. This was the Civil Court of the Vicarius,
or Deputy of Britain, under the Praefectus Praetorii of Gaul, who had the Power
to reverse his Judgments and Decrees.

THE Ensigns of his Government were a Draught of those Five Parts of Britain
beforementioned, Vid. Pancirol. in Notit. Imperii.
expressed in the Forms of several Buildings, with the Superscription of their
Names placed on the Triangular Form of the Island, as if they had comp^ehended
the whole Island; the Book of their Instructions covered with Green, and the
Commission in a gilt Cover, with several Letters inscribed on the Book, the
Signification of which is unnecessary to be here inserted; but you will find
this, as also a Draught of these Insignia themselves, in the above cited
Pancirollus.

BESIDES these general Presidents, there were likewise Courts in all the great
Cities, Municipia, or Colonies of each Province, which had their several
Officers and Magistrates according to the Model of Rome it self, who heard
Causes, and administered Justice to the particular Districts belonging to them,
much after the same manner as the Parliaments in France do at this day.

HAVING thus concluded their Civil Administration, we now come to the Military,
which was executed by Three Chief Officers under the Magister Militum of the
West, and they were these, viz. the Comes Britanniarum, Comes Littoris
Saxonici, and the Dux Britanniarum; whose several Charges, and the Tracts
subjected to each of their Commands, may be best discerned by the Names of
those Towns where their Underofficers and Forces are said to have had their
Headquarters. The first of these, viz. the Count of Britain, is thought to
have had his Command over the Inward or Middle Part of the Island, because the
two others are known to have had theirs over the Northern or Maritime Parts
thereof; but the Notitia assigns not any Forces to the former, nor mentions any
Places under his Command, because, as Pancirollus writes, the whole Island was
then almost overrun by Barbarians.

BUT as for the Comes Littoris Saxonici, so called in the Declension of the
Roman Empire, from the charge or Care he had to suppress the Saxon Pirates, who
often landing on the Eastern Parts of Britain, (lying over against Germany)
committed great Ravages there; he had eight Praepositi, and one Tribune under
him, that were Leaders of diverse Cohorts, consisting of Gauls, Germans, and
other Foreign Nations, who quartered in several Towns all along the Coasts,
from Sussex, as far as the remotest part of Norfolk: for the Names of whom,
with the Places where they lay, I shall refer you to the Notitia Imperii
Occidentalis, or (if you had rather have them in English) to Mr. Selden's
Titles of Honor, and Dr. Howell's second Part, and third Chapter, of his
General History.

THE like I may also say of the Forces under the Dux Britanniarum, or General
of Britain, whose Army, had it then been really in being, was sufficient to
have suppressed both the Picts and Scots; for they consisted of no less than
fourteen Praefects or Praepositi of Horse and Foot, whose Names, and Places
where they quartered (extending from Lincolnshire through all the Northern
Counties, as far as the Pictish Borders, and so round about by Lancashire into
North Wales) you may find in the Authors abovementioned.

BUT as for the several Ensigns of these three chief Military Officers, they
being much what the same with those of the Vicarius Britanniae, viz. The
Figures of certain Towns, with their Names set over them, together with their
Commissions, contained in Books of different colored Covers, with the
Emperor's Images set by them on Pillars, I will leave it to those who take more
Pleasure than I do in such Curiosities.

ALL these Comites and Duces were equal in Power, and only subordinate to the
Vicarius Britanniae; the Forces under their Command were not only dispersed
through the Municipia or Free Colonies, which the Romans planted here, and were
governed by their own Civil Magistrates in Imitation of Rome their Mother-City,
but were also garrisoned in diverse Towns, Castles and Forts, all along the Roman
Limits, thereby to discover the Motions of the Neighboring Nations; several of
which being intended only at first for their Military Camps, by degrees grew up
into Cities, and are known at this day by the Name of Chesters; such as are
West-Chester on the River Dee, Portchester in Hampshire (now destroyed,)
Chester in the Street in Northumberland, with several others of less note near
the Picts Wall; as also in the Inland Parts of England, ending in the word
Cester, as Leicester, Cirencester, etc. all which owe their Original to the
Latin Name Castra.

HAVING now dispatched the British and Roman Polity, I come to the main part of
Design, which is, to give a brief Account of the Civil Government that the
English Saxons established in this part of our Island, which they called
England, who consisting of several Tribes or Nations inhabiting different
Countries, yet all speaking the same Language, came over hither at several
Times under their particular Leaders; and as soon as they had expelled the
Britains, they did within the space of about a hundred Years, The Heprarchy.
erect seven distinct Kingdoms, though not of equal Extent; the Names of which,
(notwithstanding they are set down in the History it self, yet having not given
you the particular Catalogue of the several Counties they contained, because
their Dominions were not then divided into those Districts as they were
afterward,) I have reserved to this place.

1 st. Kingdom.
THE first Kingdom, being that of Kent, consisted only of that County and Surrey.

2 d. Kingdom.
THE second, viz. that of the South Saxons, contained Sussex and Surrey, or at
least great part of it.

3 d. Kingdom.
THE third was the Kingdom of the West Saxons, and contained Devonshire,
Dorsetshire, Somersetshire, Wiltshire, Hampshire and Berkshire. But as for that
Country called Cornwall, I shall not reckon it here, because it was for a long
Time after governed by its own Princes, and not brought under the West Saxon
Dominion till long after

4 th. Kingdom.
THE fourth was that of the East Saxons, which contained Essex, Middlesex, and
part of Hertfordshire.

5 th. Kingdom.
THE fifth was that of the Northumbers, which contained Lancashire, Yorkshire,
the Bishopric of Duresme, Cumberland, Westmorland, Northumberland, and part of
Scotland, as far as Edinburgh Frith.

THIS Kingdom after the Death of Ida, was divided into two parts; the first
whereof, containing all the Countries lying on this side the River Tyne, was
called the Kingdom of Deira; and that on the other side of it was called
Bernicia, and so continued for several Descents, till King Oswy, about the Year
643. upon the Murder of King Oswin his Cousin, again reduced them into one; and
they continued thus united till such time as the Southern Provinces were
overrun by the Danes, as the more Northern were by the Scots, and have ever
since remained part of that Kingdom: and hence it is the Low-Lands of Scotland,
(that is, all the Country from the River Tyne, to the Friths of Edinburgh and
Dunbritton,) anciently spoke the English Saxon Tongue, which in succeeding
Times was changed into that English Dialect they call the Modern Scotch; and
consists of the old Saxon, with no little mixture of the Danish Language: this,
I suppose, proceeded from the great Conquests, and settling so many of that
Nation in those Northern Parts.

THIS is in great measure confirmed by John of Wallingford, (published by the
Learned Dr. Gale) where he relates, 545.
that Keneth King of Scots received Lothian from King Edgar, under the
Condition of a Homage from himself and his Successors Kings of Scotland, to the
King of England, as also that the People of that Country should enjoy their
Laws and Customs, as also the use of the English Tongue.

BUT as for the true and genuine Scottish, which they now call the Speech of the
Highlanders, because by them only spoken at this day, it is no other than the
ancient Irish, which the Scots brought over with them from thence, when they
first came over to inhabit there, as you will find in the Beginning of Bede's
History.

THE sixth Kingdom was that of the East Angles, 6 th. Kingdom.
which contained Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridgshire, with the Isle of Ely.

THE seventh was that of the Mercians, containing Gloucestershire, 7 th.
Kingdom.
Herefordshire, Worcestershire, Warwickshire, Leicestershire, Rutlandshire,
Northamptonshire, Lincolnshire, Huntingtonshire, Bedfordshire, Buckinghamshire,
Oxfordshire, Staffordshire, Shropshire, Nottinghamshire, Cheshire, and part of
Hertfordshire.

BUT as for the Names of the Kings who reigned in each of these Kingdoms, till
they were all brought under that of the West Saxons, I shall refer you to the
Tables at the end of the third, fourth and fifth Books of this Volume, wherein
you have at one view all the Kings that succeeded in each of those Periods, as
also those of that part of Britain we now call Wales; and for the more exact
Chronology of the first British Princes, I must own my self obliged to the
exact account of the Right Reverend the present Lord Bishop of Bangor, who I
hope one day will let the World see some of his Learned Labors on that Subject.

THIS is a short Scheme of the several Kingdoms, into which that Part of
Britain we now call England, was divided in the Saxon Times.

I should next proceed to the particular Laws and Forms of Government in each
respective Kingdom; but since we have no Remains of those left us for want of
Letters, before the Preaching of Christianity here, we can only say in the
general, that without doubt each of these Kingdoms had its own particular Laws
and Customs; and tho they might perhaps differ one from the other in some
Points, yet they all agreed in the main, as to the most Material and
Fundamental Constitutions of their Government, and long received Laws and
Customs before ever they arrived in England, as proceeding from the same Common
Ancestors.

AND tho the English-Saxons were not immediately derived from the Germans but
Goths, as you will find in the third Book of this Volume; yet since even the
Germans themselves were derived from the same Gothic Original, with all the
rest of those Northern People, as the Sweeds, Danes and Norwegians, as appears
by the Agreement of their Language, Customs and Laws; I shall therefore suppose
that in the main likewise they agreed with the Ancient Germans, as they are
described by De moribus Germanorum.
Tacitus, in their Laws, Manners, and Religion; and therefore I shall from him
give you some of the most considerable of them, as they are collected by Mr.
Seldom in his Learned Treatise, called; Jani Anglorum Facies altera.

THE first of which is, In conciliis Rex vel Princeps, prout Aetas Sententia,
fremitu aspernantur; sin placuit, frameas concutiunt. Honoratissimum assensus
Genus est Armis laudare. Which for the Benefit of the Common Readers, I will
take upon me to translate into English, viz.

IN their Councils the King, or some principal Person, according to every one's
respective Age, Nobility, Reputation in Arms, or Eloquence, are heard, rather
by the Authority of Persuading, than the Power of Commanding: if their Opinions
displeased them, they showed their dislike by their Clamor; but if they
approved of what was spoken, they struck their Lances one against another.
This was thought the most Honorable way of giving their Assent to approve by
Arms.

Eliguntur in iisdem Conciliis Principes, qui Jura per pagos vicosque reddunt.
Centeni singulis ex plebe Comites Consilium simul and Auctoritas adsunt, viz.

IN those Councils such chief Men are Elected, as judge Causes in Towns and
Villages. A hundred Assessors chosen out of the common People are added to each
of them, as well for Counsel as Authority. From whence Mr. Seldom here supposes
our Hundreds had their Original; which anciently consisted of the Masters of
one hundred Families.

Nihil publicae vel privatae Rei nisi Armati agunt, sed Arma sumere non ante
cuiquam moris, quam Civitas suffecturum probaverit. Tum in ipso Concilio, vel
Principum aliquis, vel pater, vel propinquus, scuto frameaque Juvenem ornant:
haec apud illos Toga, hic primus juventae honos: ante hoc Domus pars videntur,
mox Reipublicae, viz.

THEY transact nothing either of Public or Private Concern without their Arms:
but it was not a Custom for any to assume those Arms, before the Commonwealth
had approved of his Ability. Then in this very Council, either one of the
principal Men, or his Father, or his near Kinsman, adorned the Youth with the
Shield and Lance. This served them instead of a Gown, and was the first Honor
of their Youth: before they only seemed as part of the Family, but now they
became a Member of the Commonwealth. And here Mr. Seldom discovers the first
Footsteps of Knighthood.

Insignis Nobilitas, aut magna patrum merita, Principis dignationem, etiam
Adolescentulis assignant; viz.

EMINENT Nobility, or the signal Merits of their Ancestors, do advance even
these young Men to the Degree and Honor of being a chief Man.

FROM hence we may observe, that all Nobility among the ancient Germans was at
first Military, as being derived from the Noble and Valiant Acts of their
Ancestors in War; and thence proceed all the present Ensigns of it; videlicet,
the Shield, on which our Coats of Arms are now depicted; as also the Helmet and
Crest that stand for an Ornament over them: for until some Brave and Worthy Act
was performed, it was not lawful among the Germans for a young Warrior to
paint any Device upon his Shield, which was only Personal to himself, and
extended not to his Posterity.

Dotem non Vxor Marito, sed Vxori Maritus offert, viz.

THE Husband settles a Dower upon the Wife, and not, vice versa, the Wife upon
the Husband. Which shows the Antiquity of Dowe^ among the Germans and
English-Saxons; and as Mr. Seldom upon this Law observes, it was called
anciently MORGANGHEB among them.

THE sixth shows, that Accisis Crinibus, nudatam adulteram coram viz.

FOR Adultery, the Husband turned the Wife out of his House in the presence of
her Relations, having first cut off her Hair, and being then stripped, whipped
her through the Town.

BUT the Severity of this Punishment, if ever it was in use here, was quite
abolished by the English-Saxons, as you will find from the Laws about it.

THE seventh is, that Haeredes, successoresque sui cuique Liberi: and nullum
viz.

EVERY Man's Heirs and Successors are his Children; and no Testament is
allowed.

BUT in this the English-Saxon Law differed much from those of the Germans; for
it was lawful in England for Men of Quality to dispose of their Land by Will
(if they pleased) provided it were Bocland, (that is Free-Tenure grantable by
Deed) as you may find by some Laws in the ensuing Volume; otherwise in Lands
held in Socage, every Man's Sons inherited all alike: But this law was changed
after the Conquest, and no Will could be made of Lands held by Military
Service, but they descended entirely to the eldest Son: which Law continued so
low as the Reign of King Henry the 8 th, 32 Hen. VIII. Cap. 1.
when the Statute was first made, which gives the Tenant by Knights Service,
Power to bequeath his Estate by Will, provided there were enough left to
perform the Service.

THE eighth says, that Suscipere Inimicitias, seu patris, seu propinqui, viz.

IT is absolutely necessary to continue the Enmities of a Father, or near
Kinsman, as well as Friendships.

FROM whence, as Mr. Seldom well observes, arose those Family-Quarrels, called
in the North of England, DEADLY FEUDS, (which you will also find mentioned in
the ensuing Collection of Saxon Laws) and which are continued in Scotland even
to this Day.

BUT to proceed with Tacitus, he says, Nec implacabiles durant: Luitur enim
etiam homicidium certo Armentorum as Pecorum numero, recipitque satisfactionem
universa Domus, viz.

THAT they do not remain implacable; for the Homicide is recompensed with a
certain Number of great and small Cattle, and the whole Family thereupon
receives Satisfaction.

THIS Custom continued long not only among the Germans, but also
English-Saxons; The Price of Blood being to be redeemed at a certain Rate,
according to each Man's Condition, which you will hereafter often find in the
said Laws to be mentioned under the Title of WIREGILD: and in the Laws of King
Aethelstan you will meet with the particular Prices of each Man's Head, from
the Clown even to the King himself; the Estimation of whose Life is likewise
there set down, tho at a much higher Rate (as it ought to be) than that of
other Men's. But of this we shall speak more anon.

Frumenti modum Dominus, aut pecoris, aut vestis Colono injungit, viz.

THE Lord of the Soil prescribes to the Husbandman, what quantity of Corn,
Cattle, or Clothes he shall pay him.

FROM whence we may take notice of the Antiquity of Rent reserved upon Farms,
which was chiefly in Provision, and not in Money, as it continued for a long
Time after the Conquest here in England, and remains so in Scotland even to
this Day.

HAVING thus done with the Laws, we shall next descend to the People who
practiced them. Adam. Bremens. Hist. Eccles. Brem. and Hamburg. cap. 5. ex
Bibliotheca Henric. Ranzovii.
The ancient Saxons, as Adam of Bremen from Einhardus relates, were like the
Germans, divided into these four sorts, viz. Noblemen, Freemen, Slaves that
were Manumized, and lastly, those that continued Slaves: But Nithard. p. 4.
Nithardus speaking of his Time, makes them but of three sorts, scilicet,
Ethelings, Frilingues, and Lazzi, that is, Noblemen, Freemen, and Slaves: and
it was established as a Law among them, that none of these should transgress
the Bounds of their own Condition, by matching with those who were either a
Degree above, or below them.

THIS Custom was also long observed in England after the Conquest, Vid. Mag.
Charta, C. 6. and Merton. C. 7.
and gave Original to those Statutes of Mag. Char. and Merton, by which the
Lord was to lose the Benefit of his Wardship, in case he married the Ward to
his Disparagement, that is, To the Daughter of a Villain, or a Tradesman, in
case that the Kindred complained of it.

BUT before we come to treat of the several Degrees of People abovementioned,
it is fit we should say something of the Head of the Saxon Commonweal, viz.
their King; who though he was chosen in all the Kingdoms of the Heptarchy, out
of the Blood Royal of Woden, their first Leader of this Gothic Colony into
Europe, as appears by their Pedigree at the end of the Book; yet were they at
first no better than Generals in War, Bid Eccles. Hist. Li. 5. Cap. 12.
and in time of Peace they had little or no Power, as we may see in Bid.

FOR he speaking of the Province of the Hither (i. e. East) Frizeland, (from
whence he supposes our Saxon Ancestors to have come, and to which the two
Hewalds, the White and the Black, went to preach the Gospel, and were there
martyred for their Pains) he has this remarkable Passage, Non enim habent
Regem iidem antiqui Saxones, sed Satrapas plurimos suae Genti praepositos, qui
ingruente Belli Articulo mittunt aequaliter sorts, and quemcunque sors
ostenderit, hunc tempore Belli Ducem omnes sequuntur, and huic obtemperant;
peracto autem Bello, rursum aequalis potentiae omnes fiunt Satrapae: i. e. For
the Ancient Saxons (says he) have no King, but several Noblemen of their own
Nation set over them, who on the breaking out of any War, cast Lots, and on
whomsoever the Lot happened to fall, all the People during that War, follow and
obey him as their General; but when the War was over and at an end, all these
Lords again became of equal Power.

AND it is likewise very observable, that neither Bid nor any other German
Author, who relates the Story of the Saxons being invited by the Britains over
hither, ever mention their being sent by any of their Kings, but only by the
Saxon Nation in general: and if it continued thus in Bede's Time, it ought
reasonably to be concluded, that it was likewise so before their coming over,
unless any Man can show me some better Authority than ever I have yet met with
to the contrary.

AND that this likewise continued so, not only in Bede's Time, but many Years
after, may appear from this Testimony of Johan. Pomarius in his Saxon
Chronicle, which, tho written in Latin, yet not being able as yet to procure
the sight of it, I shall give you what he says almost to the same effect out of
Verstegan's Restitution of decayed Intelligence; Verstegan. Chap. 3. page 68,
69.
As for the General Government of the Country, they ordained twelve Noblemen,
chosen from among others for their Worthiness and Sufficiency. These in the
Time of Peace rode their several Circuits, to see Justice and good Customs
observed; and they often of Course, ^t appointed Times, met all together, to
consult and give Order in Public Affairs; but ever in Time of War one of these
twelve was chosen to be King, and so to remain as long only as the War lasted;
and that being ended, his Name and Dignity of King also ceased, and he became
as before: and this Custom continued among them until the Time of their Wars
with the Emperor Charles the Great, at which time, Wittekind one of the Twelve
as aforesaid, a Nobleman of Angria in Westphalia, bore over the rest the Name
and Authority of King; and he being afterward by the means of the said Emperor
converted to the Faith of Christ, had by him his mutable Title of King turned
into the enduring Title and Honor of Duke; and the eleven others were in like
manner by the said Emperor advanced to the honorable Titles of Earls and
Lords, with Establishment for the continual remaining of these Titles and
Dignities unto them and their Heirs; of whose Descents are since issued the
greatest Princes at this present in Germany.

FROM what now I have given you, I think nothing is more evident than that the
Government of the Ancient English Saxons was rather Aristocratical than
Monarchical: and admitting they allowed the King they had set over them
somewhat more Power than those Noblemen abovementioned, by whom they where
governed in their own Country in time of Peace; yet was this Power of theirs
far short of that absolute Dominion which Dr. Howell in his Discourse of the
Polity of the English-Saxons supposes, (tho without any just Ground, Dr.
Howell's General History, Part. 4 Fol. 272.
) that these Kings enjoyed, and therefore he would have it, That the Government
was Monarchical, and that not only in respect of the particular Kingdoms during
the Heptarchy, which had their peculiar Kings, but even of the whole Body of
the Nation, which was usually commanded by one of the Seven; of all which Bid
takes notice in his Time.

BUT if every one of these Kings were no more a Monarch, than he who was
sometimes Supreme or Chief above the Rest, I doubt he will fall very short of
that Title, which is not found either in Bid, or in the Saxon Annals, or yet
in any other Ancient Writer before the Conquest, until the Time of King Edred,

BUT I have said enough to confute this Notion, I hope, in the Preface.

THE Doctor's next Argument is from the Nature of the Monarchy, which he says,
We must believe at the first followed the Condition of the Tenure, absolute
Conquests and Territories, Id. ibid.
both got and held by the Sword alone, usually producing absolute Governments,
which many times either by reason of the infirm Foundation laid by the
Conquerors themselves, the Humor of the People not enduring such Subjection,
or other Accidents, change into more Moderate and less Arbitrary. That Hengest,
Aella, and the other Captains, where they first erected their Dominations,
governed their Soldiers, whom now being Kings they called Subjects, with as
great Authority, and as full Command as formerly, we little doubt.

IN answer to this, and to show you, that notwithstanding what this Author has
alleged, we have still great reason to doubt the Truth of it, as being founded
on no Authority, but rather the quite contrary appears; I shall therefore only
desire the Reader in the first place to take notice, that it is no good
Argument at all to say, that because the Saxon Princes were Conquerors by the
means of their Followers, therefore they must have submitted themselves
absolutely to their Dominion, when the War was over.

FOR the better Proof of which, I would farther entreat the Reader to observe;

FIRST, That those Princes or Generals over the English-Saxons; (tho all of
them were descended from Woden their Common Ancestor,) knew no such Power as
that of Kings of Home, (according to Bid;) or if we believe Pomarius, the
Title of King lasted at the most no longer than the War: nor could those
Princes be made Kings by their own Nation before they came over, since being
only mere Soldiers of Fortune, they had as yet conquered no Dominions, from
whence they could receive that Denomination: so that then it must fall out,
that they could only be so by the Election of their Soldiers and Followers,
that came over along with them; which may be also proved from the ensuing
Annals themselves.

FOR first they call Hengest and Horsa the two Brothers, who came over hither
only Heretogan, i.e. Leaders or Captains of the Jutes that accompanied them, as
you may see An. 449. of these Annals.

NOR secondly, do they begin the Reign of Hengest till the Death of Horsa his
Brother, Anno 455. six Years after his coming over: so that it is plain he
could have no other Right to his Kingdom of Kent, but the free Election of the
People that came over with him, or else followed him not long afterward.

THE like I might say of all the rest of the Kingdoms of the Heptarchy for the
same Reason, were there no express Authorities to prove it, which yet also are
not wanting.

FOR as to the Kingdom of the West Saxons, (which afterward swallowed up all
the rest) our Annals, Anno 495. tell us Of Cerdic, and Cynric his Son, their
landing in Britain with five Ships, and having fought with the Britains, they
about six Years after their coming over, upon their conquering the Country of
the West Saxons, became their first Kings: which is further confirmed under
Anno 519. where it is expressly related, that Cerdic and Cynric then began their
Reigns over the West Saxon Kingdom. So likewise in Anno 547. it is there said,
that Ida began first to reign; from whom is derived the Royal Stock of the
Northumbrian Kings.

AND yet we find from Nennius and Malmesbury, and all our other Historians who
treat of this Matter, that Octa and Ebusa, Son and Nephew to Hengest, had
landed in the Northern Parts of England not long after Hengest himself; and
having conquered those Countries, they and their Descendants ruled there for
near 100 Years, tho without the Title of Kings, but only as subordinate Lords
or Earls under the Kings of Kent, till this Ida obtained the Kingdom; but
whether by Succession or Election, William of Malmesbury cannot tell us, but
rather inclines to the latter: and tho it be true, that these Annals mention no
other Kingdoms of the Heptarchy than these three last; yet it appears from very
good Testimonies in the ensuing History, that Norfolk, Suffolk and
Cambridgshire, being the Country of the East Angles, were conquered by them
under several petty Princes, that ruled there long before Vffa, who was made
the first King of that whole Country.

THE like I may say for the Mercian Kingdom, where Creoda, or Crida, began his
Reign about Anno 585. above 60 Years after the East Angles first settled in
those Parts.

HAVING now, I hope, sufficiently proved this Point against the Learned Dr.
Howell, I think it will plainly follow, that all those Kings abovementioned
could have no other Title to their Crowns besides Election, who from Captains
and Generals in time of War, became Kings in time of Peace over the Countries
they had conquered.

I will here therefore leave it to the Impartial Reader, to consider; whether
what Dr. Howell asserts is at all likely to be true, viz. That the Power of
these Kings commencing by the Sword, was as absolute in Time of Peace as in
that of War: for we plainly see, that these were a free People, and it is in no
ways probable that they should, contrary to the Genius of so noble and free a
Nation, submit themselves to the absolute Dominion of one Man, who owed his
delegated Power to themselves.

BESIDES this, the original Constitution of all these several Kingdoms speaks
the quite contrary; for we find in the following History, frequent mention made
of great Councils of the Wites, i. e. the chief, or wise Men of the whole
Kingdom, which Councils were established to curb the exorbitant Power of their
Kings; since by these they were elected, and by these too they were likewise
often deposed, when ever their Tyranny rendered them insupportable; as you will
see in several Instances when you peruse the following Books in this Volume.

AND thus having traced as far as we are able the Original of the first
English-Saxon Kings, we shall now in the next Place treat of the manner of
their Succession to the Crown, which some of our Modern Authors fancy to have
been by a Lineal Succession, because we find the Son to have often succeeded
the Father in most of these Kingdoms for several Descents. But if this should
be granted, yet is it no good Argument to prove a Lineal Succession by Blood:
for tho I am sensible that the Saxon Annals, as well as all other Historians,
are very obscure in this Point, not declaring which way those Princes came to
the Crown, whether by Succession or Election, because it was omitted in the old
Saxon Annals out of which they wrote, and which we find very short in that
particular; yet this will by no means warrant those Kingdoms to have been only
Successive, as some Men fondly suppose; seeing we may observe, that in the
German Empire, (which every one knows to be Elective) the Son has succeeded
the Father, or a younger Brother the Elder, for above 150 Years, ever since the
Time of the Emperor Ferdinand Brother to Charles the Fifth; however I hope no
Body will have the Confidence to affirm, that the Empire has been only
Successive, and not Elective all this while.

THE same I may say concerning the Succession of our English-Saxon Kings, in
which tho we find the Son often succeeded the Father, or one Brother another,
yet does not this prove that the Succession went by right of Inheritance, as it
does at this day.

I MAY say the like as to Denmark and Sweden, the latter of which has been by
Succession but little above fourscore Years from Charles the Ninth; and as for
the former, it has become so even in our own Memories: and yet for many
Successions in both these Kingdoms, he that was the next Heir by Lineal
Descent, was most commonly chosen King after the Death of his Father, Uncle or
Brother; but before this Election he could claim no Legal Right to the Crown by
the Laws of these Kingdoms, of which I shall give you diverse Instances. And I
think we may affirm this of all the Kingdoms of the Saxon Heptarchy; where tho
the Mycel-Gemots commonly obliged themselves to choose one of the Blood Royal,
and the next Heir rather than any other, provided he were equally fit to
govern, especially if he were recommended or designed for Successor by the Will
of the last King; however in this they took a great Latitude, as will evidently
appear in the pursuit of this Discourse.

BUT I must confess the manner how the Saxon Kings came to the Throne is but
darkly expressed by the words FENG to RICE in Saxon, in Latin Regnum capessit,
which we have commonly rendered, succeeded in, or to the Kingdom: yet those
words do not signify any Lineal Succession, but are often promiscuously used,
when the next Successor could have no Title but Election, as shall be farther
shown by and by.

NOW the best way to prove this, I think, will be briefly to survey the
Successions of each Kingdom, and the several Breaches and Alterations that were
made therein, upon this supposed Lineal Succession. And first, 1. Kent.
to begin with the Kingdom of Kent, of which we indeed have scarce any more
than the bare Names of the Kings, with but very little of their Actions, for
about four Descents, till Ethelbert the first Christian King there began to
reign, only that the Son still succeeded the Father.

SO likewise from this Ethelbert to Earcombert his Grandson, for two Descents
more we find the like seeming Lineal Succession; yet for all this does it not
therefore follow, that there might not have been either elder Brothers, or the
Sons of them, who were excluded during that Time; seeing that we only meet with
the next Successor mentioned, without telling us whether there were not such
Heirs put by: for under the Year 640. we learn from our Annals, that Earcombert
King of Kent succeeded Eadbald his Father abovementioned, who yet left an elder
Son named Ermenred, that according to the Course of Lineal Descent ought to
have succeeded to the Kingdom before his younger Brother Earcombert: Vid.
Florence of Worcester 's Genealogy of the Kentish Kings at the end of his
Chronicle, page 689. and Will. of Malmes^ury, Lib. 1. p. 10, 11.
but whether he was disinherited by his Father, or rejected by the People, our
Annals mention not, only that this Ermenred left two Sons, who afterward were
made away by one Thunor, Servant to King Earcombert.

AFTER him Egbert his Son succeeded, leaving a Son called Eadric, yet he did
not succeed as he ought to have done (according to our Modern Opinions) by
Hereditary Right, but Lothaire his Uncle, that kept the Kingdom twelve Years
from him: But whether he came in by the Testament of his Brother, or Election
of the People, or by both, neither Bid nor any other Author give us an
Account; tho it must be confessed, that this Eadric was discontented at his
being thus put by, and therefore fled to the South Saxons, and joined with them
who were then in actual War against Lothaire; who happening to be worsted in
the Fight where this Eadric commanded, and dying of the Wounds he therein
received, Eadric succeeded, but whether by Right of Lineal Descent, or
Election, is no where said: Nor does his thus making War upon his Uncle prove
his Right, since we find that King Edward the Elder suffered the like
Disturbance from Prince Vide Saxon Annals, Anno 901, 902.
Ethelwald, the Son of King Ethelred his Father's elder Brother, as you will
see in the beginning of the Reign of that King, which ended not but with the
Life of the said Prince Ethelwald, who pretended to the Crown.

NOR were Foreign Princes any better satisfied with Eadric's Right; for William
of Malmesbury tells us, that Ceadwalla made War upon him, Ibid.
and destroyed his Country, to revenge the Death of King Lothaire his
Predecessor.

BUT after this Eadric, two Princes, called Webba and Seward, held the Kingdom,
which must certainly have been by Election, because it is not related, whether
they were of the Royal Family or no; but they reigned not long, for Whitred
Brother to Eadric succeeded them: after whom this Kingdom seems to have gone in
a Lineal Succession for three Descents, as far as to his Sons Eadbert,
Ethelbert, and Alric; tho these Princes might have been also elected, for ought
we know to the contrary, for they all reigned successively after each other:
But whether any of these left Sons is uncertain, for Malmesbury tells us, That
after them the Kentish Royal Family decaying, any bold Aspirer, whom Wealth or
Faction made formidable, obtained that Crown, but how? -- Most Likely by the
Election of their Great Councils, for Usurpations by Force could not well be
practiced in Kingdoms where (there being no standing Army) the King in great
measure depended on the general good Will of the People.

BUT as for the next Kingdom, viz. that of the South Saxons, 2. South Saxons.
there is so little said of them by any of our Historians, and they were so
soon swallowed up by the Kingdom of the West Saxons, that we can only guess
they succeeded to the Crown, but it is most probable, that it was after the
same manner as the Kings did in all the other Kingdoms.

I should next treat of the Kingdom of the West Saxons, according to the course
of Time wherein it begun, but I intend to reserve that to the last, because it
is from them that all our English-Saxon Kings descended, till the Conquest.

AND therefore I will now give you a brief Succession of the Kings of the
East Saxons, 3. East Saxons.
where they seem to have followed in a Lineal Descent, till Sebert, the first
Christian King; and he dying, as Bede relates, Bid Lib. 2. Cap. 5. and Flor.
Wig. page 690.
left his three Sons joint Heirs of his Kingdom, tho we can find no more than
the Names of two of them, viz. Sexred and Seward, who being both slain in
Battle against the West Saxons, Sigbert, the Son of Seward, succeeded him.

THIS I remark to show you, that this Kingdom did not always go according to a
Lineal Succession, for all the three Brothers were Heirs alike: and that the
Testament of the King alone had not the Power to do this without the concurring
Assent of the Great Council of the Kingdom, I shall prove when I come to
discourse of the Succession of the West Saxon Kings; since it is most
reasonable to suppose the same General Laws or Constitutions concerning it to
have been in use among them all, until any one can prove the contrary.

I have no more to say concerning these Kings of the East Saxons, but that
after the Death of King Sebbi or Sebba, Ibid. Cap. 12.
we are informed by Bid, that Siggard and Swithered his two Brothers, reigned
jointly after him, which I observe only the further to make good the former
Instance, of more Heirs than one at a Time.

4. Northumbers.
AND now I come to the Kingdom of the Northumbers, the Lineal Succession whereof
being so often broken, and so very perplexed, it would be tiresome to give you
all the particular Instances in which the next Heirs by Descent were put by,
and other Princes of the Blood more remote chosen by the People in their Rooms:
so that from Ida their first King for near three hundred Years, we shall scarce
ever find that Crown settled in any one Family for above three Descents, but
that it was still translated to some other Prince of the Blood Royal, Vid. The
Genealogies of the Saxon Kings at the end of Florence of Worcester.
which seems to have been the most general Rule they observed, as any one may
see, who will please to consult their Pedigree at the end of Florence of
Worcester.

AND indeed the frequent Rebellions of this Nation against their Kings, and the
Deposing of them so as they did, being not only observed, but frequently blamed
by William of Malmesbury and our other Ancient Historians, I shall not draw any
Precedents from thence, but such as we find in the very beginning of this
Kingdom, and before that People were infected with that turbulent Humor of
casting off their Kings whenever they displeased them.

Lib. 1. Cap. 3.
TO begin with Ida their first King, it is true William of Malmesbury will not
affirm, whether he made himself King by his own Power, or else became so by
Consent of the People, because he owns it to be very much in the dark; yet
Henry Huntington is positive, that he was chosen to this Dignity by the Consent
of the Great or chief Men: but after his Death, tho a Prince of great Merit,
the Kingdom became divided, and Adda his Son only obtained the Kingdom of
Bernicia, whilst Aella, the Son of Yffi, of the same Royal Lineage, succeeded
him in that of Deira, which how it could be unless by Election, I do not
understand.

See Florence in the Place above cited.
NOR did any of the Sons of Adda succeed him in that Kingdom, but three other
Princes, viz. Glappa, Theodulf, and Frethulf, whose Relation to the
Northumbrian Blood Royal, our Authors do not declare, nor yet how they stood in
Consanguinity to each other; only they say that after them, Thedorick first,
and then Ethelrick, the Sons of Ida, succeeded in the Bernician Kingdom, which
how they could do otherwise than by Election I do not find.

Flor. Ibid.
AND note, that these six Princes last mentioned, governed Bernicia, whilst
Aella being yet alive still reigned in Deira; nor did he, for all he ruled
above thirty Years, long secure the Kingdom to his Son Eadwin; for he was soon
expelled by Ethelfrith, the Son of King Ethelrick, who forced him to fly his
Country, whilst he commanded both Nations for several Years, till being at
last overcome and slain in Battle by Redwald King of the East Angles; Eadwin
again recovered not only his own Kingdom, but that of Deira also.

BUT yet he did not enjoy what he had thus obtained many Years, for he lost his
Life in a fight with Penda King of the Mercians, and then Osric his
Cousin-German succeeded him in Deira, whilst Eanfrid, the Son of Ethelfrith,
was made King of Bernicia; but he soon after being killed by Cadwallo King of
the Britains, Oswald his Brother succeeded him, who being also slain by the
said Penda, Oswin his younger Brother was made King, whilst Oswy, the Son of
Osric, reigned in Bernicia, and having cruelly murdered Oswin, made himself
Master of both Kingdoms; but whether it was done by the Power of the Sword, or
by Election, since our Authors are silent in this Matter, I will not determine.
I have only set down the Succession of these first Kings, to show that there
was not often any Hereditary Lineal Right to the Crown observed among them.

AS for the Kingdom of the East Angles, 5. East Angles.
the Ancient Annals and Histories of that Country having been all destroyed by
the Danes, we have little more than the Names and Successions of their Kings
left us, nor yet of those higher than Vffa, (tho it is certain the East Angles
had fixed themselves in those Parts long before he began to reign) and those
but very lame and defective: For from Ethelbert who was murdered by King Offa,
for above threescore Years, we have no Account of what Kings reigned in that
Kingdom; and it is certain, that upon the Death of Offa and his Son Egfert, the
People of the East Angles freed themselves from the Mercian Yoke; but about the
Year 855. (as Asser in his Annals, and Florence of Worcester assure us) Edmund,
(after called the Martyr) being then but fifteen Years old, was Elected and
Crowned King of the East Angles by the general Consent of the People of that
Kingdom; but they do not inform us who was his Father; yet if we may give
Credit to John of Tinmouth in his Sanctilogium, he makes him to be the Son of
one Alcmond a Nobleman of the Blood Royal.

I have given you this Instance, to let you see that they were no Strangers to
Elective Kings; for if his Blood alone would have fixed in him any Title, there
would have been no need at all of his Election: but this King being afterward
murdered by the Danes, they also seized on his Kingdom, and held it till it was
reconquered by King Edward the Elder.

NOR have we much to remark of the manner of the Succession of the Mercian
Kings; 6. Mercians
for tho the Son very frequently succeeded the Father, or one Brother or Cousin
to another, yet it is as certain that it must have been chiefly by an Elective
Right, notwithstanding the Annals and our Historians do not expressly mention
it: Florence Wig. p. 691.
For Beornred having in the Year 755. treacherously slain Ethelbald King of the
Mercians, Offa a young Man of the Blood Royal, raising Forces against him, and
having driven him out of the Kingdom, he was, as Page 852. printed at the end
of Script. post Bedam.
Ingulph relates, made King in his room by the General Consent of the Nobles of
Mercia; or as Anno 758.
Matthew Westminster words it, He was by the unanimous Consent of the Clergy
and Laiety of that Kingdom, Elected and Crowned King; which without doubt was
done in a Great Council of that Nation, for we find that to secure the Crown to
his own Family, Page 26.
Matthew Paris in his Life of King Offa, tells us, that in a Great Council
assembled at Calcuith, Anno 787. he caused Egfrid his eldest on, a comely and
valiant Youth, to be crowned King, who jointly reigned with him as long as he
lived: and that this could not be done without the Consent and Election of this
Great Council, appears by the twelfth Law or Decree made therein, Vid. Sir
Henry Spelm. Council. Vol. 1. Anno 787.
entitled, De ordinatione Regum, viz. That at the Election or Ordination of
Kings, no Man should permit the Assent or Vote of evil Men to prevail, but
Kings shall be lawfully Elected by the Clergy and Elders, ( i.e. chief Men of
the Kingdom) and not begotten of Adultery or Incest, because an Adulterer,
according to the Canons, cannot arrive to the Priesthood; so neither can he be
the Lord's Anointed and Heir of his Country, or King of the whole Kingdom, who
is not begot of Lawful Matrimony.

FROM hence the Reader may observe, that he who is appointed to be Elected, is
also called Haeres Patriae, to let us see, that he who was to come in by an
Elective Right, was also accounted the Right Heir of the Kingdom.

AFTER Egfrid succeeded Kenwulfe, who certainly came in by Election, being
himself very remote from the Crown; for William of Malmesbury says, Lib. 1.
he was in the fifth Descent from Cenwalch the Brother of Penda, one of the
first Mercian Kings; a Title too stale in that Age to give a Right without a
new Election, since his Predecessor King Offa could not be admitted to obtain
the Crown without it, tho he was in Blood almost as near to it, Vid. Chronicon
Saxonicum, Anno DCCLV. where his Pedigree is set down.
being in the fifth Descent from Wibba or Wippa, who was the Father of the
aforesaid Penda.

BUT were there no other Proof of this, the Decree of the Council
abovementioned sufficiently evinces this Kingdom to have been elective at that
Time.

TO Kenwulf abovementioned, succeeded Kenelme a Child, and he is the first
Example of an Infant's succeeding when there was a Male Heir of full Age alive,
Vid. William Malm. Lib. p. 33.
viz. Ceolwulf the Brother of the said Kenwulf; which I suppose proceeded from
the great Love they bore to their late deceased King, and some Aversion they
had to his Brother, as you will see by and by.

BUT if John of Tinmouth in his Historia Aurea, (still in Manuscript in several
Libraries) may be credited, tho he wrote long after those Times, yet out of
ancient Manuscripts not now extant, he says expressly, Kenelmum aetate parvulum,
sed animo and pietate magnificum, ad Regem elegerat Amor Populi sui, i. e. the
Love of the People had elected Kenelm to be their King, tho an Infant in Years,
yet remarkable for Spirit and Piety.

BUT King Kenelme being murdered by his Sister Quendride, and she frustrated in
her expectations of the Crown, our Annals tell us, that then Ceolwulf was
advanced to it, (without making any mention at all of King Kenelme) and the
next Year expelled his Kingdom by the Faction and Contrivance of Bernulph a
potent Nobleman, but however no way related to the Blood Royal, and so
consequently could have no other Title or Pretense but Election, however
unjustly he came by it.

THE like I may say of his Successors Ludican, Wiglaff, Bertwulf, and Burhed;
the former of whom was only a remote Kinsman of Bernulph's, and the three
latter were all of them of quite different Families: but as for Ceolwulf, who
was the last that bore the Title of King of Mercia, he deserves not to be
mentioned, being only for a Time made King by the Danes to serve their turns,
and was quickly after deposed by them. I have but lightly run over the
Succession of these Kings, and refer you for the farther Proof to the following
History, where you will find all the Authors fairly quoted.

BUT now I come to the Succession of the Kings of the West Saxons, 7.
West Saxons.
from whom our English Monarchs derive their Pedigree to this Day: and
therefore I shall be the more particular in my Quotations out of the Ancient
Authors concerning the Right which those Princes had to the Crown, and the
manner how they attained it.

AS for Cerdic, and his Son Cynric, the first Kings of the West Saxons, it is
certain that they had not the title of Kings before they came over, which the
Annals place under Anno 495. as we have already observed: nor is it likely that
they claimed by any other Title than the Election of their Followers, because
we find by the same Annals, that it was above twenty Years before they took
upon them the Name of Kings; for An. 519. they say, Hoc Anno Cerdicus and
Cynricus Occidentalium Saxonum Regnum susceperunt; a quo usque die regnavit
Occidentalium Saxonum proles Regia. This Year Cerdic and Cynric began to reign
over the West Saxons, and from that Time the Royal Race of the West Saxons have
reigned to this day.

BUT it must be confessed, that the Crown from Cerdic to Ceawlin went lineally
in three Descents from Father to Son; however this does not prove but that it
might also have been Elective for the Reasons at first given.

THE same may likewise be said for Ceolric and Ceolwulph the Nephews of
Ceawlin: but that the former of these came in by Election is apparent; for upon
Ceawlin's being expelled the Kingdom, Cwichelme Vid. Rad. de Diceto, Anno 593.
his Brother ought to have succeeded him in case he had no Sons, as we do not
read he had: and yet notwithstanding Ceolric was made King, and this Cwichelme
died in the same Year with his Brother, viz. DXCIII. as you may see in the
Annals.

AND to Ceolwulf succeeded Cynegils, Son of Ceol, Vid. Annal. Saxon. An. 611.
Brother to the King last mentioned; and that he also came in by Election is
highly probable, because another Cwichelme who was his Brother was made Partner
with him in the Kingdom, which could not have been done by his sole Authority,
his own Power at that Time not being absolute.

THIS Cwichelme Lib. 1. cap. 2.
William of Malmesbury makes to be his Brother; but Florence of Worcester, and
Matthew Westminster, call him his Son: but let him have been whether you
please, it is certain here was no Monarchy, the Kingdom being divided between
two who had equal Power. But Cwichelme dying before Cynegills his Brother or
Son, the latter left the Kingdom to Cenwalch his Son; tho if Cwichelme was his
Son, then Cuthred his Nephew, the Son of Vid. Flor. Wig. An. 666. and the
Pedigree at the end of the 4 th Book.
Cwichelme, ought by right of Blood to have succeeded his Father.

BUT this King dying without any Issue, Vid. William Malmesb. Lib. 1. page 13.
left the Kingdom to Sexburge his Consort by his Testament.

AND tho this Example may seem to make good Dr. Brady's assertion, viz. that
the West Saxon Kings might bequeath the Crown to whom they would, yet that they
could not do this without the Consent of the Estates of the Great Council of
the Kingdom, I hope I shall fully make out before I have done.

BUT this Queen Sexburge dying, or being deposed, as Flor. Hist. Anno 672.
Matthew. Westminster relates, after somewhat more than a Year's Reign; Aescwin a
remote Kinsman succeeded her, tho he was six Degrees off from Cerdic the first
King; and therefore he is not likely to have had any better Title than his
Predecessors, for the Reason already given under the Kings of Mercia; and if
that will not satisfy, then I say Centwin his Successor was much nearer to the
Crown than he, being younger Son to Cynegils, who had reigned within two
Successions before, as you may see by the Pedigree at the end of the fourth
Book, where are exactly set down either from the Annals, or Ancient
Manuscripts, in what manner these several Kings stood related to each other.

BUT before the Death of Aescwin, it seems by the Saxon Annals, Anno 785. That
Ceadwalla, a Prince of the Blood Royal, taking Arms, began to contend for the
Crown of that Kingdom, tho he was very far removed from it, being descended
from Cutha the younger Son of Ceawlin.

Vid. Annal. Saxon. Anno 693.
TO Ceadwalla succeeded Ina, to whom that King upon his going to Rome left the
Crown, tho he was no nearer to it than his Predecessor, being descended from
Cuthwin, the youngest Son of Ceawlin abovementioned, and could for certain have
had no other Right than that of Election, because Cenred his Father was alive
at the same time, as you may see in the Vid. 1st Vol. of Sir Henry Spelman 's
Councils, as also the ensuing History.
Preface to this King's Laws, where he is expressly so called.

BUT as for the five next Princes, viz. Athelhard, Cuthred, Sigebyrht,
Cynewulf, and Bryhtric, it is most probable that they neither could have any
other Title than Election, since being only Kinsmen and not Sons to each other,
it is very unlikely that so many of them should have died without leaving any
Son to succeed them: which is also as good as confessed by William of
Malmesbury, in these words, Nam and ipse Brihtricus, and caeteri infra Inam
Reges, licet naturalium splendore gloriantes, quippe qui a Cerdicio originem
traherent, non parum tamen a linea Regiae stirpis exorbitaverant; i. e. For tho
Brihtric himself, and the rest of the Kings since Ina, tho boasting of their
Royal Lineage, as drawing their Origin from Cerdic, yet did they not a little
deviate from the right Royal Line, that is, they were not Lineal Heirs by
Blood: and if so, what other Right could they have except that of Election by
the People? Therefore since neither our Annals, nor any other Author that I
know of, have given us their Pedigrees, I have been forced to set down the
Names of these last five Kings by themselves, without being able to show you
what Relation they had to each other.

BUT as for Cynewulf, that he could have no Title to the Crown but what
Election gave him, it is certain; for our Annals inform us under Anno 755. That
he with the Wife and Noble Men of the West Saxons, deprived King Sigebert of
the whole Kingdom for his Cruelty and Injustice. And certainly then the same
Authority that Deposed the one, must also Elect and set up the other; since he
could by no means succeed him as his Heir, because we find in the same Annals,
Anno 755.
That Cyneheard the Brother of the late King Sigebert, conspiring against King
Cynewulf, set upon him in a certain Woman's House at Merton in Surrey, and
there slew him; and was at last also killed himself: after whom Bryhtric began
to reign, who was in a Right Line descended from Cerdic.

BUT we are now come out of the Dark into clearer Times; for K. Egbert
succeeding Bryhtric, came in by Election, being, as our Annals likewise inform
us, four Descents removed from Ingilds the Brother of King Ina; and that his
best Title was Election, appears from the Testimonies of our most ancient
Historians, viz. Ethelwerd, who says expressly, Itaque ordinatur Egberht
super-Occidentales Saxones in Regnum; E^helwerdi Hist. Lib. 3. cap. 2.
this must signify, that he was set over the Kingdom. And further to confirm
that, Ordinatur here signifies the same with Eligitur: see the Law
abovementioned concerning the Election of the Mercian Kings; the Title of it in
Sir Henry Spelman's first Volume of Councils, Fol. 292.
is, de Ordinatione Regum, i.e. of the Election of Kings.

AND that by this word Ordinatur, cannot be meant any Lineal Succession in
Ethelwerd, will further appear from him, where he says, Lib. 4. Cap. 1.
Post Obitum Athulfi Regis, ordinati sunt filii ejus in Regnum; which must be
understood either an Appointment by the Father's Will, or else a new Election,
since these Sons of King Aethelwulf could never be thus appointed or ordained
Kings by the Law of Lineal Succession, because each of these Brothers, except
the Eldest, left Sons.

BUT William of Malmesbury does likewise as good as own, Lib. 2. Cap. 1.
that King Egbert came in by Election, when he says, that upon the Death of
Brytrich, Egbert at the frequent Solicitations of his Contrymen coming over
into Britain; Moxque imperare jussus, Patriae Desideriis satisfecit, being
immediately commanded to reign, did thereupon satisfy the Desires of his
Country. Now I would fain know, if he had come in by virtue of a Lineal
Descent, why he should have needed the being commanded to reign, since he ought
rather to have commanded their Allegiance as his Due?

AND either to this Time, or rather to the latter end of this King's Reigny (as
you may find in the ensuing History) I suppose may be referred what the Author
of the Mirror of Justices, in the very beginning of the Book, says concerning
the first Election of a King to reign over the rest of the Saxon Sovereign
Princes, viz. That forty of them made him to swear, that he would maintain the
Holy Christian Faith with all his Power, and govern his People according to
Right, without regard to any Person: and that he should be liable to suffer
Right, ( i. e. Judgment) as well as others of his People.

THIS Passage, tho it be accounted by some of but a doubtful Authority, because
of the forty Princes abovementioned, whereas we never read of above seven or
eight Saxon Kings to have reigned at once, and those ^oo were by this Egbert
reduced to three besides himself; viz. the East Angles, Mercia, and
Northumberland; yet if by the Princes here mentioned, we understand not
Sovereign Princes, but Ealdormen of Counties and Great Cities, who (as Mr.
Seldom shows us in his Titles of Honor) are commonly styled in the old Saxon
Charters Principes, and by this Author in his French Original, rendered Princes;
Seldom. Tit. Hon. Fol. 502. last Edition.
these meeting together in a Great Council, did, as the chief Magistrates of
the Cities and Counties from whence they came, The Division of England into
Counties was much more ancient than King Alfred.
injoin the King this Oath which was taken at the General Council mentioned in
the ensuing History under Anno 803, or else 828. This Passage in the Mirror of
J^stic^s, if it were taken out of some old Saxon Monument now lost, (as I have
great reason to believe it was, since the Laws which he here relates concerning
King Alfred, are admitted by the Learned Author of the Notes upon his Life,
printed at Oxford, Aelfredi Magni Vita, Fol. 82.
to have been transcribed by him from some Ancient Commentaries of that King,
which Laws he there a little after recites:) I say, this Passage may serve as a
great Proof, not only of this King's Election to be the Chief or Supreme King
of all England, but also it gives us the Original Contract, if I may so call
it, which he then entered into with this Nation, at the time of his Election and
Coronation.

TO Egbert succeeded Athelwulf his Son; who, though I grant it is no where said
that he was Elected, yet if his Father were so (as it is most evident he was)
it is not likely that the Kingdom should become Successive in one Descent,
especially if we consider the manner of all his five Sons coming to the
Kingdom, either in his Lifetime, or after him.

Vid. Annal. Saxon. and Flor. Wig. An. 636.
FOR as to Athelstane his eldest Son, on whom he bestowed (almost as soon as he
came to the Crown) the Kingdom of Kent, with the South and East Saxons, I have
proved in the ensuing History from Flor. Hist. Anno 637.
Matthew Westminster and other Authors, that he was Illegitimate, and so could
have no Legal Right of Succession: nor does it seem probable, he should be set
over those Kingdoms by his Father without any previous Election, or Consent of
those People.

AND as for his other four Legitimate Sons, Ethelbald, the Eldest of them, did
by the General Consent of the King and the whole Nation, (which amounts to an
Election) Vid. Annal. Asserii, Anno 855. page 56. edit. per Doct. Gale, and De
Gestis Aelfredi, page 3.
divide the Kingdom with his Father, he himself enjoying that of the
West Saxons, whilst his Father ruled over the rest. And by the virtue of his
Testament, confirmed likewise by the General Consent of the Kingdom, Ethelbald
remained only King of the West Saxons, whilst Ethelbert his second Brother
reigned in Kent, as also over the East and South Saxons, which had been his
Brother Aethelstane's share, who died without Issue for ought we can find.

BUT after King Ethelbald's Death, Ethelbert succeeded in the whole Kingdom;
and he likewise dying, Ethelred his Brother succeeded him, after whose Death
also Alfred the youngest Brother came to the Throne.

THIS short Account is the Truth of the Matter of Fact; yet there requires a
great deal to be said to have it well understood; since Dr. Brady in his true
and exact History of the Succession of the Crown, Vol. 1. of his Introduction,
will needs derive the whole Right which these Princes had to the Kingdom, from
the Entail of it by their Father's Will abovementioned; and if the Testament of
a King then Regnant could dispose of the Crown to the prejudice of the Right
Heirs by Lineal Descent, I desire this Learned Antiquary to satisfy us how this
could consist with his supposed Right of Lineal Succession at the same Time?

BUT the Truth is, this worthy Doctor, as well as the Author of the great Point
of Succession discussed, here deal with us like some crafty. Witnesses, who
indeed speak the Truth, but not the whole Truth, if they find it will make
against them. For the Doctor in the first Place conceals, and the nameless
Author of the other Pamphlet, either wilfully or ignorantly, positively denies,
that King Alfred's three elder Brothers, who reigned before him, left any Issue
Male; whereas it is most certain that two of them, if not all Three, left Sons
behind them: for Athelm and Aethelwold, Vid. Testament. Alfredi Regis.
(to whom King Alfred by his Testament bequeaths diverse Lands therein
mentioned, under the Title of his Brother's Sons) are supposed by the Learned
Author of the Notes upon his Life, to have been the Children of King Ethelbald
his eldest Brother, tho whether they were so or no I will not be so confident
as to affirm. But that they were either the Sons of Ethelbald or Ethelbert is
most certain, and consequently they ought to have reigned before him who was
but their Uncle.

AS for King Ethelred, he had also two Sons if no more, viz. Alfred, supposed
to be Grandfather to Elthelwerd the Historian, and Oswald, whom Mr. Speed, in
the Reign of this King, says was a Witness to his Father's Charter to the Abbey
of Abington: but the Author of the Notes to King Alfred's Life being convinced
of this, Fol. 19.
to solve an Objection so directly contrary to the received Hypothesis of a
Lineal Succession, is feign to take refuge in a supposed Arbitrary Power the
English-Saxon Kings had of disposing of their Kingdom as a Fee-Simple: which is
such a Conceit, that if he would but have been pleased to put down the first
seven or eight Lines of King Alfred's Testament, instead of that Scrap he has
there given us of it, it would have sufficiently confuted that Assertion.
Therefore since he has been so fair as to give us this Testament at full length
in the second Appendix to the said Life, I will make bold to transcribe so much
as will be enough to evince the contrary, and leave the Reader to consult the
rest at his leisure.

Testamentum Alfredi Regis.
Printed also at the end of Asser de Gestis Alfredi.
EGO Aelfredus Divino Munere, labor ac studio Athelredi Archiepiscopi, nec non
totius West-Saxoniae Nobilitatis Consensu pariter and Assensu, Occidentalium
Saxonum Rex, quos in testimonium meae ultimae Volantatis complementi, ut sint
advocati in disponendis pro salute Animae meae, Regali Electione confirmo, tam
de hereditate, See the Translation of this Will at the end of K. Alfred 's Life.
quam Deus ac Principes eum senioribus populi misericorditer ac benign
dederunt, quam de haereditate, quam pater meus Aethelwulfus Rex nobis tribus
fratribus delegavit, videlicet Aethelbaldo, Aetheredo, and Mihi; ita quod qui
nostrum diutius foret superstes, Ille totius Regni Dominio congauderet.

NOW I would gladly be satisfied from the Author abovementioned, in these three
Points, if King Aethelwulf had full Power to bequeath the Kingdom to his Sons,
and to turn it from a Fee-Simple into a Fee-Tail;

FIRST, Why K. Alfred in the very first Line of this Testament calls himself
King of all West-Saxony by the Divine Donation, and the Assent and Consent of
the whole West Saxon Nobility, if he had not been Elected, or at least
Confirmed by them in the Possession of the Crown, so bequeathed to him by his
Father?

SECONDLY, When he here summoned them to be Witnesses to the completing and
confirming of this his last Will, why he distinguishes that private Inheritance
which he had given him by the Grace of God, and the Favor and Bounty of his
Nobility and People, from that public Inheritance which his Father had
bestowed on him and his two Brothers, so that the longest Liver of them should
enjoy the whole Kingdom? But,

THIRDLY, if his Father's Testament alone could have given his Brothers and him
an absolute Right to the Kingdom, how came it to pass that he styles himself
King by the Assistance of Arch-Bp Athelred, with the Assent and Consent of the
whole West Saxon Nobility? and what necessity was there for him to summon them
only to be Witnesses thereof, if their Confirmation were no ways necessary
thereunto? I fear he will not be able to answer these Queries, unless he will
grant that this last Will of King Alfred wanted as much their Confirmation, as
that of his Father had done before.

AND this may be plainly proved, not only from the beginning of the Will it
self, but also from an Agreement therein recited to have been made between the
three Brothers abovementioned; by Virtue of which they dying, the whole
Inheritance of King Ethelwolf his Father was devolved upon him by a certain
Charter made in the Mycel Gemote, or General Council of the Kingdom, at
Langdene; which being read before the Witnesses, ( i.e. all the Estates) of all
West-Saxony, they unanimously declared, that they knew of none who had a juster
Title than himself. And yet you must not forget, that both his said elder
Brothers had left Children behind them.

WHEREUPON the said Estates farther declared thus, Ecce jam habes tuam
hereditatem iterum in Manibus tuis. Nunc de Bonis and Possessionibus conde
Testamentum tuum; lega, and dona tuo proximo sanguini vel Amicis tuis and
Cognatis sicut tibi placuerit. To which the King replied, Et Omnes illi
firmit^tem irrevocabilem mihi fecerunt, and subscripserunt, ipsos nunquam
hereditatem meam alicui homini aliter pervertendo daturos, praeterquam cui
Egomet legabo die proximo jam instante.

FROM whence it is most evident, that it was to the Consent of the Estates of
the Kingdom that King Alfred owed the Power of making this his last Will, and
of bequeathing only the private Inheritance which his Father and Brothers had
left him; and where, tho he disposes of the several Lands therein mentioned,
first to his eldest Son Edward, then also to his younger Son, whom he does not
name, and his two Nephews and others; yet he pretends to make no Bequest of the
Crown, which one would think he would by no means have omitted, had he had any
such unlimited Prerogative abstracted from the Consent of the Kingdom, to have
disposed of, or entailed it, as his Father had done before him, tho not without
or against the said Consent, to which it appears every one of his Predecessors
chiefly owed his Title.

NOW give me leave to draw two Conclusions from the whole Will, which I have
almost translated verbatim at the end of King Alfred's Life in the following
History.

FIRST, That it was then indeed in the Power of the King to make his Will, and
bequeath his Kingdom; but how? with the Consent and Assent of the Estates; and
the Person or Persons to whom it was thus entailed, came in successively by
virtue of such Designation: and therefore De Gestis Alsredi.
Asser very well and justly calls King Athelwolf's Will, Hereditariam, vel
Commendatoriam Epistolam, i. e. a recommendatory Letter to the Estates of the
Kingdom to elect his Sons; but if no such Bequest was made, and so confirmed as
aforesaid, then the Estates of the Kingdom were at liberty to choose the Eldest
Son, or next Brother or, Kinsman, if he were of fit Age and Capacity, for their
Sovereign; nay, the King's Testament or Adoption preceding, a mere Stranger to
the Royal Blood might be capable of succeeding, provided he also had the
Election or Confirmation of the Great Council of the Kingdom, as I suppose
Queen Sexburgha the Wife of King Cenwalch had; and as you will further find
Harold, the Son of Harl Godwin, obtained, toward the end of this Volume.

SECONDLY, That the Person so designed was called the Heir of the preceding
King, and enjoyed the Inheritance thus acquired Jure Haereditario, i. e. by
Hereditary Right, tho he was not the next Heir in Blood to him that went before
him, as is clearly manifest from this Testament it self, wherein King Alfred
plainly distinguishes between the Dominions which he and his Brother King
Ethered were to conquer, and those that came to him Jure Haereditario, i. e. by
Hereditary Right, viz. by Virtue of his Father King Ethelwulf's Will; therefore
when the Crown fell to King Alfred by virtue of that Entail, Abbot Ailred
expressly says, ad Eum totum Regnum jure Haereditario transiit, De Genealog.
Regum Ang. Col. 351.
etc. And yet King Alfred could not be Lineal Heir to his Brothers, since they
both left Sons behind them, as has been already observed.

AND in the same Sense King Edward the Confessor, in the Preface to his Charter
to the Abbey of Westminster (which you may find at large in Monast. Anglican.)
having recited the Miseries the Nation had undergone from Wars raised by
Strangers, 1 Vol. page 59.
which were to that extremity, Adeo ut pene periclitata sit haereditaria Regum
Successio, magnumque esset interstitium inter fratrem meum Edmundum, qui Patri
meo successit, meque habitum sit; invadentibus Regnum Sweyno, and Cnuto filio
ejus, etc. where you may observe he calls his own Succession to his Brother,
Haereditaria Successio; and yet his Brother left a Son behind him, who was
Living when he was chosen King. Thus also Eadmerus relates, that Duke William
claimed the Crown of England, Jure Haereditario, Hist. Ecclesi. page 5.
from King Edward the Confessor's Testament; but certainly the Duke could have
no pretense to it by Right of Blood, being no ways descended from the
English-Saxon Kings.

SO that it is a manifest Error in some of our Modern Writers of the
Succession, who will needs understand these words, jus Haereditarium, to have
been used in the same Sense in those, as they have been taken in later Ages,
since the Crown came to be claimed by a Lineal Descent of Blood: But indeed
Eadmerus his Sense of these words is most agreeable to the Civil Law, wherein
he is called HAERES EXASSE; who comes in as Heir by Testament to the whole
Inheritance, tho no way related to the Testator; for that Law describes an Heir
thus, Haeredis significatione, omnes significari Successores, etsi verbis non
expressi: And therefore our Bracton derives the word Haeres, ab Haereditamento;
for says he, Inheritance is a Succession to all the Right which the Predecessor
(he does not say Ancestor) enjoyed: from whence you may observe, that in
Bracton's Time, this word Haeres was not even by our Law limited only to an
Heir by Blood or Descent.

HAVING said thus much of our Saxon Kings Accession to the Throne, as far as
King Alfred; I shall in the next Place proceed to give you the Succession of
all the rest, down to the pretended Conquest, from the most Ancient Authors who
lived either a good while before, or else not long after that Time, before
Men's Minds became prejudiced by those Notions of Lineal Succession, which
began to be in Vogue about the Time of Edward the Third, when the Crown had
descended from Father to Son for four Descents, tho not without somewhat that
was tantamount to an Election in that Prince himself.

TO King Alfred succeeded his Son King Edward the Elder, who, not having the
Crown bequeathed to him as his Father had, viz. by Will, confirmed by an Act of
the Great Council, was fain to be Elected, as Ethelwerd expressly tells us in
these words, Chron. Ethelwerdi. Lib. 3. Ca. 3. An. 901.
Successor equidem Monarchiae post filius supra memorati Regis coronatur, ipse
Stemmate Regali, a Primatis ELECTVS Pentecostis in die: that is, afterward
Edward the Son of the abovementioned King, being Successor of the Monarchy, was
Crowned; and being descended of the Blood Royal, was Elected by the Chief Men
of the Kingdom on the day of Pentecost, (i. e. Whitsunday).

AFTER this Edward's Decease, Aethelstan his Son succeeded him, whom most
Ancient Writers, as well in Print as Manuscript, relate to have been begot of a
Concubine, and therefore could have no Legal Right: and tho William of
Malmesbury endeavors to palliate it, yet he is almost forced to confess it at
last by saying, Sed Ipse praeter hanc Notam (si tamen vera est) nihil ignobile
habuit, i. e. that he had no other Mark of ill upon him but this, if it were
true.

BUT tho Dr. Brady will have this Prince to have succeeded wholly by virtue of
his Father's Will, Lib. 2. Cap. 6.
and cites William of Malmesbury for it, who, he says, has these words in the
History of Edward the Elder, Jussu Patris in Testamento Aethelstanus in Regem
acclamatus est; by the Command of his Father, in his Will, Aethelstan was
proclaimed King; yet he might have been so fair and ingenuous as to have given
us the words that are in the very beginning of this Chapter in the same Author,
viz. Itaque magno Consensu Optimatum ibidem Athelstanus ELECTVS, apud Regiam
Villam quae vocatur Kingston Coronatus est; i. e. That thereupon by the General
Consent of the Chief Men or Estates of the Kingdom, Athelstan being Elected,
was Crowned at the Royal Town of Kingston: but this did not agree with the
Doctor's Hypothesis, and so I suppose he thought it best to leave it out.

THIS Passage was borrowed by William of Malmesbury from a much Antienter
Author, viz. the Compiler of the Saxon Annals, who under Anno 925. expressly
tells us, That he was Electus in Regem, and apud Cingestune Consecratus,
Elected King, and Anointed at Kingston: from both which it appears, that the
Election and Consecration were then two different Actions.

AFTER Athelstan, succeeded Edmund his Brother, and indeed ought to have been
King before him, he being Legitimate, whereas the other was only a Natural Son.

BUT he dying, and leaving two Sons behind him, Edwy and Edgar, neither of
them, but Edred, King Edmund's younger Brother, was advanced to the Throne;
which how it could be done unless by Election, I confess I do not understand:
and therefore this might be omitted as to this Prince, as well as the
Coronation of King Edgar, and other of our English-Saxon Kings are both by our
Annals and Ancient Historians; for I must own I cannot find that the word
Electus is used in his Advancement to the Throne: for Ethelwerd tells us
expressly, ejus Successor extitit Eadred in Regnum, Ethelwerdi Histor. Cap. 7.
suus quippe frater; that Eadred his Successor obtained the Kingdom, because he
was his own Brother.

AND in this he is followed by Florence of Worcester, who expresses it thus,
Edredus proximus haeres fratris succedens, Regnum suscepit; Edred succeeding as
next Heir to his Brother, enjoyed the Kingdom.

Dr. Brady in his above cited Treatise, will needs solve this open Breach of a
Lineal Succession, by the Nonage of King Edmund's Sons, and the Nation's then
being under great Difficulties. The former of these I grant to be a good
Excuse, but as for the latter it was not at all true; since King Edmund, by
subduing both Northumberland and Cumberland, driving the Danes out of the one,
and delivering the other to the King of Scots, to be enjoyed as his Vassal, had
thereby sufficiently settled the Peace of the Nation: so that let the Doctor
take his choice, and either allow this King to have succeeded by Election, or
else if by Succession, it was no Lineal one, as the Doctor would maintain,
because these Historians tell us, he succeeded his Brother as next Heir, when
at the same time they confess too, that he left two Sons behind him; and if the
Nation's lying then under great Difficulties, will be a good Warrant to set by
a Right Heir, I desire he would be pleased to satisfy me, why it may not always
be a justifiable Reason to make a Breach upon the Succession in the like Cases?

AS for Edwy, Nephew to this King, indeed I do not find any thing mentioned in
the Annals or other printed Authors of his Election; yet the Ancient Manuscript
Life of Archbishop Odo, now in the Otho. D. 12.
Cottonian Library, and which seems to have been written by some Monk not long
after that Time, says expressly, Edwigus Filius Aedmundi in Regem ELECTVS est.
Nor indeed could he succeed as Heir to his Uncle, for his Lineal Right was
before him: nor does the Expression commonly used in the Saxon Annals, viz.
FENG to RICE, (which is rendered in the Latin by capessit Regnum) signify any
thing concerning the manner of this or any other King's coming to the Crown.
These being, True and exact History of the Succession of the Crown, so. 3, 9.
as the Doctor himself acknowledges, the usual Saxon and Latin words, by which
the Succession is expressed, being variously rendered by Translators, by Regnum
capessit, successit, or Electus est: and thus we likewise find the same words
are used in the Annals to express King Aethelstan's and Eadred's, nay Harold's
Accession to the Throne, tho it is evident none of them could claim by any
Lineal Succession.

AND these are not the only words made use of in the Saxon Chronicle when an
Election is signified; for An. 1015, we find these words concerning the
Election of K. Edmund Ironside, that the Wites or Wise Men who were at London,
and the Citizens, Gecuron, Eadmund to Cynge, i. e. chose Edmund King. So
likewise Anno 1036. concerning the Election of Harold Harefoot, that all the
Thanes North of Thames, and the Seamen of London, Gecuron Harold, to rule over
all England: the same word we also find Anno 1066. where after the words FENG
to RICE abovementioned, these likewise follow, and eac men Hine haer to
Gec^ron; i. e. all Men Elected him, viz. Harold, to the Crown.

AND that there may be no dispute about the meaning of this word Gecuron, we
find it often used in these Annals for the Election of the Pope, as e. g. Anno
1054. upon the Death of Pope Leo, Victor waes gecuron to Papan. So likewise
Anno 1057. upon the Death of Victor, waes Stephanus Gecoren to Papan; and I
think the Doctor might with as much appearance of Truth have maintained, that
the Saxon word Gecaron here rendered by the Latin Electus in these Annals,
signified not the Election, but Recognition of the Pope; as to assert (as he
does) with so much Confidence, that Eligerunt in all Historians signifies no
more than Recognoverunt, when used concerning our English Saxon Kings; i. e.
the Subjects acknowledged, owned or submitted to him as their King, Vid. Exact
History of the Succession p. 7, 9.
as he says concerning King Edgar and others.

BUT King Edwy being cast off by the Mercians and Northumbers, our Annals
inform us, that Eadgar Aetheling (FENG TO RICE, i. e.) succeeded to the Mercian
Kingdom, which yet was no otherwise than by Election; for an Ancient Manuscript
Life of Archbishop Dunstan, written before the Conquest, and now in the
Cleopatra. B. 13.
Cottonian Library, shows us plainly, that both the Mercians and Northumbers
Elected him for their King: the words are these, Hoc itaque Omnium
Conspiratione relicto, eligere sibi, Domino dictante, Eadgarum ejusdem Germanum
in Regem; i. e. This King Edwy by the Consent of all Men being thus deserted,
they chose, the Lord directing them, Eadgar his Brother for their King.

AND hereupon the Kingdom becoming divided between him and the King his
Brother, that Division was also confirmed by a public Act of the Estates, as
the same Author testifies; Sicque Vniverso populo testante, Publica Res Regum
ex Definitione Sagacium segregata est, ita ut famosum Flumen, Thamensis Regnum
disterminavit Amborum; tunc Edgarus a praedicto populo sic sortitus ad Regnum,
etc. i. e. So that all the People being Witnesses, each of these King's shares
were apportioned and set out by the Decree of the Wites or Wise Men; and the
Noble River of Thames was the Boundary of both their Kingdoms; then Edgar was
advanced to the Kingdom by the aforesaid People.

BUT Edwy dying not long after, the same Author relates of this Edgar, that
Regnum illius velut aequus haeres ab utroque populo ELECTVS, suscepit; that is,
that upon his Death Edgar as Right Heir being Elected both by Clergy and Laity,
succeeded to his Kingdom.

FROM whence we may observe, that the same Person who is here called the Right
Heir, yet needed an Election upon his Brother's Death to confirm his Title, and
gain him an Admission to the Throne of the whole Kingdom; which is also
confirmed by Florence of Worcester, whose Citation the Doctor himself here
makes use of thus, Ab omni Anglorum populo Electus, Regnum suscepit; which
shows that a new Election by all the People of England was necessary, tho he
was King of part of it before.

AFTER the Death of King Edgar, our Historians tell us, there was a Contest
between Prince Edward, and his Brother Ethelred, concerning their Succession to
the Crown; which, says William of Malmesbury, was set on foot by Elfrida the
Wife of King Edgar, and Mother-in-Law to Edward; which diverse of our Authors
tell us, was because those of her Faction pretended that Egelfrida, the Mother
of Prince Edward, was never married to King Edgar; for otherwise there could
have been no Color why the elder Son should not be preferred before the
Younger, especially since he was also recommended by his Father's Will: and
indeed it is left very much in the dark, whether the Lady last mentioned were
ever Edgar's lawful Wife or not: For the Annals, and more Ancient Historians,
are wholly silent in it; nor does any Writer make mention of that Lady as King
Edgar's Wife, till John of Wallingford, who lived in the Reign of King Henry
the Third.

BUT be it as it will, whether Prince Edward was Legitimate or not, his Father
however had left him (as Florence of Worcester says) Heir of his Kingdom, as
well as of his Virtues; yet we also learn from Simeon of Durham, Sim. Dunelm.
975.
that Quidam Regis filium Edwardum, Quidam illius fratrem eligerunt,
Ethelredum; quam ob causam Archipraesules Dunstanus and Oswaldus cum
Co-episcopis, Abbatibus, Ducibusque quamplurimis in unum convenerunt, and
Edwardum, ut pater ejus praeceperat, eligerunt, electum consecrarunt, and in
Regem unxerunt. Some Elected Edward the King's Son Edmund, some his Brother
Ethelred; wherefore the Archbishops, Dunstan and Oswald, with the Bishops,
Abbots, and very many Noblemen being gathered together, Elected Edward, (as his
Father had commanded) then Consecrated and Anointed him King.

THIS shows it so plain from the Doctor's own Translation of the words, that
Prince Edward (notwithstanding his Father's Will) was first Elected, and then
Anointed King, that I needed not have added any further Remark to it, had he
but faithfully rendered the Latin Text as he ought to have done; but he has
unhappily left out one material small word, and that is Electum, that so the
unwary Reader might not observe that those Kings were first Elected, before
they could be Anointed.

BUT I have not yet done with this Prince, nor with the Doctor, for John of
Tinmouth in his Historia A^rea (now in Manuscript in the Lambeth Library) tells
the Story of this Election thus:

EDGARO Rege mortuo, and Edwardo ad Regnum relicto, dum quidam principes
acquiescere nollent, Dunstanus arrepto Crucis Vexillo in medio constitit,
Edwardum illis ostendit, elegit, sacravit; that is, King Edgar being Dead, and
Edward left Heir of the Kingdom, whilst some of the Chief Men would not Consent
to it, Archbishop Dunstan taking up the Banner of the Cross, placed him in the
midst, and showing him to them, he Elected, and then Consecrated him.

SO that I will leave it to the impartial Reader to judge, whether these words
Eligerunt and Electum, here signify no more than recognoverunt, As the Doctor
will have them, i. e. they acknowledged, owned, submitted unto him as their
King, as his Father had commanded, True and exact History of the Succession,
etc. Fol. 7.
and by Will appointed, as the Doctor has been pleased to Paraphrase it. But I
would advise him in the next Edition of this Treatise, or any other he writes
upon this Subject, to show us an Example out of any Ancient Roman Authors, nay,
any Glossary of the more barbarous Ages, where the word Electus or Eligerunt,
signifies Recognition.

FOR as to all his Instances out of his own Glossary at the end of his
Introduction, instead of Presidents, I may boldly say they are only mere Cavils
against the Right and Manner by which the Kings or Bishops he there mentions
came to obtain their Thrones or Sees; Page 37.
for that the Monks who wrote of them, ever meant by such their expressions
that they were truly Elected, he himself cannot deny, which also proves the
Falsehood of that his Assertion, wherein he affirms, That the old Monks said
every one was ELECTED, that had not an HEREDITARY Title; Ibid page 38.
and tho he was set up by the ART or VIOLENCE of a Faction, or obtained the
Crown by Force and Arms without Title, yet according to them he was ELECTED,
when as the PEOPLE only received and submitted unto them when they could not
help it, and it may be because there was much Shouting, and many Acclamations
at his Reception.

BUT I hope the Presidents I have here now given will evince the contrary,
since of all the Kings that have been already mentioned to have been Elected, I
desire him to show me one, concerning whom the word Election can mean no more
than a bare Recognition or Acclamation of the People, when they first received
and submitted to them; whereas indeed they were then solemn and deliberate Acts
of Choice by the whole Estates of the Kingdom.

BUT since the Instances that the Doctor brings for this his Opinion are all
after his Conquest, when he fancies the Nation totally subdued, and their
Liberties lost; I shall reserve the Consideration of the Force of those
Authorities till my Introduction before my next Volume, if God shall grant me
Life to finish it.

BUT to return from whence some perhaps may think this too long a Digression.

KING Edward being murdered by the Instigation of his Mother, Ethelred his
Brother succeeded him; and tho the Doctor again seems to put some stress on the
words FENG to RICE, as if he had come in by Lineal Succession, yet that he was
also Elected as well as his Brother, I desire he would consult the Ancient
Annals of the Monastery of Thorney in the Cottonian Library, Bibliothec.
Cotton. Nero. cap. 7.
great part of which is written in Saxon Letters, and either some time before,
or else not long after the Conquest, and there under Anno 978. he will find
these words, Eadwardus Rex occiditur, Atheldredus eligitur, that King Edward
was killed, and Ethelred Elected.

Id. sub. Effigy Claudii. A. 3.
AND for a Proof of this, there is in the same Library the form of the
Coronation of that King and his Queen, which has these words in it.

i. e. the Ld. or Prince to be elected; whence the Spanish and Italian Titles
of Seignior.
SENIOREM per manus producant Duo Episcopi ad Ecclesiam, and Clerus hanc
decantet Antiphonam, duobus Episcopis praecinentibus.

FIRMETVR manus tua, ut supra versic.

GLORIA Patri, etc, perveniens Rex ad Ecclesiam prosternat se coram Altar, ut
hymnizetur.

TE Deum Laudamns; Te Dominum consitemur.

QVO finito tenus ymnizato, Rex erigetur de Solo, and AB EPISCOPIS ET A PLEBE
ELECTUS. Haec tria se servaturum jura promittat, and clara Voce coram Deo
omnique Populo dicat. Haec tria populo Christiano, and mihi subditis in Christi
promitto nomine,

IMPRIMIS, ut Ecclesia Dei, and omnis populus Christianus veram pacem nostro
arbitrio in omni tempore servet.

SECVNDO, Vt Rapacitates, and omnes Iniquitates omnibus gradibus interdicam.

TERTIO, Vt in omnibus Juditiis aequitatem and misericordiam praecipiam, ut
mihi and vobis indulgeat suam misericordiam clemens and misericors Deus, qui
vivit, etc. His peractis omnes dicant, Amen.

AND for a farther Confirmation of the Truth of this Oath, there is also an
Ancient Saxon Copy of it, together with a Latin Version which differs but
little from that now cited, and is said to be that Oath which Archbishop
Dunstan administered to this King at Kingston on the Day of his Coronation; at
the end of which Oath it is also specified, that so long as the King observes
it, he will thereby obtain both Earthly Glory, and also God's Mercy; so if he
breaks it, he will still pass from bad to worse, as well in respect of himself,
as People, unless he repent. This you will find printed both in Saxon and
Latin, in the second Book of King Alfred's Life, Cleopatra. B. 13.
printed at Oxford from an Ancient Manuscript in the Cottonian Library.

I shall not trouble you with a verbal Translation of all this long Oath; only
observe thus much, that hereby it appears plainly that King Ethelred had been
before Elected by the Clergy and Laity, in order to be crowned King; which is
further confirmed by that old Saxon imperfect Ritual of the Coronation of the
English Saxon Kings and Queens, part of which Mr. Seldom has given us in his
Titles of Honor, Seld. Tit. Hon. page 116.
where in the Prayer upon the Anointing we find these words, Respice propitius
ad preces nostrae humilitatis, and super hunc famulum tuum illum quem supplici
Devotione in Regem ANGLORUM vel SAXONUM pariter ELIGIMVS, Benedictionum tuarum
Dona multiplica; Id. page 140.
as also what follows in the same Chapter, in the Blessing after the
Coronation, in giving him the Scepter. Benedic, Domine, hunc PRE-ELECTVM
Principem, qui Regna omnium Regum a saeculo moderaris. Amen.

NOW from both these Places above quoted, we may safely conclude, that an
Election did most commonly precede the Coronation of our English Saxon Kings;
which I think is made so evident by these Authorities, that it needs no farther
Enlargement; nor should I trouble my self about it were it not to expose the
Obstinacy of some Men, as well as to continue the Series of this Succession
(which perhaps would seem lame to others without it) down to the Conquest.

TO go on therefore where we left off, after the Death of King Ethelred, the
Saxon Annals tell us, that Omnes Proceres, qui in Londonia erant, and Cives,
eligerunt Eadmundum in Regem, i. e. All the Chief Men, (or Witan, as it is in
the Saxon, i. e. Wise Men) that were at London, and the Citizens, chose Edmund
for their King; and yet he was his Father's eldest Son, tho whether Legitimate
or not is uncertain: for we do not find any ancient Author till after the
Conquest, that mentions Ethelred's being married to the Mother of this Prince;
and if he was not, this Son of his could have no other Title but Election. This
is also confirmed by Ingulph, who says, Cui (Ethelredo) successit in Regnum,
Londonensium and West-Saxonum Electione, Ingulph. fol. 507. b. lin. 5.
Filius ejus primogenitus Edmundus, etc. i. e. Edmund his eldest Son succeeded
his Father Ethelred, by the Election of the Londoners and West Saxons, in the
Kingdom.

BUT tho our Saxon Annals are silent of it, yet an Ancient Manuscript
Chronicle, wrote about the Time of the Conquest, now in the Cottonian Library,
relates, Otho. D. 7.
that about the same Time that King Edmund was thus Elected, Episcopi, Abbates,
quique Nobiliores Angliae Canutum in Regem eligere, the Bishops, Abbots, and
several of the Chief Men of England chose Cnute for their King; which is also
confirmed by Florence of Worcester in these words under this very Year. Post
cujus mortem maxima pars Regni tam Clericorum quam Laicorum in unum congregati,
pari consensu Cnutonem in Regem eligerunt, and ad eum Suthamptoniam veniens
pacem cum eo pepigerunt, and fidelitatem jurabant; i. e. after whose Death (
viz. of King Ethelred) the greatest part of the Kingdom, as well of the Clergy
as Laity, being met together, chose Cnute for their King; and coming to
Southampton made Peace with him, and swore Fidelity; but he there says nothing
of his Coronation.

THESE Testimonies concerning Ethelred and Edmund being thus plain, I confess
Dr. Brady has been so just as to cite them, and fairly to translate that
Passage in Ingulph by the word Election, whereas it should have been
Recognition, if it had suited with his Hypothesis; as he does also that of
Florence of Worcester, rendering the word Eligerunt, by chose him King: if
therefore it were a true Election in one case, then surely it must be so in the
other, for the same Reason.

BUT the nameless Author of the Great Point of Succession discussed, tho he
does wilfully conceal all the printed Authorities above mentioned, Page 5.
yet being hard pressed with this Passage of King Cnute, has no other way to
evade it, but by saying, That Canutus, by the Terror of his Arms, having the
greatest part of the Island, at his Devotion, forced them to acknowledge and
receive him for their King, which they being under an apparent Force, could not
refuse to do.

THE falseness of which Assertion I will not go about to prove in this Place,
but refer the Reader to the ensuing History, where he will find that the
Persons abovementioned, were not so forced by the Terror of his Arms, as to
acknowledge him for their King, since London (then, as still) the Capital City
of the Nation, with many others of the Nobility, had before Chosen King Edmund,
who by their Assistance was strong enough immediately after his Election to
fight the Danes at the great Battle at Assendune; and therefore if voluntarily,
yet it was treacherously done of them, to quit the Prince who ought to have
been Elected, and to choose a Stranger and an Invader over his Head: and
whether the Gentleman this Author writes against, had ridiculously called King
Cnute's Accession to the Throne an Election, as he would have it, I shall leave
to the impartial Reader's Judgment.

AFTER the Death of King Cnute, our Annals relate, that at a Witena-Gemot or
Great Council being held at Oxford, Leofricus Comes, and omnes prope Thani a
Boreali part Thamisis, and Nautae de Lundonia eligerunt Haroldum in Regem
totius Angliae, dum ejus Frater Hardcnutus esset in Denmearcia, i.e. Leofric
the Earl, and almost all the Thanes North of the Thames, and the Seamen of
London, chose Harold King of all England, whilst his Brother Hardecnute was in
Denmark; which is also confirmed by Fol. 509. a Line 2.
Ingulph, and Lib. 2. c. 12.
William of Malmesbury, who farther report, That the English had a Mind to
choose Edward the Son of Ethelred, or at least Hardecnute the Son of Cnute by
Emme his Wife, the Widow of King Ethelred, who was then in Denmark.

BUT Henry of Huntington says expressly, Haroldus filius Cnuti in Regem Electus
est. But Radulphus de Diceto is yet more express as to this Election of Harold,
as appears by this Passage under An. 1038. Haroldus Rex Merciorum and
Northymbrorum, ut per totam regnaret Angliam, a Principibus and omni Populo
Eligitur, i. e. Harold King of the Mercians and Northumbers, that he might
reign over all England, is Chosen by the chief Men and all the People: whence
you may observe, that tho he were then King of the Mercians and Northumbers,
yet that still needed a new Election to make him King of all England.

NOW if this were so, as the Doctor himself has ingenuously cited it in his
said Treatise; I desire he would let us know, where was then the Right of
Lineal Succession, when the People of England would fain have chosen Edward,
who could not be Right Heir of the Crown so long as the Children of his Elder
Brother were alive, tho then in Exile? nor could Hardecnute have any Right so
long as Harold his Elder Brother was alive; whom also, as our Historians
relate, his Father had appointed Successor at his Death, tho whether that be
true or no, is much to be doubted.

BUT the Author of the aforementioned Great Point of Succession, etc. (to evade
this Proof of Harold's Election) will have all this Point in Controversy to
have been, who had the most Right, and best Title to the Crown of those two,
Harold or Hardecnute, and that Earl Godwin objected Harold's Illegitimacy, and
the Will of the deceased, King, of all which there is not one word mentioned in
any of our most Ancient Historians, only he cites a Scrap in the Margin, as he
thinks, ou^ of Brompton, (but it should be Simeon of Durha^, for no such thing
is to be found in the former Author) viz. That Harold -- quasi just us haeres
coepit regnare, nec tamen ita potenter ut Canutus, quia justior haeres
expectabatur Hardicanutus, i. e. as just Heir, but yet not so absolutely as
Cnute, because the juster Heir (S^il. H^rdecanute) was expected, which he is
pleased to call him, because he falsely supposes that none could have a Right to
the Crown but one of Queen Emma's Children. But this Writer cunningly leaves
out the preceding Words with a dash, because they make against him, which I
shall here add, (...), consentientibus quamplurimis MAJORIBVS natu A^glia,
quasi Justus haeres, etc. So that it seems his Right to reign, proceeded from
the Consent of the Estates of the Kingdom.

SO that granting, as this Author supposes, That Hardecnute had been left Heir
by his Father. King Cnute's Testament, yet you see this could only give him a
Precedence of being first Proposed, and Elected.

HAROLD dying after a few Years Reign, Hardecnute was sent for out of Elanders
to succeed him; yet this could not be as his Heir, being but of the half Blood,
and his supposed Brother only by his Father's side: and therefore Henry of
Huntington says expressly, Lib. 6. p. 365.
that Post Mortem Harolds Hardecnute filius Regis Cnuti illico susceptus est,
and ELECTVS in Regeni ab Anglis, and DACIS, i. e. After the Death of Harold,
Hardecnute the Son of King Cnute was presently received, and Elected King by
the English and Danes.

HARDECNVTE dying suddenly after, about two Years Reign, the abovecited Ancient
Chronicle in the Cottonian Library, Otho D. 7.
proceeds to tell us, that Mortuo Hardecanuto, Eadwardus Annitentibus maxim
Comite Godwino and Wigornensi Livingo, levatar Londoniae in Regem, i. e. that
Hardecnute being dead, Edward by the Assistance chiefly of Earl Godwin, and
Living Bishop of Worcester, was advanced to the Throne at London.

WILLIAM of Malmesbury words it thus, speaking of Earl Godwin, Lib. 2. cap. 13.
Nec mora, congregato concilio Londoniae, rationibus suis explicitis; Regem
effecit. From whence it appears, that by Godwin's means he was made King at a
Common Council of the Kingdom.

BUT Ingulph is yet more express, who says, Page 895.
Post ejus (S^il. Hardecanuti) obitum, Omnium Electione in Edwardum
concordatur, maxim cohortante Godwino Comite. i. e. that after the Death of
Hardecnute, it was unanimously agreed upon to Elect Prince Edward; Earl Godwin
chiefly advising it.

AND Henry Huntington goes yet a step higher, and writes thus, Edwardus cum
paucis venit in Angliam, Lib. 6. p. 365.
and Electus est in Regem ab omni populo. Prince Edward coming into England
with but a few Men, was Elected King by all the People: which is also confirmed
by an Ancient Manuscript Chronicle of Thomas of Chesterton Canon of Litchfield,
in the Cottonian Library, who under Anno 1042. says thus, Cleopatra. C. 3.
Edwardus filius Athelredi Regis, ab omni Populo in Regem Electus, and
Consecratus est.

BUT the Doctor very cunningly conceals all this concerning his Election, Lib.
6. cap. 9.
and only gives us a shred out of Guilielmus Gemeticensis in these words,
Hardecanutus Edwardum totius Regni reliquit haeredem; that is, left Edward Heir
of the whole Kingdom: but so far indeed the Doctor is in the Right, Page 8.
That he could be no other than a Testamentary Heir, there being other Heirs of
the Right Line, both of Saxon and Danish Blood before him. But it may well be
doubted, whether the Author last mentioned, being a Foreigner, may not be
mistaken, if he means the words haeredem reliquit, for a Bequest by Will, since
no English Historian that I know of mentions any such thing: and indeed it is
highly improbable that this Prince made any Will at all, since all Writers
agree that he died suddenly at a Drunken Feast, in the very Flower of his Age;
and as it is not likely he made any Will before, so it was impossible he could
do it at his Death.

BUT this Election of King Edward farther appears, from the mean and abject
Carriage which this Prince showed, (as you will find William of Malmesbury)
toward Earl Godwin, when he was so far from claiming the Crown, that he only
desired he would save his Life, till the Earl encouraging him, put him in hopes
of obtaining the Kingdom upon Promise of marrying his Daughter; which he would
never have done, had he had so ^air a Pretense as the last Will of his Brother
Hardecnute to recommended him to the favor of the Estates of the Kingdom; and
if that alone would have done, to what purpose should he need afterward to be
Elected?

THIS is in part acknowledged by the Doctor; but to palliate it, he will have
Godwin, (a Council being immediately called) by his Reason and Rhetoric to
make him King; (it seems then he was to be made so) but he dares not say one
word of his Election, for fear it would betray the Cause which he has so
strenuously labored to advance.

AND therefore he thinks he has now nothing more to do, but to expose and
ridicule the Legend of the Abbot of Rievalle in making Edwards the Confessor to
be elected King in his Mother's Womb: which tho I grant to be as absurd as to
drink Prince of Wales his Health before he is born, yet the Abbot had certainly
no ground for this Story, unless he had been sufficiently convinced that this
was an Elective Kingdom in the Time of King Ethelred his Father.

BUT if the Reader desires further Satisfaction concerning the Circumstances of
this King's Election, I shall refer him to the Ancient Annals of the Church of
Winchester, which I have faithfully transcribed out of the first Volume of
Monasticon Anglicanum, and inserted into this Volume under Anno 1041. where he
will find the whole History of this Prince's Election and Coronation, written
by a Monk of that Church not long after the Conquest; these Annals are also in
Manuscript in the Cottonian Library, to which I must likewise by the Favor of
its honorable Possessor, own my self highly obliged for several considerable
Remarks in this History of the Succession of our Saxon Kings.

BUT to draw to a Conclusion upon this Subject; King Edward (as appears by our
Annals) in the Year 957, sent over for his Cousin Prince Edward, Col. 189. n.
20.
surnamed the Outlaw, Son of King Edmund, out of Hungary, as Simeon of Durham
relates, Illum se Regni haeredem constituere, that he might appoint him Heir of
the Kingdom: which had been a very idle Thing had the Kingdom been Hereditary,
and that it had been his undoubted Right by Proximity of Blood.

THIS Prince dying soon after his coming over, we no where find, that King
Edward ever offered to do the like for his Cousin Edgar Atheling; but on the
contrary forgetting his own Family, Ingulph tells us, that the Year before his
Death, Fo. 512. n. 40.
he sent Robert Arch-Bp of Canterbury his Ambassador, to let William Duke of
Normandy know, Illum designatum esse sui Regni successorem, that he had
appointed him Heir of his Kingdom: which relation tho I have proved to be false
as to Archbishop Robert, toward the end of this ensuing History; yet might it
be true in the main, and some other Bishop might have gone over to Duke William
on that Message; but however, for all this, King Edward afterward adopted Earl
Harold upon his Deathbed, for which we have very good Authority, since our
Saxon Annals testify it in these words, Page 172.
Tunc Haroldus Comes capessit Regnum, sicut Rex ei concesserat, omnesque ad id
Eum eligebant, and consecratus est in Regem in Festo Epiphaniae, which was the
same day that King Edward was Buried.

THIS is also confirmed by the History of the Abbey of Ely, written not long
after the Conquest, and lately published by the Learned Dr. Gale, Quo (Scil.
Edwardo) tumulato, Lib. 2. cap. 43. fol. 515.
subregulus Haraldus Godwini Ducis Filius, quem Rex ante suam Decessionem Regni
Successorem eligerat, a totius Angliae Primatibus ad Regale Culmen ELECTVS est,
Die eodem ab Aldredo Eboracensi Archiepiscopo in Regem honorifice consecratus;
which also agrees with Florence of Worcester, and Simeon of Durham under Anno
1066. almost in the very same words, Page 5.
and by Eadmerus (who lived not long after the Conquest) in these words, Juxta
quod Edwardus ante mortem statuerat, successit HARALDVS.

FROM all which remarkable Testimonies I shall draw these two Conclusions.

FIRST, That this Testamentary Designation of Harold by King Edward for his
Heir, was not sufficient alone to make him King, but it also required a
subsequent Election of the Estates of the Kingdom.

SECONDLY, That there is an apparent Distinction here made between his Election
and Consecration.

AND I think this enough, had I no more to say, to settle this Point; but to
let the Reader know the utmost that may be objected against these Authorities,
I must freely confess, that diverse Writers of good Credit and Reputation, who
lived after the Conquest, viz. Ingulph of Croyland, William of Malmesbury,
Ailred Abbot of Rievalle, and Henry of Huntington, look upon this Donation of
King Edward as a mere Pretense, invented by the English in Prejudice of the
Norman Duke.

BUT how they will be able to answer those plain and full Authorities I have
before cited, I know not: for William of Malmesbury himself was also forced to
confess, that King Harold claimed not only by virtue of Edward's Designation,
but by the Election of the Great Council of the Kingdom, as appears by this
Memorable Passage, Will. Malmesbur. de Gestis Anglorum Lib. 2. Fol. ^5.
viz. Ille (scilicet Haraldus) in his Answer to William then Duke of Normandy,
de puellae nuptiis referens, de Regno (addebat) praesumptuosum fuisse, quod
absque generali Senatus and Populi Conventu and Edicto, alienam illi
haereditatem juraverit, i. e. That Harold, speaking of the Marriage of the
Duke's Sister, further added, that it was a very presumptuous thing to swear
away another's Inheritance to him, without the General Act and Appointment of
the Senate and People, that is, the Nobility and Commons.

THIS shows, that it would have been a most notorious Falsehood for Harold thus
to have gone about to impose upon Duke William, had there never been any such
thing as a Real and Solemn Election, which our abovementioned Authors have
related.

Dr. Brady 's Answer to Argum. Antinorman. fol. 238.
NOR is Dr. Brady's Objection against this at all material, in saying, that
those who thus set him up, were only a Court Faction, for the People all
England over could never have notice to come to, or send their Representatives
to such a Solemnity, as to elect and crown him King in four and twenty Hour's
Time; and therefore should his Election be granted, he could not be chosen by
the People, who had neither Notice nor Knowledge of it, but only received and
submitted to him as their King.

NOW in answer to this I need only say, that if the Doctor would have been so
fair as to have consulted Sir Henry Spelman's first Volume of Councils, or the
first Volume of Monasticon Anglicanum, he would have found in both of them, (in
the Charters of the Foundation of the Abbey of Westminster, and the History of
that Church printed in the Latter) that it was not (as he says) never to have
been imagined; for it was really true, that the Estates of the Kingdom did meet
a little before Christmas, (secundum Morem, according to Custom) and not only
so, but were expressly summoned to be present at the Great Solemnity of the
Consecration of that Abbey, which was, as our Annals inform us, on St.
Innocent's day, and the King dying on the Twefth-day following, this Great
Council (which certainly was a full one) was so far from being then Dissolved,
that it chose Harold for their succeeding King, as the said Annals relate: The
nicety of the Dissolution of a Parliament upon the King's Decease not being at
that time known.

I think this is sufficient to answer all that the Doctor has, or I suppose can
say upon this Head; therefore I will now leave it to the Reader to consider,
how far any of his Assertions are true.

AS first, Whether the sure Rule of Succession was either Right of Blood? True
and exact History of the Succession, Fol. 7.


OR Secondly, Whether the bare Nomination or Appointment of the preceding King,
was then thought and allowed as Cause sufficient for the Father to prefer his
Brother's Son before his own, or a Bastard before his Lawful Issue, or that the
Instances which he has produced will be able to make it out; or else whether
those very Instances, which I have here set in their true Light, do not
directly evince the contrary?

THIRDLY, Whether from this foregoing History of the Succession, it appears
also to be true what he asserts, viz. That from Egbert the first Saxon Monarch,
Id. Fol. 9.
to Ethelred the last by Right of Blood, we do not read of many Elections for
the space of two hundred and sixteen Years; and that those we meet with are
bound and limited by Proximity of Blood, or Nomination of the Successor by the
Predecessor, and that where the word Election or any thing in that Sense is
used, it signifies only a Recognition and Submission? And I will now leave it
to the Reader's Judgment, if I have not given sufficient Instances to the
contrary in every one of these Particulars, there being not above two Kings in
all this long Series of more than two hundred and sixty Years, concerning whom
I have not brought express Testimonies from Authors of undoubted Credit both in
Print and Manuscript, of their Election by the Estates of the Kingdom. Or,

FOURTHLY, Whether his last Assertion be any truer than the former, viz. That
the Danish Kings, Id. ibid.
after Sweyn had conquered the Kingdom, (whose best Title was the Sword) either
brought hither the Custom of the Predecessor, naming or giving the Kingdom to
the Successor, as probably it might have been practiced in their own Kingdoms,
or used it as they found it here practiced by the Saxon Kings? Or whether the
Authorities I have already cited do not expressly prove, that every one of the
three Danish Kings came in by Election, and that Harold Harefoot was the only
Prince of those Three, who could make any pretense to it by Testament?

AND as for the Saxon Kings that reigned before them, how far they by their
last Wills alone could dispose of, or entail the Crown, without the concurrent
Assent and Consent of the Great Council of the Kingdom, I refer the Reader to
that part of King Alfred's Will, I have here made use of for his farther
Satisfaction, if he have still any doubt left about it.

I have now dispatched this exact and faithful History of the Succession of our
English Saxon Kings, in which I am not conscious to my self that I have either
added or diminished any thing material to, or from the Authors which I have
made use of; I desire to be believed that I have not wrote this to prove, that
the Succession to the Crown ought at this day to be Elective in the same manner
as it was before the Conquest, but only to obviate and remove the false
Opinions or Prejudices of some Men, who by the plausible Representations of the
Doctor and others, have been so far prepossessed as to believe, that an
Hereditary Succession to the Crown has been as Ancient as the Monarchy it
self; whereas we find that Sweden and Denmark have from Elective become
Hereditary Kingdoms in a much less space of Time: And I suppose no Man of those
Countries would asperse any Writer there, of being an Enemy to Monarchy for
asserting so evident a Truth; and therefore I hope I may find the same fair
Quarter at Home, notwithstanding the Doctor's Insinuations before his
abovecited History of the Succession of the Crown, That none but Papists,
Fanatics, or Commonwealth's Men, (a List of whose, Works he there gives us)
would dare to write for, or maintain this Opinion. But if Parsons the Jesuit
has happened in his Discourse of the Succession, to write some Truths
concerning it, I am no more to be thought Jesuitical for following (not him,
but) the Authors from whom he took them; than I should be if I had wrote a
Mathematical Dissertation founded upon Demonstrations from Euclid, which had
been before made use of by Tacquet, or any other Learned Jesuit, that has wrote
upon that Subject.

AFTER the Election, I shall say somewhat of the Coronation of our English
Saxon Kings, which sometimes was performed on the same Day on which they were
Elected, and sometimes several Days, nay, Months after, as appears by the
Coronation of King Edward the Confessor; who tho he were Chosen King in June
not long after his Brother Hardecnut's Decease, yet was he not Crowned till the
Easter following, as you will find in the Saxon Annals under the Years 1041,
1042. But Harold his Successor (to make the Crown the surer) was Elected and
Crowned the same Day. This Solemnity of the Coronation, was most commonly
performed by the Archbishop of Canterbury, yet was it not at first done in the
Church, but in the open Air; thus the Kings Athelstan, Edmund, and Edred, are
expressly mentioned by our Historians to have been Crowned in the Market Place
of Kingston upon Thames: and I suppose the like had been used in the Coronation
of former Kings, since it is not taken notice of as an Innovation.

BUT to say somewhat of the forms of those Crowns which our Kings then wore, it
appears from their Coins that they were at first no other than Diadems like
those of the Greek Emperors in that Age, and from whom they were borrowed: thus
Offa King of the Mercians is Graven on his Coin with a Diadem of Pearls about
his Head; Vid. Ante Vitam Aelfred. R. Tab. 4. and ante Camden. Britan. Tab.
but our great King Alfred has no more than a bare Head-band, or Circle, which
seems to have been tied behind, as you may see in his Coins. And tho I confess
there is also a Coin of one K. Egbert with a Coronet of Rays upon his Head;
yet that this was not of our K. Egbert, but rather of him that was King of
Northumberland, who began to reign An. 867, I rather incline to believe. As for
King Edward the Elder, he has in his Coins only a kind of Diadem upon his
Helmet, King Athelstan, Edmund and Eadred his Brothers being the first of our
West Saxon Kings, who wore Crowns with three Rays, or Points higher than the
rest; and therefore I look upon it as a Fiction in them who will needs have it,
that K. Alfred was Crowned with a Crown wrought with Flower de Lices; because
such a Crown was kept among the Regalia at Westminster before our late Civil
Wars, in a Box, upon whose Cover was this Inscription, Vid. Vitam Aelfredi.
page 158.
Haec est Principalior Corona cum qua Coronabantur Reges, Aelfredus, Edwardus,
etc. Which having been the Crown of Edward the Confessor, it was very easy for
the Monks of that Church who kept those Regalia in after times, to inscribe
what they pleased upon this Box, since it added so much to the Antiquity and
Reputation of this Crown: and I am the more inclined to this Opinion, because I
find King Cnute, and Edward the Confessor, to be the first Kings who wore
Diadems adorned with Flower-de-Lices, as appears by their Coins.

I shall in the next Place say somewhat of the Titles by which our West Saxon
Kings styled themselves in their Laws and Charters; and to begin with King
Egbert, (however Supreme he were over all the rest of the Kings then reigning
in England, yet we cannot find that he styled himself more than, Rex
West-Saxonum in any of his Charters; for as for Laws we have none of his left
us. The like I may say for his Successors Ethelwolf, and his Sons and
Grandsons, as far as King Athelstan, who for ought I can find was the first
Prince that upon his Victories over the Danes and Scots, changed his Title of
Rex West-Saxonum, or Anglorum alone, which was used by his Predecessors, to
this that follows, Ego Aethelstanus Rex Anglorum, per omnipotentis Dextram
totius Britanniae Regno sublimatus, as you will find it in his Charter in
William of Malmesbury, de Gestis Pontif. as also in the same Place you will
find this King's Title to have somewhat varied; Li^. 4. page 363.364. pub^^^h'd
by Dr. Gale.
for on a rich Box, or Shrine, given by this King to keep the Relicts of the
Saints in, was engraven this Inscription, Ego Aethelstanus totius Britanniae
and multarum nationum in circuitu positarum Imperator, etc. which Title was
also made use of by his Brother King Edmund, only instead of Imperator, he
styles himself Gubernator and Rector, as appears by his Charter to the Church
of Glastonbury, set down by the same Author abovementioned, in his Page 318.
published in the same Vol. by Dr. Gale.
Antiquity of the Church of Glastonbury, which was also used by King Edgar, tho
with some difference, who instead of Rector and Rex, styled himself totius
Albionis Basileus in diverse Charters; but this proceeded from the corrupt Style
of that Time, or else the particular Fancy of the Clerk or Monk who drew the
Charter: And tho instead of this word Basileus, King Ethelred his Son again
made use of Rex, yet the rest of the Title remained the same, and was also
continued by King Knut; however he sometimes styled himself Rex totius Albionis
Insulae, and aliarum Nationum plurimarum. What Titles his Sons had I do not
find, because I have not seen any of their Charters; only we may here observe,
that several Kings before Cnute, styled themselves Kings not only of Albion, or
Britain, but of several other Nations round about, by which could only be meant
that Superiority they assumed at that time over the Kings of Scotland, Wales
and Northumberland, before that Country was reduced into the form of a
Province, and was governed by Earls.

I now come, in the next place, to give you an Account of the chief Powers and
Prerogatives of our English-Saxon Kings; some of which I find set down in our
Saxon Annals at the end of the Year 693, at the Council of Becanceld, where the
Archbishop of Canterbury thus defines them in his Decree at the Conclusion of
that Council. Regum est, says he, constituere Comites, Duces, Vice-Comites, and
Judites; it is the Office of Kings to constitute Earls, Ealdormen, Sheriffs and
Judges.

TO which we may also add the Power of Coining Money, which being then the
Prerogative of the Crown, was granted by Charter to the Archbishops of
Canterbury and York, as likewise to the Abbots of Medeshamsted or Peterborough,
and to several other Abbeys; as may be seen in Monasticon Anglicanum, as well
as in the Annals themselves. Some Instances of which I have given you in the
ensuing History, not omitting some of the Coins which are still preserved in
Cabinets, some of whose Figures are to be found in the Collection of Saxon
Coins before King Alfred's Life, as also before the new Edition of Camden's
Britannia.

BUT that any of those Kings had Power by their own Royal Prerogative, to
enhance or debase the intrinsic Value of the Money, coined either in their own
or other Mints, I can no ways believe, since such a Prerogative would have
highly tended to the Loss and Defrauding of the Subject, for which that Power
was never designed; nor do I find our Kings ever assumed this Prerogative to
themselves, till later Ages. And in Confirmation of this the Sect. 3.
Mirror of Justices recites it as an old Law of the Saxon Times, that no King
of this Realm could change, embase, or enhance his Money, or make other Coin
than of Silver, san's l'assent de touts ses Counties, i. e. without the Assent
of Parliament; as Sir Edward Coke in his second Institutes, has on very good
grounds interpreted this Expression, in that Author Andrew Horn, Artic. super
Chartas, cap. 20. p. 576.
who lived in the Reign of King Edward I.

TO these we may further add, that of pardoning Offenders their Lives in
several Cases, such as striking in the King's Palace, etc. which he might also
take in Case of Homicides; but still reserving the Wiregilds, or Compensations
that were to be made to the Friends or Relations of the Parties slain, which it
was not in his Power to release, as appears by several Passages in our Saxon
Laws, some of which I have inserted in this Volume; whence, I suppose, are
derived the Appeals of the Wife, Son, or Brother, in Cases of Murder at this
day.

BUT as for the Power of making War or Peace, since I find little said of it in
our Histories, I shall not be positive in asserting any thing concerning it:
only shall observe, that in every Peace made by the King upon Payment of Money,
the Consent of the Estates of the Kingdom was required; for Taxes could not be
raised without it, as you will find in our Annals under the Years 994, 1002,
1006, 1011, when that extraordinary Tax of Danegelt was raised to be paid to
the Danes for purchasing a Peace of them. And as for the Power of making
Foreign War, that could also signify little, since those Kings had not the
Prerogative of raising Money without the Consent of their People, any more than
our Kings have at this day: nor were their Revenues so much in Money, as in
Provisions for their Household.

NOR can I omit here taking notice, that the English Saxon Kings wanted one
great Prerogative, which ours exercise at this day, viz. the power of granting
away the Demesnes of the Crown, even to pious Uses, without the Consent to the
great Council of their Kingdoms: and of this we find a remarkable Instance in
Sir H. Spelman's first Vol. of Councils, Page 340.
where Baldred King of Kent had given the Manor of Mallings to Christ-Church
in Canterbury; but because the chief Men of his Kingdom ( i. e. the Great
Council) had not consented to it, it was revoked until K. Egbert afterward by
the Consent of his WITTENA GEMOT made a new Grant thereof: and this was also
the reason why the Foundations and Infeodations of Abbeys were always confirmed
and attested by all the Estates as well Spiritual as Temporal, as you will find
by most of their Charters in Monast. Anglican. of which I have inserted some
Examples in the History it self; so that I shall leave it to the Reader's
Consideration, whether those Princes that could not dispose of their
Crown Lands without the Consent of the Great Council of the Kingdom, could
without the like Consent dispose of the Crown it self as they pleased, as Dr.
Brady in his Page 7, 8.
History of the Succession, etc. asserts, tho without any just Grounds, as has
been already proved.

BUT those Kings great Prerogative chiefly consisted in giving their Sanction
to all Laws that were made, as well relating to Civil as Ecclesiastical
Matters, that did not concern Doctrines of Faith: but this is still to be so
understood, that this Prerogative could never be exerted without the Advice and
Consent of the Mycel-Gemot, or Great Council of the Realm; at which, tho they
were often first drawn up into Form, and then proposed by the King, yet was
their Authority also necessary for the enacting of those Laws, without which
they could no ways oblige the Subject, as shall be further shown toward the
end of this Discourse.

BUT since I have given you so large an Account how our Kings then obtained the
Crown, it may perhaps be expected I should say somewhat now concerning the
manner of their losing it, sometimes by other ways than Death.

IN order to this I desire the Reader would observe, that not only in England,
but in all the Kingdoms of Europe, that were raised upon the Ruins of the Roman
Empire after the Gothic Model, the same mixed manner of Succession, partly by
Testament, partly by Election, did in those days chiefly prevail: Of which
Monsieur Mezeray himself is so sensible, that in his Abridgment of the At the
end of the Reign of K. Clotair II. tit. Moeurs and Constumes.
History of France, he freely owns, That during the Kings of the first Race,
they were still chosen out of the Royal Family; but that there were three
Conditions required to it. (1.) Birth, (tho whether they were legitimate or no
it mattered not). (2.) The last Will of the Father. (3.) The Consent of the
Great Men, or Estates of the Kingdom; and the last of these (says he) almost
ever followed the two former. Moreover, that in all those Kingdoms, where this
way of Election was in use, their Kings were so far from being absolute
Monarchs, that they were accountable for their Tyranny, or Maladministration,
to the Estates of the Kingdom, and were by them liable to be deposed for the
same: Of which (were it to my present purpose) I could give you frequent
Examples, not only in Denmark and Sweden, in both which Kingdoms that Law was
in force till within this last Century, when they became successive in a Lineal
Descent, by an Act of all the Estates; but also in Castile and Arragon, and
even in that of France it self (as much as she takes upon her to be Absolute at
this day): and for the Proof of this I shall refer you to any French History.
Those famous Examples of the last Childerick's being Deposed by the great
Council, or Assembly of the Estates of France, who elected Pepin King in his
room; and also their setting aside Charles Duke of Lorrain, tho the undoubted
Heir of the Crown by Blood, only for his supposed Enmity to the French Nation,
and their choosing Hugh Capet for their King, from whom all the Kings of France
from that time have been (so far as we know) lineally descended, renders this a
Truth too notorious to be denied.

THIS I have here mentioned, that so you may not wonder if in the ensuing
History you meet with diverse Examples of the English Saxons deposing their
Kings; since the same Custom did in those Ages prevail in all those Kingdoms,
as a part of their Original Constitution.

AND for farther Proof of this, tho I could bring several Instances from the
Mercians and Northumbers, yet because the latter were looked upon as of a
Rebellious Disposition against their Princes; and for the former it may be
said, that those they expelled were Usurpers, and not lawful Kings; I shall
therefore content my self with mentioning but two Examples concerning our
West Saxon Kings, which you will find hereafter more at large: The first is
that of Sigebert, who (as the Saxon Annals inform us Anno 752.) for his
unryhtum Daedum, i.e. illegal Practices, or (as Hen. Huntington paraphrases it)
for his Oppression, and wresting the Laws to his own Advantage, was by all the
Wites, or Wise and Great Men of West-Saxony, deprived of his Kingdom, and
Cenwolf his Kinsman was by them elected in his room. Vid. Hoveden, pars p^^or,
p. 42^.
The next is that of King Edwy, who for his loose and irregular Life (tho
chiefly for persecuting the Monks) being cast off or deposed by the Mercians
and Northumbers, his Brother Edgar was chosen to succeed him; but yet the
Kingdom was divided, and Edwy had only West-Saxony for his share. And both this
Deposition and Division were confirmed by an Act of the Estates of the whole
Kingdom, as I have already shown.

BUT whether this was lawfully and rightfully done for any real Breach of their
Original Contract, it is none of my Business here to decide; it is sufficient
to show, that the Estates of those Countries then judged so; not that I
maintain the Law is, or ought to be so at this day; but that it was so before
the Conquest, pray consider this Law, which tho found among those that go under
the Title of Edward the Confessor, yet was certainly much more Ancient, as
containing not only the Office of an English King, but what he was to suffer in
case he omitted that Duty: I shall give it you from the Latin Original in Page
345.
Hoveden and Page 138.
Lambard, in these words, Rex qui est vicarius summi Regis, ad haec est
constitutus, ut Regnum terrenum, and Populum Domini, and super omnia sanctam
veneretur ejus Ecclesiam, and regat, and ab injuriosis defendat, and maleficos
ab ea evellat, and destruat, and penitus disperdat; Quod nisi fecerit, nec
Regis Nomen in eo constabit, i.e. not so much as the Name of a King shall
remain to him. Here you see not only the Substance of this Original Contract,
but also the Penalty annexed to it, if it were broken.

AND that there was such a thing as an Original Compact or Contract between the
People of England and the Ancestors of those Kings, according to which they
were to govern, and upon the nonperformance of which, they were liable to
forfeit or lose their Crowns, I think may farther be proved, tho what the
particular Heads of it were we cannot now exactly tell, unless they were those
mentioned in the Oath, recited in the Mirror at the Election of the first Saxon
Sovereign, (whether he were Egbert, or any other) which indeed amounts to a
Contract; but there was also a Compact of the like Nature in the Kingdom of the
West Saxons before King Egbert's Time as well as after; for how else could the
Great Council of the Kingdom proceed against King Sigebert or Edwy, if there
had not been then some known Laws or Constitutions, upon the Violation of which
they were judged incapable to govern any longer? And tho the chief Heads of
that Contract may have been comprised in King Ethelred's Coronation Oath, which
I have already given you; [the first Article of which is, to preserve the Holy
Church, and all Christian People in true Peace at all Times; the second, To
restrain all Violence and Injustice in all sorts of People, (which comprehends
any raising of Taxes by the King's Officers contrary to Law); and the third, To
observe Equity and Mercy in all his Judgments, by which the King is withheld
from taking away any of his Subjects Lives arbitrarily, as also from pardoning
notorious Offenders against the State at his mere Pleasure; so that the
Religion, Estates and Lives of his People were by this Oath well secured:] I
say, tho these are the chief Heads of this Contract, yet that this was much
more Ancient than the Ceremony of a Coronation, may appear from hence.

THAT Kingly Government is this Island was never Absolute nor Despotical, but
always limited by Laws; and if limited, then those Laws must have been the
Bounds or Conditions of that Limitation; and if there was from the beginning,
or first Institution of the Government, a constant certain great Council
ordained, whose Business it was to observe, that the King did not transgress
the due Bounds of his Power; that Council (so long as the Kingdom continued
Elective) had likewise Authority to call him to Account for his
Maladministration.

BUT since the Preaching of Christianity did no ways alter the Original
Constitution of Government in all those seven Kingdoms abovementioned, it
follows, that there must have been an Original Contract precedent to the
entrance of that Religion: And it did not commence from the Coronation of our
Kings, as some have imagined, and consequently from their taking an Oath at
that Time to observe the Laws of the Kingdom; because both the one and the
other was much later than the Preaching of the Gospel it self: for this
Ceremony of a Coronation, as Mr. Seldom learnedly proves, Seld. Tit. Ho^. c. 8.
so. 131.
began no earlier in the West than with Charles the Great, his receiving his
Imperial Crown from the Hands of the Pope; and this Ceremony he also shows us,
was borrowed from the Greek Emperors, who about Justinian, or his Successor
Justin's Time, Ibid. fol. 110.
first introduced their Unction and Coronation by the Patriarch of
Constantinople, as he there makes out from a Passage of the Learned Onuphrius
in these words, De Comitiis Imperatoriis c. 2.
Constantinopoli vel sub Justiniano, vel post ejus statim Obitum, Electioni
Imperatoris additum, ut quam primum Imperator renuntiatus esset, a Patriarcha
Constantinopolitano in magna Bizantii Basilica Oleo Unctus, Diademate Aureo
redimeretur.

AND therefore what we find in our Saxon Chronicles, or any other Historians,
concerning the Coronation of our English Saxon Kings, must all of them have
commenced since that Time.

NOW the Emperor Charles's Coronation above mentioned, falling out in the Year
800, it is plain that the Coronation of our Kings could not be antienter than
that Time, which was near 450 Years after the Arrival of the Saxons in England,
and settling Kingly Government here, and above 200 Years after the Preaching of
Christianity; so that this Coronation Oath seems to have been only a constant
Renovation or Confirmation of this Original Contract, at every new King's first
Accession to the Throne, and must have had (if at all) its Original long before
that Time.

AND this also appears from the Instance of King Sigebert abovementioned, who
was deprived of his Kingdom for the Breach of this Contract, above forty Years
before there was either any Emperor or King formally Crowned in these Western
parts of Europe.

TO all which we may farther add, that if our Annals and Historians may be
credited, it does not appear that several of our Danish Kings, tho they were
solemnly Elected, were ever Crowned at all: For as for King Cnute, whose
Election is mentioned in Florence of Worcester, and other Authors, to have been
by many of the Bishops and Nobility at Southampton, Anno Dom. 1015. yet are
they all (except Abbot Brompton's Chronicle, which relates, that he was Crowned
by Living A.Bp of Canterbury) silent as to his Coronation, only that upon their
swearing Fealty to him, it is said he likewise swore to them, Quod secundum
Deum and seculum, fidelis esset eis Dominus, i.e. that according to the Laws of
God and Man, he would be a faithful Lord to them. So likewise after the Death
of Edmund Ironside, the Author of Encomium Emmae, says expressly, that he was
Elected King by the whole English Nation; but that he was not admitted without
a new Compact, both Florence and Roger Hovenden inform us in these words, viz.
That when they had again accepted of him for their King, and had sworn Fealty
to him; he likewise again pledged his Faith to them in this Form, Accepto
pignore de manu, sua nuda, cum juramentis a Principibus Danorum, i. e. they
received a Pledge or Promise from his bare or naked Hand, together with the
Oaths given by the chief Men of the Danes; who it seems swore on the King's
behalf, that he would observe the Conditions he had made before with them.

BUT as for the Coronation of his Son Harold Harefoot, that is expressly denied
by the said Author of Encomium Emmae; for he says that Elnoth (or Agelnoth)
Archbishop of Canterbury flatly refused to crown him, because he said he had
taken an Oath not to anoint him King so long as the Children of Queen Emma were
alive; and that laying down the Crown and Scepter upon the High Altar, he
straightly forbad all the Bishops to crown Harold, which so incensed him, that he
thenceforth despised his Episcopal Benediction.

BUT whether this Author (who yet lived in that very Time) might not write this
out of Hatred to Harold's Memory, as well as out of Love to Queen Emma and her
Children, I will not take upon me to determine, since no Historian besides
himself makes any mention of it; for the ancient History of Ramsey Abbey,
written some time after the Conquest, and now lately published by Dr. Gale,
says expressly in the Title to Chapt. 94. That Harold was Consecrated ( i.e.
Anointed) King.

BUT that the English Nation before the Conquest, believed that their Kings
were obliged to govern them by Law, ( i.e. according to the original Compact)
and that their Allegiance to them was then looked upon as wholly due on that
Account, our Annals seem to justify, Anno Dom. 1014, when the English Wites, or
Wise Men, both of the Clergy and Laity, after the Death of Sweyn King of
Denmark, sent over a Message to King Ethelred, being then retired into
Normandy, whereby they assured him. That no Prince was dearer to them than
their own natural Lord; always provided, Gif He hi rihtlicor healdan would
thonne He aer did, (as it is in the Saxon) i.e. if he would govern them more
rightly ( i.e. according to Law) for the future than he had done before:
whereupon he promised to be a faithful Lord to them, ( i.e. a Prince keeping
his Oath and Promise) and redress all their Grievances, if on their parts they
would return to their Allegiance. And thus by giving mutual Assurances, he came
Home and contracted a new Friendship or League with his People.

HAVING now got over these great Points of the manner of Succession, and
Deprivation of our Saxon Kings; I shall next as briefly as I can run through
all those Orders and Degrees of Men that did constitute this Commonweal.

THE first Degree of Men beneath that of Kings, was that of Aetheling,
Aetheling.
or Prince of the Blood Royal, being derived from the Saxon word Aethel, which
signifies Noble, and Ing, which being added to it, signifies one derived from
Royal Blood, as appears by the Terminations of Names in the Saxon Genealogies,
set down in our Annals under Anno 449. and in several other Places, and was
common not only to the King's Eldest Son, but to all others nearly related to
the Blood Royal; and was a mere honorary Title, without any Power or
Jurisdiction annexed to it that I know of, unless the King was at any time
pleased to bestow it. Nor can I here omit giving you the Names of two other
principal Offices or Dignities of the Kingdom, the one of which was Military,
the other Civil, the former in Saxon was called CYNINGS HOLD, in Latin Princeps
Militiae, General of the King's Forces.
i.e. General of all the King's Forces in times of War: and thus we find King
Alfred in his Will bequeaths a Legacy to Earl Ethelred his Son-in-Law, whom he
denotes by this Title, Ethelredo Principi meae Militiae.

THE other, viz. the Great Civil Officer, was that of Chancellor, Chancellor.
so called from the barbarous Latin word Cancellare, from his cancelling or
striking out what he pleased in Men's Grants and Petitions. And as for his
Power, we find it thus expressed in Ingulf, Hist. Ingulph. Fol. 36. Edit. Oxen.
(upon K. Edward the Elder's having made his Cousin Turketule Chancellor)
Quaecunque negotia temporalia, vel spiritualia Regis Judicium expectabant,
illius consilio (tam sanctae fidei, and tam profundi ingenii tenebatur) omnia
tractarentur, and tractata irrefragabilem sententiam sortirentur: from whence
we may observe, that the King did not only in that Age determine Civil, but
Spiritual Causes too in his own Person, and had his Chancellor for his
Assistant in his Judgments; which being so given, irrefragabilem sententiam
sortirentur, i.e. they obtained an uncontrollable Sentence, beyond which there
then lay no Appeal: and this I suppose was done in that great Court we now call
the King's Bench; for as for the Court of Chancery in Causes relating to
Equity, Sir Edward Coke tells us in his 4 th Institutes, Page 8.
that there are no Precedents of it before the Reign of King Henry VI.

BUT that it was the business of the Chancellor to draw up the King's Charters,
and also to sign them, before the Conquest, you will find at the end of the
last Charter of King Edward the Confessor to the Abbey of Westminster, in the
first Volume of Sir H. Spelman's Councils, where Aelfgeat a Notary signs it,
vice Reynbaldi Regis Edwardi Cancellarii.

THE next Degree was that of Ealdorman, Ealdorma^.
which was not only Titular as to the Person, but an Office, and signified, as
you will find all along in our Annals, those great Magistrates under the King,
who being called in Latin Subreguli, Principes and Consules, in some of our
Ancient Charters; and sometimes in Saxon, Cynings, i.e. petty Kings, had the
subordinate Government of Cities, Counties, and often too of whole Provinces,
in all Affairs both Civil and Military, and were of much greater Power before
King Alfred's Reign than afterward; for whereas before his Time they had the
chief Authority in all Places belonging to their Jurisdiction, they seem after
the word Eorle came in use with the Danes, to have lost much of their Power,
tho they still retained the Title. And it is observed by Sir Henry Spelman in
his Glossary, Gloss. tit. Aldermannus, Fol. 25.
that he who was called the Ealdorman of the County, signified in the Laws of
King Athelstane something between the Earl and the Sheriff, and therefore seems
to have been him who under the Earl governed the County or Province, and was
his Deputy or Judge in the County Court in his Absence. For in those Laws the
Value of an Archbishop and Earl's Head, is set at fifteen thousand Thrimsaes;
whereas the Bishop's and Ealdorman's was but at eight thousand.

YET notwithstanding this Title did not cease to be esteemed very honorable
many Years after that Time; for we find in Camden's Britannia, that the Tomb of
Ailwin, founder of the Abbey of Ramsey, Huntingtonshir^.
was inscribed with the Title of Ealdorman of all England; which, as Mr. Seldom
says, could only mean, that he was somewhat like the Ancient Chief Justiciary
of England, Ti^^^s of ^ono^r, Chap. 5 Fol. 505.
or Chief Director of the Affairs of the whole Kingdom, or Viceroy, Regiae
dignitatis consors and nominis, or half Cyning, as the (...). Lib. d^ Ramsey
published by D^. Gale.
Book of Ramsey has it.

NOT but that this word was also of a much more inferior Signification, seeing
we find frequent mention in the Laws of Edward the Confessor, Spelm. Glos Tit.
Aldemannus.
as well as in those Kings immediately after the Conquest, of Aldermannus
Hundredi, seu Wapentachii, as also of Aldermannus Civitatis, vel Burgi, whence
the Title of our present Aldermen of Cities and great Towns are derived, (tho
of a far different Signification, as well as a much later Institution:) and
this I suppose happened by reason of the Paucity of words in the Saxon Tongue,
which called Grave Men, distinguished by any Office or Dignity, by the Title of
Ealdormen, because they were at first bestowed on Men of elder Years; tho
afterward, Cap. 35. tit. Geref.
as the Auctuary to King Edward's Laws informs us, they were not so styled
propter senectutem, cum quidam Adolescentes essent; sed propter sapientiam.
Therefore I cannot forbear taking notice, that whereas Bid speaking of K.
Oswald's sending ( ad Majores natu Scotorum) to the Elders of the Scots for
Bishops, Hist. Eccles. Lib. 3. Cap 3. and Vid. Lib. 1. Cap. 13.
King Alfred in his Translation of Bid, calls them, the Ealdormen of the
Scots, that is, the Great or Chief Men of that Nation. I must here beg the
Reader's Pardon, for a Mistake I have committed in the rendering of that Passage
into English in the ensuing History; for not having the Saxon Version by me,
but only a Latin Copy, when I wrote it, nor having then consulted Mr. Seldom,
to whom I confess my self much beholden for this Criticism; I have there
translated the words Majores Natu, Scottish Bishops, because I thought it most
proper for them to be sent to about an Affair concerning Religion.

I have no more to say on this Head, only that I have left this word Ealdorman,
so often used in our Annals, untranslated: for tho I grant he is frequently
styled Dux, or Comes, in Latin, yet it would not bear being rendered Duke or
Earl in English, because that those Titles are not only very different, but
were unknown in our Saxon Tongue, till many Years after that Government was
settled in England.

I come now to the Title Earl, or Eorle, which being altogether Danish, Eorle.
was not commonly used here till the Reign of King Cnute, tho we now and then
find it mentioned in our Annals before his Time; but as for its Power and
Authority, it being much what the same with that of Ealdorman abovementioned, I
think I need say no more of it, only that neither of them were then Hereditary,
nor descended to Sons or Brothers, tho they often continued in the same Family,
when the King was pleased so to confer it: And both the Title and the Office
were liable to be forfeited upon any great Maladministration, as you will
find in diverse Instances in this Book.

THE next Title and Office I shall mention, is, that of Heretoch, which was
wholly Military; Heretoch.
and, as Sir Henry Spelman in his Glossary supposes, Tit. Hold.
was the same with that of the Hold, or Commander in War, mentioned in the
Laws of King Athelstan; because his Wiregild is made equal to that of a
High-Gerife, viz. four thousand Thrymsa's.

THIS Heretoch seems to have been somewhat like our Lord Lieutenant of a County
at this Day; and was chosen for some extraordinary Occasion, as upon a sudden
Invasion or Expedition against the Scots or Welshmen: Which being over, their
Commission also ceased, but they themselves were still had in high Esteem and
Honor, if they had prudently and courageously discharged that great Trust. And
as the same Author observes, in some Ancient Charters, (I suppose whilst the
Ealdorman exercised the whole Power of the County, as well Civil as Military)
the same Title of Ealdorman signified the latter Dignity; of which he gives us
this Instance, from a Charter out of the Ancient Book of the Church of
Worcester, where Earl Aelfhere is styled Mercna Heretogan.

BUT in the Time of Edward the Confessor (and I suppose also before) they were
certainly distinguished, Tit. de Her^tochiis.
as appears by the Thirty fifth Auctuary of that King's Laws; where after the
Offices of the Ealdormen, and Greve, the Duty of Heretochs is thus described,
which I will give you here in English. And there were other Powers and
Dignities constituted through all the Provinces and Counties of the whole
Kingdom, which were by the English called Heretochs, to wit, Noble, Wise,
Faithful, and Stout Barons. These sat our Armies in Battle Array, and raised
others as they thought fit for the Honor of the Crown, and Service of the
Kingdom. They were elected by the Common Council for the public Benefit of the
Realm in all Provinces and Counties at a full Folk-mote, as the Sheriffs of the
same also were, and ought to be: And in every County there was always one
Heretoch thus elected, to conduct the Militia of his County, according to the
King's Orders, for the Honor and Profit of the Crown of the said Kingdom,
whenever there was Occasion.

FROM whence we may observe, That before, as well as sometime after the
Conquest, when this Auctuary was made, the King had not the Nomination either
of the Heretoch or Sheriff, which were then the two Great Officers of the
County, the one Military, the other Civil.

HAVING thus dispatched the Military, I proceed to the Civil Magistrate, viz.
the Sheriff; in Saxon, Scire-Gerefa, Sheriff.
(or more contractedly Greve in the Laws of King Edward) who is called by
Ethelwerd, Exactor Regius, (i.e. the King's Receiver). This Officer, Lib. 3.
An. 787.
as Asser shows us in his Life of Alfred, before that King made his new
Reformation of the Kingdom, was appointed by the Ealdorman, and therefore
called Vice-Dominus, and was much what the same with our Vice-Comes, or
Sheriff, at this Day: But whether he had the Title of Sheriff before, as well
as after that Alteration by King Alfred, I will not determine.

BUT it appears by both these Latin Titles, that he was the Officer, who
instead of the Ealdorman, or Earl, sat as Judge in those we now call the
County Court, and Sheriff's Tourn. But these being so well known at this Day, I
shall not further enlarge, only that this Officer was also to answer to the
King's Exchequer for all Fines, Amerciaments, and other Duties arising out of
the County; the third Penny of which the Earl had granted him by the King, pro
sustentatione Dignitatis.

AND now I come at last to that great extensive Dignity of a Thane, Thane.
called in Saxon Thegne, being derived from the old word Theowian, to serve;
because they that had this Honor conferred on them, were at first the King's
Officers or Servants, and in our Ancient Latin Charters, subscribed by the Name
of Ministri Regis, and are called in the Version of our Saxon Annals, as also
in Florence of Worcester, Ministri Regii; not that they were really always the
King's Domestic Servants, tho they were so originally; on whom he likewise
bestowed several Lands in lieu of those Services, (Wages in Money being not
then in use) which Lands descended to their Heirs, if the King pleased.

THIS Title of Thane was of two sorts, the one Spiritual, the other Temporal;
the former were called in Saxon, Messe-Thegnes, i.e. Mass-Thanes, Priests, or
Parsons of Churches, and other dignified Clergymen; of whom I shall now say
nothing, but that they were then of so great Note, that in our Saxon Laws they
are ranged before the Werold-Thegnes, i. e. Temporal Thanes, and their
Weregilds rated at the same Value with them, viz. two thousand Thrymsa's.

AND tho the word denoted a Servant or Minister in general, (and so diverse had
the Title as it were merely Officiary and Personal) yet as Mr. Seldom informs
us, Tit. of Honors, Fol. 507, 508.
those that were the King's immediate Tenants of fair Possessions, which they
held by personal Service, as of his Person, (or as we say by Grand-Serjeanty,
or Knight's Service in chief) were, I conceive, the Thanes that had the
Honorary Dignity, and were part of the greater Nobility of that Time; howsoever
those Officiary Dignities of Hold and Highgereue, had then precedence of them:
that is, they were all the King's Feudal Thanes, and the Land held so was
called Tainland or Vid. Notas ad Eadmerum page 170.
Thaneland, as afterward the Lands held that made a Baron were called a
Barony, as also they are called to this day. This Title continued all the Saxon
times until the coming in of the Normans, and it was in some use also after
that Time, and then was succeeded by that of Barons. This Title being of Norman
Extraction, we rarely meet with it before the Conquest.

THERE were also besides these Chief Thanes, others who were called middle or
under Thanes, being the same with the less sort of Barons, or Lords of Manors,
who holding of other great Lords, and not of the King, were those that after
the Conquest were called Vavasors; inferior to whom there were likewise a third
Sort, who seemed to have been made up of the least or meanest Degree of Gentry
or Freeholders, which were then all one; none but the Gentry or less Nobility
then enjoying Lands by Freehold Tenure. And in this sense is to be understood
that Law of King Cnute, Cap. 52.
whereby it is appointed, That if the Master of a Family (who by that Law was
to have all his Household under his Pledge) were accused of suffering any of them
by his Privity to escape, being guilty of any Crime, he was then to wage Law
with five other Thanes, (i. e. in Latin Nobilibus) himself making the sixth.
Now it was impossible that there should be so many Chief Thanes, who held
immediately of the King in any one Hundred or Tything, out of which those
Thanes, or Gentlemen that were to make this Purgation, were to be taken.

BUT of all these Thanes, or less Nobility, I shall speak more at large by and
by, when I come to consider the Members that composed the Mycel-Gemot, or
Common Council of the Kingdom, of which these made up the great and principal
Part.

AND next to them I find another Title, tho not commonly used, yet as ancient
as the Laws of King Ina, as also mentioned in several other King's Laws,
Sithcund-Man.
viz. a Sithcund Man, who if he refused his Service in the Army, or a Military
Expedition, he forfeited his Land.

THIS Name Mr. Somner in his Glossary derives from Since, or Giseth, Comes, vel
Socius, a Ruler or Governor; and Cund, Kind, as it signifies the Condition and
Quality of any one; and Mon, Man, that is, a sort of Comes, Governor, Judge, or
Prefect: he was esteemed equal to a Thane, by the valuation of his Life in
Aethelstan's Laws.

THIS Comes is not to be taken in that Sense, as if he was a Count or Lord, (as
now understood) being only a Comes, or Companion in respect of those of his own
Rank or Degree, and interpreted by Mr. Lambard by Custos-paganus, Lamb. Explic.
Verb. page 5.
and so seems to have been the chief Man or Captain in a Town or Village, and
was to head all those he brought with him from thence into the Field; and
therefore the Penalty was the more severe on him if he ran away, lest he should
infect others by his bad Example.

SINCE I have been so large in this Introduction, I have chosen but slightly to
mention these Dignities and Offices; for they having been so learnedly and
fully handled by Mr. Seldom in his Titles of Honor, Cap. 5.
as also by Dr. Brady in his first Part of the Saxon History, and by Dr. Howel
in his Discourse of the Polity of the English Saxons, Part 4. Chapter ^.
I shall refer the Reader to them for his farther Satisfaction, and will only
speak of two Degrees of Men more, of whom it seems (being below their Notice)
they give us but a short Account.

THE first is that of Ceorle, or Countryman, Ceorle*
(from whence our word Carle or Churl is derived); indeed he could not be
possessed of what was called Bockland, or Free-land conveyable by Deed; but
however he was as free as to his Person and Property as the greatest Thane of
them all. And therefore we find in the Laws of King Alfred, diverse pecuniary
Penalties enacted against those who should commit Adultery with a Country-man's
Wife, or should endeavor to vitiate the Chastity of his Servant or Slave; or
should break the Peace by fighting, either in his House or Yard. And as for his
Person, by the last of those Laws it is appointed, what Satisfaction in Money
shall be paid by any who wound or maim him, even to Nail of his little Finger.
And this Law as equally extended to him, as to those of the greatest Quality.
And because the Nobility or Gentry were too apt to abuse these poor Countrymen
who were their Tenants and Vassals, the thirty first Law of King Alfred
ordains, what Satisfaction a Man was to make for any ways injuring and misusing
a Ceorle's Man, by binding him, beating him, or cutting off his Hair; Frolicks,
I suppose, too often then in fashion among some ill-natured domineering
Gentlemen; which made this merciful and good King provide such a necessary Law
for their future Security.

AND further to prove their Freedom, it is likewise enacted in the Laws of King
Ina, that if a Ceorlesman should refuse going out to War, he was to forfeit
thirty Shillings; which shows, that he was such a Man as was to have Weapons of
his own for the Defense of himself and Service of his Country: Which is also
required by the Laws of Edward the Confessor, in Title Greve. Complete History,
page 65.
And therefore Dr. Brady is very much out, in limiting the Title of Freemen,
mentioned in King Edward's LL. Edward^ Cap. 35.
Laws, only to such as were Tenants by Military Service; for that Law says no
such thing, but only that all the Freemen in the whole Kingdom, according to
their several respective Estates, Goods, and Possessions, and to their Fees and
Tenements, ought to have Arms, and keep them ready for the Defense of the
Kingdom, etc. Where you may observe, that all Estates, Goods and Possessions,
of what kind soever, do hereby capacitate Men to keep Arms, and consequently
give them the Title of Freemen; and therefore are not limited to Tenants by
Knights Service alone. As also appears from the Assize of Arms appointed by
King Henry the Second. Vid. Hovede^.


THE highest Degree of these Ceorles, were those called Liberi Socmanni, Socmen.
i. e. Free Socmen, so called from Soc, which in the Saxon Tongue signifies a
Plow. Of these we find no mention till the Laws of Edward the Confessor, Cap.
12.
where the Manbote (i. e. Satisfaction for a Servant slain) is by Danelage (i.
e. the Danish Law) due from a Villane or Villager, and a Socman twelve Ores;
from a Freeman three Marks: Not that this Socman here, put as distinct from
Freeman, was really a Slave, but only as Freemen were then taken properly for
Gentlemen or Freeholders; for that these Sockmen were free as to their Persons,
tho not Lands, appears by the old Natura Brevium, Cap. de Brev. de Recto.
where it defines a Socman to be such a Tenant, who holds of the King, or any
other Lord, Lands and Tenements by Villain or base Services; and was privileged
in this manner, that none could eject him from those Lands and Tenements, so
long as he could do the Services belonging to the same.

THIS I have taken notice of, because Dr. Brady, in his Preface before his
Norman History, as also indivers other Places of his Works, has labored all he
can to make the Condition of the common People of this Kingdom (before the
Conquest, as well as after) to have been little better than that of Slavery,
and seems to repine very often that it is not so still, as I could easily show
if I would go about it.

BUT certainly those could not be Slaves who had Slaves under them, and were
entrusted with the highest Badg of Freedom, not being forced or pressed
thereunto, viz. a voluntary Service in War, which the greatest were alike
subject to with these for the Defense and Safety of the Kingdom, Vid. LL.
Edwardi Confess. Cap. 35.
and which was part of the old Oath of Fidelity that was taken, as well before
as after his pretended Conquest.

BUT before I dismiss this Subject, I cannot omit taking notice, that the Laws
or Rules of Gentility were not so strictly observed under the English Saxon, as
afterward they were under the Norman Kings; for Mr. Seld^n has given us a Law
of King Athelstane, Tit. Honor, Chapter 5. Fo. 515.
which he took from an Ancient Manuscript in the Library at St. James's, in
these words, Si Villanus excrevisset, ut haberet plenarie V. Hidas terrae suae
propriae, Ecclesiam and Coquinam, Timpanarium, and Januam and Sedem and
Sundernotam in Aula Regis, deinceps Taini Lege dignus sit. Which is also
confirmed by Mr. Lambard, Apud Lambard in Itinerar, Cantii, page 552, 553.
in his Itinerary of Kent, concerning the same Law, and is there set down in
Saxon, which I shall here translate thus; That if a Ceorl or a Countryman so
thrived, that he had fully five Hides of his own Land, a Church, a Kitchen, a
Bell-house, a Borough-gate with a Seat, and any distinct Office in the King's
Court, then was he thenceforth of equal Honor or Dignity with a Thane. Where
by the Church, the Kitchen, the Bell-house, the Borough-gate, with a Seat, etc.
Mr. Seldom understands, The State or Fashion of a Lord of that Time, in having
a Church for his Family and Tenants, in keeping a Court for them, (which may
well be meant in the Burhgate setl, or Town-gate with a Seat) and in keeping a
House or Entertainment competent to that Dignity, which may be understood in
the Cycenan and Belhuis, i.e. Kitchen and Bell-house. The Bell-house may denote
the Hall, which was the place of ordinary Diet and Entertainment in the Houses
of Lords. It may well so signify, if the Saxons used the like Reason in
imposing the Name on the Lord's Hall, as some say the Italian, Spanish, and
French have done, in calling it Tinello, Tinello, and Tinel; which in our Laws
also is retained in Tinel le Roy, for the King's Hall. They would have it
therefore so named, because the Tin, or tinkling of a Bell at the Times of
Dinner and Supper were signified by it.

BUT Sundernota, mentioned in the Latin Copy of this Law, seems to denote the
distinct Office which he was to hold in the King's Court to make him equal to a
Thane. And it is also observable, that by the same Laws of King Athelstane
abovementioned, such a Ceorlsman so advanced, and having five Hides of Land,
(ad Vtwarum Regis) that is, as Mr. Seldom in the same place interprets, held by
Knights Service, Si occidatur, reddentur 2 Millia Thrymsarum; so that his
Wiregyld shows him to have been every way equal to a Thane.

BUT the most considerable Observation that may be made from this Law, is, that
V. Hides of Land were at that time reckoned a sufficient Estate to constitute a
Thane. But as to the Quantity of Land that then went to make a Hide, it was
sometimes more and sometimes less, according to the Goodness or Quality of the
Soil; but was certainly no more than what one Plow could well manure, together
with Pasture, Meadow, and Wood, competent for the Maintenance of that Plow, and
the Servants of the Family. So that the Estate of such a Thane could not be
much more than what an ordinary Gentleman has at this day.

NOR can I here pretermit what follows in the same Law above recited, where
after having shown us by what means an Under Theyn might come to be a Chief
Thane, and from thence attain to the Dignity of an Earl, it thus proceeds. And
if a Merchant so thrived, that he had passed thrice over the wide (or broad)
Sea, by his own Cunning, (or Craft as it is in the Saxon) he was thenceforth a
Thane's Right-worthy, i. e. was every way equal to him. Where you may observe
that Wealth and Industry conferred Nobility in the Saxon Times as well as at
this Day.

I come now to the lowest Rank of Men, viz. that of Slaves, Slaves.
who were called in Latin Servi, and in Saxon Freortorlings; and there were two
sorts of them, viz. such as were Personal, possessing no Estates, Vid. Aelfric.
Gloss. Saxonic
but all that they earned was their Lords, by whom therefore they were
maintained. The others were Praedial, such as were of Servile Condition and
Original, but possessed their small Holdings and Goods at the Will of their
Lord, doing all those Servile Country Works that were set them; and from
thence in the more modern Norman Dialect were called Villains, from those
Villages where they lived and wrought: But before as well as after the
Conquest, that the Latin word Villanus did not signify a Villain or Servant, I
could prove from many Instances, both out of Records and Histories, if I
thought it would not be too tedious in this Place.

AS for the Original of these Slaves among the Saxons, there is some doubt
about them; some supposing them to have been derived from the remainder of
those meaner sort of Britains, who were either taken Prisoners, or else never
forsook the Land, and so their Lives being saved, they were made servile by
their Conquerors; or else such as were descended from those who came over in
the nature of Slaves to the English Saxons that first landed here: but it is
not much material how they began, since they might proceed from both, or either
of these Originals; nor had their Lords Power of Life or Death over them, for
if they killed any of them, they were to pay the Value of their Heads to the
King.

THESE Slaves, if they were set free at any time by their Masters, were what
the Romans called Liberti, and in Saxon Freolaetan; but being then resolved
into the Body of Ceorles, or Contrymen, they did not, as among the Romans,
constitute any new Order of Men.

HAVING now gone through all the Sorts and Degrees of Men, who either lived in,
or were maintained out of the Country; I shall in the next Place say somewhat
of another distinct Body of Men, called in Saxon Burh-witan, Burh witan, i. e.
Citizens and Townsmen.
or Burh-wara, that is, Citizens or Townsmen, who had Privileges peculiar to
themselves, and living in Cities or great Towns, were governed by their own
particular Magistrates called Ealdormen, or Portgerefan, i. e. Port-Reeves,
assisted by the Chief Men of the Place, Vid. Aelfric, Gloss. Saxonic
called in Saxon, Yldist-Burh-wara, who were much the same with what we now
call Aldermen or Common Council Men; for as for the Title of Mayor, it came not
in use here till long after the Conquest.

BUT as for these Magistrates and Members of Cities and Towns, I shall speak
more by and by, when I come to treat of the constituent Parts of the Great
Council of the Kingdom.

FROM the different Orders of Men, we shall now descend to speak of the
different Courts where these Persons abovementioned, Different Courts.
(all except the Villains) were bound to appear, and there either to do or
receive Justice; for which it will be necessary to look back to the Reign of
King Alfred, who after the first Invasion of the Danes, when he began to
resettle the Kingdom, found his Subjects so far corrupted by a long and
hazardous War, that all Places being full of Robberies and Murders, there was
an absolute necessity for the making of more severe Laws to restrain them; so
that (omitting the Division of Counties or Shires, which I shall speak to
hereafter) he Cantoned his Kingdom, 1 st. into Trihings or Lathes, 1. The Court
of Trihings or Lathes.
as they are still called in Kent and other Places, consisting of three or four
Hundreds; in which the Freeholders being Judges, Lambard. de priscis Anglor.
Legibus. Fol. 135.
such Causes were brought as could not be determined in the Hundred Court:
concerning the Proceedings in which Court of the Trihing or Lathes, you may see
diverse Precedents in Sir William Dugdale's Chap. 12 Fol. 26.

2. The Hundred Court.


Origines Juridiciales.

NEXT to which there was also the Hundred-Court, in Saxon Hundred-Gemot, and in
Latin Centuriata, Because it originally consisted of an hundred Hides of Land,
as an Hide usually of an hundred Acres, or else because super december Decanos,
and centum Friburgos judicabat, that is, it had Jurisdiction over ten
Decennaries, or an hundred Friboroughs.

THIS Court before the Conquest was held twelve times a Year, and afterward
was increased by Henry I. to once a Fortnight, and then by Henry the Third
reduced to once in three Weeks.

Dugdale 's Origin. Juridic. Cap. 11.
IN this Court anciently, Vnus de melioribus qui vocatur Aldermannus, one of
the principal Inhabitants, called the Alderman, together with the Barons of the
Hundred (id est, the Freeholders) was Judge, as may seem by the Ex Regist. de
Ely, in Bibl. Cotton, sub Effigy Titi. ^. 1. F. 6. b.
Register of Ely, which says, that Aegelwynnu^ Aldermannus venit ad Ely, and
infra Cimeterium ad Aquilonalem portam Monasterii, tenuit placitum cum toto
Hundredo: Ibid. Fol. 5. b. and Fol. 7. a. and Fol. 13. b.
And the Witness of Contracts and Purchases, then were Testimonio Hundredi.
Here, not only Temporal Causes, but Ecclesiastical were handled; the Alderman,
or principal Judge, being such a one as Dei Leges and hominum jura studebat
promovere, who studied to promote the Laws of God and Man, the Bishop or
Archdeacon sitting therein, with the said Alderman: Which Jurisdiction so
continued until the beginning of William the Conqueror's Reign, that he by a
special Precept did inhibit, Cart 2. R. 2. m. 12. n. 5. per inspex.
Quod nec Episcopus, net Archidiaconus de Legibus Episcopalibus amplius in
Hundredo placitum teneat.

BUT the lowest of these Inferior Courts, was that of the Decennary, or
Tything, The Decennary, or Tything Court.
which yet was the greatest Bridle upon the Inferior sort of People; For by
virtue of this Law of King Alfred, every English Freeman, as Ingulph tells us,
ought to be in some Hundred or Tything, (I mean, whosoever was of full twelve
Years of Age); Vid Leg. Canut. cap. 19.
and if any one should be suspected of Larceny or Theft, he might in his own
Hundred or Ward, being either condemned, or giving Security, (in some
Manuscripts it is being acquitted) either incur or avoid the deserved Penalty.
William of Malmesbury adds to this, That he that could not find Security, was
afraid of the Severity of the Laws; and if any guilty Person, either before his
giving Security or after, should make his Escape, all of that Hundred and
Tything should incur the King's Fine.

HERE we have the Original of Decennaries, or Fribourgs, Vid. Leges Edwardi.
cap. 27.
in which every Man was to be bound for others as well as himself, viz. Masters
for their Servants, Husbands for their Wives, and Children, before they had
attained the Age of Fourteen; as also the Householder for his Guests. All which
ten Persons being thus bound one for another, were united under one Head,
called a Tythingman, and in some places a Borsholder; for BORGH signifies a
Surety or Pledge, and FRI is all one as Free. From whence comes our word
NEIGHBOVRS, that is, those that are Near-Pledges.

BUT that this Law concerning the Decennaries or Tythings, was not only made
for the mere Vulgar or ordinary sort of People, but that the Chiefest of the
Nobility, and even the Archbishops and Bishops themselves were alike subject
to it, Vid. Lambard. LL. Edward, Cap. 16.
will appear by that Law of Edward the Confessor, confirmed by King William I.
whereby all Archbishops Bishops, Earls and Barons, and all those that had
Courts of Sac. Soc. and Theme, etc. swore to keep their Knights, and all other
Servants there mentioned in their Frithborg, (i. e. Franc-pledg) for whom these
Lords or Masters themselves were to be Sureties: so that if any of them
offended, their Lords were obliged to do right in their Courts. And by the Laws
of Cnute, every Thane or Gentleman of Estate, Cap. 50.
was to have his Family under his own Pledge; and if any of them were accused,
he was to answer for him in the Hundred Court, i. e. was to compel him to
appear. And the Lord was also to be answerable for him, if he escaped; so that
all the Privilege that Noblemen and Gentlemen had above the common Men, was,
that they were not bound one for another, so as to be part of any Decennary or
Tithing; but each of them was Head of his own Friburgh, and his Family was as
it were a distinct Tithing of it self.

I observe this, to let the Reader understand, that how severe soever this Law
was, it was no Badg of Slavery or Subjection upon the common People, for even
the best Men in the Kingdom were alike subject to it: Neither was it brought
in, or increased, in Rigor by the Norman Conquest, as some, with greater
Prejudice than Truth, have maintained; since the Normans as well as the
English, were all under one and the same Law as to this Point.

THE Laws of this Court of the Tithing, were these;

FIRST, That if any one offended, and failed to appear, the other Sureties were
bound to have him forthcoming to Justice.

SECONDLY, But if the guilty Party fled, he should not be any where received
without a Testimonial from the Tithing from whence he came: So that a Man being
out of any Tithing, if he were received in any Town, the whole Town was in the
King's Mercy. But by the Laws of King Edward, Cap. 20.
the Decennary was allowed one and thirty Days to bring the Offender to
Justice, that so he might make Satisfaction, either by his Goods or Body.

THE third was, that if he could not be found, then the Tithingman or
Borsholder, taking with him two of the best of his own FRIBVRGH, and of the
three neighboring FRIBVRGHS nine, (to wit, of each the chief Tithingman, and
two others of the best Note) and there before the King's Justice (if he could)
he was to purge himself by Oath of the Offense and Flight of the Criminal: But
if he could not, he with his own FRIBVRGH was to restore the Loss out of the
Goods of the Party, if they were sufficient, or otherwise out of his own, and
those of his FRIBVRGH.

LASTLY, If the Neighboring FRIBOVRGS would not be their Compurgators, then
they were to swear for themselves, that they were therein no ways Guilty; and
that so soon as ever they could find him, they would bring the Offender to
Justice, or else discover where he was.

THERE were many other particulars concerning this Matter which I pass over,
that I may not be thought too prolix; but these are the most material.

The Rise of Court-Barons.

Vid. Leges Edw. Conf. apud Lamb. F. 132. a.


BUT besides this Caution concerning Pledges, they were also the first
Foundation of Court-Barons, who were under the Thane, or Baron, (i.e) the Lord
of the Manor, (as their Head) and he was to undertake for every one of his
Tenants, and to satisfy for the Offenses of each Man.

BY these Friburghs or Pledges, together with their Borsholders, were all Civil
Actions, as of Debt, Trespass, Detinue, or the like, (which arose betwixt any
of their Township) determined; but when there was a Cause that concerned Men
residing in several Seigniories, then it was transmitted to the next superior
Jurisdiction, viz. the Hundred-Court, (in some Places called the Wapentake.)

The Sciremote, or Sh^riff's Tourn.

Vid. Dugd. Juridical. Orig. c. 13. fol. 28.


THERE still remain behind two very considerable Courts, both held by the
Sheriff; The former of which was anciently called Sciremote, (i. e. the meeting
of the Inhabitants of the Shire) and was held twice in the Year, long before
the Norman Conquest, as appears from sundry Testimonies Leges Edgari (^enes
Lamb.) cap. 5. fol. 80.
; but since that, the Shireeve's Turn, from the French word Tour, in Latin
Vice, and in English Turn. Herein sat together the Bishop of the Diocese, and
the Earl or Eolderman, in Shires that had Eoldermen; Leges Canuti (ibid) c. 17^
Fol. 108. a. Seldom 's Tit. of Honor, part 2. cap. 5. and Sect. 5. Fol. 628,
130.
and the Bishop and Shireeves in such Counties as were committed to Shireeves,
for many Ages in the Saxons Times, as from these Laws from King Edgar to
Canutus, cited in the Margin, does appear, to the end they might determine as
well of what concerned Ecclesiastical as Civil Matters: the words of this last
King's Law run thus; Ex Vid. Jani Angl. etc.
omni Comitatu, bis quotannis conventus agitor, cui quidem illius Dioecesis
Episcopus and Senator intersunto: quorum Alter Jura Divina, humana alter
populum edoceto.

IN every County let there be twice a Year an Assembly of the People, whereat
the Bishop of the Diocese and the Earl shall be present, the one to direct in
Divine, the other in humane Matters.

WHICH so continued (the Bishop and Earl sitting therein together) until King
William the Conqueror in a full Convention of his Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots
and Temporal Lords, commanded, that Cart. 2. R. 2. per Inspex. m. 12.
Ecclesiastical Matters should thenceforth be handled by the Bishops in Courts
of their own, and not any more be discust amongst Secular Affairs.

IN this Court (as well as in that of the Country) according to the Laws of
King Henry I. these Persons following were to be present, as may appear by this
Clause, Intersint autem Episcopi, Comites, LL. Henry I. cap. 7.
Vicedomini, Vicarii, Centenarii, Aldermanni, Preafecti, Praepositi, Barons,
Vavassores, Tungrevii, and caeteri terrarum Domini diligenter intendentes, ne
malorum Impunitas, aut Gravionum pravitas, vel Judicum subversio solita miseros
laceratione confiniant.

AGANTVR itaque primo debita verae Christianitatis Jura; secundo, Regis
placita; postremo Causae singulorum dignis, satisfactionis expleantur. Scil.
Ecclesiastical Causes and Pleas of the Crown in the Turn; but Private Causes in
the County Court, Vid. Coke 's 4 th. Instit. 259, 260. where you will find that,

THE Tourn is a Court of Record holden before the Sheriff, the Ancient
Institution thereof was before Magna Charta to hear and determine all Felonies
(Death of Man excepted) and Common Nusances: Page 260.
See the Stat. Mag. Chart. c. 17. and the Exposition of the same in the 2 d.
Instit.

THE Style of this Court is, Curia Visus Franc. Domini Regis apud B. coram
Vicecomite in Turno suo, etc. ibid.

THE reason of which is, because in this Court the Pledges or Sureties of every
Decennary or Tithing were entered before the Court- Leets were taken out of it,
and granted to particular Lords of Manors, which Sir H. Spelman in his
Glossary supposes to have been done in the Reign of King Alfred; Verb. Laeta.
but since I find nothing concerning these Court- Leets till after the
Conquest, I shall defer the farther treating of them to that time.

I have no more to say of this Court, but that it was also called the Folcmote,
and in which, by Edward the Confessor's Laws, all Freemen were to take the Oath
of Allegiance or Fidelity to the King, Vid. LL. Edwardi, c. 35.
as appears by the Law it self; Omnes Proceres Regni, milites and Liberi
Homines totius Regni BRITANNIAE facere debent Fidelitatem Domino Regi in Pleno
FOLCMOTO coram Episcopis Regni, etc.

YOU will likewise find in the same Law (just preceding this) an extraordinary
Assembly of this Folcmote upon any sudden Danger, which met on ringing of the
Bells, called in English Motbel; and there they were to consult how to prevent
the Danger.

The County Court. Vid. Dugdale ut Supra. ibid.
THE second of these Courts was called the County Court, and was also very
Ancient, and to be held once every Month by the Shireeve, as from K. Edward the
Elder's Leges Edwardi Senioris apud Lamb. c. xi. Fol. 51. a. Videsis etiam
Leges Canuti cap. 17. apud Lamb. Fol. 108. a.
Laws appears -- Praepositus quisque ad quartam circiter quamque septimanam,
frequentem populi concionem celebrato: cuique jus dicito aequabile, Litesque
singulas (cum dies condicti advenerint) dirimito.

EVERY Shireeve shall convene the People once a Month, and do equal Right to
all, putting an end to Controversies at Times appointed.

TO this Court were antienly Appeals made from the Hundred-Court, as appears by
the Laws of Canutus -- Et nemo namium capiat in Comitatu vel extra Comitatum,
priusquam ter in Hundredo suo rectum sibi perquisierit: Cap. 39. apud Brompt.
Col. 924. and apud Lamb. Fol. 108. a. n. 18. Vid. Spelm. Gloss. vocab.
Comitatus Curia.
si tertia vice rectum non habeat, eat quarta vice ad Conventum totius
Comitatus quod Anglice dicitur Scyremot, etc. No Man by a Distress shall compel
another to the County Court, unless he have thrice complained in the
Hundred-Court; But if he have not Right the third Time, he may then sue in the
County Court, which is called the Scyregemot.

AND besides (says Sir William Dugdale) Vid. Lib. rub. in Scacc. Fol. 26. inter
Leges Hen. 1.
Regis placita and Causa singulorum debita; verae Christianitatis jura, were
first determined here; where interesse debent Commissarii, Episcopi, Comites,
and Ecclesiae potestates, (and the Presbyter Ecclesiae, as well as quatuor de
Melioribus villae, were obliged to attendance) qui Dei Leges, as well as Seculi
negotia, justa consideratione definirent.

AND a little after he further proceeds thus, Now let us see of what things the
Sheriff here antienly held Plea: -- Ad Vicecomites pertinent ista (says
Glanvile) Placitum de Recto, de liberis Tenementis, per Breve Domini Regis,
Glanvil. Lib. 1. Cap. 4.
ubi Curia Dominorum probatur de Recto defecisse; Placitum de Nativis, sed per
Breve Domini Regis.

ID est, It belongs to the Shireeve to hold Plea in this Court upon a Writ of
Right concerning Freehold, in Cases where the Lord of the Manor (wherein the
Land lies) has not done Justice; as also to hold Plea concerning Bondmen, but
by the King's Writ.

I shall say no more of this Court, but refer the Reader to the said Book (from
whence I have taken most of those things I have here given you concerning all
these Courts); Vid. Dugdale Origin. Jurid.
wherein he may find at large how great the Power of this Court was, not only
before but after the Conquest: And I have also reserved the treating of these
two Courts by themselves, because tho the 3 former are supposed by some to be
of K. Alfred's Erection upon his new Reformation of the Kingdom, but these two
were not so; for notwithstanding Ingulf tells us, that this King Alfred first
divided the Provinces of England into Counties, yet we find Mr. Seldom
Learnedly makes it out, Seldom 's Tit. of Honors, chap. 5. Fol. 509, 510.
That Alfred was not the first that divided the Kingdom into Shires or
Counties; for (says he) before Alfred's Time, those Provinces had their
Ealdormen in them: Thus we read of Ethelwolfus Barocensis Pagae Comes, and
Ceorle Domnaniae Comes, and Eanulf Somersetensis Pagae Comes; for the Earldoms
of Barkshire, Devonshire and Somersetshire under King Ethelwolf, Father to King
Alfred, are remembered in Asserius Menevensis, that lived in King Alfred's Time.
Two of them are also in Lib. 3. cap. 3.
Ethelwerd, a Writer of the Saxon Times, besides Osric Dorsetum Dux, for
Eolderman of Dorset; E^lchere or Alchere was at the same Time Ealdorman of
Kent, and Auda or Wuda of Surrey, as we have it in Hoveden, Huntingdon, and in
that Asserius also. And Ingulphus has the Charter of King Ethelbald's
Foundation of Crowland, whereunto the Comites of Leicester and of Lincoln both
subscribe.

TO which I may also add diverse Examples that you will meet with of the same
kind in the following History, out of the Saxon Annals.

HAVING thus dispatched these inferior Courts, I come now to the chiefest,
(next to that of the Great Council of the Kingdom) viz. that which was called
Curia Domini Regis, Curia Domini Regis.
Because oftentimes (as Sir Will. Dugdale informs us) the King himself sat here
in Person, having several Justices, a latere suo residentes, as Lib. 3. C. 10.
Bracton expresses it; Dugdal. Origin. Juridical. Cap. 17. F. 38.
and in his Absence, the Ealdorman, or Chief Justiciary of all England,
supplied his Place.

CONCERNING this Court, tho we have not many Memorials left of it before the
Conquest, yet it was certainly at that Time in Being, since it seems to have
been then the Great Court of all Appeals, as well Criminal as Civil, long after
the Conquest, before the Court of Common Pleas was taken out of it: for here it
was that K. Alfred is supposed to have re-heard and examined the false
Judgments of his inferior Judges in the Hundred, and County-Courts; and here it
was also that he condemned above forty of them to be executed in one Year, for
their erroneous Sentences in Matters of Life and Death, Cap. 5.
as you will find in the Mirror of Justices.

I need say no more of this Great Court, whose Power now resides in that of the
King's Bench and Common Pleas, neither the Chancery nor Exchequer having then
any Being; the former of which commenced long after the Conquest, and the
latter was erected by King William the First.

I have but two Observations to make concerning our Ancient English Saxon
Courts of Justice; the FIRST of which is, that strict Union there then was as
well in the Folk-mote and County Court, as in the Hundred-Court, between the
Ecclesiastical and Civil State; in both which the Bishop and the Sheriff
sitting together, all Causes both Spiritual and Secular were equally, and at
one time, dispatched to the great Ease and Satisfaction of the Subject, who
were taught by the Bishop in the Folk-mote what was their Duty toward God and
the Church, as they were by the Ealdorman or Sheriff what Common Laws they were
bound to observe, in order to their Honest and Peaceable Living one among
another: a Custom, which when reading of Books was not generally in use among
the Laiety, was absolutely necessary for the acquainting them with their Duty;
in imitation of which I suppose our Common Charges at Assizes and Sessions are
continued to this Day.

THE SECOND is, the great Ease the Subject must needs find in having Justice
administered to him in smaller Actions, in the Court of Decenary or Tything,
even at their own Doors; or else in Appeals and greater Actions at the Court of
the Trihing or Lathe; from whence they might remove it to the County Court; and
if they thought themselves aggrieved there, then they might bring it before the
King himself, or his chief Justiciary, in the Great Court abovementioned. An
Admirable and an Excellent Constitution this! whilst the Laws of England were
few, easy and plain, before the Partiality and Corruption of Country Juries
came in, and the bandying and Factions of Rich and Powerful Men in the Country
against each other, together with the vast varieties of Determinations of Cases
in Law, had rendered those inferior Courts not only perplexed, but unsafe and
vexatious to the Subject.

The Great Council, or Parliament.
I come now to the Supreme Court of the whole Kingdom, called in Saxon the
Wittena-Gemot, or Mycel-Synoth; in Latin Magnum, or Commune Concilium Regni,
the Great or Common Council of the Kingdom, consisting of the King and the
three Estates, which we now call our Parliament; which Court the Author of the
Mirror of Justices expressly tells us, That King Alfred ordained for a perpetual
Custom, that twice in the Year, or oftener, in Time of Peace, if Business so
required, they should assemble at London to treat of the good Government of
God's People, and how Folks should be restrained from Offending, and live in
Quiet, and should receive Right by certain Ancient Usages and Judgments, etc.
From whence you may observe, that in this Author's Time, ( viz. that of Edward
I.) it was held for Law, That the great Council of the Kingdom anciently met of
Course twice in the Year, without any express Summons from the King; and this
it seems was afterward altered to thrice in the Year, viz. at the three great
Feasts of Christmas, Easter, and Whitsontide, when the King met his Estates
with great Solemnity, wearing his Crown upon all solemn Days of Entertainment;
and when the Feasting was over, they fell to dispatch the public Affairs, Vid.
Vol. 1. Council. An. 851. Fol. 347.
as Sir H. Spelman well observes.

THESE stated Councils which were then held ex More (as our Historians term it)
i. e. according to ancient Custom, continued long after the Conquest, as shall
be farther shown hereafter: but if this Council happened to meet at any other
extraordinary Time, then the King's special Summons was requisite, as you may
find in Ingulf under Anno Dom. 948. where he tells us, King Edred summoned the
Archbishops, Bishops, and all the Proceres, and Optimates (i. e. Chief Men of
the Kingdom) to meet him at London at the Purification of the Virgin Mary.
Whence we may observe, that this Summons was thus issued, because this Council
was extraordinary, as not being held ex more, at any of the usual great Feasts
abovementioned.

CONCERNING the Original of this great Assembly, since Sir Robert Filmer in all
his Works, Page 116, 117, 118.
and particularly in his Patriarcha; and Dr. Johnston in his Excellency of
Monarchical Government, Would have this (as well as all our other Liberties and
Privileges) to have been only Royal Abatements of Power, Vid. Introduct. and
Fol. 127, 128.
and gracious Indulgences and Condescensions of our Kings for the Benefit and
Security of the Subject; who were pleased to condescend to call some Persons of
each of the three Estates (it being left to their Discretion whom to summon,
and whom not); and tho many of our Kings have made use of such great Assemblies
to consult about important Affairs of State, and by their Consent and
Approbation, to make Laws as well as (at their Prayers and Petitions) to
redress their just Grievances, yet they owed their being to our first Monarchs,
since till about the time of the Conquest there could be no General Assembly of
the Estates of the whole Kingdom, because till those Times we cannot learn it
was entirely united into one; but it was either divided into several Kingdoms,
or governed by several Laws.

I confess this looks at first like a specious Hypothesis, and may serve
perhaps to prevail upon some ignorant and unwary Readers, who will not, or
cannot give themselves the trouble of searching to the Bottom, to find out the
Truth of things. But I desire the Favor of those who believe and maintain this
Opinion, to answer me these few Queries.

FIRST, How it came to pass that in all the Kingdoms of Europe, erected out of
the Ruins of the Roman Empire, (as well as those that were not, but yet had
been constituted according to the same Gothic Model) the like General or Great
Council of Estates, consisting of the same Degrees and Orders of Men, were to
be found in every one of those Kingdoms? To begin with Sweden and Denmark, and
then go on to the Kingdom of Germany, now called the Empire, and so into
France, and from thence into Spain, among all the petty Kingdoms that then
composed that Monarchy (taking Portugal, if you please, into the Account); you
will find that the Estates of all those Kingdoms (as representing the whole
Body of the same) consisted of the Clergy, Nobility, and Deputies of Cities and
great Towns; which is briefly comprised by this single Verse of Gonterus, an
old German Poet, concerning the Estate of the Empire in his Time,

Praelati, Proceres, missisque potentibus Vrbes. SECONDLY, How it happened,
that in all the Kingdoms of the English-Saxon Heptarchy, the first Founders of
which came out of Frizeland, Westphalia, Holstein and Jutland, the like Great
Councils, consisting of the King, the Clergy and Nobility, came to be
instituted in each of them? For as to the Representatives of Cities and Towns
in England, since the Framers of the abovementioned Hypothesis deny their
appearance here, I shall say nothing as yet.

THIRDLY, Whether it be probable, that without a General Agreement of Laws and
Manners with those People of Germany, from whence these English-Saxons came,
they should by a sort of Natural and Unaccountable Sympathy, fall of themselves
into the very same Political Form and Constitution?

FOURTHLY, Whether Princes were above a thousand Years ago, so much more
Ignorant of the Arts of Government, and so little Ambitious of Riches and
Power, that they should all agree within a Century of Years, to set up one
uniform Model of Government, and admit the People into a share of their Power,
especially into that Grand Prerogative of laying Taxes; which most Princes now
do all they can to perform by their own absolute Will?

FOR as to that of understanding their Subjects Grievances, they might either
not take notice of them at all, or else, if they would, might have found out a
more easy Method to come to the Knowledge of them, than by Summoning the Clergy,
Nobility, and People of a whole Kingdom at once, to acquaint them therewith.

FIFTHLY, How it came to pass, that in all those Countries (so long as they
continued Elective) the States exercised the same Power of Deposing their Kings
for Tyranny or Maladministration? Does this look like a precarious and
dependent Power? And,

LASTLY, Whence happened it, that in France and England (and I believe I could
show the same in other Countries too) the Estates of the Kingdom met twice in
the Year, according to Custom, at a certain Time and Place, without any Summons
from the King?

NOW when the Gentlemen who maintain the Hypothesis abovementioned, shall
return a fair and satisfactory Answer to these Queries, I shall not only
willingly submit to their Judgments, but give them my Thanks for their better
Information; but till then I think it is much more agreeable to good Sense, as
well as Matter of Fact, to maintain, that those Orders and Degrees of Men that
did constitute the Great Councils, were more Ancient than Kingly Government,
nay Christianity it self among them, as appears by those Testimonies I have
produced out of Bid and other Authors; from all whom it plainly appears, that
the first Princes in all those Governments were originally Elected, of which I
hope I have given undeniable Instances, out of our own as well as Foreign
Histories: and certainly that which gives Being to a Thing, must be prior in
Nature to that which is produced from it.

HAVING now done with the Original, I shall next proceed to the Constituent
Parts of this Mycel-Synoth, or Wittena-Gemot; the last of which words is
derived from the Saxon word Wites, or Witen, i.e. Sapientes, or Wisemen;
Glossary, Fol. 66.
and tho Dr. Brady in his Glossary will have this word mostly to signify
Noblemen, or Great Lawyers, yet I do not find he brings any good Authority for
his so doing: For granting it is true, Wite signifies a Wiseman, however it no
ways proves that all Wisemen must be Lawyers, much less that those Lawyers were
Noblemen; and since he himself does not extend this Wisdom only to Knowledge in
the Laws, I need not say any more to it.

AS for the rest of his Authorities in this Page, whereby he would prove that
diverse things were done by the Decrees of these Wisemen or Lawyers, they
sufficiently answer themselves; since it appears even by his own showing, that
these Sapientes were the Bishops, Abbots, Aldermen and Thanes; and when he
makes it out that every one of these Orders of Men were Noblemen, or Lawyers, I
shall come over to his Opinion.

AS for what he says in the next Page, where he gives us the Interpretation of
those words of Bid, Principibus, and Consiliariis, by Ealdormannum and Witum;
they are yet less to the purpose, since a Man might be a very good Counselor,
and yet at the same Time no great Lawyer.

BUT the Author's seeming stabbing Proof is out of Asser, in his Life of King
Alfred, Id. Fol. 67.
Who admiring the Ignorance of his Earls and Praefects, commanded them either
forthwith to lay down their Places of Judicature, or else to apply themselves
SAPIENTIAE Studiis, to the Study of Knowledge, or of the Law. Here we see again
(says he) who had the Title of SAPIENTES, namely the Judges, that is, the
COMITES, PRAEPOSITI, and MINISTRI, or Thegnes; for these last were the Seminary
of Nobility, or Great Officers, Civil, Military, and Ecclesiastic amongst the
Saxons.

NOW I desire the Reader to observe, that admitting we should take the word
Studia SAPIENTIAE here, for the Knowledge of the Law, does it therefore follow,
that all that studied it must be Lawyers by Profession? when it is very certain
that the Study of the Law was not then, nor long after, a Trade, as it is now;
since all the Freeholders or Thegnes, afterward called Barons, were (as well
as Ealdormen) required to have a competent Knowledge of the Laws of their
Country; or else how could they either plead their own, or try each others
Causes in the Hundred and County-Courts (as they are in the Cap. 1.
Laws of K. Henry 1. recited to have done) before the Profession of Counselors
came up? Or how could they sit, and judge Causes in the County Court, or
Folc-mote, when every Thegne, or Gentleman in the County, was capable of being
chosen Sheriff, and of sitting Judge in those Courts, many Ages before the
Office of an Undersheriff was heard of?

AND as for the Auctuary to the 35 th Law of Edward the Confessor, Id. ibid.
Lamb. fol. 147.
wherein the HERETOCHS are called BARONS, NOBILES, and insignes SAPIENTES,
there can be nothing urged less to purpose; for then (according to the Doctor)
they must have had all great Titles, and have been chosen Generals in War, and
Leaders of Armies; and Pray why? because they were SAPIENTES, i. e. Great
Lawyers. But the Doctor had the good luck to find once in his Life, that Studia
Sapientiae, for want of a better Expression, signified the Study of the Law,
and therefore the word SAPIENTES and WITES, wherever he meets with them in
our Saxon Laws, or Great Councils, must (forsooth) sig^ify Lawyers or Judges:
And his Design in it is evident, that he might thereby confound the Lawmakers
with the ordinary Counselors or Advisers, whom those Lawmakers might often
employ in the drawing of the Laws; but he is indeed at last so modest as to
tell us, That at this day the Judges, and King's Counsel, and other great
Lawyers that sit in the Lord's House, are assistant to the Parliament when
there is occasion. But that he would here as well as elsewhere insinuate, that
no body else had any more right to appear there than they; you may see more
plainly in his Notes to his Fol. 85.
Complete History of England, where upon the words Sapientes or Witen made use
of in the Saxon Laws, he says, That if they only signified Men skilled in the
Laws, then were none of the Temporal Nobility present at the making of those
Laws, unless perhaps they were the Lawyers meant by that word, as being many of
them Judges and Justiciaries at that time, But yet he is at last forced (with
Justice) in the same place to acknowledge, upon the words, that Witan, Sapientes
or wise Men, must be taken for, or meant of the Bishops and Nobility, or else
they were not present at the making of these Laws; which no Man can believe,
that considers how many Ecclesiastical Laws there are amongst them, and Laws
relating to the Worship of God, and a holy Life, that were never made without
at least the Advice of the Bishops.

IT is well my Lords the Bishops were concerned here, or else sure he would
never have been so free as to make the word Witan signify not only great
Lawyers, but Divines too: and thus by the same liberty of paraphrasing, studia
Sapientiae may signify the Study of Divinity.

BUT enough of these Trifles; for the Author himself has some Lines above in
the same Notes, granted as much as I can desire, because he confesses, That in
our Saxon Laws, the Sapientes or Witan were diverse times taken for the whole
Baronage, or Nobility, as I may so say: And in this sense it is used in the 49
th Chapter of the Preface to Alured's Laws. And I desire the Doctor to show me
any Instance out of the Saxon Laws or Annals, if he can, where the words Witan,
or Witena-Gemot are used in any other sense. But what was the true meaning of
that word Baronage we shall reserve to another place; it suffices at present to
let you see he owns they were somewhat more than great Lawyers; and that it
comprehended others besides Noblemen by Birth, I shall prove by and by.

IN the mean time I shall show, by what Words and Phrases the Witena Gemot,
Witena Gemot.
consisting of these Wites, is called in the Latin Version of our Annals, as
also of our Historians who have wrote in the same Language.

Concilium Procerum, vel Primatum.
IN the first of these it is rendered Concilium PROCERVM, how truly, I have said
somewhat in the Preface: by Florence of Worcester in his Version of the same
Annals, it is commonly rendered Concilium PRIMATVM, and sometimes, but more
rarely, PROCERVM. But when this Author would distinguish the Laity from the
Clergy at these Assemblies, Laity and Clergy.
he words it thus, ARCHIEPISCOPOS, EPISCOPOS, ABBATES, and Angliae OPTIMATES;
sometimes thus, EPISCOPOS, and DVCES, nec non and PRINCIPES, and OPTIMATES
Gentis Angliae.

AS for the Signification of all these Words, I shall give it you anon; only
thus much may be agreed upon, that besides the Archbishops, Bishops, and
Abbots, the chief or best Men of England were present and assisted at these
Councils, and who, as appears by the Subscriptions to several Saxon Councils
and Charters, were either the Ealdormen, who writ themselves in Latin,
sometimes Sub-Reguli, but more often Duces, or Comites, of whom we have already
spoken enough: But this I would have remembered, that the Office of Ealdormen
not being then hereditary, it was bestowed for Merit; and Nobility by Blood was
no necessary Condition to it, since their Places in this great Assembly were
only ratione Officii, and not by Right of Inheritance as at this day.

THE next Order, whose Subscriptions we find at the Conclusion of such Councils
and Charters, Thanes.
are the Thanes; the highest Degree of which was called Thanus Regius, the
King's Thane, because he held immediately of him; and tho I grant it answered
the Title or Dignity of the greater Barons after the Norman Conquest, yet
however neither Mr. Seldom, nor any other Learned Antiquary that I know of,
does any where exclude the two other Degrees of Thanes, viz. the Middle and
Lesser, from appearing, and having places in those great and general Councils,
as well as the chief Thanes themselves.

AND besides these, we find at the end of several Charters, others who write
themselves Milites, Milites.
who, I suppose, ought to be rendered Knights; but whether they were Thanes
that held by any Military Tenure, or such as held their Lands in Allodio, that
is, freely, under no Services, I will not here take upon me to determine.

THESE are the only Degrees mentioned at the end of those Councils and Charters
abovementioned.

BUT perhaps it will now be told me, that according to my own showing, there
were no Commons summoned to these Assemblies; since neither in the Titles
before those Councils, nor at the Conclusions of them is there any mention made
of this Order of Men now called Commons, distinct from that of the Bishops and
great Noble Men; and therefore from hence Dr. Brady in his Answer to Mr. Petyt,
Dr. Brady's Introduct. fol. 6, and 7.
will have none but Bishops and great Noblemen to have had any thing to do
there: and to make this seem the more plausible, he renders that great Council,
where Plegmund Archbishop of Canterbury, Vid. Antiquit. Britan. Matthew. Parkeri
Archiep. Cant.
together with King Edward the Elder presided, viz. CONCILIVM MAGNVM
EPISCOPORVM, ABBATVM, FIDELIVM, PROCERVM, POPVLORVM IN PROVINCIA GEWISORM, etc.
in these words, A great Council of the Bishops, Abbots, Tenants in Capite or
Military Service, Noblemen, and People in the Province of the West Saxons.

AND here, before I go any further, I would desire the Doctor to answer these
two Questions.

FIRST, By what Authority he here translates the word Fideles, Tenants in
Capite, or Military Service? since I am sure he is not able to prove from any
History or Record, that this Tenure had any being in England at that time.

SECONDLY, How he can make it out, that the word Proceres always signifies
great Noblemen by Birth? without which Supposition all he is able to say on
this Subject will fall to the Ground.

BUT the Doctor thinks he has a great Advantage from what Archbishop Parker
says in the same Page; Dr. Brady, ut sup.
EDWARDVS REX SYNODVM PRAEDICTAM NOBILIVM ANGLORVM CONGREGAVIT, CVI PRESIDEBAT
PLEGMVNDVS, i. e. King Edward called the foresaid Synod of the English
Nobility, wherein Plegmund presided. Here he thinks he has a strong hold, and
therefore says, That this Author tells us the meaning of the long Title of this
Synod, which just before he had mentioned, viz. that the Bishops, Abbots,
FIDELES, Proceres, and POPVLVS, were all NOBILES, NOBLEMEN, that is, the
Ecclesiastics and Laics, or the Bishops, and Lay-Nobility, and not the
Vulgus, Commons, or ordinary sort of People.

SO then, according to the Doctor's Construction, all the foregoing Relation
of the Members of this Council was a jumbled heap of Tautologies, of Noble
Tenants in Capite, Noblemen, and Noble People.

BUT I must needs acknowledge that he is so far in the right, that by these
words Nobilium Anglorum, are not meant the vulgar, mean or ordinary sort of
People, or the Mob, (as they are now contemptuously termed) for certainly they
had never any thing to do in those August Assemblies: Nor does Mr. Petyt, or my
self maintain any such thing; and yet for all this I think we may affirm, that
all the Members that appeared there, were not Noblemen, or Great Lords only,
in the sense they are now taken.

FOR to begin with the word Nobilis, Nobilis.
which the Doctor so much insists on, it is his own too narrow Conception of
that Title which has been, I think, one main Cause of the greatest part of the
Quarrel between Mr. Petyt and him; for in all the Counties of Europe, except
England, it is very well known, that the word Nobilis includes not only
Noblemen of Title, such as Dukes, Marquesses, etc. but also all Gentlemen of
Families who are well born, and do not exercise Mechanic Trades. Thus
Nobilezza in Italian, and Noblesse in French, comprehends the less as well as
the greater Nobility. So likewise the word Aedelmen, among the Germans,
comprehends all sorts of Noblemen, as well those of Title as others, Tit.
Ad^lingi, p. 10.
which is owned by Sir H. Spelman in his Glossary in these words, Anglorum
Legibus Adelingos dici pro Nobilibus in genere, qui omnes nobiles Aedelmen
vocant, a Saxonico Aedel, nobilis. And so it was here in England long after the
Conquest, as well as before, when Knights and Gentlemen were reckoned inter
Nobiles minores, before the Title of Noblemen began to be appropriated to the
higher Nobility or Peers only; which is also owned by Dr. Brady in his Preface
to his Complete History, where he tells us of Lands held by Knights Service, as
well in the Hands of the lower sort of Noblesse, as of the greater Noblemen.

AND this being so, I shall easily prove, that all the rest of the words
insisted upon by the Doctor, do not signify only great Lords and Noblemen by
Birth: Proceres.
To go on therefore to the next word Proceres, that neither this does signify
only Men Noble by Birth. Isidore (an ancient Spanish Author) in his Origines,
Lib. 9. cap. 4.
says thus, Proceres sunt Principes Civium, that is, the chiefest of Subjects
or Citizens. And the Learned Du-Fresne also tells us in his Glossary, Page 420.
Proceres appellabantur, qui in Civitatibus praecipuos Magistratus gerebant;
that those were called Proceres, who were the chief Magistrates or Rulers in
Cities; and certainly these could scarce ever be Noblemen by Birth.

Primates.
AND as for the word Primates, it signifies no more than Principal or Chief Men,
however born; and that it was understood no otherwise among our English-Saxons,
appears from Aelfric's Glossary abovementioned, at the end of Somner's Saxon
Dictionary, where he renders the words Primates, vel Primores Civitatis, seu
Burgi, by YLDEST BVRHWARA, i. e. the Chief Magistrates in a City or Town, who
were then Persons of very considerable Note in the Nation, as I shall prove
further by and by.

Optimates.
I come now to the word Optimates, which signifies no more than the better sort
of Men, and not always Noblemen and great Lords, much less as confined to the
King's Thanes, or Tenants in Capite only; since the same Du-Fresne in his
Glossary defines Optimates to be Vassalli Barons, qui ab ullo Domino ratione
Hominii nude pendent, that is, the Feudatory Barons that merely depend on any
Superior Lord by reason of their Homage; which tho spoken in relation to
France five or six hundred Years ago, yet was certainly used in the same sense,
and no otherwise in England, as well before as after that time, and did include
all the Inferior as well as Superior Thanes, such as were the only
Freeholders in those Ages.

^rincipes.
BUT for the word Principes, he that understands any thing of the Latin Tongue,
knows, that it does not always signify Princes, or Men Noble by Birth, but any
Chief or Principal Man, remarkable by Place, Office or Dignity; and therefore
we often read in Livy, and other Latin Authors, of Principes Civitatis: and in
the above cited Laws out of Tacitus, de moribus Germanorum, it is plain, that
the word Princeps, or Principes in the plural, signified no more than chief or
considerable Men among the Germans, by reason of their Office, or present
Dignities, without any respect to their Birth. And in this sense, I suppose,
every Member of Parliament may at this day be reckoned inter Principes, among
the most considerable or chief Men of the Kingdom.

BUT the Doctor lays a great stress upon a Passage out of two Manuscript
Malmesburies, Dr. Brady's Introduct. fol. 7.
one in the Bodleian Library, cited by Sir William Dugdale, and the other in
the Treasury of the Records of the Church of Canterbury, cited by Sir Henry
Spelman, who both report of this very Council, that Edward the Elder
Congregavit Synodum Senatorum Gentis Anglorum, cui praesidebat Plegmundus, etc.
i. e. convened a Synod of the Senators (in Saxon the Aldermen) of the English
Nation, that is, such as were usually called to such Councils, which were only
the Nobiles and Great Men.

IN Answer to this I must refer the Doctor again to good old Livy, where he
will find that the Roman Senators were not all Noble by Birth, for they were
tam Patricii, quam Plebeii Ordinis.

BUT when Mr. Petyt cites William of Malmesbury, for calling a Saxon Wittena
Gemote, Generalis Senatus and Populi Conventus, to distinguish the lesser
Nobility from the greater, the Doctor replies, Id. ibid.
There is no heed to be taken how our old Monks and Historians styled the Saxon
Wittena Gemotes, or their great and Common-Councils, for the same Authors
expressed them sometimes one way, sometimes another; nor were they ever exact
and curious in observing and noting the Title, or the Constituent Parts or
Members of them.

FROM whence I cannot but observe the Doctor's great Partiality for his own
Opinion; for whenever William of Malmesbury in the Manuscript above cited,
mentions the word Senatores, it must with him immediately signify nothing less
than Great Noblemen, or what we now call Peers; but when the same Author
mentions the lower degree of Men (whom we now call Commons) as a distinct Order
from the Great Lords, or Senators, then presently he is with the Doctor, a
trifling old Monk, very little curious in observing the Constituent Parts or
Members of our Saxon Great Councils.

HAVING thus shown some of Dr. Brady's erroneous and inconsiderate Glosses
concerning the English-Saxon Nobility before the Conquest, which he vainly
supposes to have been the same as it is at this day; I shall now endeavor to
settle some truer Notions relating to those Great Councils, which as to the
Lay-Members, besides the Ealdormen abovementioned, I conceive, consisted of
the whole Body of Thanes, or Freeholders, who were then all Gentlemen either
by Birth or Estates; for I have already proved from the Laws of King Athelstan,
that a mere Ceorl's Man, if he had purchased five Hides of Thane Land, did
thereby become equal in all respects to a Thane.

NOW if the word Thane before the Conquest signified the same with the word
Baro, which came into common use after that time, as Sir Henry Spelman and Mr.
Seldom both grant it did; and Mr. Camden in his Introduction to his first
Edition of his Britannia in 4o, is yet more express as to this word Baro, as
you may see by this remarkable Passage; Verum Baro ex illis nominibus videatur
quae tempus paulatim meliora, and molliora reddidit, nam longo post tempore,
non milites, sed qui LIBERI erant DOMINI, and Thani Saxonibus dicebantur
Barons vocari coeperunt, nec dum magni honoris erant, paulo autem postea (viz.
some time after the Conquest) eo honoris pervenit, ut nomine Baronagii Angliae
omnes quodammodo Regni Ordines continuerentur: tho it must be confessed that Mr.
Camden, because he found this Passage had given some Offense to the higher
Nobility, he in his next Edition in Folio, restrained it by adding the word
Superiores before Ordines, as if none but the higher Barons might be thought to
have once made part of the Baronage of the Kingdom. And likewise Sir Henry
Spelman in his Glossary under the Title of Barons Comitatus, i. e. the Barons
of Counties, Spelm. Gloss. tit. Barons Comitatus.
(who are frequently mentioned in the Laws of our first Norman Kings) has this
remarkable Passage, and he being so great a Man, I shall not offer to abridg it.

HOC Nomine, scilicet, Barons Comitatus (says he) contineri videtur Antiquis
paginis, omnis Baronum feodalium species, in uno quovis Comitatu degentium:
Proceres nempe and Maneriorum Domini, nec non libere quique Tenentes, hoc est,
fundorum proprietarii, Anglice FREEHOLDERS. -- Notandum autem est, libere hos
Tenentes, nec tam exiles olim fuisse, nec tam Vulgares ut hodie deprehenduntur:
nam Villas and Dominia, in minutas haereditates nondum distrahebant Nobiles;
sed (ut vidimus in Hibernia) penes se retinentes, agros per precarios
excolebant and adscriptitios. Vid. LL. Edw. Confess. cap. 15. Quod per
Hundredum colligerentur (46 Marcae) and Sigillo alicujus Baronum Comitatus
sigillarentur, and ad Thesaurum Regis deportarentur. In Domesd. habiti sun^
Barons Comitatus; Magnates and Nobiles, qui in Curiis praesunt Comitatuum, hoc
est, ipsarum Curiarum Judices, quos Hen. 1. LL. suarum, cap. 30. esse libere
Tenentes Comitatus demonstrat. Regis ( inquit) Judices sunt Barons Comitatus,
qui liberas in eis terras habent, per quos debent causae singulorum alterna
prosecutione tractari. Which I shall give you thus in English. Under this Title
of Barons Comitatus, seems to be contained in our ancient Writers all sorts of
Feudal Barons dwelling in any one County, viz. the chief Men and Lords of
Manors, as also all free Tenants, that is, Proprietors of Lands, in English,
FREEHOLDERS. And it is also to be considered, that these free Tenants were not
anciently so mean and pitiful, as they are accounted at this day: For Gentlemen
had not as yet parcell'd out their Townships and Lordships into small Estates,
but (as we see in Ireland) keeping them themselves, by their hired Servants and
Villains, husbanded their own Lands. In the Laws of Edward the Confessor, cap.
15. it is appointed, that 46 Marks should be collected out of the Hundred, and
sealed up with the Seal of one of the Barons of the County, and be lodged in
the King's Treasury. In Doomsday Book, those Noblemen and Gentlemen are called
Barons of the County, who presided in County-Courts, that is, who were Judges
of those Courts, whom Hen. 1. in the 30 th Chapter of his Laws, shows to be the
free Tenants of the County. The King's Judges, says he, are the Barons of the
County, who have Freehold Lands in them, by whom the Causes of each of them
ought to be tried and adjudged in their respective turns.

AND there also immediately follows in the same Law of Henry the First, another
Clause, whereby Villains, and all such mean and beggarly Fellows, called there
Cocsetti or Perdingi, are not to be reckoned amongst the Judges of the Laws;
for they neither in the Hundred, nor in the County, forfeit their own Money,
nor that of their Masters.

THIS, I think, is sufficient to prove, that all such base and indigent People,
such as Dr. Brady calls Tag, Rag and Bobtaile, were excluded from having any
thing to do in these inferior Courts; and if so, then much more to be sure were
they shut out of the most August Assembly of the Kingdom, the Wittena-Gemot,
Mycel-Synoth, or what we now call the Parliament.

AND this I have brought to show, that I do as much disown the Thoughts of
introducing any Degrees or Orders of Men, (less than those of Quality or
Estates) into the Great Councils of those Times, as the Doctor himself does.

BUT in the first part of his Complete History he asserts, Complete Hist. Fol.
69, 70.
that not only the King's Thanes, but also all the Middle and Lesser Thanes
were both after, as well as before the Conquest, Military Men, who held their
Lands by Military or Knight's Service, which he would prove from the Heregeat,
or Heriots, that by the Laws of King Cnute, were to be paid to their Lords by
their Heirs, in Horses and Money, and certain Arms. Well, let this for once be
admitted, but I would then have the Doctor never to urge Military or
Knight Service, as a Badg of the Norman Conquest any more; and in the next
Treatise which he shall please to publish, I would desire him to make it out,
that none but the King's Thanes, (who were all one with his Tenants in Capite,
after the Conquest) had any Place in the Great Council of the Kingdom, for
without this, he does nothing: yet thus much I must say for him, that in the
beginning of his Answer to Mr. Petyt, Answer to Mr. Petyt 's Rights of the
Commons in Folio. p. 10.
he seems to be somewhat more good-natured, making the Saxon Wittena Gemotes
more large and diffusive; for in them he owns, were Archbishops, Bishops,
Masse-Thegnes, or Dignified and Great Clergymen, Aldermen, or Comites, King's
Gereves or Praepositi, King's Thegnes, Thanes, or Ministers, his Counselors,
Judges or Magistrates. Where tho he confounds the King's Judges and
Counselors, (whose Presence there was not absolutely necessary, as not being
any constituent Parts or Members thereof) with the Bishops, Aldermen, and
Thanes, without whose Consent no Laws could be made; yet he grants us enough in
reckoning other Thanes and Magistrates to have had Places there, besides the
King's, and who I conceive had a Right to appear there without any particular
Summons to each of them; and sure all these were not Tenants in Capite.

NOW having laid down, and I hope established a true Notion what sort of Men
then constituted the greater part of the Wittena-Gemotes of those Times; I come
to the next Degree or Order of Men, who then most properly represented the
Commons of England, Deputies of Cities and Great Towns. Procuratores.
viz. the Deputies of Cities and Great Towns: and tho I confess these are not
ordinarily mentioned in any of the Ancient Saxon Laws or Charters, yet that
they were comprehended sometimes under the Title of Procuratores, I am very
well satisfied, as appears from the Annals In Bibl. Cotton. Tiber. C. 4.
of Winchelcomb, wherein there is a Charter of Kenwulf King of the Mercians,
bearing date Anno Dom. 811. where all the Orders of Men summoned to be present
at that Assembly, are thus particularly recited by that King, viz. Merciorum
Optimates, Episcopos, Principes, Comites, PROCVRATORES, meosque propinquos, nec
non Cuthredum Regem Cantuariorum, atque Suthredum Regem Oriental. Saxon. cum
omnibus qui Testes nostris Synodalubus conciliabulis aderant.

NOW I would be gladly informed by any Man, well conversant in Antiquity, what
the word Procuratores could here signify after Comites, unless it were the
Deputies or Representatives of the Cities and Towns of Mercia?

THE like word is also found in a Charter of King Athelstan's, dated Anno 931.
of certain Lands granted to the Abbey of Abington; which Charter is entered in
the great Register that belonged to that Abbey, and is now in the Cottonian
Library, and concludes thus, Claudius. B. 9. Cap. 5^.
Haec Charta in Villa Regali quae Aetwelope nuncupatur, Episcopis, Abbatibus,
Ducibus, patriae Procuratoribus, Regia dapsilitate ovantibus perscripta est.

BY which Patriae Procuratoribus abovementioned, I know not what else can be
understood, but the Deputies or Representatives of the Cities and Chief Towns,
who then sent Members to those General Councils.

THO of what sort of Men these Procuratores or Deputies of Cities and Towns
then consisted, I confess it is hard at this distance of Time to determine;
when the Original Records of those Councils wherein they appeared are lost, and
that we have so obscure a mention made of them in the Saxon Laws and Charters.
But if I may take the Liberty to guess, there were not so many Citizens chosen
for each City as at this Day; but only their Chief Magistrates, Rulers, or
Aldermen, (which were single Persons, and not many, for there was then but one
Alderman in a Town) or else such as were called Port-Gerefas, (now Port-Reves
in diverse Places) who might appear for them of Course, or be constantly Chosen
on purpose: but if the Charter of King Athelstan abovecited be true, (as I see
no reason to question its Authority) it appears, that the ordinary Boroughs
were then represented by two Burgesses in Parliament, as at this Day.

BUT that these, as well as the Magistrates and most considerable Citizens
might then all pass, and be included under the General Name of Witan, or Wites,
called in Latin Sapientes, I have the Authority of the Learned Du Fresne, Tome
3. page ^00.
who in his Glossary assures us, that anciently among the Lombards, Sapientes
in Italia appellabantur Civitatum Primarii, quorum consilio Respublicae
gerebantur, i. e. that among the Lombards in Italy, the Chief Citizens were
called Wisemen, by whose Counsel public Affairs were transacted: and for this
he cites Hieron. Rubeus, who in his History of Ravenna under Anno 1297. has
this remarkable Passage concerning these Sapientes; (says he) Sed long antea
illud nomen obtinuit in aliis Longabardarum civitatibus, ut colligere licet ex
Ottone, and Acerbo Morena in Historia Rerum Lundevetium; which Authority tho
fetched as far as Italy, is very pertinent to prove the same Title to have been
in use among the English Saxons of the same Age with the Lombards, since (as
Grotius has learnedly proved in his Preface to his Gothic History) the
Lombards were but one Stirp or Tribe of those Ancient Goths, from whom (as I
have already proved in the beginning of the third Book of this Volume) the
English Saxons were also derived.

BUT that these Citizens of Cities, in those Times, might deserve the Name of
Wites or Sapientes, as well for their Prudence as Riches, appears from the
Charter of K. Edward the Confessor, in the great Chartulary of the Abbey of
Westminster, Faustina. A. 3. Fol. 97.
now to be seen in the Cottonian Library, which begins thus, Edward Cing great
Willem and Leodtan, and Aelfy Porte-Reven, and all mine Burh-Thanes on LVNDEN
Frindlic; this tho Saxon, yet being so near the English of our own Times, I
need not translate, only I desire the Reader to take notice, that the Citizens
of London were then so considerable, as in this Charter to have had the Title
of Thanes, as they were often called Barons de London in our Ancient
Historians after the Conquest.

AND as for the City of Canterbury in those Times, it had not only a Chief
Magistrate, called in Latin Praepositus, in Saxon Port-Gerefa, as Mr. Somner in
his Antiquities of Canterbury informs us; Page 64, 65.
but also in the same Place he has given us a Saxon Deed, written some Years
before the Conquest, and containing an Exchange of certain Lands and Houses in
that City, made between the Family, ( i. e. Monks of the Cathedral Church) and
the Crihtan of that City, being Merchants or Chapmen; and you have already
seen, that a Merchant having thrice passed the Seas, was accounted equal to a
Thane: and can any one then reasonably doubt, that Persons of that Wealth and
Dignity were not capable of being chosen Representatives of their Cities, in
the Saxon Great Councils?

NOR can I forbear citing, before I close up this Subject, that remarkable
Authority out of In Bib. Cotton. Faustina. A. 3.
Sulcardus's Manuscript Chartulary of the Abbey of Westminster, where there is
entered a Charter of King William the First, bearing date An. Dom. 1071. And
after the King had subscribed his own Name to it with the Sign of the Cross,
there are added many of the Bishops, Abbots, and Temporal Nobility; and then
instead of cum multis aliis, this Clause is subjoined, viz. In the Margin of
the Book there is this Note in a more Modern Hand, Nota hic, hos omnes
convocari a Rege sua Auctoritate, ad causas Religionis tractandas, tam nobiles
de clero quam Principes Regni, cum aliis inferioris gradus; conventio quorum
videtur esse Parliamentum: from whence it appears, that this Notator took this
Assembly for a Parliament of those Times.
Multis praeterea illustrissimis Virorum personis, and Regni Principibus
diversi Ordinis omissis, qui huic Confirmationi piissimo affectu Testes and
Fautores fuerunt: Hii autem illo tempore a Regia potestate e deversis
Provinciis and Vrbibus, ad Vniversalem Synodum pro causis cujuslibet
Christianae Ecclesiae audiendis and tractandis, ad praescriptum Celeberrimum
Coenobium, quod Westmonasterium dicitur, convocati. i. e. Besides many other
very Eminent Persons and Chief Men of the Kingdom of diverse Orders being
omitted, who with most pious Affection, were Witnesses and Approvers to this
Confirmation; and these were summoned at that Time by the Royal Authority, from
diverse Provinces and Cities, to the General Synod held at the Famous Abbey of
Westminster, for the hearing and determining of the Causes of each Christian
Church.

THIS is an Authority which seemed so convincing, that Sir William Dugdale has
made use of it in his Origines Juridiciales, to prove the Antiquity of the
Commons of England in Parliament; yet Dr. Brady in the Conclusion of his Answer
to Mr. Cook's Argumentum Antinormanicum, accuses that Gentleman of being both
Ignorant and Mistaken in the meaning of Cities and Provinces, and the Persons
that came from them, whom he indeed would have to be not any Representatives of
Counties and Cities, but only Deans, Archdeacons, and other dignified Persons
and Church Officers, as well of the Laity as Clergy, who were summoned by the
King to this Synod, from Provinces and Cities, to advise and inform the King of
the Convenience of the Places, whither the Bishops Sees then about to be
removed from Villages to Cities, were to be transferred.

BUT since there is not one word in this Charter said of any such Thing, and
that Sir Henry Spelman in his Glossary renders the word Provincia for a County,
and not a Bishop's See; I my self not now having leisure to pursue such
Niceties, shall refer the Curious for their farther Satisfaction to the eighth
Dialogue of Bibliotheca Politica, Bibliothec. Politic. page 567, 568.
where they may read whatsoever he has said against it sufficiently answered.

THESE are the only Authorities I shall make use of at this Time, to prove that
the Cities and Boroughs had then their Delegates or Representatives in the
Saxon Witena-Gemotes.

I will now conclude this Point with the Judgment of that Learned Antiquary Mr.
Lambard, Archeion. p. 256, 257, etc.
who certainly understood the Constitution of this Ancient Government, as well
at least, if not better, than Dr. Brady; and he tells us,

THAT whereas in the beginning of each Law, ( viz. those made by the Saxon
Kings he there mentions) all the Acts are said to pass from the King and his
Wise Men both of the Clergy and Laity, in the Body of the Laws, each Statute
being thus, And it is the Advice of our Lord, and his Wisemen: So as it
appears that it was then a received Form of Speech, to signify both the
Spirituality and the Laity (that is to say, the greater Nobility, and the less,
or Commons) by this one word Witan, i. e. Wisemen.

NOW as those written Authorities do undoubtedly confirm our Assertion of the
Continuance of this manner of Parliament, so is there also unwritten Law or
Prescription, that does no less infallibly uphold the same. For it is well
known, that in every Quarter of the Realm, a great many Boroughs do yet send
Burgesses to the Parliament, which are nevertheless so Of which sort are Gatton
in Surrey, besides several Boro^ghs in Devonshire, Com^^^^, and other Cou^^i^s.
ancient, and so long since decayed, and gone to naught, that it cannot be
showed, that they have been of any Reputation at any time since the Conquest,
and much less that they have obtained this Privilege, by the Grant of any King
succeeding the same. So that the Interest which they have in Parliament grows
by an ancient Usage before the Conquest, whereof they cannot show any
beginning: which thing is also confirmed by a contrary Usage in the self-same
thing; for it is likewise known, that they of Ancient Demesne, do prescribe in
not sending to the Parliament, for which reason also they are neither
Contributors to the Wages of the Knights of Shires, neither are they bound by
sundry Acts of Parliament, tho the same be generally penned, and do make no
Exceptions of them. But there is no ancient Demesne, saving that only which is
described in the Book of Doomsday, under the Title of Terra Regis, which of
necessity must be such as either was in the Hands of the Conqueror himself, who
made the Book, or of Edward the Confessor, that was before him. And so again,
if they of ancient Demesnes have ever since the Conquest prescribed not to
elect Burgesses to Parliament, then (no doubt) there was a Parliament before
the Conquest, to the which they of other Places did send their Burgesses.

I shall here crave leave to add one Record, tho after the Conquest, in
Confirmation of what Mr. Lambard has here learnedly asserted; for that several
Boroughs claimed to send Members to Parliament by Prescription in the beginning
of the Reign of Edward the Third, appears by a Rot. Pat. 17. Ed. 3. pars 1. m.
20.
Petition put in to that King An. 17 Edw. 3. wherein the Burgesses of the Town
of Barnstaple in Devonshire, set forth, that it being a free Borough, had by
Charter from King Athelstan, among other Privileges, a right of sending two
Burgesses to all Parliaments for the said Borough; upon which the King and his
Council ordered a Writ of Inquiry, which certainly would never have been done,
if Dr. Brady's Notion were true, that the Cities and Boroughs never sent any
Representatives to Parliament but once in the 49 th of Hen. 3. and then no more
till the 18 th of Edward the First, which was but a little above 50 Years to
the time of this Petition, which being within the Memory of so many then
living, the King and his Council would never have ordered a Writ of Inquiry
about such a vain and idle Pretense.

FROM all which, I think, it may safely be concluded, that this Learned
Antiquary abovementioned, I mean Mr. Lambard, did not without good Authority
believe, that not only the Great Lords or Peers, but also the Inferior
Nobility, and Representatives of Cities and Towns, were included under the word
Witan; and likewise that those Places claimed that Privilege by Prescription.

I shall therefore desire the Doctor, that when he writes next upon this
Subject, he will please to crave in Aid some Gentlemen of the Long Robe of his
Opinion, to help him to answer this Argument of Mr. Lambard from general
Prescription; as also what has been already said concerning this matter in the
same Dialogue of Bibliotheca Politica abovementioned, beginning at page 483,
and ending at page 593, inclusively: and if he can then with his Assistances
prove all our ancient Lawyers to have been mistaken in this memorable Point, I
shall own my self to have been so too. But I desire this may be taken notice
of, that no Prescription whatsoever in Law can be laid of later Date, than the
first Year of King Richard the First, which began almost fourscore Years before
the 49 th of Hen. 3. when he fancies the Commons were first summoned to
Parliament.

BUT that I may be as brief as I can, I shall reduce what I have further to say
upon this Head, to a few Queries. As,

FIRST, Whether in all the Kingdoms of Europe of the Gothic Model, beginning
with Sweden and Denmark, and ending with Scotland, there can be shown any of
them wherein the Cities and Great Towns, either had not, or at least not till
of Modern Times, their particular Representatives in the Common Councils, or
Assemblies of the Estates in those Kingdoms?

SECONDLY, Why in England alone, whose King was not more Absolute than in other
Neighboring Kingdoms, and which was framed after the same Gothic Constitution,
its Cities and ancient Boroughs (which were in those Times very considerable
for Strength, Trade and Wealth, and guarded by so many Laws made in the Saxon
Times) should not be thought considerable enough to have any Delegates in the
Common Council of the Kingdom, till so long after the Conquest, as the 49 th of
Hen. 3. which (if we may believe the Doctor) was also intermitted from that
time for above the space of twenty Years, till the 18 th of King Edward the
First?

BESIDES which, I would also propose these farther Queries concerning the
Antiquity of the Commons in general. As,

FIRST, If Clerus and Populus signify in our Ancient Authors the Clergy and
Laity, which the Doctor asserts, and I will not oppose; then I would ask him,
why (the same word Clerus including the inferior Clergy, viz. Deans,
Archdeacons, etc. as well as the superior, viz. Archbishops and Bishops,
etc. assembled in our Great Councils or Synods) the word Populus must not be
allowed the same Latitude of Signification, and extend to the Gentry, or less
Nobility, together with the chief Citizens and Burgesses, by a like Parity of
Reason? unless he can make it out, that Clerus must be understood in a very
comprehensive sense, and Populus in a very contracted and narrow one, only to
mean Great Lords and Noblemen of the higher Rank.

SECONDLY, I would desire to know of him what the words Populus and Populi
shall signify, when put after and distinct from the words Proceres, Optimates,
Senatores, or Senatus, etc. when these words occur in several ancient Charters
of our English-Saxon Kings, as well as Historians that make any mention of the
Great Councils, unless they mean the People or Commons distinct from the Great
Lords? Of which I shall here set down a few Instances out of many, both from
Charters, Laws and Historians.

THE first whereof is found in the Charter of King Ethelred, containing a Grant
and Confirmation of several great Privileges to the Monastery of Wolverhampton,
Vid. Monastic. Anglican. vol. 1. fol. 988. col. 2.
which concludes in these words, Haec Decreta sunt Sigerici Archiepiscopi in
placito coram Rege Ethelredo, and Eboracensi Archiepiscopo, and omnibus
Episcopis, Abbatibus Regionis Britanniae, seu Senatoribus, Ducibus, and Populo
Terrae.

THE next is, the third Charter of King Edward the Confessor to the Abbey of
Westminster, made in a Great Council of the Kingdom, which was held in the last
Year of his Reign, Vid. Spelm. Council. f. 625.
and concludes thus, Hanc igitur Chartam meae Donationis and Libertatis, in die
Dedicationis praedictae Ecclesiae, recitari jussi, coram Episcopis, Abbatibus,
Comitibus, and omnibus Optimatibus Angliae, omniabque; Populo audiente and
vidente.

NOW from both these Charters it seems evident, that by the word Populus, the
Representatives of Cities and Boroughs are here meant and understood, who were
present at the sealing of them, as well as the greater Nobility, viz. the
Senators, Ealdormen and Earls, and the lesser Nobility, viz. the Thanes, or
Freeholders, included under the Title of Optimates, since the mere Vulgar or
Mob could never be admitted into the Place of the Great Council as Witnesses to
the solemn reading and sealing of those Charters.

MY third Instance shall be that famous Law concerning the Grant of Tithes by
King Ethelwolf, Anno Dom. 855. which is cited in the Lamb. LL. Edw. Regis, cap.
8.
Laws of Edward the Confessor, and confirmed by King William the First, under
the Title de Apibus, and de aliis minutis Decimis, wherein it is thus
expressed, Haec (scilicet, these Tithes) concessa sunt a Rege, Baronibus, and
Populo. Here it is plain, that the word Populus must signify a distinct Order
or Degree of Men from that of the Barons.

THIS Law of King Edward the Confessor being urged by Mr. Petyt in his Rights
of the Commons asserted, the Doctor passes over in silence; but when the
ingenious Author of Argumentum Anti-Normanicum, makes use of the same
Authority, the Doctor can no longer contain himself, Answer to Argument.
Anti-^orman. fol. 297.
but in his Answer to that Book, tells him (after an insulting diminutive
Reflection upon his Person) that, He thinks this Law was made in King Edward's
days, and was piping-hot when the Conqueror came in, but (he says) it will
prove otherwise upon Examination of it, and also doubtful, whether there was
ever such a Law or not made by a Saxon Monarch or King. Lamb. ibid.
For after the Law has enumerated the manner of Tithing in very many things
both great and small, requiring an exact Tenth to be paid for most of them; it
says, That he which detains the Tenth, if need be, may be forced to Payment by
the Justice of the Bishop and King; and then immediately follow these words,
Haec autem praedicavit Beatus Augustinus, and concessa sunt a REGE, BARONIBVS
and POPVLO: Sed postea Instinctu Diaboli multi eam (viz. decimam) detinuerunt,
etc. These things St. Augustine preached up, and they were granted by the King,
Barons and People, etc.

THE rest of the Latin he there cites being not to the Point in Dispute, I pass
over; yet I cannot but observe, that from hence the Doctor believes he has got
a notable Advantage over him, for he thus proceeds.

HENCE it is evident, that these Concessions of Tithes were made in the time of
St. Augustine, Archbishop of Canterbury, sent hither from Rome in the Reign of
Ethelbert King of Kent; for the words, and concessa sunt a REGE, BARONIBVS ET
POPVLO, can relate to no other than the words immediately preceding, haec enim
praedicavit Beatus Augustinus. And the words next following them do also prove
the same; sed postea Instinctu Diaboli, Multi eam detinuerunt, etc. which was
after they were granted by the King, Barons, and People: so that this was at
most but the Confirmation of a Law made by King Ethelbert; and how, and by what
words the Legislators were expressed near 500 Years after the Law made, and how
they were rendered in Latin after the coming in of the Normans, transiently and
without Design to give an Account of them, cannot be of much Value to prove who
they were; and that the Laws of King Edward were made, or at least translated
into Norman Latin after the Conquest, appears by the words, Comites, Barons,
Milites, Servientes, Servitium, Villanus, Catalla, manutenere, all Norman
words, and not known here till their coming hither. He that will assert any
thing from a single uncouth Expression in one Case, and upon one Occasion only,
brings but a slender Proof for what he says.

THESE are the Doctor's own words which I have transcribed almost Verbatim,
that I may do not prejudice to the Force of his Argument, which in short
depends upon this single false Supposition, viz. that the Compiler or Drawer up
of King Edward's Laws, imagined that this Law concerning Tithes was made by
King Ethelbert, and was afterward confirmed by King Edward near 500 Years
after the Law was made, when none could tell by what words the first
Legislators were expressed.

BUT if this now should happen to prove otherwise, all that the Doctor has said
on this Subject will by an unlucky Mischance fall to the Ground.

AND I shall show here, that first of all his Argument is not cogent, that
because the words, and concessa sunt a Rege, Baronibus and Populo, immediately
follow those aforegoing, viz, Haec enim praedicavit B. Augustinus; therefore
this Law could be made by no other than K. Ethelbert, since the words are put
indefinitely, without mentioning any King in particular.

FOR St. Augustine might preach up Tithes, and yet the Law whereby they were
given to the Clergy might be made many Years after; and that this was so, will
appear by a brief History of the Matter of Fact. For first there is not, (nor I
believe ever was) any Law extant of King Ethelbert concerning Tithes, nor is so
much as mentioned by any Writer or Historian that I know of: the first Law, or
Canon we find for the payment of them, being that of the Council or Synod of
Calcuithe, held under King Offa, Anno Dom. 536. and which, either because it
was only an Ecclesiastical Canon, or else because it was not made in a General
Council of the whole Kingdom, was not of any Universal Obligation, (at least as
a Temporal Law) before that famous Grant of Tithes made by King Ethelwolf upon
his going to Rome, and confirmed as a General Law at a Council held at
Winchester after his return, Anno Dom. 855. and at which not any of the Bishops
and Great Lords were present, but an infinite Number of other faithful
Subjects, (or Commons as we now call them), I shall show more at large by and
by; and to this, and not to any Law of King Ethelbert's, I doubt not but the
Compiler of these Laws of King Edward had respect, when he tells us that Tithes
were granted A REGE, BARONIBVS, and POPVLO, that is, by the King, Barons, and
People of all England, and not by those of one petty Kingdom, (as Kent was in
the Time of King Ethelbert) whose Laws could never oblige the whole English
Nation; and therefore the words that follow, viz. sed postea, etc. must also
refer to the Time of making this Law by King Ethelwolf, and not to this
imaginary Grant of King Ethelbert, which the Compiler of these Laws knew
nothing of.

THIS being so, I think all the rest the Doctor says signifies but little; for
he is much mistaken notwithstanding he so positively affirms, that all those
words he there mentions, were not known here till the coming over of the
Normans; since he might have found, if he had pleased, the words Comes and
Miles in the singular Number in the Subscriptions of diverse Charters and Laws
before the Conquest, and the word Comites in the Body of the very Charters
themselves; for which I shall only refer him to the first Volume of Sir Henry
Spelman's Councils, as well as those in Monasticon Anglicanum.

Baro.
AS for the word Baro, I grant it did not come into Common or Legal use till
after the Time he mentions; yet that it was sometimes used before, I shall
refer him to Asserius his Annals, which however it was continued by another
Hand till the beginning of the Reign of K. Edward the Elder, yet that it was
wrote before the Conquest, there is no doubt to be made of it; and in the very
last Page of those Annals he may find the Names of the Barons Normannorum, (as
he calls them) who are there related to have been slain.

Villanus.
AS for Villanus used for a Ceorle's Man, or Countryman, you may see an Example
of the use of that word in King Athelstan's Law above cited: and the Doctor
himself mentions Terra Villanorum, i. e. Lands of Villanes or Villagers before
the Norman Times. Complete Hist. p. 67.


AND as for the rest of the words, viz. Servientes, Servitium, Catalla, and
Manutenere, I confess they are not to be met with in the Latin Versions of the
Saxon Laws made before the Conquest; but I would fain know why they might not
have been in use before that Time, tho they are not there mentioned? I am
confident no impartial Reader will grant that a Negative Argument is any good
Proof to the contrary.

BUT should I own that the words ( Barons, and all the rest of them there
cited by the Doctor) were not commonly in use till after the Conquest, yet that
would do him but little Service; for admit that this Law was only briefly
recited by the Collector of them in the Form there set down, it will be all
one, for the People or Commons were represented in the Time of Henry the First,
(when these Laws were drawn up in the Form we now have them) or else they could
never have been mentioned in this Law as a distinct Order of Men, by a Writer
who certainly lived long before the 49 th of Henry III. since this Law is found
thus worded in Roger Hoveden's Copy of King Edward's Laws, which was written by
him (being Secretary to Henry II.) above a hundred Years before the Commons
(according to the Doctor's Hypothesis) were ever heard of: So that unless he
can prove that Henry III. was before Henry II. I think he will but Aethiopem
lavare.

BUT indeed if this single uncouth Expression (as the Doctor calls it) had been
found in one Case, and upon one Occasion only, I confess it might have been as
slender a Proof as he would have it: but when I have not only given him
frequent Instances of the use of this word in our Ancient Charters and Laws, as
contradistinct from all the rest of the Orders abovementioned, I think that
Pretense will stand him in little stead; and if these are not yet sufficient, I
will superadd a few more from our Ancient Historians to the same purpose.

FIRST, From William of Malmesbury and Henry Huntington, who both agree almost
in the same words, concerning the Deposition of Sigebert King of the
West Saxons for Tyranny and Cruelty, Anno 754. Huntington expresses it thus,
viz. Sigebertus Rex in principio secundi Anni Regni sui, cum incorrigibilis
Superbiae and Nequitiae esset, congregati sunt PROCERES and POPVLVS totius
Regni, and provida Deliberatione Omnium expulsus est a Regno. Kinewulf vero
Juvenis egregius de Regia stirpe, ELECTVS est in Regem.

SECONDLY, From Ailred Abbot of Rievalle, who in his Life of Edward the
Confessor, giving an Account of the manner of that King's being Elected in his
Mother's Womb, tells us, Decem-Scriptores, fol. 372.
that Ethelred his Father having convened a Great Council for the appointing a
Successor, proceeds thus; Fit Magnus coram Rege Episcoporum, Procerumque
Conventus, Magnus Plebis Vulgique Consensus. Wherein he makes a plain
Distinction between the Assembly of the great Noble Men, or Proceres, from the
Consent of the Commons here, called Plebs and Vulgus.

AND tho I grant with the Doctor, this Story of King Edward's Election in his
Mother's Womb to have been but a Fiction; yet it is certain, that this Abbot
then spoke according to his Belief of the manner of Electing a King in those
Times, and truly sets down the Parties whose Presence and Votes were necessary
for the completing of such an Election, or else he must have spoke as much by
way of Prophecy concerning this Matter, as King Ethelred and the Estates of the
Kingdom had done about K. Edward's being Elected in his Mother's Womb. And the
Reader may remember that these Authors abovecited, lived and wrote many Years
before the 49 th of Henry III. when the Doctor supposes the Commons were first
summoned to Parliament; and therefore could not be corrupted with the Notions
(not to say Prejudices) of those who wrote after that Time.

BUT I know the Doctor has a Subterfuge, as he thinks for these plain and full
Authoriries, and that is, that by the Populus, Plebs and Vulgus mentioned as
you have heard, the King's Thanes, or less Barons as they were called after the
Conquest, who were all Tenants in Capite, are hereby only to be understood; and
that no other but they had any Right to be present, and vote in the Great
Councils of the Kingdom; and this he has endeavored to make good in his Answer
to Mr. Petyt's abovesaid Treatise.

BUT since the Doctor's Authorities do there relate to the Times after his
Conquest, (concerning which I shall not now say any thing) I will content my
self at present with asking him only these two Questions*

FIRST, How he will prove, that none but the Persons he there mentions,
appeared in those Councils, since we cannot trace any Footsteps in our most
Ancient Laws or Historians of his Tenants in Capite, being the only Constituent
Parts of the Saxon Witena-Gemotes?

AND it was indeed very unlikely they should, if we consider the many
Free-Tenants who before the Conquest held in Allodio without any Military
Services; Tit. Alodium.
and this, as Sir Henry Spelman well observes, was opposed to Feud or Fee, in
the Ancient Version of King Canutus his Laws, Cap. 75.
where it is called in Saxon, Bockland; and in the Laws of King Alfred, Terra
Haereditaria, Cap. 36.
and seems to be the same with our Fee-Simple, which might be made over to
Strangers without any License from the Lord of whom such Land was held.

OF which sort of Men there is also frequent mention in Doomsday Book, under
the Title of Alloarii and Allodiarii, and of whom it is there also often said,
Potuit ire cum terra quo voluit, or potuit se vertere ad alium Dominum. Of
these there were certainly many more before the Conquest than afterward, when
I own the greatest part of the Kingdom was in a few Years parcell'd out into
Knights Fees.

SECONDLY, I desire to be informed how our Great Councils could consist of such
a multitude of Persons, as I find in Ancient Charters and Historians to have
appeared at those Assemblies, not only before, but long after the Conquest? But
of the Period before that Time, (and which I treat of in this Volume) I shall
give these remarkable Instances.

THE first is out of an Ancient Manuscript in the Cottonian Library, concerning
the League between Alfred and Godrun the Dane, Sub effigy Claudii, D. 2. F. 8.
which begins thus, Circa Annum Salvatoris nostri DCCCLXXVI. in Magno Concilio
sive Mycel-Gemot, Aluredus Rex Anglorum and Godrunus Rex Anglo-Danorum, and
Omnes Angligenae Sapientes, and omnis populus qui in Anglia mansit, Pacis
agenda sive foedus constituerunt, and Juramento confirmaverunt pro seipsis and
Junioribus suis Ingenitis. Wherein this is worth observing, that by the
Angligenae Sapientes here mentioned, the greater Wites or Noblemen are
understood, and by Populus, the Representatives of the inferior People or
Commons.

THE next is, that at the end of King Ethelwolf's Charter of Tithes, Anno 855.
where you will find after the Subscriptions of the Bishops, Earls and other
Great Men, Vid. Spelm. Council. f. 350.
or Thanes, to this Law, these following Parties are mentioned, Aliorumque
Fidelium infinita Multitudo, qui omnes Regium Chirographum laudaverunt,
Dignitates vero sua Nomina subscripserunt.

FROM whence you may observe, that tho only the Dignified Persons subscribed
their Names, yet all the rest of this Multitude had a Right to approve, and
give their Consents to what was there transacted: But it cannot be imagined,
that this Charter would ever take notice of the Approbation of the mere Rabble
without, however they might show a Joy and Satisfaction at what was there done
by their Hollowing and Shouting.

AND this I conceive to be the Reason why these Councils often met in the open
Air, when the Weather would permit, because no one Room could easily hold them;
as appears by the Conclusion of King Edgar's Charter to Ely Abbey, bearing date
at Wulsamere, An. Dom. 970. Apud Wlsamere (says the Record) non clam in angulo,
Charta antiq. in Turri Land. B.
sed sub Dio, palam evidentissime, scientibus totius Regni mei Primatibus; who
were not only Primates Rega, the King's Tenants in Capite, but Primates Regni,
the principal or most considerable Men of the Kingdom.

I could give several more Instances to prove, that our Ancient Witena-Gemotes
consisted of a much greater number than the Doctor's Tenants in Capite, which
in the time of his Conqueror were not five or six hundred Persons, and might
not be half that number in the time of Edward the Confessor. But since the rest
of my Authorities fall out in the following Period, I shall reserve them to the
next succeeding Volume. These are sufficient I think, to make out that long
before the time the Doctor allows, the Commons had their Representatives in the
Great Councils by those of their own Order; but whether by Knights, Citizens
and Burgesses, as now at this day, I do not affirm.

BUT to pass from Charters to the Laws themselves, that prove the
English-Saxons Witena Gemotes, to have then consisted of a great multitude of
People, I shall only instance in the famous Charter of Athelwolf's concerning
Tithes, Anno Dom. 855. which being confirmed into a Law at the Common Council
at Winchester, there is both in the Copy of this Charter in Ingulph, as also in
that in Sir H. Spelman's first Volume of Councils, this Conclusion (after the
Subscriptions of Archbishops, Bishops, Earldormen, and others) in these words,
Aliorumque, Fidelium infinita multitudo, qui omnes Regis Chirographum
laudaverunt, Dignitates vero sua nomina subscripserunt, i. e. there were
besides a great multitude of faithful Subjects, who all approved of the Royal
Subscriptions; but the Dignities, i. e. the dignified Persons alone subscribed
their Names.

NOW I would fain be satisfied from the learned Doctor, or any other who shall
next undertake this Controversy, who this infinita Fidelium multitudo were,
that are here said to have approved of this Charter, unless they were the whole
Body of the inferior Nobility, or Freeholders of the Nation, together with the
Deputies of Cities and Boroughs, on whose behalf the Dignities are said to have
subscribed their Names? since it had been very ridiculuos for this Charter to
have mentioned the Assent or Approbation of the Mob, or mere Vulgar that only
looked on at this Assembly, or to have taken particular notice that these had
not subscribed their Names, but only the Persons of great Dignity.

I come next to consider in whom the Legislative Power, or that of Enacting and
Repealing Laws, did then as well as now consist.

Dr. Johnston in his Excellency of Monarchical Government, Chap. 24. and other
high Assertors of the Royal Prerogative, think they have done enough to prove,
that the Power of enacting Laws resided wholly in the English-Saxon Kings; and
for this they cite the Vid. LLeg. Regum Inae, Aelfredi, Aethelstani, Edgari,
etc.

Vid. Spelm. Council. vol. 1. fol. 552.


Titles or Prefaces to several Laws, wherein the King by the Advice of his
Bishops, and Wites, or Wisemen, strictly charges and commands such and such
Laws to be observed; and sometimes he does it in his own Person without
mentioning any of them, as may be seen in the Preface to the Laws of King
Cnute, and other Places.

I shall not dispute the Truth of any of the Authorities these Gentlemen
produce, but freely confess that the King, as Head of the Body Politic or
Commonweal, is often mentioned, as if he himself made such and such a Law; as
we say at this day the Statutes of King Charles the First, or Second, tho every
body knows that those Laws were enacted with the Consent and Authority of
Parliament.

SO under our English-Saxon Kings, tho the King's Authority gave Sanction to
the Law, and he might propter Excellentiam Personae, frequently bid and command
in his own Person, yet it was still in such a manner as was consistent with the
settled and received Constitution of the Kingdom, which I dare maintain has
not been altered in this Point since that time. Some few Authorities of this
sort I will here set down, collected out of the same Books these very Gentlemen
have made use of, to which I will also add some ancient Charters of
indisputable Credit.

THE first shall be from the Laws of King Ina, which you may see in the Preface
to Sir Henry Spelman's Councils, Tom. 1. fol. 219.
where in a Mycel Synod several Ecclesiastical as well as Civil Laws were made
to these ends, viz. ad Concordiam publicam promovendam, per Commune Concilium,
and Assensum Episcoporum, Principum, Procerum, Comitum, and omnium Sapientum
Seniorum, and Populorum totius Regni. And as for the Conclusions of King
Alfred's Laws, which Page 193.
Dr. Johnston urges for the King's sole Power in making Laws; they rather make
against than for his Opinion, for he there shows us, that this King having
commanded his Laws to be written, those that he liked not, he with the Council
of his Wites rejected, and those he liked, he bad, or commanded to be holden;
where I desire the Reader to take notice, that he neither rejected nor
commanded these Laws, but MID MINRA WITENA GETHEAT, in Saxon, that is, with the
Consent of his Witena, or Council of Wisemen, whose Consent and Approbation
was certainly necessary in those Laws, as appears by these very words at their
Conclusion, which the Doctor himself has thus translated out of Saxon; I
Alfred King of the West Saxons, showed all these (Laws) to all my Wites (i. e.
Council of Nobility, or Wisemen) and they said they all liked (or were
pleased) they should be holden.

AND that the Saxon word GETHEAT signifies somewhat more than bare Counsel or
Advice, you may see in the Title to King Athelstan's Laws, Vid. Chronic.
Brompt. fol. 848.
which is thus, Haec sunt Judicia quae Sapientes Exoniae, Consilio Adelstani
Regis instituerunt, and iterum apud Fueresham, and tertia vice apud
Thundresfeldium, ubi hoc definitum simul and confirmatum est.

HERE you may observe, that the Sapientes, the Wites, or Wisemen, are said to
institute or make these Judgments or Laws by the Advice of the King, and not He
by theirs.

THIRDLY, I will present you with the Title of King Ethelred's Laws, Brompt. ut
supr. col. 893, 894.
(as you may see in the same Author) and there we meet with these words, Hoc
est Concilium quod Ethelredus Rex, and Sapientes sui condixerunt ad
Emendationem and Augmentum Pacis, omni Populo apud Wodestocam in Mercena Landa,
id est, in terra Mercenorum.

FOURTHLY, To another Body of Laws made by the same King Ethelred, Idem fol.
895.
you will find this Title, Hae sunt Leges quas Ethelredus Rex, and Sapientes
sui constituerunt apud Venetyngum, ad Emendationem Pacis and Faelicitatis
Incrementum.

BY these two last Titles prefixed to King Ethelred's Decrees, the Reader may
please to take notice, that Concilium in the first of them does not there
signify barely Advice or Counsel, (tho if it did only do that it would make but
little to these Gentlemen's purpose) but it must (and can do nothing else here
than) intend and mean the Laws and Statutes which were made in this Great
Assembly, not by King Ethelred alone, but by him and his Wisemen: this you
find in both of them; for what is called Concilium in the former, the latter
Title calls Leges, and were all enacted by the joint and unanimous Consent of
the King and his Great Council.

I shall now proceed to give you a few Instances from ancient Charters: And the
first is that out of the great Register of Abingdon above cited, which being
thus, Bibl. Cotton. sub Effig. Claud. B. 9. cap. 31.
Ego Ecberht Rex Occidentalium Saxonum cum Licentia and Consensu totius Gentis
nostrae, and Vnanimitate omnium Optimatum, etc.

FROM whence I shall observe, that as ancient as the time of King Egbert, the
whole English-Saxon Nation, as well as the chief Men of it, are said to give
not only their Consent, but their License to this Charter, without which the
Authority of the King, and the Unanimity of these chief Men would have
signified little.

THE second Charter is that of King Cnute to the Abbey of Briadricesworth
(afterward called St. Edmundsbury) now in the Office of the King's
Remembrancer of the Exchequer, the beginning of which runs thus, Rot. Cart. 4.
E. 3. m. 24. n. 58.
Ego Cnute Rex totius Albionis Insulae, and aliarum Nationum plurimarum, in
Cathedra Regali promotus, The same Expressions as to the enacting part, as well
as all the Parties that gave their Assent, you may also find in K. Edward the
Confessor's last Charter to the Abbey of Westminster. vid. Sir Hen. Spelman 's
1st vol. of Councils, ad finem.
cum Concilio and Decreto Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, Abbatum, Comitum,
aliorumque omnium Fidelium elegi sanciend.

THIS Charter is the more remarkable, because made by a Prince who came in
partly by Force, and therefore one might have thought he would have exerted a
more absolute Power in making Laws by his sole Authority; and yet we find him
so far from pretending to do that, that he grants this Charter not only by the
Consent, but by the Decree of the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Earls, and all
his other faithful Subjects; which word (in the Latin, Fideles) tho Dr. Brady
understands it only of Military Tenants in Capite, yet I doubt not but it is
there to be taken in a much larger sense, and must comprehend all the lesser
Thanes, or Freeholders abovementioned, as also the Deputies or Representatives
of Cities and Towns: of which Fideles Sir Henry Spleman understands omnes qui
in Principis alicujus ditione sunt, vulgo subjecti: Hi sunt qui in Historiis
dicuntur Fideles Regis. And also in the same sense it is to be understood in
the Oath of Fidelity taken anciently in the Court-Leets, as the same Author
shows us, Spelm. Gloss. f. 225. col. 1.
Tu J. S. jurabis quod ab ista die in antea, eris Fidelis and Legalis Domino
nostro Regi, and suis Haeredibus; and Fidelitatem and Legalitatem ei portabis
de vita and membro, and de Terreno honor, and quod tu eorum Malum aut Damnum
nec noveris, nec audiveris, quod non defendes (id est, prohibes) pro posse tuo,
etc.

AND tho I grant this word ( Fideles) is after the Conquest frequently used for
a Military Tenant or Vassal, yet does it likewise even then often extend
further than to Tenants in Capite only, as I am able to prove from the very
Authorities he gives us in his own Glossary, under the Title Fideles, were it
now worth while to dispute that Point. But in the mean time it lies upon him to
make out, that the Fidelium Multitudo mentioned in King Athelwolf's Charter
abovecited, and the Omnium Fidelium in these, were no other than his Tenants in
Capite, which when ever he does, (to make use of his own Phrase) Erit mihi
Magnus Apollo.

I could also give you some Instances to the same Effect out of the Saxon
Annals under the Years 994, and 1002. in both which it is said expressly, THA
GAEREDDE SE KING AND HIS WIT AN; that is, it was Decreed by the King and his
Wites or Wisemen, to make Peace with the Danes, and to raise a Tax for that end.

SO that to conclude, I think this Dispute about the King's Authority in making
of Laws, may easily be reconciled to that which the two Houses of Parliament
now exercise, that is, the King makes the Laws, yet by and with the Assent of
the Lords and Commons, as is declared in the Year-Book of Edward the Third. 22
Edw. 3. f. 3. a. b.
And if such their Assent be absolutely necessary, can any Man in reason deny
their Authority to be Essential in the making of these Laws?

AND therefore Bracton understood well enough what he wrote, when he tells us,
Came Legis Vigorem habeat Quicquid de Consilio and Consensu Magnatum, and
Reipublicae Communi sponsione, Authoritate Principis praecedente, jaste fuerit
Definitum and Approbatum; i. e. That whatsoever has been rightly decreed and
approved of by the Advice and Consent of the Chief Men, and the General
Agreement of the Commonwealth, the Prince's Authority preceding, carries
thenceforth the Force of a Law.

WHEREBY it appears that in this Great Man's Time, the King gave his Consent to
Laws first, by ordering them to be drawn up by his Council, and proposed to the
Parliament when they met; and that it was in their Power either to accept or
refuse them, as we see it is in Charters and Acts of Pardon at this Day, when
they are Passed and Confirmed by both Houses; and for this see the Preface to
the Statute of Westminster the Third.

AS for the Judicial Power of this Witena-Gemote, in Banishing great and
notorious Offenders against the King and Kingdom, whose Crimes were either not
directly Treason according to the strict Letter of the Law, or else their
Persons being too great for any other less Court of Judicature; you may find
diverse Examples in our Annals and Historians, viz. under the Years 1048, 1052,
1055. But I do not find any great Lord or Nobleman condemned to Death, or
attainted by Authority of this Council, till long after the Conquest.

HAVING now shown the Ancient Authority of the Estates of the Kingdom to have
been always necessary and concurrent, (I do not say coordinate) with that of
the King, and also what other Powers they constantly then used; in the next
Place I come to observe the near Conjunction and Union of both Church and State
in their Mycel-Synods or Witena-Gemotes; which lets us see what kind of
Supremacy our English-Saxon Kings then exercised in Church Matters, as also who
they were that at that Time made Ecclesiastical as well as Civil Laws: and I
shall give it you in the Words of a very Learned Lawyer lately deceased,
Observations on the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of the Kings of England, page
13, 14, etc.
I mean, Mr. Joseph Washington, since I own I am not able to mend what has
been wrote by so excellent a Pen: his words are these.

IN the second Place, (for in the precedent Pages he had given some Instances
before the entry of the Saxons, (which being not to my present Design I omit)
to make appear in some Measure how the Law stood in those Times with respect to
the King's Supremacy;) I will exhibit (says he) a very few Instances of the
Saxon Times, during the Heptarchy. The Reader may consult many more at his
Leisure.

NO marvel if we find this People submitting to nothing in Religion, but what
was ordained by themselves; De Majoribus Omnes, Tacit. de Morib. German. Cap.
11.
was one of their Fundamental Constitutions before they came hither, and it is
continued here to this Day. And Matters of Religion were amongst their Majora,
even before they received Christianity.

ACCORDINGLY Edwin King of Northamberland, habito cum Sapientibus Consilio,
renounced his Paganism, and he and they embraced the Christian Faith. This is
described in Bid and Huntington, Vid. Bid Eccl. Hist l. 2. c. 13. Hunting. l.
3. f. 188.
to have been done in such an Assembly of Men, as the Parliaments of those Days
are generally mentioned to consist of.

AFTER the Christian Religion had spread among the Saxons, the Bishops and
Clergy frequently held Synods without the Laity for Church-Visitation, Vid.
Spel. Council. ubicunque.
and made Constitutions for the Regulation of the Clergy, which they obeyed and
submitted to by reason of their Oath of Canonical Obedience: but as nothing
transacted in those Assemblies of the Clergy bound the People, so can no
Instance be produced of the Clergy's being bound by any Act of the King, not
assented to in the Provincial Synods of those Times.

THESE Synods may easily be distinguished from our Mycel-Synods or
Witena-Gemotes, not only by the Matters transacted in them, but by the Persons
that therein presided, and subscribed them, viz. the Pope's Legate, or else the
Archbishop of Canterbury or York, and the Bishops, Abbots, etc. without the
Names of any Temporal Persons present thereat, when they were mere
Ecclesiastical Synods; but if they were mixed as well for Temporal as
Ecclesiastical Matters, both the King and Archbishop are said to preside,
otherwise the King alone: and before the Union of the Heptarchy into one
Kingdom, these Synods were commonly held in the Dominions of that King who was
then most Powerful, so that the lesser or weaker Princes were fain to appear
therein in Person, or by their Deputies; but if they did not appear there, nor
yet send any Deputies, those Councils were looked upon as to all Temporal and
Ecclesiastical Matters, no other than particular Synods, or Councils of those
Kingdoms wherein they were held, or whose Kings consented to them; for which I
could give you several Instances were it not to avoid being tedious; but for
this I refer the Reader to the first Volume of Sir H. Spelman, as also to
diverse Charters in Monast. Anglican. and Ingulf; some of which are taken notice
of in this Introduction, and the following History. This I thought fit to
superadd, the better to explain what our Learned Author has said upon this
Point.

BUT notwithstanding he there further observes, That the Clergy themselves,
both as to Doctrine, Discipline, and Ceremonies, were bound by the Public Laws
of the Kingdom, enacted in the Great Councils of the Nation; concerning which
he gives us these ensuing Instances.

IN the Year 673. Concilium Herudfordiae celebratum est sub initio primi Anni
Lotharii Regis Cantiae, praesidente Theodoro Cantuariae Archiepiscopo. Mat.
Westminster. fol. 122, 123.
At this Council (says Matthew Westminster) were present Episcopi Angliae, and
Reges, and Magnates Vniversi: where Theodore proposed december Capitula, out of a
Book of Canons before them all, which were there assented to, and subscribed.
The first was concerning the Observation of Easter; the ninth; that the Number
of Bishops should be increased, Spelm. Council. Vol. 1. Page 152, 153.
crescente Fidelium numero. The rest were concerning Bishops, Bishoprics,
Monks, Marriage, Fornication, etc.

THE Presence of the Bishops and all the Magnates, makes this Assembly appear
to have been a Parliament of those Times. What Orders of Men were comprehended
under the word Magnates, is not material to our present purpose. The Great
Councils that made the Laws, and without whom no Laws were made, are frequently
so described by our Ancient Historians.

BUT without all peradventure these Magnates were Laymen, and that is enough
for my Point.

THEN the same Author goes on in these words, In the Year 692. Ina King o^ the
West Saxons, enacted many Constitutions for the Government of the Church, as De
Formula vivendi Ministrorum Dei. De baptizandis Infantibus. De Opere in die
Dominico. De Immunitate Fani, etc. The Preface to which Law runs thus, Ego Inas
Dei beneficio Occiduorum Saxonum Rex, suasu and Instituto Cenredi Patris mei,
and Heddae and Erkenwaldi Episcoporum meorum, Omnium Senatorum meorum, and natu
Majorum Sapientum Populi mei, in magna Servorum, Dei frequentia, religiose
studebam tum animorum nostrorum saluti, tum communi Regni nostri conservationi,
ut legitima nuptiarum foedera, etc. Here the King, his Bishops, all his
Senators, the Natu majores and Sapientes of his People, (which are Descriptions
of the Laity in the Parliaments of those Times) and a great Number of God's
Servants, (by which the Clergy are meant) make Ecclestastical Laws: This was a
Parliament, Ibid. fol. 182, 183, etc.
as appears not only by the Presence of the Laity, but by many Temporal Laws
enacted at the same Time.

IN the Year 694. Concilium Magnum Becanceldae celebratum est, praesidente
Withredo Rege Cantiae, nec non Bertualdo Archiepiscopo Britanniae, cum Tobia
Episcopo Roffensi, Abbatibus, Abbatissis, Presbyteris, Diaconibus, Ducibus,
Satrapis, etc. All these pariter tractabant, anxie examinabant de statu
Ecclesiarum Dei, etc. Here the King's Legislative Power in Ecclesiastical
Matters exerted it self, not Personally, but in this Great Council. They do all
Enact, Statuimus, decernimus, praecipimus. For when the King himself is spoken
of, the singular Number is used, Nullus unquam habeat Licentiam accipere
alicujus Ecclesiae vel Familiae Monasterii Dominium, Ibid. p. 189, 190.
quae a meipso vel Antecessoribus meis, etc.

A Council was held at Berghamstede, Anno quinto Withredi Regis Cantiae, i. e.
Anno Christi 697. Sub Bertualdo Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi, praesentibus
Gysmundo Episcopo Roffensi, and omnibus Ordinibus Gentis illius, cum Viris
quibusdam militaribus. In quo de moribus cavetur ad Ecclesiae cognitionem
plerumque pertinentibus. These Ordines Gentis illius, seem by the Preface to
these Laws, to be meant of the Ordines Ecclesiastici Gentis illius; but withal,
that they cum viris utique militaribus humanissime and Communi Omnium Assensu
has Leges decrevere. Ibid. p. 194.
So that these Ecclesiastical Laws were enacted by the Assent of the Viri
Militares, as well as of the King and the Clergy.

A Council was held at Cloveshoe, sub Cuthberto Doroberniae Archiepiscopo,
praesentibus (praeter Episcopos, Sacerdotes and Ecclesiasticos quamplurimos)
Aedelbaldo Merciorum Rege cum suis Principibus and Ducibus, Anno Dom. 747. In
quo decernebatur de unitate Ecclesiae, Spelm. Council. p. 242, etc.
de statu Christianae Religionis, and de Concordia and Pace, etc.

In the Year 787. Concilium Legatinum and Pananglicum was held at Calcuith, in
which many Canons were made de fide primitus suscepta retinenda, aliisque ad
Ecclesiae regimen pertinentibus. This Council was held coram Rege Aelfwaldo,
and Archiepiscopo Eanbaldo, and omnibus Episcopis and Abbatibus Regionis, seu
Senatoribus and Ducibus, and Populo Terrae. After these Ecclesiastical Laws had
been thus enacted by Aelfwald King of Northumberland, the Legates carried them
into the Council or Parliament of the Mercians, where the glorious King Offa,
cum Senatoribus Terrae, una cum, etc. convenerat. There they were read in Latin
and Teutonick, that all might understand, and all promised to observe them; and
the King and his Princes, Spelm. Council. vol. 1. f. 291, 292, etc.
the Archbishop and his Companions, signed them with the sign of the Cross.

MANY Instances of this kind might have been added, as particularly that of the
Council at Hatfield, Anno 680, wherein the Canons of five General Councils were
received, which was a Witena-Gemot, a Conventus Sapientum; but I spare time,
and am endeavoring only to open a Door.

BY these Instances it is apparent, that the same Body of Men that enacted the
Temporal Laws of the Kingdom did in the very same Councils make Laws for the
Government of the Church. Indeed, the whole Fabric of the English-Saxon Church
was built upon Acts of Parliament; nothing in which the whole Community was
concerned, was enacted, decreed, or established, but by that Authority. For
whosoever reads impartially the Histories of those Times, and compares them with
one another, will find, that as most of those ancient Councils, commonly so
called, were no other than (to speak in our Modern Language) Parliaments; so
not any thing whatsoever in Religion, obligatory to the People, whether in
Matters of Faith, Discipline, Ceremonies, or any Religious Observances, was
imposed, but in such Assemblies as no Man can deny to have been Parliaments of
those times, that has not a Forehead of Brass. For the Presence not of the
Kings only, but of the Duces, Principes, Satrapae, Populus Terrae, etc. shows
sufficiently, that neither the Kings and the Clergy, without the concurrent
Authority of the same Persons that enacted Temporal Laws, could prescribe
General Laws in Matters of Religion. I do not dispute what Orders of Men among
the Saxons were described by Duces, Principes, etc. but sure I am, that they
were Laymen, and as sure, that they assented to, and confirmed those Laws,
without whose Assent they were no Laws: so that the Kings of those Times had no
greater Legislative Power in Ecclesiastical Matters than in Temporal.

THE tearing the Ecclesiastical Power from the Temporal, was the great Root of
the Papacy: It was that mounted it to this height; those Powers never were
distinct in England, nor most other Nations, till that See got the Ascendant.
And it is strange Inconsistency to argue one while, that whatever the Pope de
facto, formerly did by the Canon Law, that of Right belongs to our Kings; and
another while, that the several Acts that restore the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction to the Crown, are but declarative. It shows how little the
Supremacy is understood by Modern Assertors of it, and how little they are
acquainted with the Ancient Government of England.

THE third Period of Time to be considered, shall be from the uniting of the
several Kingdoms of the Saxons under one Monarchy to the Norman Conquest.

IN this Division we find a Letter from Pope Formosus to King Edward the Elder,
wherein the Pope complains, that the Country of the West Saxons had wanted
Bishops for seven whole Years: Upon the Receipt of this Letter, the King calls
Synodum Senatorum Gentis Anglorum, who being assembled, singulis tribubus
Gewisiorum (i. e. West-Saxonum) singulos constituerunt Episcopos, Spelm.
Council. 387, 388.
and quod olim duo habuerunt, in quinque diviserunt.

THE Ecclesiastical Laws of King Edward the Elder, and Guthrun the Dane, begin
with this Proemium: Haec sunt Senatus-consulta ac Instituta, quae primo
Aluredus and Guthrunus Reges, deinde Edwardus and Guthrunus Reges, illis ipsis
temporibus tulere, cum pacis foedus Daci and Angli ferierunt. Quaeque postea a
sapientibus (Tha Witan) saepius recitata atque ad Communem Regni utilitatem
aucta atque amplificata sunt. The Titles of some of these Laws are, De
Apostatis, De Correctione Ordinatorum, (i. e.) Sacris Initiatorum, De Incestu,
De Jejuniis, etc. all of Ecclesiastical Cognizance, or at least of aftertimes
so reputed. These are called Senatus-consulta, than which a more apposite word
could scarce have been used for Acts of Parliament, and were assented to by the
Witen; Spelm. Council. 390, etc.
from which word the Saxon Term for Parliaments, Witena-Gemot, is derived.

A Concilium celebre was held under King Athelstan, in quo Leges plurimae, tum
Civiles, tum Ecclesiasticae, statuebantur. It Is true, the Civil Laws are
omitted, and Sir Henry Spelman gives us an Account only of the Ecclesiastical
Laws made at this Assembly, which conclude, Decreta, Actaque haec sunt in
celebri Gratanleano Concilio, cui Wulfelmus interfuit Archiepiscopus, Spelm.
Council. 396, etc.
and cum eo Optimates and Sapientes ab Athelstano evocati frequentissimi.

KING Edmund held a Council Anno 944. where many Ecclesiastical as well as
Secular Laws were made, as De Vitae castitate eorum qui sacris initiantur; De
Fani instauratione; De pejerantibus; De iis qui barbara factitarunt Sacrificia,
etc. And this Council is expressed to have been Conventus tam Ecclesiasticorum,
Spelm. Council. fol. 419, etc.
quam Laicorum; celebris tam Ecclesiasticorum, quam Laicorum frequentia.

I will give no more Instances before the Conquest, tho numbers are to be had
which lie scattered up and down in the Monkish Histories, which being compared
with one another, will sufficiently disclose what I assert. For sometimes Laws
that concert Temporal Affairs, as well as Ecclesiastical, are said to have been
made by such a King in one Author, which very Laws another Historian tells us
were made in the Great Council, for which yet they have no uniform,
appropriated Expression, Term, or Denomination: Just as we in common Parlance
say, King Edward the Third, or King Henry the Seventh made such a Law, which
yet every Man understands to have been made in Parliament, because else it were
not a Law.

SO far have I made bold with the words of this Learned Gentleman: I shall now,
by way of Confirmation to what he has said, observe, from Mr. Lambard's
Edition of his English-Saxon Laws (which was a different Copy from that, Lamb.
Archaionomia, f. 57. and dein.
from whence Sir Henry Spelman published his Councils) that our Saxon Laws both
Ecclesiastical and Civil, were made by one and the same Authority, as appears
by the Preface to the Laws of King Edmund, which we find runs thus, Aedmundus
Rex ipso solemni Paschatis Festo, frequentem Londini tam Ecclesiasticorum quam
Laicorum Coetum celebravit, etc. So likewise in the Laws of King Edgar, Id.
fol. 62.
the Preface of which is thus, Leges quas Edgarus Rex frequenti Senatu, ad Dei
Gloriam, and Reipublicae utilitatem, sancivit. In the Saxon Original thus, MID
HIS WITENA GEHEAHTE GERAED, that is, with the Council of his Wisemen he
established. The Laws of King Cnute likewise begin thus, Consultum quod Canutus
Anglorum, Id. fol. 97.
Dacorum, and Norwegiorum Rex, ex Sapientum Concilio sancivit. (Note, the words
in the Saxon are the same as above.)

I could illustrate this further by several more Instances out of the same
Volume, were I not afraid of having already trespassed too much upon you; only
I desire you would please to take notice, that in each Body of these
abovementioned Laws, the Ecclesiastical precede, and then the Civil or
Temporal follow, tho being both made at the same time, in the same Council, and
by the joint Authority of the same Parties.

BUT now to add one thing more from the said Author, Mr. Washington, which is,
That Bishoprics and other Ecclesiastical Dignities were in the Saxon Times
(commonly) conferred in Parliament; we have the Testimony of Ingulphus, who was
Abbot of Crowland in King William the Conqueror's Reign; a multis annis
retroactis nulla erat Electio Praelatorum mere libera and Canonica: sed omnes
Dignitates tam Episcoporum, quam Abbatum, Regis Curia pro sua complacentia
conferebat: that is, says he, that for many Years past, there was no Election
of Prelates absolutely free and Canonical: But all Dignities both of Bishops
and Abbots, were conferred by the King's Court ( i. e. the Great Council of the
Kingdom, as I shall prove by and by) according to their good Pleasure.

AFTER which, the Person so elected, being first consecrated, the King invested
him with the Temporalties, per traditionem Baculi and Annuli, as you will find
in the same Author.

AND that this Custom was very ancient will appear by the Election of Wilfrid
to be Bishop of Hagulstade, In vita Wilfridi, cap. 11. edit. per Rev. Dom. Dr.
Gale fol. 46.
Anno 666. for Stephen Heddi expressly tells us in his Life, Reges deinde
Concilium cum sapientibus suae Gentis post spatium inierunt, quem eligerent in
sedem vacantem, etc. Responderunt Omnes uno Consensu, Neminem habemus meliorem
and digniorem nostrae Gentis, quam Wilfridum Presbyterum and Abbatem. Then the
two Kings ( i. e. of Northumberland) after some time held a Council with the
Wisemen of their own Nation, to consider whom they should choose to fill up
the vacant See, etc. and they all unanimously answered, We have none fitter nor
more worthy in our Nation, than Wilfrid the Presbyter and Abbot; and thereupon
being presently elected, he was consecrated Bishop.

THE next Authority of much what the same time you may find in an ancient
Manuscript-Life of St. Erkenwald in the Cottonian Library, Claudius A. 5.
where are these words, Contigit autem Episcopus Londonicae sedis, Cedda
migravit ad Dominum, consensu vero Sebbae Regis, and vocabulo universae plebis,
vir Domini Erkenwaldus in Cathredra Pontificali sublimatus est, i. e. but it
happened, that Cedda Bishop of London deceasing, Erkenwald, that holy Man, by
the Consent of King Sebba, and the Nomination of all the People, was promoted
to the Episcopal Throne.

BUT long after this, as a Nameless Author of the Manuscript-Life of St.
Dunstan informs us, Bibl. Cotton. Vitellius D. 17.
he was made Bishop after this manner, viz. Postea, Anno 958. factus est magnus
sapientum Conventus, in loco, qui vocatur Bradanforde, and eo omnium ex
electione ordinatus est Dunstanus ad Episcopum Wigornensem. To wit, that
afterward, scilicet, in the Year 958. a Great Council of the Wisemen of the
Kingdom, was held at Bradanforde, and there by the Election of them all Dunstan
was advanced to be Bishop of Worcester, etc. and then the King finding how well
he discharged that Trust, the same Author tells us, that he committed to him
the Church of London, then void by the Death of its Pastor, or Bishop.

THIS Nomination of the King's must be understood in the same sense with that
which went before, as well as with what immediately follows, viz. that
Brihthelm, Archbishop of Canterbury, being deprived, a little after he retired
to his Monastery, and then Rex, scilicet, Edgarus, ex Divino respectu, and
Sapientum Consilio, constituit Dunstanum ad su^m praedicta Ecclesiae
Sacerdotem; King Edgar, both from a Divine respect, and from the Counsel of his
Wisemen, constituted Dunstan chief Bishop of that Church.

THE next Example we have, is that of St. Wulstan, Bishop of Worcester, who (as
it is related by a Monk of that Church in his Manuscript-Life of that Saint,
about Anno 1170.) being sent for on purpose to be made a Bishop, he gives us
the manner of his being elected thus, Sanctus ergo ad Curiam exhibitus, jubetur
suscipere Donum Episcopatus; contra ille niti, and se tanto honori imparem
(cunctis reclamitantibus) clamitare, adeo concors populus in unam venerat
sententiam, ut non peccaret qui diceret in tot corporibus in hoc duntaxat
negotio unam conflatam esse Animam. This holy Man being called before the Great
Council, (for so Curia in this place is certainly to be understood) he was
commanded to accept the Gift of a Bishopric; but he endeavored all he could
to wave the Acceptance of it, alleging, that he was altogether unfit for so
great an Honor; but the whole Assembly not admitting his Excuse, they all
unanimously came to this Resolution, that one should not have told a Lie who
had said in this particular Affair, that one Soul had animated so many Bodies.

SO that it was not without very good Cause, that Matthew Paris tells us
concerning this Bishop's Election, Mat. Paris. fol. 20.
there concurred Plebis Petitio, Voluntas Episcoporum, Gratia Procerum, Regis
Authoritas.

HAVING thus given you so many good Authorities from ancient Manuscripts and
approved Historians of the Power of those Great Councils in the Election of
Bishops, I shall only add a few more from our Saxon Annals.

THE first is under Anno 970, which relates, that then Oskytel, Archbishop of
York deceased, who had been by the Consent of King Edward the Martyr, and all
his Wisemen, consecrated Archbishop of that See.

THE next is under Anno 994. and there we read, that Sigeric the Archbishop
deceasing, Aelfric Bishop of Winchester was elected in his room on Easter Day
at Ambresbury, by King Aethelred, and all his Wisemen; from whence it appears,
that not only the King, but the Great Council of the Kingdom had a share in
this Election.

I could give you also several Instances in the said Annals of diverse Abbots
elected in the same Assemblies to the greater Monasteries; but I hope what I
have done already is sufficient to my present Purpose, and therefore shall
leave it to the Reader's Judgment to consider, whether, when these Annals and
Historians inform us, that Rex constituit such and such a Man to be Bishop or
Archbishop of such or such a See, it is not to be understood in the same Sense
as we have already observed from Mr. Washington's said Treatise; that when this
or that King is said to have made such or such a Law, it is still to be
understood as made in Parliament?

I shall now say somewhat of the same Great Council's Power in the Deprivation
of Bishops, of which I shall not trouble you with many, but they shall be such
Examples as are of undeniable Authority.

THE first is from Osbern in his Life of Archbishop Dunstan, lately printed in
the first Volume of Anglia Sacra, concerning the Deprivation of Archbishop
Brihthelme abovementioned in these words, Bryhtelmus post paucos suscepti
Pontificatus dies, cogitans quod ad tantam rem minus esset Idoneus, jussus a
Rege and Omni populo discedere, discessit, atque ad relictam nuper Ecclesiam
non sine Verecundia rediit, i. e. Bryhtelme within a few Days after he had
received his Bishopric, not thinking with himself that he was fit for so great
a Charge, being commanded by the King and all the People to quit it, departed,
and returned to the Church he had lately left, though not without Shame.

BUT that John of Wallingford was very well satisfied, that this Archbishop
was deprived by the Lay, as well as Spiritual part of the Great Council,
appears by his Chronicle, where having set forth his unfi^ness by reason of his
too great Easiness and Softness of Temper, he proceeds thus, Rex Edgarus eadem
via qua ascenderat, fecit eum descendere; nam Concione super hoc eodem facta,
objecit Bryhthelmo plura Capitula, nimiam ipsius remissionem morum argumenta,
and condictione and Assensu Baronum suorum ad curam Solius Dorcasinae Ecclesiae
relabi fecit, that is, King Edgar made him to go down the same way he got up;
for a Council being called for this very Matter, he objected several Articles
against this Bryhtelme, showing his too great Easiness and Remissness in
Discipline; and thereupon by the Appointment and Assent of his Barons, he
caused him to retire to the Cure of his former Church of Dorchester. By which
it is evident, that this Author (living in the Reign of Henry the Third) was
very well satisfied that the Temporal as well as the Spiritual Barons, were
concerned in this Deprivation.

I was likewise from the Authority of the Saxon Annals, as also of William of
Malmesbury, about to have here also added the Deprivation of one Siward, who is
reported by the Annals, An. 1043. to have been privately Consecrated to the Sea
of Canterbury, with the King's good liking, by Archbishop Eadsige, and who
then laid down that Charge: and of which Siward, Lib. 1. de Pont.
William of Malmesbury farther tells us, that he was afterward deprived for
his Ingratitude to Archbishop Eadsige, in denying him necessary Maintenance:
but since there is no such Person as this S^^ard in the Catalogues of the
Archbishops of Canterbury, and that upon a more nice Examination, I find in
the Learned Mr. Wharton's Treatise, Vid. Ang. Sacra, Vol. 1. Page 107.
De Successione Archiepis. Cantuar. that this Siward (who was also Abbot of
Abingdon) was never Consecrated Archbishop, but only Chorepiscopus, or
Substitute to Archbishop Eadsige; who was then unable to perform his Function
by reason of his Infirmities: which upon a review of this Passage in William of
Malmesbury, I find also confirmed by him, in calling him no more than Successor
Designatus, and who being put by for his Ingratitude, was preferred no higher
than to be Bishop of Rochester; but this is denied by the abovecited Mr.
Wharton, who says expressly, that this Siward Abbot of Abingdon, and Substitute
to the Archbishop, was never Bishop of that See, but died at Abingdon of a
long Sickness before Archbishop Eadsige. So much I thought fit to let the
Reader know, because in this History under Anno 1043, being deceived by the
express words of the Annals, I have there made this Siward to have been
Archbishop of Canterbury, and deprived for his Ingratitude to his Predecessor,
which I am (upon better Consideration) now convinced to have been a Mistake.

I shall conclude with our Saxon Annals, which under the Year 1052. relate,
that Earl Godwin having in a Great Council held at London, purged himself and
his Sons of the Crimes laid to their Charge; and being thereupon restored,
Archbishop Robert the Norman, his Enemy, (having just before fled away into
his own Country) was not only by a Decree of this Council banis^ed, but also
deprived of his Archbishopric; and Stigand then was advanced to that See in
his stead, which certainly was done by the same Authority as deprived the
former: and if so, then I think none can deny but that Power might also have
deprived any other inferior Bishop; and yet we do no where find there was any
Schism in England among the Clergy at that Time, because these two Primates of
the Church had been deprived without their own Consent, by the Lay, as well as
Spiritual part of the Great Council.

HAVING now finished all I had to say concerning the Power of the King, and the
Witena-Gemote in Ecclesiastical Matters, I would not be thought to assert that
they have the like Authorities in Matters of mere Spiritual Cognizance, since I
am very well satisfied of the Primitive Institution of the Episcopal Order,
from the first Preaching of Christianity in the Time of the Romans, to the
Restoration of it in this Island upon the Conversion of the Saxons; which is
not liable to be abrogated by any Temporal Power, and which has been continued
among the Britains or Welsh, without any Interruption from thence, even to our
own Times.

BUT as for the Ecclesiastical Power, it was at first settled under the two
Archbishops of Canterbury and York, who had then no Jurisdiction or
Pre-eminence the one over the other; the former being Primate of the Southern,
as the latter was of the Northern parts of England: only I cannot but observe,
Vid. Lambard 's Peramb^lat. of Kent, Page 340.
that the Church of St. Martin's without the City of Canterbury, was (till
after the Conquest) the Sea of a Bishop, called in Latin Core Episcopus, who
(always remaining in the Country) supplied the Absence of the Metropolitan,
that for the most part followed the Court; and that as well in governing the
Monks, as in performing the Solemnities of the Church, and in exercising the
Authority of an Archdeacon;

AND no doubt had also the Episcopal Powers of Ordination and Confirmation, or
else he could have been no Bishop. I observe this to let you see, that the
English were not then so strictly tied up as not to allow of more than one
Bishop in one City.

BUT since I have chiefly designed to speak of Civil Affairs, I shall not here
meddle with the Ecclesiastical Authority of the Bishops or their Courts, or the
Officers belonging to them, but will leave them to those to whose Province it
does more peculiarly appertain.

HAVING thus dispatched what I had to say concerning the Synods and Great
Councils of the Kingdom in the Saxon Times, I shall in the next Place treat of
the English Laws before the Conquest; Of the English Laws before the Conquest.
and they were of two kinds, viz. either the particular Customs or Laws of the
several divisions of the Kingdom in which those Customs were in use; or else
such Additions to, or Emendations of them, as were made from time to time by
the Great Council of the whole Kingdom, concerning the Punishment of Crimes,
the manner of holding Men to their good Behavior, or relating to the
Alteration of Property either in Lands or Goods; with diverse other particulars,
for which I refer you to the Laws themselves, as I have extracted them from Sir
Henry Spelman and Mr. Lambard, their Learned Collections: and some concerning
each of these particulars, I have given you in the following Work.

BUT to show you in the first place the Original of the Saxon Customary Laws,
The Original of the Saxon Customary Laws.
they were certainly derived from each of the Great Nations that settled
themselves in this Island before the Heptarchy was reduced into one Kingdom;
but indeed after the Danes had settled themselves here in England, we find they
were divided into these three sorts of Laws, in the beginning of Edward the
Confessor's Reign, according to the several parts of the Kingdom wherein they
prevailed; as,

1. MERCHEN-LAGE, or the Mercian Law, 1. Merchen-Lage.
which took place in the Counties of Gloucester, Worcester, Hereford, Warwick,
Oxon, Chester, Salop and Stafford.

2. WEST-Saxon-Lage, or the Law of the West Saxons, 2. West-Saxon-Lage.
which was in use in the Counties of Kent, Sussex, Surrey, Berks, Southampton,
Somerset, Dorset, Devon and Cornwall; I mean that part of it which spoke
English, the rest being governed by their own ( i. e.) the British Laws.

3. DANE-Lage, 3. Dane-Lage.
or the Laws which the Danes introduced here into those Counties where they
chiefly fixed, viz. in those of York, Derby, Nottingham, Leicester, Lincoln,
Northampton, Bucks, Hertford, Essex, Middlesex, Suffolk and Cambridg.

BUT as for Cumberland, Northumberland, and Westmoreland, I suppose they are
omitted in this Catalogue, because in the Times not long before the Conquest,
the first was under the Power of the Scots, and consequently under their Laws,
as the two latter were under that of their own Earls, who ruled those Counties
as Feudatary Princes under the Kings of England; tho thus much is certain, that
the Danish Laws took Place there as well as in Yorkshire.

BUT after King Edward the Confessor came to the Crown, he reduced the whole
Kingdom under one General; for thus says Ranulph Higden, as he is cited by Sir
Henry Spelman in his Glossary, Tit. Lex. Ex tribus his Legibus, Sanctus
Edwardus unam Legem Communem edidit, quas Leges Sancti Edwardi usque hodie
vocant. Brompton says the like, Iste Supradictus Rex Sanct. Ed. Conf. dictus
est Edwardus Tertius, qui Leges Communes Anglorum Genti tempore suo ordinavit;
quia proante Leges nimis partiales editae fuerant. But Roger Hoveden carries
them up higher in his History of Henry the Second, for he says, Quod istae
Leges primum inventae and institutae erant tempore Edgari Avi sui; sed postquam
Edwardus venit ad Regnum, Consilio Baronum Angliae, Legem per 48. Annos sopit^m
excitavit, excitatam reparavit, reparatam decoravit, decoratam confirmavit;
confirmata vero vocata est Lex Edwardi Regis, non quia ipse invenisset eam
prius, sed cum praetermissa fuerat, and Oblivioni penitus data e Diebus Avi sui
Edgari, qui primus Inventor ejus fuisse dicitur usque ad sua tempora, quia
justa and honesta erant, e profundo Abysso extraxit, and eam revocavit, and ut
suam observandam tradidit. But the true Reason why it is called the Common Law,
is, because it is the Common or Municipal Law of this Kingdom; so that Lex
Communis, or Jus Patriae, is all one with Lex Patriae, or Jus Patrium: and it
is also called the Common Law in other Countries, as Lex Communis Norica,
Burgundica, Lombardica, etc. And from this latter they were so called by
William the First, in his Confirmation of them.

HAVING now given you the Original of our Laws in General, we will next proceed
to show you what they were in particular, as far as they concern those two
great Branches of all Municipal Laws, viz. the Civil or the Criminal: The
former o^ which concerns Lands and Goods, and the latter the Nature and
Punishments of Criminal Offenses.

The Civil Laws.
TO begin with the former as far as it concerns Lands, I shall satisfy my self
with what Dr. Brady has with great Industry and Exactness extracted in the
first part of his Complete History of England, out of those Learned Authors you
will find there cited in the Margin, Dr. Brady's Complete Hist. Fol. 66, 67.
which is as follows.

Mr. Somner says, there were but two sorts of Tenures here in the Saxon times
before the Conquest; Gavelkind, Fol. 11.
K. Edw. Sen. cap. 11.
Bocland and Folkland, to which two all other sorts of Land might be reduced.
Bocland, as Gloss. in verbo Terra ex Scripto. Bocland and Folkland, what?
Lambard says, was Free and Hereditary, and was a Possession by Writing, the
other without. That by Writing was possessed by the Free or Nobler sort; that
without, called Folkland, was holden by paying Annual Rent, or performance of
Services, and was possessed by the Rural People, Rusticks, Colons or Clowns; in
those Times these Writings Spelm. Council. Fol. 310. An. 800. Council. Clovesho.
C. 2, 3, 6.
were called in Latin, Libelli Terrarum, Landboc's and Telligraphia, and Livery
and Seizin was then made and given, by Somner. ut ^up. page 12, 13.
delivery of a Turf taken from the Land with the Writings: This was called
Terra Testamentalis, and hereditaria, Land Inheritable, and devisable by Will,
unless the first Purchaser or Acquirer, by Writing or Witness, had prohibited
it; and then it could not be sold or disposed of from the LL. A^uvid. Cap. 37.
Bocland and Allodium.
nearest Kindred. This Bocland was of the same Nature with Allodium in
Doomsday, holden without any Paiments, nor chargeable with Services to any Lord
or Seignory; and though the Name was almost quite lost, yet the thing remained
under the Name of Allodium, and the Lands possessed by the Allodiarii
frequently mentioned in Doomsday.

I have been the more exact in putting down this Passage, because it plainly
proves, from the learned Doctor's own showing, that if the greatest part of the
Lands before the Conquest, held by Men of any Quality, were Bocland, Compl.
Hist. page 66, 67.
and that this Bocland was the same (as he grants) with Lands held in Allodio;
(and I have already proved that such Lands were held without any Paiments or
Services, other than such public Taxes as were imposed by the Great Council of
the Kingdom; that is, Danegelt, with such other Duties as all Lands whatsoever
were liable to:) then is it also as evident that these Lands, which were far
the greatest part of the Lands in the Kingdom, were not held by Knight's
Service, and consequently their Owners could not be Tenants in Capite, as this
Author is pleased in other Places to suppose; and therefore these Tenants in
Allodio could never be so represented by such Military Persons, as that they
alone could either make Laws for them, or lay Taxes on their Estates, without
their Consents either by themselves or Representatives in the Great Councils or
Parliaments of those Times; and therefore such free Tenants must have either
appeared for themselves in Person, or have chosen others to represent them.

AND if any Man doubt whether these Lands held in Allodio, were before the
Conquest the greatest part of the Lands of the Kingdom; I must refer them for
their Satisfaction to Mr. Somners and Mr. Taylor's Treatises upon Gavelkind,
Page 603.
as also to Mr. Lambard's Discourse of the Customs of Kent, at the end of his
Perambulation of that County; who there fully prove, that the Ancient Bocland
descending to all the Male Issue alike, was not mere Socage Tenure, but
Allodial. 2 dly, That this was the general Tenure of all Lands not held by
Knights Service before the Conquest, (as well Gavelkind as others) and that not
only at the Common Law, but confirmed by diverse Saxon Kings; as by that Law of
King Edmund, Si quis intestatus obierit, Liberi ejus haereditatem aequaliter
dividant: So likewise by the 68 th and 75 th Laws of King Cnute, as also by
those of Edward the Confessor, confirmed by William the Conqueror, Cap. 36. And
therefore Mr. Somner in his said Treatise of Gavelkind, farther proves, that
this was a Liberty left to the Kentish Men by William the Conqueror, when all
the rest of England changed its Ancient Tenure; and Mr. Tailor in his History
of Gavelkind, Chap. 6, 7, 8. has proved this to have been a general Custom,
not only in Kent, but in Wales and several parts of England.

I shall not any further pursue what the Doctor has said of Lands holden by
Military Service before the Conquest, or of the Herriots or Reliefs that were
due upon them, which were payable out of the Feudal Lands of the Ealdormen,
middle and less Thanes; but shall refer you to the Laws of King Cnute, and
those of the Confessor, the former of which you will find at the end of his
Reign in the ensuing Volume, wherein is set down what the Heirs of each of
those Feudatary Tenants were to pay to their Lords at the Death of their
Ancestors.

BUT that these could not be near all the Lands of England, appears by what
has been already said of Lands held in Allodio. And I have known some Learned
Antiquaries, who have not without good Cause believed that all Tenure by
Knight Service in England, was derived from the Danes and Norwegians, who upon
their Conquests and settling here, first brought in that sort of Tenure out of
Denmark and Norway; from whence the English Saxon Kings might by Degrees impose
it upon several Lands by them granted to their Ealdormen or Earls, and chief
Thanes, by Military or Knights Service, who likewise granted them to their
inferior Thanes under the like Tenures; and yet it would have been very
unreasonable that such inferior Thanes should have so far been deprived of
their ancient English Freedom, as that the Earls and King's Thanes should have
it in their Power to make what Laws, and impose what Taxes they pleased upon
them as their under Tenants, without their Consent.

AND if mere Tenure alone could have done this, I would fain know why the
English Kings before the Conquest, by the same reason might not as well have
made Laws, and taxed their Tenants in Capite without their Consent, as these
could have done their Tenants that held under them? But this is altogether
false in Matter of Fact, as all the Histories of those Times show; Danegelt it
self being first imposed by the Consent of the King and his Wites, Anno 994.
as appears by the Saxon Annals.

NOT but that I grant all the Lands of England were then held under those three
great Services called in Latin Trinoda Necessitas, viz. 1. Expedition (that is,
the finding of Men to defend the Kingdom in case of Invasion.) 2. The Repair of
Bridges; and, 3. Fortifying of Castles; from which even Lands granted to the
Church were not exempted, as appears by the Charters to several Monasteries.
But these were Services due, and to be performed by the Common Law and Custom
of the Kingdom, and did not concern one sort of Tenure more than another.

I have no more to observe concerning this Bocland, but that it passed by Deed,
Ingulph. Hist. fol. 508.
called by Ingulphus, Chirographa, until the Confessor's time, and was
confirmed by the Subscriptions of the Fideles, or Subjects there present, with
golden Crosses, and some other holy Marks; only this methinks ought not to be
passed over, that the Ceremony of Livery or Seizin of Lands is very ancient, as
appears by the Charter of Ceadwalla, King of the West Saxons (preserved among
the Evidences belonging to the Archbishop of Canterbury) in the Year
DCLXXXVII. made to Theodore then Archbishop of that See, of certain Lands with
this Subscription, Ad cumulum autem Confirmationis, ego Cedwalla Cespitem
terrae praedictae super sanctum Altar Salvatoris posui, and propria manu, pro
ignorantia Literarum, signum sanctae Crucis expressi and subscripsi: that is,
For the farther Confirmation thereof, I Ceadwalla have put this said Turf of
Earth upon the holy Altar, and for want of Learning, have with my own Hand made
and subscribed the Sign of the holy Cross. The like also has Camden out of a
Patent made by Withered King of Kent, Vid. Camd. Brit. in Cantio.
to a Nunnery in the Isle of Thanet. So much for Bocland.

CONTRARY to which was that called Folkland, which Sir Henry Spelman says,
Folkland. Spelm. Gloss. ^it. Folkland.
was Terra popularis, scilicet, quae jure communi possidetur, vel sine scripto;
that is, Land belonging to the ordinary sort of People, which they enjoyed of
common Right, without any Writings or Deeds, as we see in Copyhold Lands at
this day, for which the Tenants have seldom any other Evidences than the Copy
of the Court-Rolls of the Manor; which Copyhold Lands were anciently either
held by Sockmen (that is, Freemen holding by the Plow) to perform mean and
villain Services, or else by those who were Villains appendant to the Manor.

THESE might be ousted of their small Estates at the Will of the Lord, Tenants
in Ancient Demesne.
which a Farmer could not be so long as he honestly performed his Services; and
these were they, who after the Conquest were called Tenants in Ancient Demesne,
either of the King, or of some other Lord, as you will find in the old Natura
Breviam. Cap. Breve de Recto.


OF the like sort also, as Dr. Brady very well informs us, Complete. Hist. fol.
67, 68.
were Lands and Possessions mentioned by other Names in our Saxon Laws, as
Gaffolland, Rent-Land, or Farm-Land, Foedus Alured, Saxon Tenures.
and Guthr. c. 2. Gafogyldenhus, an House yielding or paying Rent, or Gable.
LL. Inae, c. 6. There are also mentioned Inland, Inland. Utland or Outland.
or the Lords Demesnes, which he kept in his own Hands, and Neatland, which is
called Vtland, or Outland, in Lamb. Peramb. Kent, p. 495.
Byrthric's Will; Terra Villanorum, and was let out to Countrymen, or
Villagers, Aegder of Thegnes inlandge, of Neatland, i. e. either of the Lords
or Thanes Inland, or Demesnes, or else the Country-mans, Villagers, or Villan's
Land, 1 Edit. Spelm. Gloss. in verb.
Gafolland, Neatland, and Vtland, as Gavelk. p. 14, 115.
Mr. Somner truly informs us, were opposed to Inland, Spelm. Gloss. in verbo.
or Demesne-Lands, and were Lands granted out for Rent, or Service, or both,
and reducible to Folkland; and it is very probable they were the same, or of the
same Nature; for that in the Laws where they are mentioned, it appears they
were always occupied by Ceorls, Churles, Countrymen, Colons or Clowns; The
Names of ordinary People.
by Gebures, Boors, Rustics, Plough, or Husbandmen; or by Neates, and Geneates,
Drudges, Villanes, or Villagers. These three Saxon words being almost of the
same Signification, tho very different in Sound, were always applied to the
ordinary sort of People, called by us Folk at this day. Thus far the Doctor,
which I will not contradict, tho he here makes all Ceorles Men to have been
mere Drudges, which was not so, since those that held Land by Socage-Services,
were as free as to all things else from the Power of their Lords, as our
Tenants are at this day.

BUT I desire by the way, that this may not be unobserved, that I can no where
find the word Colonus used for a Husbandman or Clown, in any of our ancient
Saxon Laws, Spelm. Gloss. in verb.
tho Sir Henry Spelman gives us some Examples of the use of it in the German
Laws, there signifying Liberi Ecclesiastici, quos Colonos vocant, and the King
had also his Coloni; but this learned Author supposes that these Coloni
answered our Sockmen, who were certainly Freemen and not Villains. Nor did
Villanus signify a Villain, but a Countryman or Villager in general, till
after the Conquest; and then it was not from the Latin but French Idiom, that a
Villain came to signify a Slave or Drudg.

HAVING now given you what I thought fit to say concerning the several Tenures,
and ways of Conveyance of Lands in the Saxon Times, I shall proceed in the next
place to discourse somewhat of the manner of the disposing of their Goods and
Personal Estates, which they might do either by Deed or last Will in Writing,
as at this day: But if they happened at any time to die intestate, then their
Goods were equally divided between the Wife and Children of the Deceased; tho
by a Law of King Edmund, the Relict, or Widow, was to have half her Husband's
Goods, yet by the Laws of Edward the Confessor, it was declared, that in case
any one died Intestate, then the Children were equally to divide the Goods;
which I take to be understood with a Salvo of the Wife's Dower or Portion. As
yet therefore the Ordinaries had nothing to do with the Administration, for
Goods passed by Descent as well as Lands, and upon this Custom the Writ de
Rationabili part Bonorum was grounded at the Common Law, as well for the
Children as the Wife's Part, F.N.B. p. 122.
according as by the Body of the Writ may appear.

THE antientest Will that Mr. The Original of Ecclesiast. Jurisdict. of
Testaments, set out by Dr. Littleton, fol. 5.
Seldom says he has observed before the Conquest, is, one of King Edgar's
time, which Mr. Lambard Peramb. Cant. p. 548.
has given us in his Perambulation of Kent, and that is of one Brithric, a
Gentleman, or Thane, and his Wife Elswithe, wherein they devised both their
Lands and Goods, and also gave his chief Lord and the Lady his Wife several
noble Legacies to prevail with him that his Will might stand good. By which it
should seem the Lands bequeathed were Feudal Lands (held by Knights Service)
which could not be alienated without the Lord's Consent. But Mr. Seldom there
further takes notice, That the Protection or Execution of this Testament, as
well as the Probate, were within the Jurisdiction of the Lord's Court; and that
especially because diverse Lords of Manors have to this day the Probate of
Testaments by Custom continued, against that which is otherwise regularly
settled in the Church.

BUT as for Intestates Goods, he says, The Disposition or Administration of
them was in the Saxon times in the chief Lord of him that died, Seldom ut sup.
fol. 15, 16. cap. 1.
in case the Intestate were an immediate Tenant, and died at home in Peace: But
in case he were no Tenant, or died in his Lord's Army, then it was (it seems)
as other Inheritance, under the Jurisdiction of that Temporal Court within
whose Territory the Goods were. This may be proved out of the Laws of that
Time, which ordain, that upon the Death of an Intestate, whom they call CWIALE
AWE, the Lord Canuti Leg. cap. 68.
is only to have the Heriots due to him, which are also appointed by Ejusdem
Leg. cap. 68.
the Laws of the same time, that by his (the Lord's) Advice or Judgment, his
(the Intestate's) Goods be divided among his Wife and Children, and the next of
kin, according as to every one of them of right belongs; that is, according to
the nearness of Kindred, if no Children, or Nephews from them be: for it must,
I suppose, be understood, that the Succession was such, that the Children
excluded all their Kindred, and of their Kindred the next succeeded, according
to that in Tacitus De Moribus Germanorum.
of his Germans, whose Customs were doubtless mixed with our English-Saxons;
Haeredes, says he, successoresque sint cuique liberi, and nullum Testamentum.
But it seems Christianity afterward brought in the free Power of making
Testaments amongst them, Si liberi non sunt, proximus gradus in possessione,
Fratres, Patrui, Avunculi.

BUT this is expressed only in case the Tenant died at home, and in Peace; for
if he died in his Lord's Canut. Legibus, cap. 75.
Army, both the Heriot was forgiven, and the Inheritance both of Goods and
Lands was to be divided as it ought, which was, it seems, by the Jurisdiction
of the Temporal Court, within whose Territory the Death ( of the Intestate) or
Goods were; for in that case, it is not said, that the Lord's Judgment was to
be used, but that the Heirs should divide all; or, as the words in the
Confessor's Law are, habeant Leg. Edw. Confess. cap. de Heretochiis.
Haeredes ejus pecuniam and terram ejus sine aliqua Diminutione, and recte
dividant inter se; where the Right of the Heir both to Lands and Goods is
expressly designed, but the Judge that should give it them, not mentioned.
Therefore it seems, it remained as other Parts of the Common Law, under the
Temporal Jurisdiction, as by the F. S Instit. de bonorum possessione.
Civil Law it was under the Praetors. Thus far this learned and great Author.

FROM whence we may make this Note, that the Probate of Wills was a Matter of
Civil Cognizance before the Conquest, and for some time after, till, the Canon
Law being more generally received in England, the Bishops Courts took this
Power to themselves, supposed by Mr. Seldom, in his 6 th Chapter of his said
Treatise, to be about the time of Henry the Second.

WE shall now, in the last place, Criminal part of the English Saxon Laws.
go on to the Criminal part of the English-Saxon Laws, viz. the manner of
Trial, Judgment and Execution passed and inflicted on Offenders in those Times.

ALL Trials for Criminal Matters were then either in the Court-Leets, the
Sheriffs-turn, or the County-Courts, All Trials in Court-Leets, Sheriffs-turn,
or County-Courts.
in which last the greater Offenders were commonly tried, and that most
anciently by Witnesses and Juries, as at this day: for we find in the Mirror of
Justices, Mirror, Cap. 5. Sect. 1.
that King Alfred commanded one of his Justices to be put to death for passing
Sentence upon a Verdict corruptly obtained, upon the Votes of the Jurors,
whereof three of the Twelve were in the Negative. And the same King put another
of his Justices to death for passing Sentence of Death upon an Ignoramus
returned by the Jury.

BUT the first Law we read of that defined the Number of Jurymen to be Twelve,
The Number of Jurymen to be Twelve.
was that of Aetheldred I. above two hundred Years before the Conquest, which
says, In singulis Centuriis, etc. in English thus, In every Century or Hundred,
let there be a Court, LL. Sax. Lamb.
and let Twelve Ancient Freemen, together with the Lord of the Hundred, be
sworn that they will not condemn the Innocent, nor acquit the Guilty.

BUT whether there were any such thing as a Grand Jury or Inquest, we do not
particularly find, Grand Jury.
only we may reasonably conclude there was, because in the same Mirror we read
that a Justice suffered Death for passing Sentence only upon the Coroner's
Record; and another Justice had the same Punishment for condemning one without
any preceding Appeal or Indictment.

YET the first time that we find any mention of a Jury by Men's Peers or Equals,
is in the Agreement between Alfred and Guthrune the Dane, in these words in
English, viz. That if a Lord or a Baron be accused of Homicide, he shall be
acquitted by twelve Lords; K. Alured. Council. Brit. fol. 492.
but if of inferior Rank, he shall be acquitted by eleven of his Equals, and
one Lord.

BUT in Cases very doubtful, and where there was not sufficient Evidence by
Witnesses, but only strong Presumptions of Guilt, Ordeal, what, and what (...)
Trial.

Somn. Gloss^r. in verbo Ordeal.


in the times after King Alfred, Trials by Ordeal came in, which Somner in his
Glossary says was derived from Or a Negative, or Privative, and Dal, which
signifies Distinction, or Difference, that is, without any Distinction or
Difference, and imports a just, impartial Judgment: it was of two sorts, by
Fire or Water; by Fire, when the Person accused carried in his bare Hand a
red-hot Iron some few steps; which, if it weighed but one Pound, was called
single Ordeal, and so double, or treble, according to the Pounds the Iron
weighed: or when he walked barefoot, and blindfold, over and between certain
red-hot Plow-shares, placed at a stated distance; if in doing this the Party
was burnt, he was pronounced Guilty; if not, he was accounted Innocent.
Water-Ordeal was either when they cast the accused into Water, and if they did
swim, were adjudged Guilty; if they sunk, Innocent: or else their Hands and
Arms were put sometimes up to the Wrist, LL. Longob. lib. 1. tit. 9. c. 39.
Glanv. lib. 14. cap. 1. in fine.
sometimes up to the Elbow in boiling-hot Water; if they were scalded, they
were esteemed Guilty; if not, Innocent. The Noble and Freemen were tried by
Fire-Ordeal, the Peasants and Servants by Water Ordeal.

A great Example of the former you will find toward the latter end of the
sixth Book, Fol. 79.
concerning the putting of Queen Emma, Mother of Edward the Confessor, to this
Fire-Ordeal by Plow-shares, upon suspicion of Incontinency with Ailwyn Bishop
of Winchester: but indeed this Story is very improbable for several reasons;
for first, the Crime she stood accused of could be no more than simple
Fornication, which was then as well as now within the Cognizance of the Church,
and for which no higher Punishment than the common Penance was inflicted. And
further, See the Hist. Anno 1042.
we find this Queen to have fallen into the King's Displeasure in the first or
second Year of his Reign, and being not long after restored to his Favor, we
do not read she was ever after questioned: and as for Robert, Archbishop of
Canterbury, who is said to have been one of her chief Prosecutors, it is
certain he was not consecrated to that See till about seven or eight Years
after. Besides all which, Bishop De Praesul. p. 89, 90.
Godwin in his Account of this Archbishop, further proves from Florence of
Worcester, and William of Malmesbury, that Bishop Ailwin was dead Anno 1047, a
Year before ever Robert was made Archbishop; and therefore this learned Author
does wholly deny the reality of this Story. But to return again to our Ordeal.

THE first mention made thereof as we meet with, was at the Council of Mentz,
and afterward in the Council of Triers; but we have no Foot-step thereof in
our English Laws, till it was brought into this Nation by the Council of
Berkhamstead, under Bertwald Archbishop of Canterbury, Anno 647; and it after
became inserted into those of King Athelstan, LL. Aethelst. Can. 23.
tho it was certainly in use before that time.

I have little more to add concerning this way of Trial by Ordeal, but that it
was under the Government of the Clergy, who never permitted it to be put in
Execution but when they were present. And sometimes it was performed with the
great Solemnity of receiving the Holy Eucharist, especially if the suspected
Person was of their Order and Function; and if the Party was cast, he was to
suffer as Guilty.

THIS way of Trial by Ordeal continued long after the Conquest, but at last it
was forbid by the Pope's Decree; and we have now no Remainders of it left,
unless it be in the Country Peoples trying of Witches, who being tied with
their Thumbs and Toes together, and so flung into the Water, if they sink, are
accounted Innocent; if they swim, Guilty: but indeed if this Ordeal, either by
Fire or Water, was performed by the help of the Devil, one would wonder it
should ever be introduced, especially with such solemn Prayers and
Preparations, as you may find in Lambard's Explications of Law-terms, and in
Matthew Parker Archbishop of Canterbury his Antiquities of the British Church.
Vita Roberti Archiep.
And on the other side, if it was assisted by a Divine Power, it is as
wonderful how it came to be forbid by the Pope, as wholly unlawful.

BUT besides these ways of Trial abovementioned, upon more slight Suspicions,
our English Saxon Ancestors were used to content themselves with a Voyer dire,
or the Oath of the Party suspected, and the concurring Testimony of other Men;
the first attesting his own Innocence, the other attesting their own
Consciences for the Truth of the former Testimony; and therefore were, and
still are called Compurgators. Their number was more or less, and of greater or
less Value, according as the Offense, or the Party suspected was of greater or
less Concernment.

AND as for the way of Trial by single Combat or Duel, tho some Writers suppose
it to have been in use before the Conquest, yet since I meet with no mention of
it either in our Historians or Laws, I shall defer discoursing of it till I
come to the next Volume.

HAVING now dispatched this Head concerning Trials, I Will proceed to the
Judgments and Penalties that were inflicted on Persons for several Offenses.
And first I shall consider those against Almighty God, as Sacrilege, Sacrilege.
which you will find upon the first introducing of Christianity to have been
appointed by the Pope, as also by the Laws of King Egbert, either in making
satisfaction of nine times the Value, or in case of Inability, to pay that Sum
in Stripes; for not then, nor long after was it punishable with Death: De
Gestis Pontificum, l. 1.
for William of Malmesbury tells us, that Theodered, the good Bishop of London,
in the Reign of King Athelstan, fell short of one thing, viz. That he caused
certain Thieves to be hanged, who had robbed St. Edmunds Church in Suffolk, and
were there held by some invisible Power, insomuch that they could not go away
with what they had stolen, but were all taken and executed accordingly; for
which piece of Severity he was much blamed.

THE next Offense was Working upon Sundays, Sabaoth-breaking*
which by the Laws of King Ina, was punishable by Fine, if the Criminal were a
Freeman; and by Whipping if he were a Bond-Servant.

BUT as for Blasphemy, Cursing or Swearing, either they were Crimes the Saxons
were not guilty of, or else they inflicted no Punishments on those who were
culpable of them; for I find no mention of them in the Saxon Laws.

AS for the Offenses against both God and Man, I will first begin with Adultery
and Fornication, and these were Capital amongst the Saxons: Adultery and
Fornication.
for by the Laws of Withred King of Kent, if a Military Man should (after that
Council was ended, despising the King's Law, and the Judicial Sentence of the
Bishop's Excommunication) be taken in Adultery, he should pay to his Lord an
hundred Shillings. But afterward by the Laws of King Cnute, a Wife found
guilty of Adultery, should have her Nose and Ears cut off, and the Man was
Fined or Banished: and by those of King Alfred, the Man convicted of Adultery
with another's Wife, should pay to the Husband so abused, a Fine suitable to the
Estate and Quality of him that was so injured.

THE highest Offense against Man alone was Treason, Treason.
and the Punishment for this Offense I find set down in the 4 th Law of K.
Alfred to this effect, viz. That if any one by himself, or any other Person
should attempt against the King's Life, he should lose his Life and Goods; or
in case he will purge himself, he was to do it according to the Valuation of
the King's Head. But in this the King had no greater a Prerogative than diverse
other of his Subjects; for the same Law does inform us, That it ordained in all
Judgments concerning other Men, whether Noble or Ignoble, whosoever should
Conspire against his Lord, should lose both his Life and Estate, or else pay
the Valuation of his Lord's Head.

Coining and Clipping.
I come next to the Coining and Clipping of Money, which was not originally such
an Offense as was punished by Death; for the first Law that made it so was that
of Ethelred, whereby it is left to the King's discretion, either to fine, or
put to Death such Merchants as imported false Money; and all Port-Reeves of
Towns who should be Accessory to it were made liable to the same: but for all
this it was not even after the Conquest punishable by Death, but amputation of
the Right Hand and Privy-Members.

Murder.
AS for Murder, or killing a Man with Malice prepensed, it was by the Preface to
King Alfred's Laws punishable by Death: And this and the former Law concerning
Treason, will help us to interpret in what Cases the Wiregilds or Mulcts, that
we find so frequently mentioned in the Saxon Laws, were to be paid for the Life
of a Man, and particularly that Law of King Athelstan, which sets the Rate of
these Wiregilds according to the Quality of the Person slain, from the King to
the Peasant; that is, when the Party was Killed in some sudden Fray or Quarrel
without any Malice forethought.

THIS I take notice of, to obviate the Error of some who suppose, that all
Murder, even of the King himself, was redeemable by Money, which was not
allowed in any Cases but those we account Manslaughter at this Day;
Manslaughter.
and shows the Antiquity of that distinction between Manslaughter and Murder,
which is now almost peculiar to England, and arose at first from the Proneness
of our Nation to Fewds and sudden Quarrels; tho the like Custom is also to be
found in the Ancient Frisian and German Laws, if you will take the Pains to
consult them. But as for Bloodshed, Maiming, etc.
Striking, Maiming, Wounding, Dismembring, etc. they were all of them
punishable by Mulcts or Fines, as you will see in the Laws of King Alfred, and
other Places in this Volume.

Robbery and Burglary.
I proceed in the next Place to Robbery and Burglary, which by the Laws of King
Ina, were punishable by Death; only the Thief was admmitted sometimes to redeem
it according to the Estimation of his Head, and that I suppose was left to the
discretion of the Judge, either to deny or allow. But for all other less Thefts,
they were redeemable by Fines. And the Laws of Edward the Confessor, limited
that Punishment of Death to Thefts of twelve Pence in value, or above.

Trespasses.
AND Trespasses of a less Nature upon Lands and Goods, were to be punished by
the Criminal's making Satisfaction to the injured Party, and his paying a
certain Fine besides to the King; which by King Alfred's Law was set at five
Shillings; and in his Time other Actions were likewise used, Cap. 30.
such as we call Actions upon the Case; and the Plaintiff not only recovered
Damages for Trespasses done to Possessions and Goods, but also Costs for
Injuries in Point of Scandal and Defamation, in case the Complainant specially
declare that he was thereby disabled, or injured in his Preferment, and made
Proof of the same, much like to the Forms of our Pleadings now.

Perjury.
AS for Perjury which I have hitherto omitted, tho in strict Method it should
have been mentioned before, as a Sin against both God and Man, the Saxons were
utterly Enemies to it, and punished it with perpetual discredit of their
Testimony, and sometimes with Banishment, or with grievous Fines to the King,
and Mulcts to the Judge. For that difference I find observed in those Days
between Fines and Mulcts, LL. Aethelst. Cap. 12. LL. Canuti, c. 5. Spec. Sax.
l. 3. Art. 53. LL. Edw. c. 18.
tho the more Ancient Times used them for one and the same; for I often find
pars Mu^ctae Regi. In all these Matters where any Interest was vested in the
Crown, the King had the Prerogative of Pardon, yet always a Recompense was
saved to the injured Party; besides the Security of the Good-behaviour for Time
to come, as the case required.

THESE Mulcts for all these Offenses were set down in a Book, which was the
Rule and Standard of the Judge's Sentence. And it is called in the Preface to
the Laws of King Edward, the Doom or Judgment-Book; and Composition was to be
made, and Satisfaction given, according to what was laid in this Judicial or
Doom-Book.

THIS shows that Fines were then set out and appointed by Law, Fines set and
appointed by Law.
and were proportioned not only according to Men's Offenses, but Abilities of
what they were able to pay; and were not in those Times left to the Arbitrary
Wills and Humors of the Judge, to ruin Men's Fortunes and Families, and imprison
their Persons during Life, perhaps only for a small Offense in a rash Word, or
unmalicious Deed.

I confess this Introduction is longer than I first intended it, but herein I
hope the Reader will excuse me, since I have presented him with a true Scheme
of the Ancient English-Saxon Government and Laws, as well Ecclesiastical as
Civil, relating to the just Prerogatives of the King, as also to the true
Rights and Liberties of the People: and this I have done for two Ends; first,
to inform those of our own Nation as well as Strangers, that this Government
before the pretended Conquest, agreed in the most material parts of it with
those of the same Gothic Model all over Europe; and that if we do still labor
to preserve our Ancient Constitution, when most of our Neighbors have either
lost or given up theirs, I think we do deserve Commendation, more especially
since both Prince and People may have found an equal Interest and Happiness in
it.

AND secondly, to show, that neither the Danish nor Norman Invasions, (called
by some Conquests) have at all altered it in any of the Substantial parts of
our Government or Laws, notwithstanding what some Men have so strenuously
advanced to the contrary, out of what designs they themselves best know.

AS for what I have here laid down, if any thing appears either new, or of
suspicious Credit, I desire to be no farther believed, than the Reasons and
Authorities I have here produced will justify me; and therefore shall leave the
Reader to make what Judgment he pleases of it, which if it does not suit with
mine, I shall not take it amiss, since I am sufficiently sensible how much Men's
Opinions depend on their present Interest, Education, or Course of Life: and I
cannot but observe, that there are a sort of Men, whose Heads seem framed for
such a set of Notions rather than others, which make them that they cannot
easily digest any thing that clashes with them.

BUT I do not pretend to be infallible, or to propose my sense as a Rule and
Standard to all others; Homo sum, nihil humanum a me alienum puto, as the
Comic Poet has long since well observed.

ONE thing indeed I think I may pretend to in this Undertaking, and that is
Integrity; for I look upon it a much viler thing, either to falsify, or conceal
part of an Authority that makes against one, and use only so much as shall
serve a present Turn, that it is to pick a Pocket: and as it is of far more
dangerous Consequence to the Public, if not found out; I must say it is
likewise more easily to be discovered, since every Man may, if he please,
consult the Authors that such Writers make use of, and so detect the Fraud.

BUT for those who think they may differ from me in some things with good
Reason and Authority, and will please by their learned Labors to give the
World any better Information and Account of these Matters than I have done; I
shall be so far from being displeased at them, that I shall upon full
Satisfaction, readily own my self very much in their Debt, for making the World
and me so much the Wiser: only I must desire to be treated as one, who, if I
chance to be under any Error, am not so wilfully, nor (as I think) without
great appearance of Reason and Authority on my side; since I call God to
witness, that neither from a vain Ambition of Glory, nor prospect of any
Temporal Advantage, nor design of gratifying any Party or Faction, have I wrote
any thing that may disgust Men of different Principles and Notions.

AND I thank God for this great Blessing to us, that we live in a Time, when we
may not only think or speak, but also safely write what we believe to be the
Truth, to which all Mankind do owe Allegiance; and therefore I hope I never
shall abuse that invaluable Liberty, to the Prejudice of the Government, or
that excellent constituted Church, of which I own my self a Member, being fully
satisfied that the main End of all our Writings, ought to be for the Honor of
God, and the Common Good of Mankind.

THE TABLE to the Preface and Introduction.
A.
ACtions on the Case, how ancient -- page 126 Adultery, its Punishment, 125
Aetheling the Title, what it was 72 St. Albans his Sufferings most probably a
Legend -- 24, 25, 26 King Alfred his Preface to Pope Gregory's Pastoral, 11.
His Testament, with Observations upon it -- 51, 52 Allodium, Lands h^ld in
Allodio 118, 119 Annals Saxon, a brief Account of them, and their Translation
10, 11 Ancient Demesne, Tenants therein 121 Antiquity of the Ordeal, 124. Of
the Distinction between Manslaughter and Murder -- 126 Archbishops of
Canterbury and York anciently of equal Dignity and Power -- 116 Asser
Menevensis, an Account of him and his Writings -- 12, 13
B.
BAro, its ancient Signification, 93, 94. When it came first in common use --
102 Barons Comitatus, what they were 96 Bid, the first English Historian, 10
Bishoprics and Abbeys often bestowed by the Election of the great Council of
the Kingdom in the Saxon-Times -- 113, 114 Bishops sometimes deprived by the
same Councils -- 115, 116 Blasphemy, vid. Swearing and Cursing. Bocland, what
it was, 118. The same with Lands in Allodio, 119 Dr. Brady his Errors
concerning the English-Saxon Succession, 50, 51, etc. Britain how divided under
the Romans -- page 31, 32 Bromton John, an Account of the Chronicle that passes
under his Name -- 16 Burglary, how punishable -- 126 Burhwitan or Burhwara, who
they were -- 80
C.
CAradoc of Lancarvon his Welsh Chronicle -- 15 Ceorl, or Ceorl's Man ( i. e.
Countryman) his Privileges -- 77 Chancellor, whence derived, and the Antiquity
of that Office -- 73 Clipping and Coining of Money, its Punishment -- 126
Coining of Money a Prerogative of the Crown -- 67 Colonus, its Signification --
121 Combat single, or Duel -- 125 Comes Littoris Saxonici, who he was -- 33
Commons present in the great Councils of the Kingdom, 88-101. To have been also
present there in the Reign of K. William I. 97. Proved also to have a Right by
Prescription before his time -- 98 Compurgators, who -- 125 Conquests of the
Danes and Normans (which were no more than Invasions) never altered this
Government or Laws in any of its substantial parts -- 127 Contract, or Compact
Original between the first English Saxon Kings and their Subjects, proved, 69,
70. and that more ancient than the Coronation Oath -- 71, 72 Coronation of our
Kings whence derived -- 16 Coronation Oath, its Form before the pretended
Conquest -- 58 Costs, recovering of Costs and Damages, how ancient -- page 126
Great Council of the Wites, for what ends they were established 41 Great
Council or Parliament its Original, 86-88. The Persons of whom it consisted,
87-102. These Councils often met in the open Air, 104. Its Power in making Laws
-- 105-08 Counties, their Division more ancient than the Reign of K. Alfred --
84 The County Court, what -- 84 Courts of Justice in England, how many they
were under the Saxon Kings -- 80, 85 Court-Barons, their Original -- 82 Craig,
Sir Thomas, his Objections against the Truth and Antiquity of our English
Historians considered 18-23 Crown of England not bequeathable by the Testament
of the English-Saxon Kings -- 51, 52 Curia Domini Regis, its Signification --
85
D.
DAnegelt first imposed by Authority of the King and his Wites -- 120 The
Decennary, or Tything-Court, what -- 81 Defamation, how punishable -- 126
Degrees of Men that constituted the Commonweal -- 72-80 Demesnes of the Crown
could not be granted away even to pious Uses, by the English-Saxon Kings,
without the Consent of the Great Council 68 Deprivation of English Saxon Kings,
68. Of Bishops by the Great Council -- 115, 116 Deputies of Cities and great
Towns, how ancient -- 95 Disposition of Goods and Personal Estates, either by
Deed or last Will -- 121 Doom, or Judgment-Book -- 127 Durham Simeon, who he
was -- 15 Dux Britanniae, what he was -- 33
E.
EAdmerus his History page 14 Ealdorman, the Title -- 73 East Angles, the
Succession of their Kings -- 45 East-Saxon Kings, their Succession 43
Ecclesiastical Laws, by whom made 108-113 Ecclesiastical Power settled at first
under the two Archbishops of Can^erbury and York -- 116 Eddi Stephen, Author
of the Life of Bishop Wilfred, with a brief account of him -- 10 Edward the
Confessor, the manner of his Election -- 61 Electus and eligerunt, their true
Signification -- 55, 56 Encomium Emmae -- 14 English-Saxons, vid. Saxons. Eorl
-- 74 Ethelwerd surnamed Quaestor, an account of him, and his Work 14
F.
FEng to Rice, the meaning of that Saxon Phrase -- 55 Feudal Lands, what -- 122
Fideles, who they were in the Saxon Government -- 107 Fidelium multitudo in the
Charter of King Ethelwulf, what it signified -- 104, 105 Fines and Mulcts their
difference, set down in a Book at a certain rate, and not arbitrary -- 127
Folcland, what it was 118-120 Folcmote, the same with the County Court -- 83
Fornication, its Punishment -- 125 Franc Pledge, what -- 8 France, its ancient
Kings, the manner of their Succession -- 69 Friburg, or Tithing-Court, its
Institution and Business -- 80, 81
G.
GAvelkind -- 118, 119 General of the King's Forces, his Antiquity -- 72
Ancient German Laws -- 35, etc. Government of Britain before the arrival of
Jul. Caesar very uncertain, 29. During the time of the Romans, 31-34. Under the
Saxons, 34, etc. Of the Ancient English Saxons, rather Aristocratical, than
Monarchical, page 39
H.
HAgulstad Richard, an account of him, and his History, 15 Heir, its ancient
Signification, 53, 54. His Right to Lands and Goods, 122 Saxon Heptarchy, vid.
Kingdoms. Heretoch, what that Office was -- 74 Heriots, to whom due -- 122
Higden Ranulph his Polychronicon, 17. Our Historians in English, a brief
Censure of them -- 5, 6, 7 Historians in Latin, an Account and Censure of their
Works, 7-18 The Hold, what -- 74 Homage from the Scottish Kings to those of
England, how far to be credited -- 19, 20 Hoveden Roger, an Account of his
Works -- 16 Dr. Howel his Mistake in making the first Saxon Kings absolute
Monarchs -- 39 Hundred-Court, what -- 80 Huntingdon Henry, an Account of him --
16
I.
INtestates, their Goods how anciently to be divided -- 121, 122 Introduction,
its Design -- 127 Joseph of Arimathea his preaching the Gospel in England
fabulous, 24 Judgments inflicted for several Offenses -- 125, 126 Grand-Juries,
how ancient -- 123 Jurymen, their Number to be Twelve in the English-Saxon
Times 123 Jus Haereditarium, its Signification 53
K.
KEntish Kings their Succession, 42, 43 Kings of Britain not despotic, but
often elected -- 30 Kings at first no better than Generals in War; in Peace
they had little or no Power -- page 38 Saxon Kings not absolute or by Conquest
-- 39, 40 Kings of the Saxons at first elected, 39-41. The manner of their
Succession to the Crown, ib. 66. Their losing their Crowns otherways sometimes
than by Death, 68, etc. The King, in what sense he is said to make Laws -- 108
English Saxon Kings, what kind of Supremacy they exercised in Ecclesiastical
Affairs, -- 108, etc. Kingdoms of the English-Saxons how many erected in this
Island, 34, 35
L.
LAnds in England all held under the three great Services, called in Latin,
Trinoda necessitas 120 Lathes, what -- 80 Laws British -- 29 German -- 35-38
Ecclesiastical, by whom, 108-113 Saxon Customary Laws, their Original, and how
many sorts of them, 117, 118. Reduced into one Body by ^ Edward the Confessor,
ib. Their Civil Laws concerning Lands, 118 Legislative Power, in whom it
resided under the English Saxon Kings -- 105-108
M.
MAiming, etc. how punishable anciently -- 126 Malmesbury William, his
Character -- 15 Manslaughter and Murder their distinction -- ibid. Mercian
Kings, their Succession, 45 Milites, what sort of Men -- 90 Monasteries, how
far taken notice of in the ensuing History -- 24 Monmouth Geoffery, a Censure
of his Work -- 7 Mulcts, the difference betwixt this word and Fines -- 126, 127
Murder its Punishment in the English-Saxon Times -- page 126
N.
NObiles Angli, who they anciently were -- 91 Northumbrian Kings, their
Succession -- 44
O.
Offenses of several sorts, with their Penalties -- 125, 126 Optimates, who
they were -- 92 Ordeal what, and what the Trial 123, 124 Ordinaries at first
had nothing to do in Administrations -- 122 Ordinary People, how they were
called in the Saxon Times -- 121 Original of the first English Saxon Kings --
38-41 Original Contract -- 70, etc. Osbern Author of the Lives of St. Dunstan
and St. Alphege 14
P.
PArliament, the Original of this Great Assembly, 86. The same with the ancient
Witena-Gemots, and Mycel Synoth, 86. which met thrice every Year ex more, ibid.
Perjury, Saxons utter Enemies to it, and their Punishment of it. 126, 127 Plebs
and Vulgus, their Signification 99, 100 Populus and Populi must signify the
Commons in the Saxon Laws and Charters -- ibid. to 102 Portgereses or Port
Reves their Antiquity -- 96 The ancient Prerogatives of our English Kings, 67,
68. to pardon, 67, 127. They could not debase the Money, nor give away their
Crown Lands without the Consent of the Common Council of the Kingdom -- 126,
127 Primates, Principes and Proceres, what they were -- 90, 92 Probate of
Wills, 122. how long a matter of Civil Cognizance, 122, 123 Procuratores
Patriae, who they were, page 95 Punishments among the English Saxons, their
several sorts 125, 126
Q.
SEveral Questions for Dr. Brady to answer -- 99, 100
R.
DE Rationabili part Bonorum, the Writ grounded at Common Law, and on what
Custom 122 Robbery, how punishable -- 126 Romans their Government in Britain --
31-33
S.
SAbaoth-breaking, its Punishment -- 125 Sacrilege, its Punishment -- 125
Sapientes, who they were -- 96 Saxons not at first governed by Kings 38 English
Saxons, whence derived, 35. Their Government rather Aristocratrical than
Monarchical -- 39 South Saxons, their Kingdom, 34, 43 Saxon-Tenures -- 121
Scandal, how punishable -- 126 Senatores Gentis Anglorum, who they were, -- 92,
93 The Scire-mote, or Sheriffs-tourn* what -- 82, 83 Sheriff, his ancient
Office -- 75 Sithcundman, what -- 78 Slaves, or Servants, among the
English-Saxons, and what Power their Lords had over them -- 79, 80 Free Socmen,
what they were, with their Privileges -- 78 Studia Sapientiae sometimes (tho
rarely) taken for the Study of the Law -- 88 Succession of the English-Saxon
Kings, whether hereditary or elective -- 38-65 Swearing and Cursing, rarely
known in the Saxon Times -- 125 Mycel Synoth, what -- 86
T.
TEnants in England, how many sorts under the Saxon-Kings, 118, 119. In ancient
Demesne, who -- 121 Thane, his Title and Dignity, 75, 76, 136. Their several
sorts ibid. Thanes of London, who -- 96 Trinoda necessitas, what -- 120 Thefts,
small ones, their Punishments -- 126 The Tourn of the Sheriff -- 83 Trespasses
upon Lands and Goods, how punishable -- 126 A Tithing, or Decennary, what 81
Tithes granted a Rege, Baronibus and Populo -- 100 Treason, its Punishment,
125, 126 Trials, the several sorts among the English-Saxons, 123, 124, 125 The
Trihing Court, what it was, 80
V.
VIcarius Britanniae, what he was -- 32 Villanus, its Signification, 120, 121
Voyer dire, what -- 125
W.
WAllingford John, an Account of him, -- 17 Mr. Washington's Observations on
the King's Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction -- 108-113 West Saxon Kings their
Succession, 47-65. The Form of their Crowns and Titles, 66, 67. Often deposed
-- 69, 70 Witena Gemote, or Great Council, by what other Names it is called in
our ancient Histories -- 90 Wites or Witan among the English-Saxons, its
Signification did not mean only Lawyers, 88. For what they were established in
the Great Councils -- 41 War or Peace, in whom the Power, 68 Will, the
antientest observed before the Conquest, when -- 122 Wiregilds, what -- 67, 68,
126 Worcester Florence his Character, and an Account of his Chronicle, 17
ERRATA.
In the Preface. PAge 5. line 5. for be would, read would be. P. 17. l. 4. f.
Greshams, r. Gresham. Ibid. l. 45. del. in. P. 23. l. 3. f. Ilcombil, r.
Ilcombkil. P. 23. l. 14. f. that, r. whither, ib. f. never, r. ever. P. 24. l.
15. f. no, r. any.

Introduction. PAge 31. line 17. for longer, read long. Ib. l. 18. f. which, r.
and, ib. r. enjoyed it. P. 34. l. 27. del. for a long time after. P. 86. l. 13.
del. the Comma's in the Margin, beginning at, from whence you may observe; and
ending at, well observes. P. 89. l. 15. f. word, r. words. Ibid. l. 32. f.
upon, r. that. Ib. del. that. P. 96. l. 29. f. Longobardarum, r. Longobardorum,
P. 97. l. a. f. Crihtan, r. Crihtan, (i. e. Knights.) P. 105. l. 38. f.
consist, r. reside.

ADDENDA and CORRIGENDA.
SINCE this Volume was printed off, coming to a more strict View of the whole
Work, than I could make when it was in loose Sheets; I think fit to make some
few Additions and Corrections, as in these following Particulars.

BOOK IV.
Page 195. The Consecration of Erkenwald Bishop of London being set down twice,
viz. in the beginning of Anno 675. and again at the end of that Year, and was
forgot to be struck out in the Page abovementioned, those first three Lines
and half, beginning at Line 23. may be struck out; and that Relation referred
to p. 196. at the end of the Year (where it is already) and you may read it in
these words. This Year also according to Matthew. of Westminster (forbid does
not give us the time when it was done) Erkenwald a younger Son to Anna King of
the East Angles was by Theodore the Archbishop consecrated Bishop of London,
he being in great Reputation for the Sanctity of his Life, as having before he
came to be a Bishop, etc. Read the rest as in the Print.

P. 198. Queen Etheldrithes being twice married and never lain with, having
been already mentioned, p. 193. you may strike out part of three Lines in p.
198. beginning at Line 48. at who yet remained, and ending line 51. with but
she, and then read it thus: Wife of King Egfrid abovementioned; this Lady, tho
twice married still remaining a Virgin, died at last, etc.

BOOK V.
Page 312. line ult. The Continuation of Asser's Chronicle published by Dr.
Gale, having put this Action of Prince Ethelwald's, there mentioned under the
Year 904. and Florence of Worcester making him come as far as Crecanford (now
Crayford in Kent); from the different Names of which Places, and Years, I
supposed that this Action was not the same with that related in the Year 905.
but upon better Consideration I am now satisfied, that either Florence's Copy
of the Annals, or his Transcriber were mistaken, and that Crecanford and
Bradenewood mentioned by him under 905, and Creccagelade and Braeden set down
in the Annals under the same Year, are both the same Places, setting aside the
difference of the Years; so that this is also but one and the same Action: and
therefore I rather now choose to follow the printed Copies of the Saxon Annals,
and place the whole under Anno 905. therefore you may strike out the last Line
of page 312. beginning at after, as also the four first Lines of page 313.
ending with, so returned home.

P. 265. After the Reign of Ethelwulf, Anno 855. add this that follows. That
about these Times the Scottish Kings held the Low-lands of Scotland as
Tributaries to the Kings of Northumberland, take this Relation from Lessely
Bishop of Rosse's History of Scotland, in the Reign of King Donald V. where he
tells us, that the Picts (who had been lately conquered and expelled Scotland)
having hid themselves in Northumberland, and the Neighboring Countries,
combined with the Britains and Saxons to recover their Liberties, who, being
thus confederated, invaded Scotland; whereupon King Donald gathering together
his Army met them near Jetburgh, and joining Battle with them put them to
flight; with which Success the King and his Men growing insolent and secure,
spent the Night following in Luxury and Drinking, without keeping any Guard, or
observing Military Discipline; of which the Enemies (who it seems fled not far)
gaining Intelligence, and laying hold of this Opportunity, set upon them about
Midnight, and slew near 20000 Scots, being then (as it were) buried in Wine and
Sleep; King Donald himself being also taken Prisoner, and to purchase his
Liberty, was forced to give up all the Countries lying between the River Cluyde
and Sterling to the Britains and Saxons, and farther obliged himself and his
Successors to the Annual Payment of a Sum of Money in Name of a Tribute: and
that then in the sixth Year of his unhappy Reign the English-Saxons, in Memory
of this Victory, rebuilt the ruined Castle of Sterling, and fortified the Bridge
of Forth, where they erected a Cross of Stone as a Monument of their Victory,
on which were engraven these barbarous Latin Verses.

Anglos a Scotis separat Crux ista remotis,
Arma hic stant Bruti, stant Scoti sub hac Cruce tuti.
BUT in the mean time the Picts, who were the Authors of this Scottish
Slaughter, were so far from being thereby restored to their Country, that they
were quite expelled by the Saxons out of Britain.

THIS Relation Hector Boethius gives you much more prolix, and makes King Osbern
who reigned in Northumberland, to have commanded the English-Saxons at the
great Battle abovementioned.

THE same Author likewise shows us in the Reign of K. Gregory, Anno 872. how
the Britains came to be driven out of Cumberland, which they had till then
enjoyed, viz. That the Britains having by the Assistance of the Danes, expelled
the Scots from diverse Territories, endeavored also by secret Treacheries to
drive them yet further; but being surprised by K. Gregory were by him quite
expelled Cumberland and Westmorland, as a Punishment for having violated their
Faith with him.

Page 313. l. 18. After East Angles, add this. And Bromton's Chronicle in this
Year further adds, That Ethelwald having passed the Thames at Crekelade to
Brithenden, and marched as far as Brandenstoke (now Bradenstoke) in Wiltshire;
so that as Mr. Britan. Wiltshire. p. 102.
Camden well observes, our Modern Historians have been much mistaken, in making
that Place to be Basingstoke in Hampshire.

BOOK VI.
Page 8. l. 1. You may strike out the three remaining Lines after Dunstan; for
I am satisfied upon better Consideration, that the Assertion therein contained
is not true, as I have proved in the Introduction, p. 71, 72.

Page 12. l. 8. After the words freely forgave him, add this. That the
Low-lands of Scotland continued under the Dominion of the Kings of England till
the Reign of King Edgar, we have the express Testimony of John of Wallingford
Abbot of St. Albans, who wrote his Chronicle in the beginning of the Reign of
King Henry the Third, and before ever the Dispute concerning any Homage being
due for the whole Kingdom of Scotland was raised, which began not till the time
of K. Edward the First. This P. 444, 44^.
Author thus relates it in the beginning of the Reign of King Edgar, viz. that
about Anno Dom. 964, that King summoning the Northumbrian Barons (i. e. Thanes)
to a Council at York, ordained diverse things relating to the Public Affairs of
the Kingdom, among which he divided the Earldom of Oswulph (Earl of
Northumberland late deceased) into two; for the King was not willing to bestow
so great a Part of the Kingdom on any as an Inheritance, lest the Northumbers
should again aspire to their ancient Liberty; wherefore he bestowed that Part
of Northumberland lying between the Humber and the Theys upon Earl Oslac,
girding him with the Sword of that Earldom: But from Theys to Mireferth being
the Seacoast of Deira, he bestowed upon Earl Eadulf, surnamed Ethelwald; and
thus the two Kingdoms became two Earldoms, and so continued all the times of
the English-Saxon Kings under their Gift and Jurisdiction; whilst Lothian lying
open to the Incursions of the Scots was of no great concern to our Kings.

BUT Keneth K. of Scotland receiving a high Character of the Generosity of K.
Edgar from the two Earls abovementioned, desired the King's safe Conduct to
come to London to visit him, which being granted, the said two Earls conducted
him thither, where he was honorably received by K. Edgar, who often conversing
friendly and familiarly with Keneth, he then represented to K. Edgar, that
Lothian appertained to him as his Right, having been long possessed by the
Kings of Scotland as their Inheritance: but the King not being willing to do
any thing that he might afterward repent of, referred the Determination of
this Affair to his great Council; where the chief Men of the Kingdom would not
assent to part with it, unless under a Homage to be yielded by the K. of
Scotland to the K. of England; and that too only because all Access to that
Country was very difficult; and its Government of little or no Profit:
Whereupon K. Keneth assented to this Demand, and so received it under that
Condition, did Homage for it accordingly, promising likewise many other things;
as that the People should still remain under the English Name and Language,
which continues to this day; and so the old Quarrel about Lothian was now
happily determined, tho some new ones were often started. Thus the King of
Scots became Feudatary to King Edgar on this occasion; whence you may observe
how the Scottish Nation became Masters of Lothian, where Edinburgh the Capital
City of the Kingdom is seated, and which City continued in the Hands of the
English (as Mr. Vid. Britan. D^sc^ipt. of Scotland.
Camden well observes from an ancient Manuscript he there cites) till the Reign
of K. Indulf, viz. till about Anno Dom. 960.

You may add this to the Laws of King Edgar at the end of his Reign: p. 14.
This King is also related by William of Malmesbury to have made a Law to
restrain excessive drinking of great Draughts; by which Law it was ordained,
that no Man under a great Penalty should drink at one Draught below certain
Pins that were ordered to be fixed within the sides of the Cups or Goblets for
that purpose.

Page 72. I confess I was so far misled by the Authority of the Saxon Annals
and Matthew. Westminster, as to believe that Siward mentioned under Anno 1043.
had been consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury; but being now satisfied of the
contrary, and having given good Reasons against it in the Introduction, p. 115,
116. that Relation of William of Malmesbury from these words, l. 20. of which
Author, may be thus altered. That tho he was designed Successor to this
Archbishop, and to that end was consecrated his Corepiscopus (i. e. his
Coadjutor) yet that notwithstanding he was soon after deposed for his
Ingratitude, in defrauding the weak old Man of his necessary Maintenance. But
that this also was a mistake in this Author, see the Introduction, p. 115, 116.

Thus much I thought fit to advertise the Reader, since I had rather confess my
own involuntary Mistakes, than put another to the trouble of showing them to
the World; but however, since I do not pretend to be infallible, if any Person
of greater Skill in our English Histories, will take the pains to show the
World any other Errors or Omissions I have been guilty of in this Work, I shall
be ^o far from taking it ill, that for the public Satisfaction, they shall be
mended (...) the next Edition.

THE General History OF BRITAIN, NOW CALLED ENGLAND: As well Ecclesiastical, as
Civil. BOOK I. From the Earliest Accounts of TIME, to the First Coming of
JULIUS CAESAR.
SINCE I design (with God's Permission) to write and digest the most Remarkable
Things and Transactions that have occurred in this Kingdom from the earliest
Accounts of Time, I shall follow Venerable Bede, as well as other Historians,
in first giving a brief Description of this Island.

Britain, the largest of all the Europaean Islands, (and one of the biggest in
this Habitable Globe,) is situate between 50 Degrees 16 Minutes, and 59
Degrees 30 Minutes North Latitude, the whole Isle lying in length from
Dunsby-Head, the most Northerly Promontory of Scotland, to Dover, the space of
near Six hundred Miles; yet is the Climate more mild and temperate than could
be expected in so Northerly a Situation; the Winds from the Seas encompassing
it on all sides, so tempering the Air, that it is neither so cold in Winter,
nor yet so hot in Summer, as the opposite Continents of France, Germany, and
the Low Countries; and also by the Indulgence of Heaven, as well as the
Fertility of its Native Soil, it is plentifully furnished with all Things
necessary for Human Life.

It was anciently called by the Greeks Albion, but whether from a Giant of that
Name feigned to be the Son of Neptune, after the Fabulous Humor of those
Times, in giving Names to Countries from Giants and Heroes; or else from the
Greek word (...), which according to Festus signifies White; since, this Island
is on many sides of it encompassed with Rocks of that Color; or else from the
Phoenician word Alp, which signifies High; or from Alben, which in the Hebrew
Tongue signifies White, is uncertain, and therefore needless to be insisted on
too much.

As for the Name of Britain, which Nennius and diverse other British Writers
derive from Brutus, (whom they likewise call Brito;) but others of them from
the British words Pride Cain, i. e. Forma candida, a white Form; it seems too
far fetched; and besides, we do not find that the Natives of this Isle ever
called it Britain.

Introduct. to Britan.
Mr. Camden derives it from the Welsh word Brith, which signifies Painted, (for
the ancient Britains used to paint themselves of a pale bluish Color with
Glastum, or Woad;) and (...), which in Greek signifies a Region, or Country.
But this Etymology has this Inconvenience in it, that it is derived from too
far different Languages; and besides it seems very improbable, that such an
Accidental Custom as that of painting their Bodies, should give a Name to the
whole Island, as well as its Inhabitants. Nor does this word, Brith, signify
in the Welsh Tongue, Painted, but rather Spotted with diverse Colors; whereas
the ancient Britains, as some write, did not paint themselves with various
Colors, but only stained their Bodies with one simple Color, viz. Blue. We
must therefore endeavor to derive it from some other Language, if it was not
the Britains themselves, but other Nations (as is most probable) that first
called this Island Britain. Now it is certain, that there is no Word in the
Greek Tongue from whence (...) can well be derived, which Name only the more
modern Greek Historians have given this Island; for tho Lib. III. c. 2.
Strabo in his Geography calls it (...), yet since this word is an Adjective,
it is plain that (...), i. e. Insula, an Island, is to be understood: So that
it seems the word (...) must be more ancient than (...), and therefore Mr.
Camden's derivation of it will scarcely hold good: Yet Ptolomy never calls this
Island (...), but (...), for when he speaks of all the Islands lying together
in these Seas toward the North, he calls them (...), or (...); i. e. Insulae
Britannicae, the British Islands. And Lib. II. c. 16.
Pliny in his Natural History speaking of all these Islands, says, Albion ipsi
nomen fuit, cum Britannicae vocarentur omnes; i. e. The particular Name was
Albion, but the Islands together were called British.

But Monsieur Bochart, in his most Learned Work, Entitled Lib. I. c. 39.
Chanaan, where he Treats of the Colonies and Language of the Phoenicians, has
given us a more probable derivation of the Name of Britain, which he supposes
to be derived from the Phoenicians, who in their Language called this Island
(as well as some others near it) Barat Anac, or more contractedly Bratanac, i.
e. in the Land or Country of Tin or Lead; which being thus given it by the
Phoenician Mariners, that first sailed thither and discovered those Islands,
might afterward by the Greeks be mollified into (...), and (...). Now, that
the Phoenicians were the first that discovered those Isles, (which the
Graecians called Cassiterides, (and which are proved by Mr. Camden to be no
other than our Scilly Islands,) and from whence, as (...) II. c. 2.
Strabo tells us in his Geography, The Phoenicians first brought Tin, which tho
they vended to the Greeks, yet kept the Trade, as well as the Place, private to
themselves, may be believed upon these Authorities: Lib. VII c. 36.
Pliny tells us, That Midocritus was the first who brought Lead from the
Cassiterides. But Monsieur Bochart there shows us, That it ought to be read
Melichartus, who was the Phoenician Hercules of Sanchoniathon, and to whom the
Phoen^cians attributed their first Western Discoveries.

Yet notwithstanding the Care of the Phoenicians to conceal these Islands, the
Greeks did at last discover them, (tho we cannot tell the certain time when,)
giving them the Name of Cassiterides, which signifies in the Greek Tongue, the
same that Barat-Anac does in the Phoenician, viz. The Land or Country of Tin;
which Name; tho given only to these Islands at first, was at last also
communicated to the adjoining Countries, now called Cornwall and Devonshire;
from whence also the Phoenicians might bring this Commodity; and so by degrees
this Name came to be given to all those Islands thus lying together; since in
those Times (as well as now) it is probable, there might be Mines of this Metal
in Britain itself, as well as in those smaller Islands abovementioned: In some
of which Mr. Camden tells us, there are found Veins of this Metal even unto
this Day; and there might be far greater Mines of it in former Ages, tho long
since worn out.

But it is Objected, That Mr. Camden, in his Introduction to his Britannia,
has positively asserted, that Britain was not known to the Greeks, and
therefore its Name could not be derived from them, or the Phoenicians: and for
Proof of this, he cites a Place out of the Third Book of Polybius's History,
which we shall here render into English thus. As for Asia and Lybia, where they
join to each other about Ethiopia, none can say positively to this Day, whether
it be a Continent running to the South, or whether it be encompassed by the
Sea. So likewise what lies between Tanais and Narbon, stretching Northward, is
unknown to us at this present, unless hereafter by diligent Enquiry we may
learn something of it; they that speak or write any thing of these Matters, are
to be thought to know nothing, and to lay down mere Fables.] By which Words
Polybius only means, That as it was doubtful whether the Sea encompassed the
South Parts of Africa, so it was unknown whether the North Parts of Europe
about Narbon were likewise so encompassed; whereas Mr. Camden understands the
Words as if they were spoken in general, when indeed they related only to that
particular Question, Whether the Northern Tracts of Europe were environed with
the Sea or not, which notwithstanding the great Improvement of Navigation
stands unresolved even unto this Day. But that Polybius writ not in this sense,
appears further, in that he himself describes the Fountains of Rhodanus and
Ligeris, with many other Places of Gaul which lie all above Narbon. But to put
this past all Dispute, in this very Third Book, he promises particularly to
write of the further or Western Sea, as also of the Britanick Islands, (for so
he calls them,) and of their manner of making Tin: Which Promise of his
required more than a Cursory Knowledge to perform: Since he says, That the
Trade into those Seas was then very great; now that he also performed this
Promise, appears from Lib. II.
Strabo where Polybius is cited, as comparing the Opinions of Pytheas,
Dicaearchus, and Eratosthenes, concerning the Magnitude of Britain; but that
these Islands were discovered by the Greeks long before Polybius's time,
appears also from Herodotus, who confesses, he does not know the Islands
Cassiterides, from whence Tin, is brought; (that is, he did not know them any
otherwise than by Report;) and if these smaller Islands were then discovered,
can any one believe, that so great an Island as Britain, which lay so near
them, could remain undiscovered? But I have spoke enough, if not too much, of
the Etymologies of the Names of this Island; since of all that may be counted
Learning, nothing is more uncertain than this, nor is it often of any great use
when known.

I shall therefore now proceed to somewhat more Solid and Useful, and try if we
can discover who were the first Inhabitants of this Island; but since the
Scriptures, as well as Profane Histories, are silent in this Point, it is
impossible to tell the Name of the Man who brought the first Colony hither;
Only thus much seems probable, That Europe was Peopled by the Posterity of
Jophet, either from one Alanus, (whom Nenniu^ supposes to have been his
Grandson,) or else from Gomer his Son, from whom Mr. Camden derives the Names
of Cimmerii and Cimbri, whom be supposes to be one and the same Nation, and by
whom the ancient Galli^ was first Inhabited, and from whom he brings the
present Welsh, called in their own Language Cymra, which, if true, nothing is
more certain and easy to believe, than that this Island was first Inhabited
(at least as to its more Southern Parts) from the Continent of Gaul, as is
delivered by Bid in his first Chapter as a current Tradition in his Time; and
Mr. Camden farther proves it out of Caesar's Commentaries: For tho be there
tells us, that the Inland Parts of Britain were Inhabited by those who called
themselves the Natives; yet that the Maritime Parts were possessed by such, who
to make War, and get Prey, had passed over from Belgium and Gaul, which were
then called by the same Names as those People from whence they came. Which may
be also proved from other Arguments, as their Affinity in Customs, Language and
Religion, with those of Gaul, as they are there described by Caesar, and also
by other Roman Authors: Tho Tacitus, in his Life of Agricola, does not wholly
agree with Caesar as to this Particular, for he there tells us, That the
Northern Parts of Britain seem to have been Peopled by the Germans, as the
Eastern Coasts by their opposite Neighbors the Gauls, and the South Part by
the Iberi or Spaniards: This he gathers from the different Complexion of the
People, the Northern Britains (says he) are Fair, having large Limbs, and long
yellow Hair like the Germans; but the Silures, or Southern Britains, were
Swarthy, and had curled Hair like the Spaniards, whereas the Coast lying
over against Gaul agreed in Language, Customs, and in every thing else with the
Gauls.

It was not from the Continent of Gaul alone, that this Island was first
Inhabited, but also from Ireland, and the North Parts of Germany, or else from
Scandinavia, now called Sweden; forbid tells us in the First Chapter of his
History, That, after the Br^tains, the Picts came out of Scythia in long Ships,
and landed first in the North of Ireland; but being there refused Habitation by
the Scots, who then possessed that Island, they were advised to plant
themselves in the North part of Britain, which they then thereupon performed;
and when the Picts, wanting Wives, desired the Scots to bestow some on them,
they consented to it on this condition, That when there was any dispute about
the Succession to the Crown; they should rather choose a King from the Feminine,
than M^sculine Line of their former Kings, which is still observed (says he)
among the Picts to this day.

Now that this Country, which Bid here calls Scythia, could be no other, than
the more Northern Parts of Germany, or else Gothia (now called Sweden) at the
farthest, seems highly probable, since the best Writers of the middle Ages do
all agree, that these parts were in those times called by the general Name of
S^ythia. And you may see Authorities sufficient for this, cited by Archbishop
Usher in the 15th Chapter of his learned work; D^ Antiquitate Britannica um
Ecclesiarum, and by the reverend Dr. Stillingfleet (now Lord Bishop of
Worcester) in his Origines Britannicae; who allows Hector Boethius his
Conjecture not to be be improbable, Cap. 5.
who derives them from the Agathyrsi, who came out of Sarmatia into the Cimbuca
Ch^rsonesus, and from thence into Scotland.

But that the Scots came into this Island many Ages after out of Ireland is
also as certain, Since Bid tells us in the same place, that in process of time
Britain received a Third Nation, viz. of the Scots, besides the Britains and
Picts, which Scots going out of Ireland under the conduct of one Reuda, took
those Territories which they have among the Picts, either by terms or agreement
with them, from which Reuda even to this day they are called Da^reudini, for
Dal in their language signifies a share or portion, which Reuda in what Age he
lived and brought over this Colony out of Ireland, since it has bred a great
dispute among our Modern Antiquaries, I shall not take upon me now to decide:
But that the Scots came at first from Ireland, is acknowledged by John Fordon,
and John Major, their two eldest Historians extant; the latter of whom tells
us, That as yet, that is, in his time, almost half Scotland spoke the Irish
Tongue, which they had brought over with them from Ireland.

To return to the matter in hand it is evident from Bid, that in his time, God
was served in five several Languages in this Island, ( viz) The English, the
British, the Scottish, (or present Irish) the Latin (which they commonly used in
Divine Service) and the Pictish; though what that Language was we cannot now
tell; for the Picts being totally subdued by the Scots, and thereby
incorporated into the body of that Nation, that Tongue is quite extinct; though
if it had not been at least different in Dialect from that of the Britains, it
seems improbable that Bid, who was so near a neighbor to them, should mention
it as a distinct Tongue from all the rest. And yet notwithstanding by all the
relicts we can now find of it in the Names of places in the South and West
parts of Scotland, they are purely British, as Mr. Camden has learnedly proved
in his said Introduction, and therefore, since the name of Pict is indeed
Latin, and signifies no more than painted Men, and that no Roman Author makes
mention of them, before Ammianus Marcellinus, who lived about the end of the
fourth Century, and is the first who calls the Inhabitants of the Northern
parts of Britain by the name of Picti, distinguishing them into Dicalidonii
(perhaps, it should be Deucaldonii) and Vecturiones, which the learned Dr.
Lloyd, late Lord Bishop of St. Asaph, and now of Coventry and Litchfield, in
his Historical account of Church Government in Britain, probably enough derives
from the British Deucilyddion, and C^withwrion, that is Southern Caledones, or
Borderers and Northern Men. It is probable that these Picts were no other than
the remainder of those Britains, who preserved their Liberty by resisting the
Roman Arms, and were at last divided from the Roman Britains, by a Wall, now
called the Picts Wall, (the Vestiges of which are to be seen to this Day) drawn
between the mouths of the Rivers Tine and Eske, to hinder their farther
Incursions into those parts which were then under the Roman Empire.

But having said enough concerning this Island in general, together with its
first Inhabitants and their Languages; It is now high time to come to our main
design, the History of that part of it, called at this day England, and which
was in the Romans time divided into several Provinces or Governments, as
Britannia Prima, Secunda, and Maxima Caesariensis, etc. they may ^e seen in the
Ancient Notitia of the Roman Emp^re. We must therefore in the first place
ingenuously confess, that till the coming in of the Romans, there are no
certain or Authentic Histories remaining of any transactions before that time;
for Gildas, who lived not long after the Saxons were first called into Britain,
freely owns, that as for the Ancient monuments of his Country, (whatever they
were) being either burnt by Enemies, or carried beyond Sea by his banished
Country men, they were not then to be found, therefore I shall wholly omit that
fabulous Succession of Celtick Kings, who are feigned to be derived from
Samothes, one of the Sons of Japhet, whom they suppose to have planted Colonies
first on the Continent of Celtica or Gaul, and next in this Island, and thence
to have named it Samothea, since they never had any existence, but in the brain
of Amnius de Viterbo, and by him vented in his counterfeit Berosus, which is
long since exploded by all that are any thing versed in Antiquity.

But now I could heartily wish that we had any certain monuments of the History
of this Kingdom, which might justly supply their room; but having no Authentic
accounts left us of the British Kings, that reigned in this Island till Julius
Caesar's first Expedition hither, I could willingly have excused my self from
the drudgery of writing things so uncertain, nay in diverse particulars utterly
false, were it not that most Authors who have already writ our History either
in English or Latin, have thought those long Successions of Kings not unworthy
a particular Recital, as supposing it scarce possible, that a descent of above
Sixty Kings together, with so many transactions attended with such particular
Circumstances, as the making of War and Peace, building of Cities and enacting
Laws, should be wholly Fabulous and Romantic, or that the names of so many
successive Princes should never have been derived from any real Persons.

For though it is true that Geoffrey of Monmouth is looked upon as the chief
(if not only) Author of the Story of Brutus and his Successors; yet it is
certain that he pretends in the Proem to his History, (which he dedicated to no
less a Man than Robert Earl of Gloucester, natural Son to K. Hen. the I.) that
he received an ancient British History from Walter, Archdeacon of Oxon, which
(as he says) he faithfully translated out of the British Tongue into Latin,
though William Neobrigensis, (who lived some time after this Geoffrey) in the
very beginning of his History writes thus of him, In these our days (says he) a
certain Writer is risen, who has devised many foolish Fictions of the
Britains, he is named Geoffrey: And a little after, thus, with ho^ little
shame, and with what great Confidence does he frame his Lies! So that you may
see his History began to be cried out against almost as soon as it was
published. And yet for all this, it is certain, that Geoffrey was not the first
Author of this Story of Brutus; for Nennius, Cap. 2.3, 4.
who lived in the 8th Century (and is also Entitled Gildas in some Copies) in
his History makes the Isle of Britain to be first inhabited by one Brito, the
Son of Hisicion, the Son of Japhet, or else from one Brutus, (it seems he did
not know which) whose Pedigree he derives from Aeneas by his Son Ascanius, and
who (as he supposes) reigned in Britain in the time that Eli Judged Israel, and
under whose Conduct the Britains in the third Age of the World first came into
this Island; which Calculation falls out right enough with our at present
received Chronology: But as for Sigebertus Gemblacensis, a French Monk, (who
lived about Twenty Years before Geoffrey) though in some Editions he speaks of
Bru^e with his Trojans arrival in Gaul, and of his passage from thence into
Britain, yet it is certain they are none of that Author's words, there being no
such thing to be found in the truest Edition of his Chronicle, published by
Mirraes. An. 1608. as the above cited Lord Bishop of Coventry, and Litchfield,
in his learned Preface to his Historical account of Church Government in great
Britain and Ireland, has fully proved. But after him Henry Archdeacon of
Huntington, an Author of Credit (who lived at the same time with Geoffrey)
ascribes the first habitation of this Island to Brutus, the Son of Sylvius,
Grandson to Aeneas: whom together with his certain Trojans he supposes to have
come into Britain in the third Age of the World, as the Scots did in the fourth
into Ireland, which he seems to have taken out of Nennius, or some other
ancient Author: But this must still be confessed, that the whole relation of the
Actions of Brutus, and the Succession of all the Princes that followed him, do
all depend upon the Credit of Geoffrey and the truth of his tra^saction, and so
was looked upon in the Age in which he published his History: But to make this
Brute to be a Trojan, and to give him a Genealogy, which is plainly
contradicted by all the Roman Authors, is that for which his History ought to
be condemned: Yet thus much may be said in Excuse of him, and of all those
Authors who have ascribed the Origin of the Britains to Brute, that they have
imitated the Vanity of the ancient Greeks and Romans, who derived their Kings
from some God or Hero. And have been followed in it not only by the Britains,
but the French and almost all other Nations of Europe, since they began to
write Histories of their Originals.

But since it is fit that we should give you some account (though as short as
possible) of this Brute and his Successors, I shall contract their History from
Geoffrey of Monmouth into as narrow a Compass as I can.

Brutus, who is supposed to have first Peopled Britain with Inhabitants of the
Trojan Race, is said to have been the Great Grandson of Aeneas, by his Son
Ascanius, who killing his Father Sylvius, King of Alba, accidently with an
Arrow, was forced to fly his Country, and going into Greece joined himself with
the remainder of those scattered Trojans he ^ound there, and becoming their
Leader, made War upon Pandrasus, the King of that Country, to whom he sent this
Message, viz. That the Trojans holding it unworthy their Ancestors to serve in
a Foreign Kingdom, had retreated to the Woods; choosing rather a Savage, than a
slavish Life; if that displeased him, then with his leave they might depart to
some other Soil. The particulars of which being tedious and fabulous, are here
needless further to be inserted. But at last that King being by them made a
Prisoner, was forced to accept of terms of Peace, the Articles of which were,
That Brute should Marry Inogena the King's Daughter, and in Consideration of
her Dower should have a Fleet given him, with Liberty to transport all such as
would be willing to follow his Fortunes: The Marriage being thereupon
solemnized, Brute and his Trojans with a great Fleet betook themselves to Sea,
and within a short time landed on a deserted Island, where they found a ruined
City, in which was a Temple, and an Image of Diana, that gave Oracles;
whereupon Brutus consulting with his Diviner and Twelve other of the Ancients,
was advised to invoke the Goddess to tell him, in what Land or Region he should
find a place to settle in, and accordingly as we find it in Geoffrey of
Monmouth, he is said to Adress her thus, Diva potens Nemorum, terror
Sylvestribus apris,
Cui licet anfractus ire per aethereos,
Infernasque domos: Terrestria Jura resolve,
Et dic, quas terras nos habitare velis.
Dic certam sedem, qua te veneremur in aevum,
Qua tibi Virgineis Templa dicabo Choris.


Thus excellently well translated by the Learned Mr. Milton. Goddess of Shades,
and Huntress who at will
Walk'st on the rouling Sphere, and through the deep,
On thy third Reign the Earth look now, and tell
What Land, what Seat of rest thou bidst me seek,
What certain Seat, where I may worship thee
For ay, with Temples vowed, and Virgin Quires.


Whereupon the Goddess returned this following Answer. Brute sub Occasum solis
trans Gallica regna
Insula in Oecano est undique cincta Mari.
Insula in Oceano est, habitata Gigantibus olim,
Nunc deserta quidem, Gentibus apta tuis.
Hanc pete, namque tibi seeds erit illa perennis;
Haec fiet natis altera Troja tuis
Hic de prole tua Reges nascentur, and illis
Totius Terrae subditus Orbis erit.


Rendered thus, Brutus, far to the West, in the Ocean wide
Beyond the Realm of Gaul, a Land there lies,
Sea-Girt it lies, where Giants dwelt of old,
Now void, it fits thy People, thither bend
Thy Course, there shall thou find a lasting Seat,
There to thy Sons another Troy shall rise,
And Kings be born of thee, whose dreaded Might
Shall awe the World, and Conquer Nations bold.


But these Verses being in Latin, when there was no such Language sp^ke in the
World, sufficiently betray the moderness of the invention: So that were it no
more to please, then instruct, I should not have inserted them here.

And now Brute being guided, as he thought by a Divine Conduct, Sails again
toward the West, and Landing in Italy meets with some other Trojans who had
come thither with Antenor, many of whom he takes along with him, together with
one Corinaeus their Chief. With this recruit Bru^^ puts again to Sea, and
passing the Pillars of Hercules, at the mouth of Ligeris in Aquitania casts
Anchor, where they were set upon by one Goffarius a Pictish King of that
Country, now called Poictou, with whom having several Battles, Brute at last
Conquered and Expell^d him his Kingdom, but he soliciting the other Kings of
Gaul to his assistance; Brute thereupon finding himself too weak for so great a
force, called a Council, where 'twas resolved, that since this was not the Land
promised them by the Oracle, they should again put to Sea: So embarking all
their Forces, after a few days Sail they arrived at Albion, and Landed at a
Haven, now called Totuesse in Devonshire. The time of which enterprise is
supposed to be about 1200 Years after the Flood, and about 66. Years after the
Destruction of Troy; if any certain time can be assigned for so uncertain a
relation.

But Bru^e having at length (through many dangers and difficulties) attained
this long wished for Island, Lands his Trojans, and marches up into the Country
to take possession of it, which he found in great part desert, or Inhabited
only by some Giants; these he quickly destroys and to his People divides the
Land, which in allusion to his own Name he called Britain. On Corinaeus
Cornwall, (as we now call it) was bestowed: But here I omit as a Fable, only
fit to be told Children, how this Hero, though no Giant himself, yet took up
the mighty Giant Gogmagog in his Arms, and flung him off from a Cliff into the
Sea, from whence the place has been ever since called Langoemagog, that is to
say, the Gyant's Leap.

After Brute had thus conquered the Island, he chose a fit place to build a
City, which he called Troja Nova; (for it seems he spoke Latin though it were
not then used in Italy) which Cities Name was changed in time to Trinobantum,
or Troynovant, after to London: This he made the Seat of his Kingdom, (Eli
being then High Priest in Judea), where he enacted several Laws, and having
reigned here Fifteen Years, he divided his Kingdom among his Three Sons;
Locrinus the Eldest had that part called Loegria now England: Camber the second
possessed Cambria, now Wales. And Albanactus, Albania, now Scotland; but he
some time after being invaded by one Humber King of the Huns, was slain in
Fight, and his People driven back into Loegria, whereupon King Locrinus and his
Brother Camber marched against this Humber, who fighting with them, and being
overcome, and drowned in a River, left his Name to it. I designedly omit the
long story of the Lady Estrildis, whom Locrinus then taking Prisoner he fell in
Love with, and privately enjoyed, and would have Married, had it not been for
fear of Corinaeus, whose Daughter Gwendolin, he had already betroathed; but no
sooner was Corinaeus dead, but he owned Estrildis for his Queen, which so
incensed Gwendolin, that although Locrinus was strengthened by the addition of
Cambria upon the Death of his Bro^her; yet she goes into Cornwall, and by
powerful solicitations in the behalf of her self and her young Son Madan, the
Cornish are brought to assist her: With these Forces, she marched against
Locrinus, and in a pitched Battle nigh the River Stour he was overcome, and
Slain, in the 20th Year of his Reign, upon this (just as she would have it) the
Kingdom fell to her Son

Madan, the Son of Locrinus by Gwendolin, although a Child, yet succeeded his
Father, but under the Regency of the Queen his Mother, who out of Revenge,
drowned Estrildis and her Daughter Sabra in a River, which from her was called
Sabrina, in English Severne; Gwendolin, her Son coming to full Age, resigned
her Power, and retired into Cornwall, after she had Governed Fifteen Years: But
Madan having had the fame of Ruling well for the space of Forty Years in all,
left behind him two Sons, Mempritius and Manlius; Mempritius the Eldest Son of
Madan is supposed to have ruled over the whole Island, but Manlius his Younger
Brother rebelling against him, he desired a treaty with him, who giving his
Brother a meeting, he treacherously murdered him, and now having put an end to
that trouble, giving himself up to Luxury and Cruelty, and at last to unnatural
Lust, hunting in a Forest was devoured by Wolves; to whom succeeded Ebrank his
Son, who was a Man of mighty Strength and Stature; h^ first after Brutus wasted
G^ul, and returning rich and prosperous, built Caerbranc, now York, and in
Albania, the Town of Mount Agned, now Edinburgh. He is said to have had Twenty
Wives, and by them Twenty Sons and Thirty Daughters, which (as our Author
relates) were sent under the Conduct of their Brother to Sylvius Alba then King
of Italy to be provided with Husbands, because he had heard that the Sabines
would not give their Daughters in Marriage to the Latins, which is so very
ridiculous that it needs no Confutation. This Prince dying, after he had
reigned about Forty Years, left the Kingdom to Brute, Sir-named Greenshield
from the color of his Target; he revenged those Indignities, which had been
put upon his Father by Brunchild, Prince of Hannonia or Hainault Conquering him
near the banks of the Scaldis, i. e. the Scheld, but the modern names of
Hainault, and Brunchild sufficiently betray the Novelty of this Fable: He has
the Character of an Excellent Prince, Just, Merciful, and a most exact observer
of his Word; and reigned Twelve Years, to whom succeeded

Leil his Son, who built the City of Carlisle, (in the Days of Solomon,) after
called by the Romans Lugubalia, and did also repair Caerleon, now called
Chester; he was a good Prince till the latter end of his days, when falling
into several Vices, he occasioned great dissentions in the Kingdom, which did
not end with his life, but after he had reigned Twenty five Years, left the
Kingdom to

Rudhudibras or Hudibras, who composed the disturbances begun in his Fathers
days, and, studying nothing more than to strengthen and adorn his Kingdom,
built several Cities, as Caerkin now Canterbury; likewise Caer Guent, now
Winchester; as also Mount Paladur, after Septonia or Shaftsbury, and having
reigned Twenty nine Years, was succeeded by,

Bladud his Son, who is said to have been skilled in Magic, and thereby to
have found out those Medicinal Waters, now called the Bath, where he also built
a City, called Caer Baden; he is said to be a Man of a good Invention, and
having made himself Wings to fly, fell down from the Temple of Apollo in
Trinovant, and broke his Neck, having governed Britain Twenty Years. To him
succeeded

Leir his Son who built Caer Leir, now called Leicester: He had only Three
Daughters, Gonnilla, R^gana, and Cordiella his darling; but in his old Age,
being jealous of their Affections, he called them before him, and demanded,
that they would give him some assurance of their Love; the two Eldest called
Heaven and Earth to witness, that they loved him Ten thousand times dearer than
their own Souls, and that they were not able to Express their infinite kindness
for him; and at last concluded their flatteries with horrid Oaths and
asseverations of their Sincerity; but Cordiella, the Youngest, though having
before her Eyes the present reward of an easy flattery, yet could not be moved
from giving him this downright honest Answer: Father (says she) my Love toward
you, is as my Duty bids, What should a Father seek? What can a Child promise
more? They who pretend beyond this flatter: This short Answer not at all
satisfied the old suspicious King; for he showed his resentments by his neglect
of her, and the sudden advancement of her Sisters, Marrying Regana to the Duke
of Cornwall, and Gonarilla to the Duke of Albania; reserving no portion at all
for Cordiella, but it so happened, that Aganippus a Prince of Gaul (however he
came by this Greek Name) hearing of her Virtue and Beauty desired her in
Marriage, to whom she was welcome without any other Dower, but her own Virtues.
King Leir having thus disposed of his two Eldest Daughters, and dividing half
his Kingdom between them, they within some time by their subtle practices work
him out of all; so that he was forced to sojourn with his Daughters by turns,
who being set on by their Husbands, put so many affronts and Indignities upon
him (needless here to be recited) that in the end he was constrained to leave
the Realm, and take refuge with Cordiella. This rejected Daughter received him
with all the Duty and Affection imaginable; and then appeared the difference
between the downright Love of some Children to their Parents, and the over
talkative obsequiousness of others, while the hopes of a large Inheritance
obliges their Tongues to Express more Duty than ever they mean to perform; but
what was more significant than Words, she assisted her Father with powerful
aids, and in Person went to revenge his wrongs: So that bringing a great Army
into Britain, she destroyed his Enemies, and restored him to his Crown, which
he held but for the space of Two Years, whose Reign in all is computed to be
about Forty Years, and then dying left the Throne to

Cordilla, who Governed the Kingdom for Five Years; but in the mean time her
Husband Aganippus dying; Morgan and Cunedage her Nephews, by her Sisters
Gonorilla and Regana, disdaining to be under the Government of a Woman,
rebelled against her; and so prevailed, that they took her Prisoner; but she
being a Woman of a high Spirit slew her self, rather than to live under their
Tyranny.

Whereupon Cunedage and Morgan possessing the whole Government, divided the
Island between them; to Morgan fell Albania, to Cunedage all the Land on this
side Humber; Morgan not being content with his Portion Invaded his Brother, but
being driven by him into Wales, and there Slain, gave the Name of Glan-Morgan
to that Country: Cunedage now Ruling alone built many Temples to his Gods, and
dying, was buried at Trinovant; after he had Ruled Thirty three Years, to whom
succeeded

Rivallo the Son of Cunedage; in his time it rained Blood for Three Days
together, from whose Putrefaction, Noisome and Venomous Flies were bred; which
in Swarms infested the whole Land, and brought great Contagion both upon Men
and Beasts. He, after he had Ruled Forty six Years, was succeeded by

Gurgust his Son, of whom nothing is recorded worth mentioning; he is said to
have Reigned Thirty seven Years: Nor is there more left of Jago his Nephew,

Nor yet of Sillius, or Sicillius, tho how related to the former is not said:
But to him, after Forty nine Years Reign, succeeded

K^nemare, said to be Brother of Jago, of whom there is nothing Recorded, but
that he was Buried at York: To whom succeeded

Gor^odug, the Son of Kinemare, he is noted for Tyranny: But dying, he left
behind him two Sons

Ferrex, and Porrex, who Reigning jointly at first, did within a few Years
begin to contend, who should have the whole Kingdom; in which Contention, after
a great Battle Fought between them, Ferrex was Slain, whose Death affected his
Mother with so great a Grief, that transported by Revenge, she by the help of
her Maidens, Slew her other Son Porrex whilst he was a Sleep; an unheard of
Example, and too strange to be true.

After his Death, the Blood Royal of Brute being extinguished by his Death,
there happned cruel Wars, so that the Kingdom was rent into five parts; one
Pinnor made himself King of Loegria or England: Stator seized Albania; Rudock
Cambria, and Cloten Cornwall: But as to the fifth division, the Story is
silent; this Pentarchie is supposed to have lasted above Fifty Years, the
Kingdom in the mean time being miserably harrassed by Civil Wars, until

Dunwallo Molmutius, Son of Cloten King of Cornwall, excelling in Valor and
Comeliness of Person, by subduing the other four Princes, reduced the whole
Island again into a Monarchy, and is said to be the First in Britain that wore
a Crown of Gold; and therefore by some reputed the first King: But what he got
by Force he managed with great Prudence and Moderation; Enacting several
excellent Laws, which Geoffrey says were translated into Latin by Gildas; and
in Saxon afterward by King Alfred. But since no such work of his is any where
extant, I shall not give them so much Credit as to recite them; though Mr.
Seldom has not thought them unworthy of a place in his learned Treatise;
called, Janus, Anglorum. But this King, after he had governed Forty Years,
died, and was buried at T^inovant, to whom succeeded his two Sons

Belinus and Brennus, who after some Controversies, divided the Kingdom between
them, Brennus being to have all that lay North of Humber, and B^linus the rest;
but the Younger being not long so contented, did upon new designs Sail into
Norway, and enter into a League with Elsing King of that Country, and Married
his Daughter, which Belinus hearing of, did in his absence dispossess him of
his Kingdom; Brennus with a Fleet of Norwegians makes toward Britain, but is
encountered by Guithlac, a Danish King, who laying claim to his Bride pursued
him at Sea, and being there vanquished in a Fight, was forced to get away with
a few Ships; but Brennus nevertheless recollecting his shattered Navy, landed
in Albania, and gave Battle to his Brother, who totally routed him and forced
him to fly into Gaul, with no more than one single Vessel.

But Belinus being now rid of his Brother, turns his Thoughts to Arts of Peace,
and amongst other things they reckon his making the Four great Ways or Streets,
which are still to be seen, to run cross the Kingdom, which they will have him,
and not the Romans, to have first laid.

Brennus in the mean while having been kindly received by Seguinus King of
Armorica, now Britagn in France, and having Married his Daughter, was by him
assisted with a powerful Army to regain his Kingdom, and Landing in Britain,
was now ready to give Battle to his Brother; when their Mother Conwenna
mediated between them, and so persuaded them, that embracing each other they
were perfectly reconciled; so that going to Trinovant, they resolved to turn
their united Forces on Foreign Parts, and then Sailing into Gaul, the Author
tells us, that under these two, not only all that Country, but also Italy, was
Conquered, as you may find in the Roman Authors. If those were Britains and not
Gauls which took Rome, which is not worth our while to Dispute: Some say, that
Belinus went not into Gaul with his Brother, or if he did that he soon
returned. After which he made it his Business to adorn his Kingdom, Building
some Cities, of which Caer-Uske, now Caer-Leon upon Uske was one; and he also
adorned Trinovant with a Gate called to this Day Belin's Gate, having a Tower
on the Top of it; at the Foot of which he made a Harbor for Ships: He is also
said to be the first Founder of the Tower of London. After he had Reigned
Twenty-six Years died, and his Body being burnt on a Funeral Pile, his Ashes
were put in a golden Urn, and placed on the Top of the Tower that he himself
had Built.

Gurguint, Surnamed Brabtruc; his Son, succeeded him, in whose Reign the Danes
refused the Payment of the Tribute, which had bin imposed by Belinus, when
their King Guithlac, being driven by force of Weather upon the Coast of
Northumberland, was made a Prisoner, nor could be set free, without an
Engagement to pay Tribute for himself and Successors, which being now denied,
Gurguint now Sailed into Denmark, and by force of Arms obliged the Danes to
renew their Treaty, and received Homage of their King and Chief Nobility, and
then Embarked again for Britain: In his return he met with a Fleet of Thirty
Sail about the Isle of Orkeney, these he encountered, and having taken their
Captain Bartholain, he demanded of him what he was, and the Reason of his
coming into those Parts; Bartholain answered, that he and his Followers were
named Balences, being banished from Spain (their Country) with their Wives and
Children, and thereupon had put to Sea to seek out new Habitations, whereupon
it is said this King assigned them Ireland, being a Place not then Peopled.
This King is supposed to have Built Caer-Werith or Lancaster, Caer-Peris or
Portchester in Hampshire, and Caer-Gaurvie now Warwick, where he was buried,
after he had Reigned Nineteen Years; to whom succeeded

Guintelin his Son, he was a Prince Learned, Prudent, and of singular Justice
and Moderation; he is said to have had a Wife of as great Virtue, named Martia,
to whom Geoffrey falsely Attributes the making of the Laws called Merceuenlage,
which was indeed so called not from her, but but from the Mercians, by whose
Kings they were first enacted. This King is also said to have Reigned
Twenty-six Years, and was succeeded by

Sicilius the II. his Son, being about Seven Years of Age, but under the
Government of his Mother Martia, he is supposed to have Reigned Fifteen Years,
Seven under the Tuition of his Mother, and Eight after his full Age; and having
given all the Signs of a hopeful Prince, he was suddenly snatched away by
Death, and then the Crown fell to

Kimarus the Son of Sicilius; but he being of a wild and ungovernable Temper,
and wholly given up to all manner of Exorbitances, was killed in the Woods, in
pursuit after his Game, some say by an Ambush, others by wild Beasts: He
Reigned but three Years, then

Elanius, or Danius his Brother succeeded. This King was not Inferior to his
Predecessor in Wickedness of Life, insomuch, that some make them the same
Person, so exactly did these two Princes correspond in their Vices. He held the
Scepter about Ten Years; the succeeded his Son

Morvidus, or Morindus (by a Concubine) a Man of great strength and Comeliness;
as to the Qualities of his Mind, he was Liberal, but withal exceeding
Passionate: In his Days the Moriani, or rather Morini, a People of Gaul,
Landing in Northumberland with Fire and Sword wasted that Country, which
Morindus hearing of, with all Expedition gathered his Forces, and with long and
wearifom Marches made up to them, and in one Ba^tel utterly defeated them, and
then put all the Prisoners to Death with exquisite Torments; but not long after
hearing of an hideous Monster, which, coming out of the Irish Sea, seized and
devoured many that lived near the Shore. The King beholding the lamentable
Destruction of his Subjects, fought the Monster himself: the Contest held for a
while doubtful, but at last the Monster prevailed and devoured the King. This
is said to have happened in the Ninth Year of his Reign, to whom succeeded

Gorbonian his eldest Son, a religious Prince, which he evidenced to the World
by repairing decayed Temples, and erecting new ones in several Places in his
Dominions: He is said to have built Grantham in Lincolnshire, and some say
Cambridge, anciently called Caer-Grant and Grant Chester. He Reigned Ten Years,
and was succeeded by his Brother

Archigallo, the Second Son of Morindus; he endeavored to depress the
Nobility, by depriving them of all Power and Command, and preferring Mean and
unworthy Men, and by taking away Men's Estates to enrich his own Treasure; all
which Oppressions the Nobility of the Kingdom not being any longer to bear,
they rose up in Arms, and deposing him, placed

Elidure his Brother in the Throne; he was called by his Subjects Elidure the
Pious; for as he went on Hunting one Day in the Wood Calater, in the midst of
the Forest he met with his Brother Archigallo, and being struck with Pity of
his Misfortunes, he secretly conveyed him Home to his own House at the City of
Alchluid, where feigning himself sick, he assembled all the Nobles of his
Realm, and there partly by Persuasions, partly by Commands, he engaged them
again to receive his Brother Archigallo for their Sovereign; and afterward
calling a general Assembly of his People at York, he there publicly resigned
his Crown, and taking it off his own Head, placed it on his Brother's, after he
had Reigned Three Years.

Archigallo being thus Restored, by his wise and sober Deportment regained the
Affections of his People; for he discarded his former Favorites, and adhered
to the prudent Advice of his Nobility, and Reigning to the general Liking of
his Subjects for the space of Ten Years, died and was buried at Caer-brank, or
York.

Elidure, after the Death of his Brother, became once more King of Britain, and
so with much Honor and Reputation received the second time the Crown, but was
soon deposed by the Ambition of his Brethren, Vigenius and Peridurus, after One
Year's Government; when being seized by them, and his Person confined to the
Tower of London, they divided the Kingdom between them; Peridurus took Albania,
and Vigenius all the Country on this side Humber for his share.

Vigenius dying after he had Reigned Seven Years, the whole Kingdom devolved to
Peridurus who managed it with great Moderation and Justice, and having governed
Nine Years died, then Elidure again resumed the Crown, being delivered out of
Prison by his Subjects, and after he had Reigned Four Years to the general
Satisfaction of all Men, then dying, was succeeded by his Nephew or Grandson,
the Son of Gorbonian, who is called

Regin by Mat of Westminster, though not named particularly by Geoffrey: He was
a worthy Prince, and Reigned with the general Approbation of all his People, to
whom succeeded

Morgan, or Margan, the Son of Ar^igallo, he Reigned Fourteen Years in
Tranquillity: After him

Ennian, or Emerian, another Son of Archigallo's was advanced to the Throne,
who, quite different from his Brother, governed Tyrannically, and was in the
Sixth Year of his Reign Deposed, and then succeeded

Ydwallo the Son of Vigenius, who warned by the Misfortune of his Predecessor
avoided Tyranny; after whom Reigned

Rinco the Son of Peridurus, an heroic Prince and a great Warrior. Then next
follows, in Geoffrey of Monmouth, a long descent of Kings, who either did
nothing, or had no Body to Record it; these make up Seventeen Kings in all,
viz. Gerantius the Son of Elidurus, to whom succeeded Catellus his Son, then
Coillus, and after him Porrex the Second; then Cherin, or Cherim; then
succeeded Fulgentius the Eldest Son of Cherin; next him Androgeus the Third Son
of Cherim enjoyed the Crown; then after him

Urianus the Son of Androgeus began to Reign, who giving himself up to all Riot
and Intemperance, soon died; and to him succeeded

Eliod; then Elidavius, then Cledanus, or Cletanus, called also by others
Detonus; but here arises so great a Difference amongst the Writers of this long
Bed-Roll of British Kings, that there is nothing of Certainty concerning their
very Names, much less of their Actions, for their Names are variously recited
by Geoffrey, and those Authors that lived after him, and pretend to correct or
enlarge him; but you must take them as we find them. Then succeeded

Gurgurntius; then Merianus, and after him Bledunus; then Capenus; next to him
Sisilius the Third; then Blegabred, who is said to have been excellently well
Skilled in Vocal as well as Instrumental Music; he Reigned Ten Years: After
him succeeded

Arthimallo his Brother; and after him Eld^l: Then follow Nine Kings more,
without any thing Recorded of them, but their bare Names, viz.

Rodianus or Redian, then Redarchius or Redargius, then Samuil, then Penisill,
then Carpoir or Corporius, and after him Geidu^llus or Dinellus the Son of
Carpoir, a Prince Modest and Prudent in all his Actions, who left his Son Heli
his Successor, who Reigned Forty Years, and was succeeded by

Lud his Eldest Son, who is reported to have been a Virtuous Princ^, making
diverse excellent Laws, and Correcting many Abuses in the Government; he Adorned
the City of London with new Walls and Towers, and therein built a Gate, which
is still called after his Name, Lud-Gate; and is said to have built himself a
Palace not far from it: And, after he had Reigned Eleven Years, died, leaving
behind him two Sons, Anarogeus and Theomantius, under the Tuition of his Brother

Cassibelan, whose Bounty and Worthy demeanor so wrought upon the People, that
he easily got the Kingdom transferred upon himself; yet nevertheless showing
some Favor to his Nephews, he conferred freely upon Androgeus London with
Kent, and upon Theomantius Cornwall; reserving to himself a Superiority over
them both, till the Romans for a while eclipsed his Power.

I shall not here trouble my self to set down, much less to confute the Errors
that may be found in the Chronology of these Kings Reigns, since Geoffrey of
Monmouth, from whom they are taken, has bin so cautious, as not to give us any
account in what Year of the World they Reigned; sometimes telling us (though with
no certainty at all) the Names of the Judges and Kings of Israel, whom he makes
Contemporary with them. But as for his last Nine and Twenty Kings from Elidure
to Lud, he has given us nothing but their bare Names, without so much as
setting down how many Years they reigned, as if he himself, or those Authors he
had Translated had bin ashamed, or weary of their own tedious Stories, and so
would make it as short as they could.

But as for Mat. of Westminster, Ponticus Virunnius, Polydore Virgil, and one
Richard White, (who calls himself Basinstoke) I do not think it worth while to
put down their pretended Corrections, Emendations, and Additions of Geoffrey's
History, since, if he had no Authority to invent, I am sure they can less
pretend to Correct his Inventions, or alter his Course of Succession of the
British Kings, as Polydore has done, under pretense of making them more
suitable to his own Accounts of time: But White has exceeded all others in
this, making bold with Geoffrey, not on^y altering the Names of his Kings and
their Course of Succession in many Places, but also referring them in
particular to the Years of the World, in which he supposes them to have
Reigned, adding also the Years of their Reigns wherever he thought Geoffrey
to be deficient, but without vouchsafing to give us the Names of any Authors
from whence he took them: So that since we have indeed no better Authorities
than Geoffrey himself, I shall not go about to Confute the Faults that might be
found in the Chronology which Mr. White has given us of these Kings Reigns;
though it were no hard Matter to show diverse Absurdities in it. But this much
is evident from the disagreement of these Authors, about the Names of their
Kings and the Years of their Reigns, that they had nothing but their own
Fancies to rely upon, for what they wrote; whence proceeds so great a Confusion
in this part of their British History, that no Body can certainly conclude any
thing from hence, unless that they were all mistaken: Nor is it only the
uncertainty of Kings Names and Successions that we here find fault with, but
the great Improbability (I might say Impossibility) of diverse Matters of Fact
related by Geoffrey of Monmouth, in this History of the British Kings: As for
Instance, that of King Ebrane's sending his Thirty Daughters to find Husbands
in Italy; which Story plainly took its rise from the Sabines denying their
Daughters to those People, which Romulus many Years after got together. Not to
mention the Story of Morindus's being devoured by a Sea Monster, whereas
neither our Seas nor Rivers do now (or ever did) afford any such noxious
Creatures; diverse other more improbable Relations (because I would not tire the
Reader with such Fooleries) I have here omitted. Besides all which, the very
Names of many of these Kings, such as Jaco, (which is the same with James in
English) Molmutius, Morindus, as also Archigallo, Gorbonian, Ennianus,
Geruntius, Fulgentius, Androgeus, Archimalus, Rodianus, sufficiently betray
some a Phoenician, some a Grecian, and some a Roman Original, and could never
be derived from the British O^iginals.

Lastly, There is great difference between this part of the British History
(especially from Elidure to Lud) and all other Histories; for whereas these
commonly are barren of particular Transactions in their beginning, and
afterward enlarge themselves still more and more the further they proceed.
This History is quite contrary, and the farther we go, the more confused we
find the Succession of their Kings, and the less there is Recorded of their
Actions; for from Elidure to Lud there are Nine and Twenty Kings, of whom
nothing almost is Recorded but their bare Names; and which is also very
remarkable, from this Elidure, Geoffrey makes no mention of the Years of their
Reigns. What we find of this kind has been added by those that writ long after
him, who have done it very preposterously, allowing not above Ten Years one
with another to Thirty Kings, which are supposed to have Reigned in about Two
Hundred Years; so that if there were any Truth in this History, it seems more
rational to believe these Kings not to have succeeded each other, but many of
them to have bin Contemporary Rulers of particular Provinces of this Island.

I shall therefore conclude this Part of the History with Mr. Milton's Words
concerning these Kings. Thus far have we gone relying upon the Credit of
Geoffrey of Monmouth and his Assertors, though, for the Reasons
abovementioned, I have not thought it beside my Purpose to relate what I have
found, whereto I neither oblige the Belief of other Persons, nor shall
over-hastily subscribe my own.

Yet granting these things not to have been true, but invented by the Author
abovementioned; yet since even Romances, as well as true Histories, may
furnish us with Observations sufficient to Instruct us, not only in the Humors
and Passions of Mankind, but also in the Causes as well as Effects of human
Actions: And since Ambition, Lust, and the Desire of Revenge are commonly in
their turns the Motives that incite Princes as well as private Men to
Transgress the Laws of Reason; let us look back and survey some of the most
remarkable Actions of those Princes, whose History we have here cited.

From those frequent Divisions we here read to have been made of the Kingdom
between several Brothers, we may learn, that the Britains had no Notion of any
Right in the Eldest Brother to Command over all the Rest, no not after they
became Christians; the Welsh Princes still dividing their Territories among all
their Sons alike, though we may see the Inconvenience of this Course, by their
making War upon each other about their particular Shares: Whence we may
conclude, that Sovereignty ought to be left undivided, and the more Shares
there are in it, the more Causes there are of Civil Wars and Divisions; nor
have any proved more fatal than those among Brothers, of which we have
sufficient Examples, not only in this, but other Histories.

From so many Kings being deposed for their Tyranny, we may observe, that the
ancient Britains, though under a Monarchy, yet did not think themselves obliged
to suffer their Kings, by becoming Tyrants, to make their People Slaves; but
knew how to cast off that Yoke when it grew insupportable.

Lastly, from Cassibelan's being made a King by the People, for his Valor and
Worth, it plainly appears, that if the Kingdom were then Hereditary; yet the
Estates did then reserve a Power to themselves, during the Minority of the
Right Heir, to place in the Throne that Prince of the Blood Royal, who was like
to prove most able to defend them either against Foreign or Domestic Enemies;
as this Prince in the War with Caesar evidenced to the World. I have made bold
to add these few political Observations, that the Reader as well as my self may
profit somewhat by Reading a History otherwise so dry and uninstructive.

THE General History OF BRITAIN, NOW CALLED ENGLAND: As well Ecclesiastical, as
Civil. BOOK II. Containing the Annals of ENGLAND, from the First Landing of
JULIUS CAESAR, to the Romans Total Desertion thereof, being about Four Hundred
and Ninety Years.
HAVING in the former Book deduced the Succession of British Kings (as well as
I was able) from Brute to the Beginning of the Reign of Cassibelan, in whose
Time Caesar Landed in Britain; and having hitherto wandered through diverse Ages
of Fictions, or Uncertainties at best, like a Man in a dark Night, who knows
not well whether he is in or out of his Road, yet is still forced to Travel on,
till Daylight overtake him: So we having hitherto gone forward, though in the
dark, are at last arrived at a Period, which will give us a more certain Light
into our British History; though no Roman or Greek Historian did ever undertake
to write a History on purpose concerning this Island, during all the time that
the Roman Emperors governed here, either in Person or by their Lieutenants. For
those Authors that are extant, only write of the Affairs of Britain
occasionally, and as they stood intermixed with other Parts of the Roman
History: Hence we find that they rarely mention the Affairs of Britain, but by
the bye, when an Expedition, occasioned by some fresh Rebellion or sudden
Commotion, obliged them either to come in Person, or to send Forces over
hither. Nor is there any Author, except Tacitus in his Life of Agricola, who
expressly treats of the whole Government or Actions of any one Lieutenant of all
those that governed here; whence it is that we have so imperfect an Account of
the Civil State of this Island, or what particular Laws were made for the
Government of it, whilst it continued part of the Roman Empire, farther than we
may pick up from some Laws dispersed here and there in the Code, and Digest; or
else from the Notitiae of the Roman Empire: To which may be also added (that
which is yet worse than all the rest) the great Loss Civil Knowledge has
undergone, by the perishing of so many excellent Histories both in Greek and
Latin; so that whoever pleases to survey them will find of those few that
remain, scarce one of them is come to us entire, but has lost some consider^ble
Part or other: All which, if we had them together, would without doubt make a
Complete Roman History of this Island, which now it is impossible to perform,
having nothing left us during several Emperors Reigns, but some lame Epitomes,
or immethodical Lives in the Historiae Augustae. This I premise, that you
should not wonde^ if you find such large gaps in this Period, as to things
performed in Britain, during several Successions of Roman Emperors: So that if
it were not for some old Altars, and votive Inscriptions that have been dug up
of late Years in diverse Places of this Island, we could not certainly have
known any further than by guess, that those Emperors, whose Names are there
mentioned, had any thing to do here; and as for Geoffrey of Monmouth, and those
few Modern Writers who take upon them to treat of these Matters, they are so
false and uncertain, that they are rarely to be relied upon, and indeed never
to be made use of, but when we are at a loss for any other Account of those
Times. So that this (as I suppose) has bin the Reason why some of our late
English Historians, for want of other Matter, have stuffed out their Histories,
not only with what the Roman Emperors did in Gaul, or Britain, but all the
other Parts of the Roman Empire, where they had occasion to make Wars; which is
indeed rather to give a General History of the then known World, than of one
single Island or Province.

But since I intend to confine my self only to write of such Actions as were
performed within the compass of this Isle, either by the Roman Emperors or
their Lieutenants during the time they governed here; I shall rather choose
sometimes to leave a gap in the Story it self, than to write Things foreign and
impertinent to the Subject I am to treat of: And indeed I could willingly have
forborne Writing this Part of the History at all, since it has been done
already by Mr. Camden in Latin, and Mr. Milton in English, who have scarce
omitted any thing which is worth the Collecting out of the Greek and Latin
Historians, that was necessary to complete this Period. Therefore, were it not
for leaving too great a Chasm in our intended Work, I could very willingly have
excused my self from so ungrateful a Task, in which I confess it is hard to
equal, and much more to exceed such great Authors. But since I find there is a
Necessity, in order to render the History entire, to give an Account of what
was done in this Island during the Roman Empire, I shall perform it as well as
I am able.

But that I may follow Caesar's Example, give me leave from him, as well as
other Greek and Roman Authors, to give you a short Account of the Religion and
Manners of the ancient Britains, as well in Caesar's Time as some Ages after,
before we say any thing of his Expedition hither.

That Great Man in the Fifth Book of his admirable Commentaries tells us, that
in his Time there were in Britain a vast number of Men and Cattle, the Houses
thick, and built almost like to those of the Gauls; that they used Copper or
Iron-Plates weighed by a certain Standard instead of Money: That they counted
it against their Religion so much as to taste of a Hare, Hen or Goose. And a
little after proceeds thus; Of all People those which inhabit Kent were most
human, neither differed much from the Gallick Customs: The more Inland People
for the most part sowed no Corn, but lived upon Milk and Flesh, being clothed
with Skins. But all the Britains stained themselves with Woad, which made them
of a bluish color, and thereby of a more terrible aspect in Battle: They wore
long Hair, but shaved all the rest of their Bodies, besides the upper Lip. Ten
or twelve Men had Wives among them in common, chiefly Brethren with Brethren,
and even Parents with their Children, but the Children that were got by them
were looked upon as theirs, by whom those Women were taken in Marriage.

As for their manner of Fighting, I shall leave that to be related when I come
to Julius Caesar's War in Britain.

Strabo in his Geography Lib. IV.
tells us, That the Britains exceeded the Gauls in Stature, he having seen some
of them at Rome who were half a Foot higher than the tallest Men there, but
that they were looser made. He says farther, That they were like the Gauls in
Disposition, but more simple and barbarous; so that some of them knew not how
to make any Cheese, though they abounded in Milk; and that diverse of them were
ignorant of dressing Gardens, as well as other Parts of Husbandry: That they
had many distinct Governments among them; their Woods served them instead of
Cities, for with Trees cut down, when they had enclosed a large Circle, they
build themselves Cottages, and Stables for their Cattle within it, though for
no very long time.

Diodorus Siculus describes the Britains to be Aborigines, ^i^. ^ Hist. Lib. IV.
and living after the Manner of the Ancients, and in Fight using Chariots like
the Greek Heroes in the Trojan War; that they made their Houses for the most
part of Reeds or Wood; that they laid up their Corn in the Ear in Granaries,
from whence they fetched as much as would serve for one Day's Use; that they
were simple and incorrupt in their Manners, Strangers to the Craft and Subtilty
of that Age, and lived content with very mean Diet and Apparel, remote from
Riches and Luxury that attends them; and that the Isle abounded in a multitude
of Men, who were subject to diverse Kings and Princes.

Lib. III.
Pomponius Mela in his Treatise de Scitu Orbis relates, That Britain produced
much People and diverse Kings, but that they were all rude and unpolished; and
that the farther they were from the Continent, the more ignorant they were of
Foreign Riches, abounding chiefly in Cattle. That they died their Bodies with
Woad, uncertain, whether for Ornament, or some other Cause. That they sought
frequent Causes of War, and disturbed each other, from Ambition of Empire, and
desire of enlarging their Dominions. That they fought not only on Horseback and
on Foot, but also armed like the Gauls in Chariots, whose Axeltrees were armed
with Scythes.

Cornelius Tacitus in his Cap. 2.
Life of Agricola tells us, That the Britains were very like the Gauls, whether
the same Original, or the likeness of Climate were the Cause of it; so likewise
their Speech was not much different. They had the same boldness in seeking out
Dangers, and the same fear in declining of them when they were at hand: Yet
that the Britains showed greater fierceness, as whom long Peace has not yet
softened; for we have heard (says he) that the Gauls were once famous for War,
but Cowardice soon succeeded slothfulness, their Valor and Liberty being lost
together; which has also happened to the Britains already Conquered; but that
the rest of them remained such as the Gauls once were: their chief Strength was
in their Foot, but that some Nations of them used also Chariots in fight; the
Charioteers were more Noble, their Followers fighting for them. That in Times
past they obeyed Kings, but were then divided by their Princes into Factions
and Parties; neither is there any thing so advantageous for the Romans against
the strongest Nations, than that they do not consult in Common; for there are
very seldom Assemblies for two or three Cities to repel common Danger; so
whilst they fight separately they are all alike overcome. And in the next
Chapter he goes on thus; The Britains cheerfully yielded to the Pressing of
their Men, paying Tribute, and all the other Duties imposed by the Emperor,
provided Injuries were not done them; these they will hardly endure, for they
submit that they may obey, not that they may serve as Slaves.

Dion Cassius (epitomized by Xiphilin) speaking of the more Northern Britains
relates, Lib. LXIII.
that they Tilled no Ground, but lived on their Fruits and Hunting, for of
Fish, though they had great Store, they never tasted. That they lived in their
Cabines naked and barefooted. They had their Wives in Common, and all of them
maintained the Children. The chief Authority, for the most part, resided in the
People. They were much addicted to Steal. They fought from Chariots, and had
little nimble Horses; their Footmen ran very fast, and also stood very firmly
to their Posts. Their Arms were a Shield and a short Spear, at whose lower end
there was a Ball of Brass, that when they shake it they may terrify their
Enemies with the noise. They wore long Daggers. They can bear Hunger, Cold, and
all sorts of Labor; being in the Woods they can live upon the Bark of Trees.
They have still ready a certain sort of Food upon all Occasions, of which if
they take the quantity of a Bean, they will not be Hungry or Thirsty for a
great while after.

Lib. XI.
But Herodian is the first who describes the Northern People, then the most
barbarous sort of Britains, and who, I suppose, were afterward called Picti
(that is, painted Men) to have had their Bodies marked with diverse Figures;
which, whether it was their Custom in Ceasar's Time, may be doubtful, since he
makes no mention of it. But this Author thus proceeds: The Britains know not
the use of Garments, but gird their Bellies and Necks with Iron, thinking it an
Ornament as well as a Sign of their Riches, in the same manner as other Nations
prize Gold. They marked their very Bodies with diverse Figures of all sorts of
Animals, wherefore they will not wear Cloths, lest they should hide the
Painting of their Bodies. It is a warlike Nation, and most greedy of Slaughter,
and use only a narrow Shield and a Lance, besides a Sword hanging from their
naked Bodies. They knew not the use of the Breast Plate or Helmet, thinking
them a hinderance to them in their running over the Bogs, of which they had
great Store.

Pliny relates (among their other Customs) that they wore Rings on their middle
Fingers, and manured their Land with Marl; Lib. XXXIII. cap. 1.

Lib. XVII. c. 8.


which can be only meant of the more civilized Britains, who undertook
Husbandry; which improvement is used with us in some Countries to this day: but
as for their Drink, Solinus tells us, they made it of Barley as we do now: and
as Dioscorides also notes, who calls it, (though corruptly) Curmy, for Curw,
for so the modern Britains still call Ale.

So that whoever will but consider the Manners and Customs of the Ancient
Britains, Cap. 35.
may find them not to be much different from those of the naked Indians of some
part of America; when they were first discovered: only then they had the use of
Brass and Iron, which those wanted until they were brought to them from other
places: and also had Horses and Chariots, the use of all which were unknown to
the Americans: but in other things you will find them much alike, only the
latter seem to have been a better tempered and more Virtuous People; from
whence the Reader may judge of the likelihood of those Stories in Geoffrey of
Monmouth, when he makes such descriptions of the stately Cities, Palaces, and
Fleets of the British Kings; whilst Caesar, and Lucan, and Pliny describe their
Vessels to have had their Ribs and Keels made of slight Timber, interwoven with
Wicker like our Baskets, and covered with Hides, sowed together; not having the
Art of making Saws to cut out Boards or Planks.

Having given you an account of their Ancient Manners and Government; I will
next say somewhat of their Religion. Caesar tells us, that the Religion of the
Britains and Gauls were much the same; that they had the same Gods, and the
same Priests, viz. The Druids, who had a great Authority, not only in
Religious, but Civil Matters; so that they could Excommunicate whom they
thought fit; and a Person so interdicted could not be admitted to their
Sacrifices, but was esteemed among the number of the Accursed: so that all
Persons studiously avoided him, not daring to come near him, for fear of being
infected with so dangerous a Curse.

These Druids taught the People that the Soul was Immortal, Caesar Comment.
Lib. IV.
and went out of one Body into another: But whether they had learned this from
the Greeks, who traded amongst them, or from the ancient Phoenicians, is
uncertain.

But as for their Gods, they were the same with the Gauls. Jupiter was
Worshipped under the Name of Taramis, or Taran, for Taran still signifies in
Welsh Thunder. Maximus Tyrius writes, That they Worshipped the highest Oak they
could find, as the Figure or Representation of this God.

Tutates the God of Travelers is supposed to be the same with Mercury, and by
the Britains called Duw Taith, the God of Journeys. Mars was Worshipped by the
Gauls and Britains under the Name of Hesus; as also Camulus, as Mr. Camden
proves, from a Coin of Cunobelin, of which he gives us the Draught, being a
Man's Head with an Helmet on it, and with these Letters, CAMU. The next God of
the Britains was Apollo, Worshipped by them under the Name of Beleus or
Belinus, as appears by a Passage of Julius Capitolinus in his Life of Maximin.
He is also supposed to have bin called Belatucadrus; there being diverse Altars
and Inscriptions dug up of late Years out of the Earth, all of them with this
Title, DEO BELATUCADRO, which Name seems to be derived from the Assyrian God
Bell, or Belus.

As for Goddesses, they Worshipped Diana under the Name of Camma. Another
Goddess the Britains had, who is called by Dion Andraste, or Andrate, and is
supposed to have bin the Goddess of Victory; she had a Temple at Camalodunum
(now Maldon in Essex.) As for their Sacrifices, though they were most often
Beasts, at sometimes they also Sacrificed Men, as Caesar expressly tells us; and
Tacitus relates, That it was usual for the Britains to consult the Gods by the
Entrails of Men; Pliny also tells us, That the Misletoe growing upon an Oak,
being cut with many Ceremonies, was made use of in all their Sacrifices and
other Religious Rites; and also says, that Britain in his time did so
Superstitiously cultivate Magic Arts, and that with so many Ceremonies; that
they might have communicated it even to the Persians themselves.

These are the chief Things, which ancient Authors have left us, concerning the
British Customs and Manners, relating either to their Religious, Civil, or
private Life, which, if it seem tedious to you, may be passed by: So I now come
to my main Design, and give you Caesar's own Account of his first Invasion of
Britain, out of the Fourth and Fifth Books of his Commentaries.

Comment. Lib. IV.
Julius Caesar having now subdued most part of Gallia, and quieted the Germans,
and stopped their Incursions into his Province, resolved on an Expedition into
Britain: his Pretenses were these, That the Britains had underhand sent
Supplies to the Cities of Armorica, who the Year before had revolted from his
Obedience, and had joined with the rest of Gaul in a general and dangerous
Rebellion, and not only so, but that they had received into their Protection
the Bellovaci his Enemies, who had fled to them for aid. These Caesar there
assigns as the Causes to justify this Invasion.

But though these were the seeming Causes that moved Caesar to this sudden
Expedition, yet certainly a Soul so great as his could not be tempted, by the
mean hopes of getting the British Pearls, to so dangerous a War, as Suetonius
in the Life of Caesar supposes, though he mentions his comparing their weight
and largeness by poising them in his Hand; yet I will not deny, but he might
even propose the getting of these as a Bait to encourage his Soldiers in this
Enterprise. By his past as well as future Actions we may guess, that besides
Glory his main Design in Invading Britain, was to inure his Soldiers to
Hardship, and to accustom them to the most uncouth and barbarous Enemies; that
they might not be afterward terrified at the most dangerous Enterprises, but
wholly depend upon his Fortune and Conduct.

Caesar therefore, although Summer was almost spent, and Winter coming on very
early in the Northern Parts of Gaul, yet resolved to pass over into Britain,
and if the time of the Year should not suffer him to make War, yet he thought
it might be to good purpose if he should but Land upon the Island, and
understand the Natures of the Inhabitants, and come to know the chief Places,
Harbors and Accesses to; it all which, he says, were as yet unknown to the
Gauls; for, besides Merchants, no Body commonly went thither, and even to those
scarce any thing was known besides the Seacoast, and those Countries which
were opposite to Gallia: Therefore though the Merchants were called together
from all Parts, yet could he not understand what Nations they were that
inhabited it, nor what sort of War they made, nor what customs they used, nor
what Ports were fitting to receive a Fleet of great Ships: Though by the way
this seems very strange, if it were true, as they of Rhemes told Caesar, that
Divitiacus King of the Soissons had a little before held Britain also under his
dominion; besides the Belgian Colonies, which he affirms to have named and
Peopled many Provinces there, as also what he tells us in the Sixth Book of his
Commentaries, that those who desired to know the Druids Discipline went thither
Yearly on purpose to learn it.

But be this as it will, he thought it necessary before he exposed his own
person, to send Ca. Volusenus thither with one Galley to discover these things,
commanding him to return as soon as this could be effected, whilst he with all
his Forces marched toward the Country of the Morini, now the Province of
Picardy. Because thence was the shortest cut into Britain; hither he draws
together his Ships from all parts of the neighboring Provinces, as also that
Fleet which he had built last Summer for the Armorican War, in the mean time
when his design was made known, being carried over by the Merchants into
Britain, Ambassadors came to him from diverse Princes and States of this
Island, who promised to give Hostages, and to obey the Roman Empire: All which
being heard, Caesar as largely promising and exhorting them to continue still
in that mind sent them back; and with them Comius of the Atribates (now called
the Country of Arras,) whom upon the conquest thereof he had made King, and of
whose Courage and Fidelity Caesar was very well assured: him he enjoins, that
he should go to as many of the States as he could, and persuade them to come
into the Roman Interest, and should also inform them that he himself would
speedily come over thither. But Volusenus having only surveyed the Country at a
distance (which was all he could do, since he durst not go out of his Ship, nor
trust himself with these Barbarians) on the Fifth day returned to Caesar, and
related to him whatsoever he had there observed.

Caesar having settled the Morini by taking Hostages of them, then gathered
together about Eighty Ships of burden, which he judged sufficient for the
transporting of two Legions; but all his Galleys he distributed to his Quaestor
and Lieutenants; there were also Eight Ships of burden more, which lay Wind
bound at a place Eight Miles distant, so that they could not reach the same
Port; These he appointed for the Horse, the rest of the Army he committed to Q.
Titus Sabinus, and L. Aurunculus Cotta, with orders to march into the Country
of the Menapii, and into those Towns of the Morini, from whence Ambassadors
had not yet come to him. But P^ Sulpicius Rufus his Lieutenant he commands to
keep the Port with a sufficient Garrison. All things being thus dispatched, and
having now got a fair Wind, about the the Third Watch, he set Sail, commanding
the Horsemen to march to the further Port, and thence to go on board and follow
him, which orders proved too slowly executed. But he himself together with the
first Ships about Four a Clock in the Afternoon reached Britain, where he found
diverse strong Troops of the Enemies lodged on the Hills; the nature of which
It Is supposed by Mr. Somner to have been near Dover.
place was such, these Hills hanging so steep over the Sea, that a Dart might
be cast from the higher ground to the Shore; therefore judging this no fit
place to Land his Men, he lay at Anchor till Nine of the Clock, that the rest
of the Navy could come up to him: in the mean time calling a Council of his
Lieutenants and Tribunes, he communicates those things he had learned from
Volusenus, and also what he would have done; telling them that the Nature of
all Military (and especially Maritime) Affairs, having a sudden and unconstant
motion, all things should be executed by his orders, and that in due time.
These being dismissed, and having got the Wind and Tide both with him, the
signal being given, and the Anchors weighed, he sailed again forward about
Eight Miles from that place, to an open and plain Shore, where he came to an
Anchor. But the Britains knowing the Roman's design, having sent their Horses
and Charioteers before (which they were chiefly wont to use in Fight) followed
with the rest of their Forces, and hindered the Romans from landing: The
difficulty of which was great in these respects, because the Ships by reason of
their great bulk were not able to ride, but in a deep Sea; whilst the Soldiers
having their hands taken up with their Arms, were yet in unknown places, not
only to Leap down from the Ships and to withstand the Billows, but also at the
same time to Fight their Enemies; whilst they either fighting on the Shore, or
else marching but a little way into the Water, and having their hands free,
fought in places where they were well acquainted, and boldly spurred on their
Horses already managed and used to it; but the Romans being terrified with
these things, and altogether unskilled in this sort of fighting, did not show
the same briskness and courage, as they were wont to express in Land Service;
which when Caesar perceived, he ordered the long Ships or Galleys (as both
unusual to these Barbarians, and more ready for use) to fall off a little from
the Ships of burden, and to be rowed toward the Shore, and being laid against
the naked side of the Enemies, to drive them back with Slings, Darts, and other
Engines; which stood the Romans in good stead, for the Britains being terrified
with the strange shape of their Galleys, the motion of their Oars, and those
unusual kind of Engines, first stood still, and then began a little to retreat:
But the Romans still delaying, because of the depth of the Sea, the Ensign of
the Tenth Legion first invoking the Gods, that this action might prove
fortunate and successful, cried out, Leap down fellow Soldiers, unless you
mean to betray this Note the Roman Ensigns were then all Eagles, tho afterward
they took the Figures of other Animals.
Eagle to the Enemies, for I will certainly perform my duty to the
Commonwealth, and to the General: When he had spoke thus with a loud Voice, he
cast himself into the Sea, and began to carry the Eagle toward the Enemy; Then
the Roman Soldiers encouraging one another not to suffer so great a disgrace
as the loss of their Ensign, all leaped out of the Ship, whom when the others
from the next Ships had beheld, they also followed them, and quickly reaching
the Shore, pressed upon the Enemy.

The Fight was sharp on both sides, but the Romans were not able either to keep
their Ranks, nor get any firm footing, nor yet to follow their Ensigns: So that
every Man being forced to join himself to the first Ensigns he met with, they
were hand put to it, whilst the Enemies acquainted with all the shallows, when
ever from the Shore they beheld any marching from the Ships, immediately
spurring on their Horses, they charged them at disadvantage, many encompassing
a few, whilst others assaulting them on the i. e. that side which wa^ (...)
unarmed side, casts Darts against the rest; which when Caesar perceived, he
commanded the Long Boats of the Galleys, and smaller Vessels to be manned with
Soldiers, and sent them to the assistance of those whom he beheld most
distressed. The Romans, as soon as they got on Shore, making head, all together
charged the Enemy, and put them to flight, yet could not pursue them far for
want of Horse; this only was deficient to Caesar's wonted Fortune.

The Britains being worsted in fight, as soon as they got together again,
presently dispatched Messengers to Caesar desiring Peace; promising that they
would give him Hostages, and do whatever he enjoined; together with these
Ambassadors came Comius of Arras, whom (as I have before shown) had been
already sent by Caesar into Britain; him, as soon as he came out of the Ship,
and had related the General's Message, they laid hold on, and put into bonds;
but the fight being over they sent him back, and Petitioning for Peace, cast
the blame upon the common People; and desired that because of their Ignorance
this fault might be pardoned: but Caesar complained, That when they had of
their own accord, by their Ambassadors sent to him into the Continent desiring
Peace: Yet that they had without any Cause made War; But (he said) he would
pardon their Folly, and therefore again enjoined them to send Hostages, part of
whom they gave him presently, the residue they promised (being to be sent for,
from places more remote) to send him within a few days, whereupon their Princes
came from all parts, and commended themselves and their States to Caesar.

Peace being thus concluded, within Four days after his arrival in Britain, the
Eighteen Ships which are already mentioned to have taken in the Horse; sailed
from the farther Port on the opposite Shore with a gentle Gale, but when they
drew near the Island, and could be now discerned from the Camp: So great a
Tempest suddenly arose, that none of them could hold their course; but some
were driven back to the same place from whence they set forth, whilst others
were carried to the further part, of the Island lying toward the West with very
great hazard; for casting out their Anchors they took in so much Water, that
they were forced (tho in the Night) out to Sea again, and to Steer toward the
Continent: It also happened the same Night that the Moon was at the full, which
is wont to make the highest Tides in the Ocean; but was then unknown to the
Roman Mariners: So that at the same time the Spring Tide had filled all those
Galleys with Water in which Caesar had transported his Army; though he had now
drawn them on Shore; whilst the Tempest had shattered the Vessels of burden
which lay at Anchor, neither was it in their Men's power any ways to help them;
so that many Ships being Wracked, the rest, their Cables, Anchors, and other
Tackle being broken or spoiled, became unfit for Service; this caused a great
Consternation in the Army, for there were not any other Ships left, in which
they could be again transported, and all things necessary were wanting to refit
them, nor was there any Corn provided for them to Winter in these parts; all
which being known to the Britains, their Princes, though after the Fight they
had agreed to perform those things which Caesar had enjoined; yet when they
understood that the Romans wanted Horses, Ships, and Provisions, and had also
judged of the paucity of their Soldiers from the small circuit of the Roman
Camp, which seemed the less, because Caesar had transported his Legions without
any Baggage; they thought it the best course again to take Arms, and thereby to
hinder the Romans from fetching in Corn or other Provisions, and so to protract
the War till Winter came on, for they thought if these were once vanquished and
cut off from ever returning into Gaul, none of them hereafter would again
presume to transport an Army into Britain; Therefore the Plot being thus laid,
they began by little and little to steal out of the Camp, and privately to draw
their Men out of the Fields.

But Caesar although he did not then know their design, yet from the late
disaster of his Ships, as also from their neglecting to send in their Hostages,
suspected what would happen, therefore provided for the worst, for he every day
brought in Corn out of the Fields into the Camp, and as for those Ships that
were most shattered, he made use of their materials to refit the rest, and what
things were farther necessary he ordered to be brought from the Continent, all
which being executed by his Soldiers with the utmost labor and diligence,
only twelve Ships being lost, he fitted out the rest ready to go to Sea: Whilst
these things were in action, the seventh Legion being by course sent out to
Forage, and that there was at that time no appearance of War, whilst great
part of their Men remained in the Fields, and others of them went, and came
between that and the Camp, those Soldiers who kept guard at its Entries, gave
notice, that there appeared a greater dust than was usual in that part of the
Country toward which that Legion had marched; whereupon Caesar suspecting that
the Britains were undertaking some new design, commanded those Cohorts which
were then upon the Guard, to march with him toward that Quarter, ordering two
more to take their places, and the rest to Arm, and immediately to follow him;
when he had marched some distance from the Camp, he perceived his Soldiers to
be overcharged by the Enemy, and hardly able to sustain their assault, and that
the Legion being drawn up close together, Darts were cast at them from all
quarters; for the Corn being cut and carried away in all other parts, one piece
was left, and the Enemies guessing that the Romans would come thither for it,
had laid in ambush in the Woods, and suddenly assaulting them, being then
without their Arms, and busy in reaping, killing some, thereby routed the
rest, being then out of their Ranks, hemming them in both with their Horse and
Esseda a sort of open Wagons.
Chariots: For in their Battles they make use for the most part of Chariots,
with which they first of all scowre through all parts, casting Darts as they
go, and so by the terror of their Horses, and rattling of their Chariot-wheels,
they often break the Roman Ranks, and when they have got in among the Troops of
Horse they leap down from their Chariots, and Fight on Foot, in the mean time
the Charioteers retire a little from the Battle, and so place themselves, that
if they should be pressed by any number of their Enemies, their Masters may
find an easy retreat; by which way of fighting they had both the speed of
Horsemen, and the steadiness of Foot Soldiers; and had so enured themselves
by daily use and Exercise, as that they were able to stop their Horses in full
speed, though running down steep places; as likewise they had been used to turn
their Charriots in a narrow compass, to run along the Temo.
Pole, to sit upon the Jugum.
Yoke, that join or couple the Horses together, and from thence quickly to
return into their Chariots. The Romans being much astonished with this new way
of Fighting: Caesar in a lucky moment came to their rescue: At whose approach
the Enemies stopped, and the Romans began to recover themselves, which tho
done, yet Caesar thinking it no fit time further to provoke the Enemy, nor then
to renew the Fight, kept his ground and presently led back the Legions to the
Camp; whilst these things were doing, the Britains who where in the Fields also
retired.

During many days following there happned continual bad weather, which both
kept the Romans in the Camp, and hindered the Enemies from attempting any thing
against them.

But in the mean time the Britains sent Messengers into all parts, publishing
abroad the small number of the Roman Forces; and how great a booty they were
like to get, that this was the time of freeing themselves for ever, if they
could but take the Roman Camp: Upon which great numbers of Horse and Foot being
now drawn together came to the Camp: Caesar although he foresaw the Event by
that which had happened before, and that the Enemies if once stoutly repulsed,
would avoid the danger by flight; having got about Thirty Horse, whom Comius of
Arras had brought over with him at his coming into Britain, drew out the
Legions in Battle before his Camp, which when joined, the Enemy being not able
to bear the assault of the Roman Soldiers, turned their backs; whom Caesar
followed as long as his Men's speed and strength would permit: After a great
slaughter, and burning of the Villages round about, but they returned to their
Camp. The same day Messengers came from the Britains to treat of Peace, from
whom Caesar demanded double the number of Hostages, which he had before
enjoined, commanding them to be brought over to him to the Continent; because
the Equinox approaching, he did not think a Winter Voyage was to be undertaken
with such weak, crazy Vessels; therefore having now got a convenient Season, a
little after midnight he hoisted Sail, so that all the Ships got safe to the
Continent.

It is not pertinent to our History to relate here how Caesar's Men as soon
almost as they came on Shore, were set upon by the Morini, whom he had before
left in peace, and whom notwithstanding he routed, and killed a great number of
them till they were quite subdued.

But it seems the Britains had no great Opinion of Caesar's Power, for only Two
States of all Britain sent him Hostages, the rest neglecting it. These things
being thus performed upon the reading of Caesar's Letters, Twenty days
supplication to the Gods was decreed by the Senate.

Thus far we have given you Caesar's own account of his first Expedition into
Britain, of which he had no great cause to boast; since, had it not been for
his own good conduct, assisted by the timorousness of the Britains, he had
never returned to make this relation; but this much is to be acknowledged, that
his landing here is a noble monument of his skill in Military affairs, for
Cicero writing to his friend Atticus, tells him in one of his Epistles, that
the accesses to the Island were wonderously fortified with strong works, or
banks.

But Valerius Maximus, as also Plutarch in his Life of Caesar, have given us a
noble Example of the Roman Courage, as well as discipline, who both relate that
in the confused fight which happened at Caesar's first, landing, Sceva a Roman
Soldier having pressed too far among the Enemies, and being beset round, after
incredible valor shown, single, against a Multitude, swam back safe to his
General, and in the very place that rung aloud with his praises earnestly
desired pardon, for his rash adventure against Military discipline; which
modest confessing his fault after no bad event for such an action, wherein
Valor and ingenuity outweighed the transgression of Discipline, easily gained
him pardon and preferred him to be a Centurion: this was that Sceva who
afterward gave good occasion to have his name remembered at the Battle of
Dyrachium, between Caesar and Pompey, whose side he had then took.

Th^s is all we can find concerning Caesar's first Expedition into Britain
either from himself or others, more than that Orosius in his History from some
accounts that are now lost, tells us that most of Caesar's great Ships which
were to bring over his Horse, were cast away in that violent Storm, he has
already told us of.

The Winter following Caesar returned into Italy as his Custom was, for some
Years before; but upon his return thence finding that most of the Britains had
neglected to send him their Hostages according to their former agreement, he
resolved to make a fresh descent upon them, and in order to this (in the Fifth
Book of his Commentaries) he tells us that upon his going into ^taly he had
commanded his Lieutenants, whom he had set over the Legions, that they should
take care to build as many new Ships as possibly they could that Winter* and to
repair the old ones, showing them the model of those that he would have built:
And, for the more ready taking in of Men and Horses to be of somewhat a lower
make, than those that are used of in the Mediterranean Sea; and for the more
speedy lading and unlading them, to be also somewhat broader and flatter
bottomed than ordinary, as well for the transporting of the Horses as baggage,
but to be all made to be rowed with Oa^s, to which purpose their low building
contr^buted much, but all things necessary for the rigging out of these Ships
he ordered to be brought out of Spain.

Caesar upon his return from Italy, having settled all things in the hither
Gallia, made a short Expedition into Illyricum, and having settled affairs
there, returned into Gaul; where he found built by the extraordinary industry
of his Soldiers, about Six hundred Vessels of that kind already described,
(notwithstanding the great scarcity of all necessary materials) together with
Twenty Eight Galleys, all which did not want much of being ready to be launched
within a few days; so having much commended his Soldiers, and Overseers of the
Work, he then commanded them all to meet at the Port called Ictius, from which
(he had already known) was the most convenient passage into Britain, being
about Thirty Miles from the Continent.

Concerning which Port, give me leave to say somewhat by the bye, since there
are so many several Opinions whether it be still in being, or else is destroyed
by the Sands; and indeed there is such a great difference about this Port, that
there is scarce a Haven, or Creek upon all the Coast of Flanders and France,
from Bruges to Bulogin, but some Writer or other would make to be this Portus
Ictius now mentioned by Caesar; but since there can be but Three places on this
Coast, viz. Calice, Whitsand, and Buloign, that can with any probability
pretend to have been this Portus Ictius, I shall neglect to speak of any of the
rest, except these Three.

As for the first of these, though it be the nearest cut between France and
England; yet it is not likely to have been that Ancient Haven: For though it be
the shortest, yet it was not the most convenient passage in Caesar's time; both
which are to be taken notice of, since he himself in his former Book calls it
the shortest; but in this, the most convenient passage, and therefore cannot
answer the distance from Calice to Dover, which is but Twenty Miles; whereas
Caesar describes this Port to be about Thirty Miles distant from Britain, nor
was this place so much as known in Caesar's time, being never used as a Port,
till of latter Ages that Whitsand was quite stopped up by the Sands driven into
it. Nor was Calice ever commonly used for a Port till Philip Earl of Buloign
built and walled this Town, before which time there is little mention made of
it: But as for Whitsand, though it had much fairer pretenses than Calice, as
having been the ancient Port from whence Men usually passed from France into
England, for above Five hundred Years before; till it was at last about the
Fourteenth Century become utterly unserviceable for the Reason already given:
Yet that this could not be the Portus Ictius, is proved by the learned
Cluverius, in his Goegraphy, nor was it any ancient Port, being seldom or never
made use of as such in the Roman's time; none of the Military ways leading at
all to it.

And therefore only Buloign can with any probability pretend to be this Portus
Ictius, as being the ancient Gessoriacum, from whence the Romans most commonly
passed into Britain, and best agrees with the distance that Caesar here sets
down, being also proved by the above cited Cluverius; and by our Learned
Antiquary Mr. Somner, to have been the true Portus Ictius, by many unanswerable
Arguments and Authorities. And as for the only Objection made against it, that
it is not likely that one Place should have so many several Names: It signifies
not much, since the same Place might be called by several Names in different
Ages. That which was Portus Ictius in Caesar's Time, being afterward, (when a
Town came to be Built there,) called Gessoriacum, which in aftertimes was
named Bononia, and now Buloigne. But whosoever desires to know more concerning
this Matter, may consult the said, Cluverius's Ancient Germany, as also his
Geography; but especially that De Porti^ Icti^.
Treatise of Mr. Somners, wherein he proves against Monsieur Chris^et, that
neither St Omers, nor Mardick, could be the Portus Ictus mentioned by Caesar:
Which Treatise, together with another of the Learned Monsieur D^ Fresne's upon
the same Subject, has bin lately Published in Latin by my worthy Friend Mr.
Edmund Gibson, of Queen's College, Oxon. together with an Ingenious
Dissertation of his own upon the same question. But to return to the Matter in
Hand, from which we have too much digressed.

Caesar in the Fifth Book of his Commentaries tells us. That having found a fit
time, Anno ante Christ. LII.
he had Commanded his Soldiers again to Embarque for Britain, when there
happened a Mutiny raised by Dumnorix with his Aeduan Horse, who would have left
the Expedition and gone home; but he being killed by some of Caesar's
Soldiers, whom he had ordered to do that Execution, all those Horsemen
returned again to him. Things being thus settled, Labi^nus was left behind on
the Continent with Three Legions and Two Thousand Horse to defend that Port,
and to provide Corn, as also to observe the Motion of the Gauls.

Then Caesar with Five Legions, and an equal Number of Horse, to what he had
left behind, about Sunset weighed Anchor, and sailed on with a gentle Southern
Gale; but about Midnight the Wind falling, he could not hold on his Course;
but Day coming on, found he had bin carried away by the Tide, and that he had
left Britain too much on his Left Hand: But then again taking Advantage of the
Change of the Tide, he endeavored, Anno ante Christ. LII.
by the help of Oars, to reach that part of the Island, where he had found
before to be the best Landing the last Year; wherein the Soldiers deserved a
great Commendation, who made the heavy Transport Ships, by the constant Labor
of Rowing, keep almost equal speed with the Galleys. About Noon they arrived at
Britain with all their Ships, but there was not any Enemies to be seen in that
Place; for, as Caesar learned afterward from the Prisoners, the Britains had
been there with great Forces, but were terrified with the vast Multitude of the
Ships, which, with Vessels of Provision and others upon private Accounts,
amounted to above Eight Hundred; so that the Britains had quickly left the
Shore, and retired into Places more remote. Caesar having Landed his Army, and
chosen a fit Place for his Camp, as soon as he learned from the Prisoners in
what Place the Enemy's Forces were Encamped, about the Third Watch of the Night
marched toward them, being not concerned for his Ships, because he left them at
Anchor in a safe and bold Shore, with Ten Cohorts, and Three Hundred Horse to
guard them, under the Command of Q. Airius. But Marching that Night about
Twelve Miles (toward Chilham in Kent, as is supposed) he at last saw the
Enemies Forces, who with their Horse marching down to the River Stoure, lying
between them, began [from the higher Ground] to assail the Romans, and to give
them Battle; but being repulsed by the Horse, they conveyed themselves into the
Woods, where having a Place strongly Fortified, as well by Art as Nature, and
which it seems they had before provided during their own Domestic Wars; for
all the Avenues to it were closed up with Trees laid overthwart the Passages.
The Britains fought straggling out of the Woods, and hindered the Romans from
entering within the Fortification: But the Soldiers of the Seventh Legion
making a (i.e. A kind of an Arch made with their Shields clapped c^ose to each
other, like the back of a Tortoise, from whence it had its Name.
Testudo, did by a Mount raised against their Fortification soon take it, and
drove them out of the Woods, having themselves received very little Loss; but
since they fled, Caesar forbad to pursue them too far, because he was ignorant
of the Place; and a great part of the Day being spent, he would employ the rest
of it for the Fortifying of his Camp.

The next Day, early in the Morning, he sent his Foot Soldiers and Horsemen,
being divided into Three Bodies, upon another Expedition, that they might now
pursue those that fled: But before they had marched any great distance of
Ground, the Enemy being in sight, some Horsemen came from Q. Atrius to Caesar,
telling him, that a great Tempest having risen the Night before, almost all the
Ships were shattered and cast on Shore, neither the Anchors nor Cables being
able to hold them, nor could the Masters of the Vessels nor Mariners withstand
the Force of the Tempest; so that by the Ships falling foul upon each other,
great Damage was received; which when Caesar knew, he returned to his Ships,
and he himself beheld what he had heard from the Messengers; so that about
Forty Ships being lost, the rest might be refitted, though not without much
Labor. Therefore he chose some Carpenters out of the Legions, and Commanded
others to be sent for from the Continent, and he writ to Labienus, that he
should by the help of those Legions he had with him, speedily get ready as many
Ships as he was able, whilst he himself (although it was a business of great
Toil) thought it was most convenient to have all his Ships haled on Shore, and
to enclose them within the same Fortification with his Camp; in which Work he
spent about Ten Days without any Intermission of Labor Day or Night. Anno ante
Christ. LII.
The Ships being thus drawn up, and the Camp strongly Fortified, he left the
same Forces to guard them as before, whilst he himself marched forward to the
same Place from whence he had last returned: When he came thither, he found
much greater Forces of the Britains, there assembled from all Parts. The Chief
Command for managing this War being by their common Consent committed to
Cassibelan, whose Territories the River Thames divided from the Maritime
States, being about Eighty Miles distant from the Sea. There had been in former
Times perpetual Wars between him and the Neighboring Cities. But the Britains
being now terrified by this second Invasion, had given him the Supreme Command
over them all.

Now from hence you may see the Falsehood of Geoffrey of Monmouth, who makes
this Island to have bin a Monarchy before Caesar's coming, and Cassibelan to
have bin the Sole King; whereas we find him only to have been a small Inland
Prince, and the rest of the Island divided into many Petty States or
Principalities. The rest of what Caesar here tells us concerning the Manners of
the Britains, as also the Situation of this Island, these being either already
related, or else needless, as sufficiently known, I shall pass over, and return
to Caesar's Actions, as he relates them in the same Book.

In this March the British Cavalry and Charioteers fought sharply with the
Roman Horsemen, yet nevertheless these were Superior in all Places, and drove
them to the Hills and Woods, many being slain; but the Romans pursuing them too
eagerly, lost some of their own Men. Some time after this the Enemy on a
sudden sallied out from the Woods, the Romans not being aware of them, (being
busy in Fortifying their Camp) and charged briskly upon those who were upon
the Guard before the Camp. But two Cohorts (the chief of two Legions) being
sent by Caesar to their assistance, whilst they made a halt, as being surpised
with their new way of Fighting; the Enemy boldly charged back again through the
midst of them, without the loss of a Man: So that Day Quintus Laberius Durus, a
Tribune, was killed; but the Enemy, upon the sending out of fresh Cohorts, were
repelled, and forced to save themselves by flight.

This Skirmish thus fought before the Camp, and in the Eyes of all Men, made it
evident, that the Legionary Soldiers, being neither able, for the weight of
their Arms, to pursue those that retreated, nor yet daring to go far from their
Ensigns, were no equal Match for such a kind of Enemy; and that the Horse
fought with much greater Danger, because the Britains oftentimes retired on
purpose, and when they had drawn the Romans a little from the Legions, leaped
from their Chariots and fought on Foot, to the great Disadvantage of the
Romans. But the manner of their Cavalries fighting brought the same or equal
Danger to those that retired, as to those that pursued: To which you may add,
that they never fought in close Order, but scattered, and at some distance, and
had their Men so Posted, that they could easily Succor each other, fresh Men
still relieving those that were wounded or weary.

The next Day the Enemies made a stand upon the Hills at a distance from the
Camp, and began to show themselves less frequently, being not so forward to
Skirmish with their Horse as they were the Day before; but about Noon, when
Caesar had sent out the Three Legions with C. Trebonius to Forage, Anno ante
Christ. LII.
they suddenly on all sides set upon the Foragers, and charged up after them to
the very Legions and Ensigns, whilst the Romans charging them with great
Courage, repelled them. Nor made they an end of chasing them, until the Horse,
who were supported by the Legions behind them (and not giving them time either
to stand still to rally, or to get down from their Chariots as they were wont)
had slain a great many of them. After this Rout the British Auxiliaries which
had come from all Parts returned home; and from that time the Britains never
fought the Romans again with their whole Forces: But Caesar guessing their
Designs, drew his Army toward the River Thamesis into the Confines of
Cassibelan's Territories, which River was only fordable (and that very hardly)
in one place: At his arrival he found great Forces of the Enemy's there
Encamped, and the Bank Fortified with sharp Stakes, and many of the same sort
were also fixed under Water, which being made known by the Prisoners and
Fugitives, the Horse being sent before, he ordered the Legions immediately to
follow; but the Soldiers marched with that Courage, that, though their Heads
only appeared above Water, yet the Enemy, not enduring the Force of the Horse
and Legions, quitting the Banks committed themselves to flight. This Ford is
supposed by Mr. Cambden in his Britannia, to have been at Coway-Stakes near
Lalam in Middlesex, where the remainder of those Piles placed by the Britains
were of late Times still to be seen, being bound about with Lead, and of the
thickness of a Man's Thigh; and some of them have been of late Years pulled up,
as hindering the Passage of the Barges.

Cassibelan having now lost all hopes of doing any good by downright Fighting,
having dismissed the greater part of his Forces, retained only about Four
Thousand Charioteers, who observed the Roman Marches; and going a little out of
the way, hid themselves in woody and intricate Places, driving away the Men and
Cattle into the Woods: But in those Parts of the Country where he knew the
Romans were to march, whilst the Horse were dispersed abroad into the Fields,
either for Forage or Booty, he sent out his Charioteers from the Woods, by all
the known ways, and there fought the Roman Horsemen, putting them in great
hazard; whereupon Caesar strictly commanded them not to march too far from the
Legions, and that they should only burn and destroy the Country as far as the
Legionary Soldiers alone could safely perform it in their Marches. In the mean
time the Trinobantes, being one of the strongest States of all those Parts,
sent Ambassadors to Caesar, promising to submit themselves to him, and perform
his Commands, desiring that he would defend Mandubratius from the Injuries of
Cassibelan, and would send him to them, that he might receive the Supreme
Authority of their State. This Mandubratius being a young Prince, had fled to
Caesar in Gallia; for his Father Immanuentius had been King of that Country,
but having been slain by Cassibelan, his Son avoided the like Fate by flight.
Whereupon Caesar sent him to them, enjoining them to give him Forty Hostages,
and Corn for his Army; they speedily performed his Commands, and sent him that
number of Hostages, as also the Corn. The Trinobantes being defended from the
Violence of the Soldiers, the I shall not undertake to English th^se Names,
because they are very ^ncertain.
Segontiaci, Anacalites, Bibroci, and Cassi, having also sent Embassies,
submitted themselves to Caesar: By these he understood that the Town of
Cassibelam (supposed to be Verulamium) was not far off, being strongly
Fortified with Woods and Bogs, in which a great number of Men and Cattle was
got together.

You may here also observe Caesar's Description of a British Town: Anno ante
Christ. LII.
The Britains, says he, when they have taken in some woody Place, and enclosed
it with a Ditch, or Rampire, call it a Town, to which, to avoid the Incursions
of their Enemies, they are wont to retreat, But thither C^^sar marched with his
Legions, and found the Place strongly Fortified both by Art and Nature; yet
when he began to Storm it on both sides, the Enemies not enduring the Assault
of the Roman Legions, threw themselves out from another Part of the Town, and
so made their Escape, whilst many were killed as they fled: Here Caesar found
great Multitudes of Cattle.

Whilst these things were doing, Cassibelan sent Messengers into Kent, in which
Parts were four petty Princes, (whom Caesar, for his own Glory, calls Kings,)
viz. Cingetorix, Carvilius, Taximagulus and Segonax; these he orders, that with
all the Forces they could make, they should assault upon the sudden, and take
the Romans Naval Camp. These Princes, with their Forces, marching to the place,
the Romans sallying out upon the Britains, killed many of them, and taking
Cingeterox, a noted Leader, Prisoner, returned again to their Camp without any
Loss. Cassibelan hearing of the Success of this Fight, having had his Borders
thus wasted, and received so considerable Losses, but being chiefly terrified
with the Defection of so many States, sent Ambassadors to Caesar, by the
Mediation of Comius of Arras, to treat about a Submission: Caesar being
resolved to pass the Winter in the Continent, because of the sudden Commotions
in Gaul, and that there was not much of the Summer left, and which might be
easily spun out, demanded Hostages, and set how much yearly Tribute the
Britains should pay to the People of Rome; and having farther forbad
Cassibelan, either to molest Mandubratius, or the Trinobantes, Hostages being
taken, Caesar marched back his Army to the Seaside, where he found all his
Ships re-fitted; but because he had a great number of Prisoners, as that also
some of his Ships were lost by the Tempest, he resolved to transport his Army
at two several Returns; yet it happened, that out of so great a number of
Ships, in so many Voyages to and fro, neither in this, nor the former Year, any
Ship that carried the Soldiers was wanting; whereas, of those which were sent
him empty from the Continent, and which afterward Labienus had taken care to
have new-built, (being to the number of Sixty) very few reached the Port;
almost all of them being lost, or driven back; These when C^sar for some time
had in vain expected, lest he should be debarred from going over by the Season
of the Year, because the Aequinox now approached, he was forced to crowd his
Soldiers the closer together; and having found a calm Season, about the Second
Watch of the Night he set Sail; and by Break of Day reached the Continent.

This is the Account which Caesar himself gives us of both these Expeditions:
Howbeit, M.
other Ancient Writers have spoken more doubtfully of Caesar's Victories here,
and that in plain Terms he fled from hence; for which that noted Verse in
Lucan, with diverse Passages here and there in Tacitus, are alleged. Paulus
Orosius, who took what he wrote from an History of Suetonius, now lost, writes,
That Caesar in his first Journey being entertained with a sharp Fight, lost no
small number of his Foot; and by Tempest, nigh all his Horse: But be it as it
will, Pliny tells us, That at his Return to Rome, as from a glorious
Enterprise, he offered to Venus, the Patroness of his Family, a Breast Plate
embroidered with British Pearls.

Anno ante Christ. XL.
I shall not much trouble you with the Relation of Cassibelan's Actions after
Caesar's Departure, since we have no other Account of them, but from Geoffrey
of Monmouth: But, according to his Relation, Mandubratius (whom he calls
Androgeus) was not restored to the Kingdom of the Trinobantes; whether through
the ill Will of Cassibelan, or the general Hatred the People had to him, is
uncertain: So that leaving Britain, he again betook himself unto Caesar, and
attended him to Rome, where he was entertained as King of Britain, and a Friend
to the Roman Commonwealth. Cassibelan, after the Departure of the Romans, is
said to have reigned Ten Years; which Time he employed in revenging himself
upon the Cities and States that had revolted from him during the Wars with
Caesar.

After whom, until the Time of the Emperor Claudius, the Britains were free
from the Roman Yoke, living under their own Kings, and being governed by their
own Laws: So that for a while we must take our Farewell of the Roman History,
collecting it only as we find it scattered here and there, and follow the
Succession of the British Kings, according to Geoffrey.

Then Theomantius, or Tenantius, Nephew of Cassibelan, is said by him to have
succeeded his Uncle, having before enjoyed the Principality of Cornwall; far
remote from the Troubles of these Times, and by that means not engaged in the
Quarrel, was not obliged, either to take into the Roman Interest; or by aiding
Cassibelan, to justify his Violences; by which indifferent Carriage, by the
general Applause of the People he is said to come to the Crown.

Anno ante Christ. XL.
In this King's Reign it is supposed, that Octavius (the Grandchild of Julia,
Caesar's Sister) obtained the Empire of Rome: But before he had fully possessed
himself of it, Geoffrey relates, That Tenantius sent his Son Kynobelin to
attend him in his Wars; hoping thereby to ingratiate himself with Augustus, and
obtain a Relaxation of the imposed Tribute: And that Kynobelin so well behaved
himself, that he grew into special Favor with the Emperor, and accompanied him
to Rome, where he was saluted by the Name of FRIEND of the Commonwealth; and
that during his Residence there, Tenantius paid no Tribute at all; which (as
the British Historian relates) was in respect of his Son's great Favor with
Augustus. But the Roman Authors seem rather to make the Troubles of the Empire,
and the Bandyings of the Factions against each other, after the Death of Julius
Caesar, the Causes of the Quiet of the Britains during those Civil Dissentions.

But Augustus Caesar, who succeeded his Uncle Julius in the Empire, either
contemning this Island, as a place of no Importance, and whose Enmity or
Friendship conduced nothing to the good or ill Fortune of the Empire; or as
Tacitus, in his Life of Agricola, relates, because of the Civil Wars that had
lately happened, caused a long Quiet to Britain: D^on. Cas. l. 49.
Yet we find Augustus once advanced as far as Gallia, in order to the Reducing
of Britain under his Obedience; and had not a Revolt in Ib^d. l. 23.
Pannonia diverted him, he had certainly attempted it. Yet about Seven Years
after, with the same Resolution, he once more drew down into Gallia; but the
Britains hearing th^reof. sent their Ambassadors thither to him, to beg Peace;
which for the present he accepted of, because it required some Time to settle
his Affairs in Gaul, which were then much out of order: The Year following, he
again resumed his Resolutions of making an Expedition into Britain, because
they had not performed their Articles with him; but he was again hindered by
fresh Insurrections in Spain. Anno ante Chr. XIV.
The Cantabrians and Asturians being revolted, Tenantius having re^gned in
Britain Thirty two Years; then dying, was succeeded by

Geoff. Mon.
Kymbelein, or Kynobelin, who, if he was not educated at Rome, yet the good
Correspondence between the Romans and Britains about these Times, gave fair
Occasion to the British Writers to feign it: For now, it seems, the Britains
began to learn the Roman Arts, to flatter for Advantage, and by Gifts to
appease a powerful Prince, and buy off a War. So they sent their Tribute to
Dion. ibid.
Augustus, with Offerings and Sacrifices to the Roman Gods, to be offered in
the Capitol; where, in the Temple of Mars, they swore Fidelity to the Senate
and and People of Rome. Which Obsequious Addresses, as I suppose gave Occasion
to Car. Lib. III. Od. 5.

Coelo tonantem credidimus Iovem

Regnare: praes^ns divus habebitur

Augustus, adjectis Britannis Imp^rio, gravibusque P^rsis.


Horace to write thus: Though we believe that thundering Jove
In Heaven reigns, yet here below
Augustus we a God do prove;
Since Britains, and proud Persians too,
Are to his Empire made to bow.
Nay, so conformable to the Roman Customs was this Kynobelin himself, that he
caused Coins to be stamped after the manner of the Romans, some of which are
still to be seen; whereas before, all Payments among the Britains were made
with Rings of Iron, and Plates of Brass, of a certain Weight: And his Image was
made after the manner of the Emperors; and on the Reverse is CAME: signifying
Camolodunum, (now Maldon) his Royal Seat: And it is to be suspected that
Tribute was paid with it; for in a Coin of his, TASCIO is found in Great
Letters, with a Man on the Reverse, sitting Hammering of Metal: Which Word
implies Tribute, as you may find in that Collection of Coins before Mr.
Camden's Britannia.

The Emperor Tib^rius, who succeeded Augustus, Anno Dom. XIV.
being given up to Ease and Luxury, thought it best to observe Suet. in Aug.
Augustus's Advice, of contracting, rather than enlarging the Bounds of the
Empire: So that as he had no Desire to trouble the Britains, they had also as
little to provoke him; though it is certain that they still paid their usual
Customs and Tolls for those Commodities they transported to the Romans, into
Gaul; and exchanged with them Things wrought in Ivory, for Chains and Trinkets
of Amber, which they wore for Pendants and Bracelets. The Roman Customers
collected them at first after a precarious manner; and (as Strabo writes) not
daring to compel them. Besides, their Courtesy to Germanicus's Soldiers, who
had been Ship-wrack'd on the British Shore, and had been by them sent back to
their General, produced a like kind Return from the Romans.

Caius Caligula, who succeeded Tiberius, Anno Dom. XXXVII.
being a Prince of a cruel Nature and fantastic Humor, having passed the
Sueton, in Calig.
Alps, and come into Gaul and Belgium, to peel those Provinces, and having
received into his Protection Adminius, the Son of Kynobelin, (above mentioned,)
who being expelled by his Father, fled to Caligula, and excited him to invade
Britain. Whereupon, as if the whole Isle had been yielded up to him, he sent
magnificent Letters to Rome, giving a strict Charge to the Couriers, that they
should drive their Chariots into the Forum, to the very Curia; and should not
deliver their Letters, but in the Temple of Mars, and in a full Assembly of the
Senate. Anno Dom. XXXVII.
But Caligula, after this, marched his Army to the Belgic Shore, making as if
he would pass over into Britain; but being (as is supposed) assured that the
Britains were ready to oppose his Landing, if he should attempt it, Dion. l. 15.
thereupon he thought it safer to let them alone: Yet however, he put out to
Sea in a Galley; and after he had rowed a little distance from the Shore,
returned again to Land; and then mounting on an high Tribunal, ordering the
Trumpets to sound a Charge, gave his Soldiers the Signal of Battle; then all on
the sudden commanded them to gather their Suet. ibid.
Helmets and Laps full of Cockles; Muscles, and other Shells: Having gotten
these Spoils (as he called them) of the Ocean, (as wanting others to adorn his
Trophies,) he grew as proud as if he had conquered the Ocean it self; and
rewarded his Soldiers for this great Victory, with a Donative of an Hundred
Denarii a Man, bidding them all depart Rich and Happy. After which, he erected
an high Tower on the Belgic Shore, out of which, as from a Pharus, Lights
might direct Mariners to steer their Course by Night; the Ruins of which Pharus
are supposed, even to this Day, to be seen at very low Tides, on the Coast of
Holland; being called by the Inhabitants, to this Day, Britten Huis. Nor did
Caligula stop here; but was so vain, as to carry these Shells to Rome,
(together with the Galleys in which he went out to Sea;) where, when he had
required a Triumph for this noble Enterprise, finding the Senate averse to it,
he had Thoughts of murdering them all for refusing him Triumphal Honors; but
he was not long after murdered himself.

Anno Dom. XLIII.
But that we may return again to the Affairs of Britain, which remained in Peace
till the Reign of Claudius; and then Cynobelin (according to Geoffrey) after
Threescore Years happy Reign, died, (not long before the Roman Invasion.) This
Prince had many Sons; ( viz.) Adminius, who, as we have already heard, was
banished by his Father: As also, Togodumus, who is thought to be the same with
him whom Geoffrey calls Guidar, or Guinder; and whom he supposes to have
reigned, some say Four, and others Eight and Twenty Years; in whose Reign,
Claudius the Emperor invaded Britain. But Lib. 60.
Dion Cassius makes no Mention of this Prince, and only names Togadumnus and
Caractacus, being Brothers, to have reigned in this Island; but whether with
Equal, or Subordinate Authority, he does not mention; only gives us an exact
Relation of the Invasion by Claudius, the Occasion of which he thus relates:
That one Bericus, (though what he was, he does not further say) having been
driven out of this Island by a certain Sedition, and highly resenting it, was
the Man who excited Claudius to invade his Country: And that the Britains being
provoked at the Receipt of these Fugitives, and their not being given up when
demanded, thereupon forbad all Commerce with the Romans. So a War being
resolved on, Plautius, then Praetor in Gaul, was immediately ordered by the
Emperor to transport those Legions he had with him, into Britain: But the
Praetor, who was to carry over this Army, could very hardly get them out of
Gaul; being much concerned that they were to make War (as it were) in another
World; spending a great deal of Time in Delays, before they would yield to go
along with him. But when Narcissus, (Claudius's Freed-Man) being sent by him to
persuade the Army to march, had ascended the Tribunal, and went about to make a
Speech to them, the Soldiers being inflamed with Indignation, began presently
to cry out, Io Saturnalia; (for in the Feast of the Saturnalia, it is the
Custom for Slaves to act the Part of their Masters: Anno Dom^ XLIII.
) Yet nevertheless, they were at last persuaded to follow Plautius, and go on
Shipboard. But the Forces being divided into Three Parts, lest coming all to
one place, they should be hindered from Landing, were kept back in their
Passage by contrary Winds, and suffered great Hardship: Yet, taking fresh
Courage, because a Meteor had shot from East to West, (the very Course they
were to steer,) they at last reached the Island, no body hindering them; for the
Britains not believing the Romans would have come over, (for the Reasons you
have already heard,) had prepared no Forces to prevent them; and therefore, not
drawing together, had hid themselves in the Woods and Marshes, with Hopes of
drawing on the Romans by Delays, as had before happened under Julius Caesar: So
that Plautius spent much Time in finding them out; but after he had once found
them, he overcame first Caractacus, and afterward Togadumnus, the Sons of
Kynobelin, (their Father being dead some time before:) For the Britains did not
enjoy a Popular Liberty, but were then subject to diverse Kings: Yet all these
being put to flight, he received a part of the Boduni into his Subjection, who
before obeyed the Catuellani; and a Garrison being left there, he marched to a
certain River which the Britains supposed the Romans could not pass over
without a Bridge, and so lay there the more carelessly encamped on the other
side: Wherefore Plautius sent over the Germans first, who being accustomed in
their Armor to swim over the swiftest Rivers, set upon the Enemy on a sudden,
but killed none, only wounded the Horses which drew their Chariots; wherewith
they were so galled, that they would not endure their Riders. Then Plautius
sent Flavius Vespasian, (who afterward was Emperor,) together with Sabinus,
his Brother, as his Lieutenant; who also passing the River, killed many of the
Britains at unawares; yet did not the rest, for all this, run away, but the
next Day renewed the Fight with doubtful Success, until C. Sidius (though he had
like to have fallen into the Enemy's Hands) so routed them, that although he
had never been Consul, he had nevertheless Triumphal Honors bestowed upon him.

From hence the Britains retired to the Mouth of the River Thames, and easily
passed it, knowing all the Fords and Shallows; whither the Romans following
them, were in great danger: But when the Germans had again swum over, and that
some others had likewise passed by a Bridge that lay higher, the Britains being
every where routed, they made a great Slaughter of them; though pursuing the
Residue too rashly, they fell into the Marshes, and many were lost. For these
Reasons, and because the Britains were not, by the Death of Togadumnus, (who
was killed,) at all discouraged, but rather more eager to revenge his Death,
Plautius doubting the Success, would not proceed farther; but putting Garrisons
into those Places he had conquered, sent notice to the Emperor Claudius, who
had before ordered him to do so, if any thing extraordinary or unexpected
should happen.

Claudius having received this Message, Anno Dom. XLIV.
immediately got all things ready (together with diverse Elephants) for this
Expedition; and being now the Third Time Consul, and having chosen Britain for
his Province, he committed the Care of the City and Soldiers to L. Vitellius,
his Colleague, (who was Father to A. Vitellius, afterward Emperor.) But
Claudius sailing from Ostia, landed at Marseilles, though by the way Sueton: in
Claudio.
he had like, by foul Weather, to have been cast away, first on the Islands
Staechades, and then on the Coast of Liguria; Anno Dom. XLIV.
yet landing, he passed through Gaul, as far as Gessoriacum, (now Bolo^gne;)
where again embarking, he passed over into Britain, and joined his Forces that
expected him near the Thames; then passing over the River, he fought with the
Britains in a pitched Battle, and obtained the Victory; taking Camolodunum, the
Royal Seat of Kynobelin, together with many Prisoners, some by Force, and some
by Surrender. For these Exploits, he was oftentimes by his Soldiers saluted
Imperator, or General, though against the received Custom of the Romans; for it
was not lawful before to assume that Title more than once in the same War.
Claudius having thus disarmed the Britains, left them to the Government of
Plautius; ordering to subdue those that remained unconquered: But as for those
that submitted, he remitted the Confiscation of their Estates; which so obliged
the Britains, that they built him a Temple, and adored him as a God. But whilst
he returned toward Rome, his Sons-in-Law Pompeius and Silanus were sent before
with the News of his Victory, which was accomplished in Sixteen Days. For no
longer stayed he in Britain, and that with so little Noise, that it gave
occasion to Suetonius (tho erroniously) to write, that he suddu'd Britain
without ever a Battle, or any Bloodshed.

Claudius returning thus Triumphantly to Rome (from whence he had been absent
but Six Months in all) the Senate decreed his Son the Surname of Britannicus,
to himself a Triumph, and annual Games, with two Triumphal Arches, one in the
City, the other in Gaul, from whence he had passed into Britain. In his Triumph
(performing all things according to Custom) he ascended the Stairs of the
Capitol on his Knees, his two Sons-in-Law supporting him on each side; he then
bestowed on those who had served with him in this Expedition (not only such who
had been Consuls, but even bare Senators) Triumphal Ornaments. I shall not
trouble you with the rest of this Solemnity, since it is not much to the Matter
in hand, and also transacted out of this Island, only I shall Remark, S.
That it appears this Conquest of Britain was looked upon as so considerable,
that the Senate thought fit to Decree as high Honors to the Emperor, who had
now subdued but part of this Island; as they had done for any former
Conquerors, and the Surname of Britannicus, was esteemed as Glorious as that of
Germanicus, Africanus, or Asiaticus: And even in the height of the Roman
Grandeur it was esteemed so considerable a part of the Empire, that it was held
not Inferior to any of the forementioned Provinces, and cost more Legions in
gaining and preserving it than all Asia, and was never forsaken by the Romans,
but in their last Extremity.

I shall now by the way take a little notice of Geoffrey of Monmouth's Relation
of this British War, which is much different from the Roman Accounts of it, he
making Claudius to Land at Portchester in Hampshire, and to have Besieged that
Town, to the Relief whereof Guiderius, or Guider (the abovementioned King of
the Britains) quickly came, and that a Battle ensuing it went on the Britains
side; until Hamo, a Roman, disguising himself like a Britain, slew the King;
whereupon Arviragus his Brother, (lest the Britains should be discouraged)
concealed the King's Death, and arming himself in his Armor, continued the
Battle, and so obtained a great Victory, and then succeeded his Brother Guider.
But since none of the Roman Historians make any mention of these Kings, nor of
Hamo (who is here supposed to have killed Guider) it is probable, that their
very Succession is as Fabulous as Arviragus his Encounters with Hamo; and his
Marriage with Genuissa, a supposed Daughter of Claudius; Anno Dom. XLIV.
as likewise his Treaty with that Emperor and homage done to him; Therefore
leaving such Fables, we will come to what the Romans performed in this Island
after Claudius his departure to Rome. Which is thus related by Tacitus and
Suetonius.

Aulus Plautius being left by Claudius as his Lieutenant in Britain, after the
Emperor's departure, diligently prosecuted the War; Tacitus Annal. Lib. XIII.
c. 32.
and so behaved himself in quieting the revolting Countries, and gaining new
Conquests as far as the Western parts of the Island, that Claudius allowed him
an A sort of petty triumph perform^d on foot.
Ovation, and at his Entrance into Rome, himself went to meet him, giving him
the Right hand both in going and coming. Neither were the Actions of Vespatian
(afterward Emperor) less remarkable in this War; for partly under the Conduct
of Claudius himself, and partly of Plautius, he fought Thirty Battles with the
Britains, Sueton, in Vespas.
and brought two most powerful Nations, and above Twenty Towns, together with
the Isle of Wight, under his Subjection; for all which noble Actions he
received Triumphal Ornaments, and a little while after two Sacerdotal
Dignities, together with the Consulship: His Son Titus, then serving under him
in the quality of a Tribune, was much renowned for his Valor and Diligence; he
had also the good fortune to rescue and relieve his Father: And his modest
Behavior was as signal, as his Courage; as appears by many Inscriptions, under
his Image, dispersed through diverse Provinces.

Ostorius Scapula succeeded Plautius in the Quality of Propraetor, a Man no
less experienced in Martial Affairs: An. XXV. Id. Annal. Lib. XII. c. 31.
At his first entrance into his command he met with many Commotions and
Troubles; for that part of Britain, which was not yet subdued broke in upon
their Neighbors, who had entered into League, or made any submission to the
Romans, wasting their Country; and with so much the more Vigor, for that they
thought this new General (as not yet acquainted with his business, nor having
Experience of his Army) would not be soon able to revenge it; especially
considering that Winter was near, and that a Season unfit for Action: but
Ostorius, knowing that the first Success makes the greatest Impression of Fear,
or Confidence, resolved to put a stop to their Inroads betimes, before they
proceeded too far; and for that end he quickly took with him some of his
lightest Cohorts, and unexpectedly seting upon them, killed many, following
those that fled so close, that he gave them no time to rally; and lest for the
future a treacherous unstable Peace might prove more dangerous, and
troublesome, as well to himself as his Soldiers; he disarmed all whom he
suspected most likely to revolt, and set Garrisons on the two Rivers, Severn
and Antona (now Avon,) thereby to hinder the Incursions of the British Army: By
this means he reduced the most Southerly parts of the Island into the form of a
Province; having also planted there a Colony of Veterane Soldiers, and to
secure his Conquest the better, he gave several Cities to Cogidunus, to be held
as Tributary to the Roman Empire, under the Title of King: by which he strongly
engaged him to its interest; it being an ancient and received Policy of that
State (as Tacitus well observes) to make Kings the Instruments of it is
Ambition, as well as of their own Servitude.

Anno Dom. XLIV.
But the Iceni, (who Inhabited what we now call Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridge, and
Huntington-shires a potent Nation and not yet wasted by War, because they had
voluntarily entered in alliance with the Romans; not brooking these proceedings
of Ostorius, took Arms, and by their Example encouraged many of their
neighboring Nations to do the like: this done, they encamped in a place chosen
for that purpose, casting up a Rampire of Earth; leaving a very narrow
Entrance, for fear, least the Enemy's Horse should break in upon them.

Ostorius, although he had not his Legions, but only his Auxiliaries with him;
yet resolved, if he could, to break down this Fence, which he perceived was but
rudely thrown up, and setting all his Cohorts to work, the Horse also alighting
to that Service, he himself giving the Signal, at once they flung down the
Works, and drove the Enemy from their Fortress: But the Britains, as well
through the Consciousness of their Rebellion, as because all ways of escaping
were blocked up, made a notable Defense: In which Battle, M. Ostorius the Son
of the Lieutenant, gained the honor of having saved a Citizen.

The Iceni thus overcome; the other States, who hitherto stood in a doubtful
Posture between War and Peace, Tacit. An. lib. 12. c^p. 32.
were confirmed in their Obedience by their sufferings. After this Success,
Ostorius marched into the Country of the Cangi (who they were is not well
known) where he plundered and laid waste their Fields, they not daring to give
him Battle; and if at any time they ventured out of their Coverts to fall on
his Rear, they always met with sharp entertainment: At last he approached near
the Irish Sea, where news was brought him of stirs among the Brigantes,
(supposed to have been the Inhabitants of Yorkshire, Lancashire, and the other
Northern Countries). Upon this he resolves to return, intending not to attempt
any new Design, till he had fully quieted those Commotions behind him: and
indeed the Brigantes were soon quieted; those few who took Arms being all
Slain, and the rest pardoned. But the Nation of the Silures (the Inhabitants of
the now South Wales) were not to be won by Clemency, or terrified by Severity;
but would needs have a War, and if subdued, were to be kept in obedience by
Garrisons of Legionary Soldiers.

So he marched against these Silures, who, besides their natural Fierceness,
Ib. cap. 33.
were much exalted with the Opinion they had of the Courage and Conduct of
Caractacus, who by many doubtful, and some Fortunate Attempts, had raised
himself to a greater Reputation in Arms than any of the British Generals: he
finding himself over-matched in Strength made use of Policy: he knew his
Advantage lay in choice of Ground, to that end he transferred the War to the
rough unacces^ible Country of the the Ordovices (now those of North Wales)
choosing for the Seat of the War, a place, whose Avenues were most difficult to
the Romans, and easiest of Access to themselves: there he raised a
Fortification with great Stones on the tops of the Mountains: and where a River
running near made a dangerous and uncertain Ford, placed a range or breast-work
of larger Stones to defend the passage: which place (as Mr. Camden Conjectures)
has still from him the Name of Caer Caradoc, lying on the West edge of
Shropshire: Caradoc being in the British Tongue supposed to be the same with
Caractacus in the Latin. Ostorius having drawn hither all his Forces (since
Caractacus resolved here to ^ight it to the last) the Officers went about,
encouraging their Men, diminishing their Fears, Anno Dom. XLIV.
and enlivening their Courage by all the Rhetoric of War. But Caractacus
notably bestir'd himself, and with quick motions going from place to place,
Cried out, this was the Day, and this the Field, which would be either the
recovery of their Liberty, or the beginning of a new and perpetual Slavery: and
then invoked the Names of his glorious Ancestors, who had driven out Caesar the
Dictator; and by whose Valor they had hitherto been freed from the Roman Axes
and Tributes; and still kept their Wives and Children preserved from dishonor.

At these, or such like Speeches, the Army testified their Joy by loud Shouts
and Acclamations; and every one, according to his Country Superstition, bound
himself by Oath, that neither Force nor Wounds should make them yield.

This Courageous alacrity in the Enemy startled the Roman General: especially
when he descried the River before him, and the Rampire made upon its Banks,
both of great difficulty to be passed; whilst the steep Hills full of Armed Men
hanging over their heads, gave a dismal prospect, and made a terrible Scene of
War: but the Common Soldiers being eager for Battle required the Signal;
Crying out, nothing was impregnable to Valor: This impatience was increased by
the Prefects and Tribunes, who were of the same Opinion. Then Ostorius having
first tried which Fords were passable, and which not, led them on as insensible
of Danger; who with no great difficulty wading through the River, when they
were come near to the Rampire, and that it came to be disputed with Darts and
Javelins, greater loss followed on the Roman than British side: So that not
being able longer to endure it, the Legionary Soldiers joining close together
made a Testudo; whereupon this rude Fortification of rough Stones being thrown
down, and the Romans meeting with them hand to hand, the Barbarians soon fled
to the tops of the Mountains: but thither also the heavy as well as the
Light-Armed Soldiers quickly followed them; whilst the Britains assaulting
them with their Darts, these received them in close order, whereby their Ranks
were soon broken, who made use of no defense, either of Brest-plates or
Helmets: So that, if they could have resisted the Auxiliaries, yet they were
beat down by the Swords and Darts of the Legionary Soldiers; and if they
turned from these, they were again routed by the broad Swords and Spears of the
Auxiliaries. The Victory was very remarkable, the Wife and Daughter of
Caractacus being taken Prisoners, and his Brethren submitting to Mercy.

But though he had committed himself to the Fidelity of Cartismandua Queen of
the Brigantes, (yet as unsafe Counsels prove commonly unfortunate) he was by
her, delivered bound to the Victors in the Seventh Year (according to Tacitus,
Ib. cap. 36.
) but indeed in the Ninth Year after this War was begun in Britain.
Nevertheless Caractacus his Fame being carried through all the Neighboring
Provinces, was also Celebrated as far as Italy, and they desired to see the Man
that had for so many Years despised the Roman Forces: so that the name of
Caractacus became famous at Rome it self; and Caesar whilst he extolled his own
Victory, added glory to the conquered; for the People being summoned as to some
solemn Spectacle, the Praetorian Cohorts stood to their Arms in the Field,
which lay before their Camp; The King's Servants marched before, bearing his
Gold Chains and other Ornaments, Anno Dom. XLIV.
with what ever else he had gained in Foreign Wars; presently after came his
Brethren with his Wife and Daughters, and last of all He himself: The behavior
of others, through fear was mean and degenerate; he only neither in
Countenance, Word, or Action, appeared dejected: But standing at the Tribunal
of Caesar, Spoke to this purpose.

If my mind, O Caesar, had been as moderate in the Height of Fortune, as my
Birth and Dignity was Eminent, I might have entered as a Friend, rather than a
Captive into this City; nor could thou have disliked one for a Confederate,
so Noble by Descent, and Ruling so many Natinos. My present Estate, tho to me
disgraceful, to thee is Glorious: I had once Riches, Horses, Arms, and Men; no
wonder if I was not contended to lose them, but if you will extend your Empire
over all others; then of necessity all others must obey you: If I sooner had
been brought to yield, my Mi^fortune had been less notorious, your Conquest
less renowned: but by a severe treatment of me, both will be soon forgotten: if
you grant that I may Live, I shall live a lasting Monument of your Clemency.

Caesar moved at so sad a Spectacle of Fortune, but especially at the Nobleness
of his bearing it, gave him Pardon, as also to his Wife and Brothers; they
being all unbound went also to do the like Reverence to the Empr^ss Agrippina;
who sat not far off on another Throne, no less conspicuous: a new indeed, and
unwonted sight, far different from the Manners of the ancient Romans, to see a
Woman in her Faeminine Pride, presiding ove^ the Roman Ensigns; but indeed she
looked upon her self as a Companion, and Sharer of the Empire obtained by her
As being the Daughter of Germanicus.
Ancestors.

The Senators being then also summoned, made long and pompuous Discourses upon
this taking of Caractacus; saying, it was no less famous than when P. Scipio
showed Scyphax, Tacit. An. lib. 12. cap. 38.
or L. Paulus, Perseus, or any other General, who had exposed Captive Kings to
the view of the People of Rome; so that they decreed to Ostorius all the
Ensigns of a Triumph.

After this, Affairs continued some time prosperous; but presently after became
more doubtful: either because that Caractacus being now removed, he thought the
Britains as good as subdued, and so the Wars was less eagerly pursued; or
whether the Enemy in Compassion of so great a King burnt more fiercely with
Revenge; for they had beset the Governor in his Camp, and fell upon the
Legionary Cohorts, who had been left to build Forts among the Silures; and
unless Assistance had come in to them speedily from the Neighboring Garrisons
and Castles, the whole Army had then perished; nevertheless the Governor with
Eight Centurions, and the most forward Soldiers of each Company were cut off,
and not long after they routed those that were Forraging, as also some Troops
sent to their Relief.

Then Ostorius drew forth his Light Armed Cohorts, nor had he thereby put a
stop to his Men's flight, unless the Legions had also engaged in the Fight,
(...) c. 39.
by whose Force it first became equal, and at length quite turned the Scale;
for the Enemies fled, tho with small Loss, because the Day was declining;
afterward followed frequent Skirmishes, more like Robberies than Fights, they
often meeting in the Woods or Marshes, as Design or Chance gave them
opportunity; often commanded, sometimes without any command: Anno Dom. XLIV.
all which proceeded from the remarkable obstinacy of the Silures, whom that
common saying of the Roman General had much provoked, That as the Sicambri had
been formerly destroyed, so also the very name of the Silures ought wholly to
be extinguished. Therefore they intercepted two Auxiliary Cohorts, who through
the Avarice of their Officers were too securely pillaging: and bestowing the
Prisoners and Spoils on certain neighboring Nations, drew them also into a
Revolt: When Ostorius being now worn out with Cares and Troubles ended his
Days. The Britains rejoicing, that tho not a Battle; yet a lingering War had
taken off so great a Soldier.

But Caesar understanding the Death of his Lieutenant, lest the Province should
remain without a Governor, sent A. Didius in his room, who quickly arriving
there, found Affairs but in an ill Condition; for in the mean while there had
happened an unsuccessful Engagement of that Legion over which Manlius Valens
commanded: the Fame of which Exploit being also much increased by the Enemy's
reports, that thereby they might terrify the new General, which was also much
increased by himself, that if the War were well ended he might win the greater
Glory, or if otherwise, he might gain the easier pardon. But the Silures had
already done much mischief, and made Incursions all abroad, until by Didius's
meeting of them they were repelled; which being one of the last Actions that
happened in Claudius's Reign, I shall only take notice that he lived about
Three Years after his sending Didius hither, and died (as is supposed) of
Poison given him by his Wife Agrippina; therefore since by his Conquest of so
great a part of Britain, he is accounted by most Authors as the Sovereign power
thereof: I shall for the future give you the Names of all the Roman Emperors
his Successors, that ruled here, till their quitting of this Island, whether
they were here in Person or not. Claudius was succeeded by

Nero his Wive's Son by Birth, and his own by Adoption, Anno Dom. LV.
of whose Reign I shall say nothing, but what relates to the particular History
of this Island. Therefore since Tacitus tells us, that those things, which were
done under the two Praetors, Ostorius and Didius, Annal. XII.
for the space of many Years, he had for their better remembrance put all
together; It plainly appearing, that most of those things he there treats of,
are to be referred to Nero's Reign; I shall make bold to place in the beginning
of his Time that long War between the Romans and Venutius, which Tacitus thus
relates.

After Caractacus was gone, Venutius a Prince of the Jugantes, was the most
remarkable for Military skill, having continued faithful hitherto; Id. Ibid.
being defended by the Roman Arms, as long as he kept Queen Cartismandua for
his Wife; but a Quarrel happened between them, and presently after a War; in
which he at last took up Arms against the Romans, to which Tacitus tell us in
another place, he was highly provoked, not only upon the account of his natural
Fierceness, but by the injuries of the Queen his Wife; who, being proud of her
Nobility, had increased her power, after her taking of Caractacus, as you have
heard; so that abounding in Wealth, and wallowing in Luxury, she despised her
Husband Venutius, and made Vellocatus his Armor-bearer the partner of her Bed
and Kingdom: So that upon this, immediately the whole State became divided; on
the Husband's side were the inclinations of the Nation; for the Adulterer, the
Queen's Lust and Violence; from whence proceeded a Civil War among themselves;
Anno Dom. LV.
for Cartismandua by her Stratagems had intercepted the Brother and Kinsman of
Venutius: whence those of his party were the more provoked; mere shame egging
them on, lest they should be subject to the command of a Woman: whereupon a
strong Party of the choicest Troops Invade her Kingdom, which being foreseen;
and certain Cohorts being sent to her assistance, they fought a sharp Battle,
whose beginning though doubtful, yet the Conclusion proved prosperous, tho the
Legion which Cessius Nascia Commanded, fought with different Success.

But Tacitus tells us in another place, that Venutius sending for more Supplies
(I suppose from his own Kingdom; History III.
) as also by a general defection of the Brigantes themselves, brought
Cartismandua into extreme hazard; so that she was forced to seek Aid of the
Romans, whose Cohorts, though in diverse Battles they freed the Queen from
danger, yet was the Kingdom still left to Venutius, and the War continued on
the Romans: I suppose Tacitus means this, during the times of all other
Lieutenants, though not expressly mentioned by him; for he tells us in his Life
of Agricola, That Veranius succeeded Didius, and dying within the Year, that
then Suetonius Paulinus found affairs prosperous for the first Two Years: yet
it seems could not drive Venutius out of his Kingdom. But tho Tacitus
afterward in the Third Book of his Histories relates this Story of
Cartismandua, as if it had fallen out in the time of Vitellius, and that the
Discord and Civil Wars which then happened in the Roman Empire, had encouraged
the Britains to take Arms under the Command of Venutius; yet it is evident from
what he has already said in his Annals, that this War with Venutius must have
been begun in Nero's time, since Didius was the first Lieutenant in Britain,
who sent any assistance to Cartismandua; and who must be supposed to have been
dead, or removed some time before the Death of Nero; or else there would be no
room left for his two Successors above mentioned; the latter of which ended his
Government with the Reign of Vitellius.

But to return to our History, it is certain that Veranius the Successor of A.
Didius did little, Annal. LXIII.
except his wasting the Silures by many small Incursions; being hindered by
Death from carrying the War any further. A Man of great reputation for his
Discipline, but, as appears by his last Words in his Testament, guilty of
manifest Vanity and Ambition; for after many things spoken in Flattery of Nero,
he said that he would have subjected all, viz. Britain, to him, if he might
have lived but two Years longer.

After him Paulinus Suetonius governed Britain, being in Reputation and
Military Skill a Commander equal to Corbulo; Ibid. c. 38.
but since in Paulinus's Time the Romans received so great a blow in Britain,
Let us take Tacitus's account of it.

This General desiring to equal Corbulo's glory in recovering Armenia, by
taming the British Rebels; Anno Dom. LXIII.
endeavored to Conquer the Island Mona (now called Anglesey), strong in People
and a Receptacle of Fugitives. To which end he built many flat bottomed
Vessels, for that shallow and uncertain Shore: his Foot thus wasted over, his
Horse waded or swom, where thick upon the Strand stood several gross bands of
Men well Armed; many Women like Furies running to and fro in dismal Habits,
with their Hair hanging loose about their Shoulders, held Torches in their
Hands: The Druids (who were their Priests, of whom we have spoken in another
place) with Hands lift up to Heaven, Anno Dom. LXIII.
stood uttering direful Imprecations: All which so astonished the Soldiers with
the Novelty of the Sight; that at first they yielded themselves, without any
Resistance to their Enemies Blows; but then being encouraged by the
Exhortations of their General, and encouraging one another, that they should
not fear this Womanish, Phanatick Rout, they led on the Ensigns; and routing
all they met, overturned them into their own Fires. After this, a Garrison was
imposed upon the Conquered; and the Groves* sacred to their cruel
Superstitions, were cut down; for they looked upon it as piece of Religion to
sacrifice Captives, and to consult the Gods by inspecting Humane Entrails. But
whilst Suetonius was thus in Action, Word is brought him, that a sudden
Defection had happened in his Province; the Occasion of which is thus farther
related by our Author.

Tacit. lib. 12.
Prasutagus, King of the Icenians, abounding in Wealth, had left Caesar Coheir
with his two Daughters, thereby hoping to have secured from Wrong both his
Kingdom, and his Family; which fell out far otherwise: For, under Color to
Oversee and take Possession of the Emperor's new Inheritance, his Kingdom
became a Prey to the Centurions; his House to ravenous Officers, his Wife
Boadicia being violated with Stripes, and his Daughters ravished: And, as if
the Romans had gotten the whole Kingdom as a Legacy, the chiefest Men of the
Icenians are turned out of their ancient Estates, and those of the Royal Family
treated like Slaves. By which Indignities, and for fear of greater Evils when
they should be reduced into the Form of a Province, they took Arms. The
Trinobantes were also moved to rebel, whilst others who were not as yet reduced
to Servitude conspired with those that were, to regain their former Liberty.
This proceeded from a cruel Hatred against the Veterane Soldiers, who being
planted in the late Colony of Camalodunum, drove Men from their Houses and
Estates in the Country, calling them Slaves and Captives: The other Soldiers
also encouraging this Violence of the Veteranes, as well through a Likeness in
Manners, as through an Hope of the same License. To which may be also added,
That the Temple dedicated to Claudius was looked upon as a Badge of their
Eternal Slavery; and the Priests ordained for it, under a Show of Religion,
seized upon diverse Men's Estates. Nor did it seem difficult to destroy a
Colony, defended by no Fortifications; which was but little foreseen by the
Roman Commanders, who rather had studied their Pleasure, than Safety.

To all which Provocations, Lib. LXII.
Dion also adds, That Catus Decianus the Procurator, endeavored to bring all
Men's Goods under the Compass of a new Confiscation; by disavowing the
Remission of Claudius himself. Lastly, Seneca (only in his Books a Philosopher)
having drawn in the Britains to borrow of him vast Sums, upon fair Promises of
an easy Loan; and for Re-payment, to take their own Time; all on a sudden
compelled them to pay both Principal and Interest at once, with great
Extortion: Which you will find in In Vita Agric. cap. 14.
Tacitus, expressed at large, in a long Speech by the injured Britains.

Thus provoked by the heaviest Sufferings, and invited by Opportunity in the
Absence of Paulinus, the Annal. Lib. XIV. Cap. 31*
Icenians, and by their Example the Trinobantes, and as many more as hated
Servitude rose up in Arms; but of these ensuing Troubles many foregoing Signs
appeared, among which the Image of Victory at Camalodunum fell down of it self,
with the Face backward, as if she had turned to the Enemy: And certain Women,
in a kind of Ecstasie, Anno Dom. LXIII.
foretold great Calamities to come: In the Council-House by Night, strange
Noises were heard; and in the Theater, hideous Howlings; but in the River
Thames, horrid Appearances were seen, as of a Colony destroyed, but what these
were, Dion tells us more plainly viz. That in that River there were discovered
the Ruins of Houses under Water: Besides, the Ocean seemed of a bloody hue,
whilst at the Ebb appeared the Shapes of human Bodies left upon the Sands: All
which as it raised in the Britains new Courage, so in the Romans it caused
unwonted Fears: Therefore since Suetonius was now far off, they desired from
Catus Decianus some Assistance; but he sent them scarce above Two Hundred Men,
and those ill Armed.

There was within the Town a moderate Garrison of Soldiers, who trusted in the
Strength of the Temple; but some who were conscious of the intended Rebellion,
had perplexed their Councils, and hindered them from drawing any Line about the
Place; nor were the Old Women and Children turned out, and the Fighting Men (as
they ought to have done) only left behind. Thus the Romans being secure, as in
the midst of Peace, were circumvented by a Multitude of Barbarians, so that all
Places were quickly Spoiled and Burnt at the very first Assault; the Temple, in
which the Soldiers had gotten together, held out Two Days, but was at last
taken. The Britains being thus Victors, marched out to meet Petillius Cerialis,
Lieutenant of the Ninth Legion, then coming to their Succor, they routed his
Legion, and killed all the Foot; but Cerialis with the Horse escaped into the
Camp, which was defended by the Trenches. Catus Decianus the Procurator, whose
Covetousness, and the hatred of the Province that ensued upon it, had been the
Cause of this War, fled like a Coward into Gaul.

But Suetonius not dismayed with this sad News, marched through his Enemy's
Country to London, Ibid. cap. 33.
which, tho not honored with the Title of a Colony, yet was then famous for
the great Concourse of Merchants, and plenty of all Provisions; where being
arrived, he was doubtful whether or no he should make it the Seat of War; but
having considered the small number of his Soldiers, and taking warning from
Cerialis, he resolved to preserve the whole by the loss of this one City: So
that he was not moved by the Cries and Tears of those who implored his
Protection, from giving his Men the Signal of Departure; only taking those into
his Army, who would or could march along with him; they who, through weakness
of Sex, or Age, or love of the Place, stayed behind, were destroyed by the
Enemy, as was also Verulam, a Roman Municipium, or Free City: For the
Barbarians omitting Forts and Castles, pillaged the richest Places first, and
then went easily forward to others more eminent for Strength: So that, as it
afterward appeared, about Seventy Thousand Citizens with their Confederates in
the Places abovementioned, lost their Lives: None might be spared, none
ransomed; but they endeavored by Gibbets, Fire, Crosses, and all other ways of
Slaughter, to return those Punishments they had suffered, and prevent any
Revenge that was to be taken upon them.

Dion here also adds, That the Roman Wives and Virgins being hung up naked, had
their Breasts cut off and sowed to their Mouths, that even dead they might be
seen to eat their own Flesh; whilst the Britains Feasted in the Temple of
Andate, their Goddess of Victory.

Tacit. Ibid. chap. 34.
Suctonius having then with him the Fourteenth Legion, Anno Dom. LXIII.
with the Standard Bearers of the Twentieth, which, together with the
Auxiliaries, made in all about Ten Thousand Men; resolving to lay aside all
Delays, prepared to join Battle, having chosen a Place accessable, only by a
narrow Lane, and defended behind by a Wood; knowing well enough that the
Enemies could do nothing but upon his Front, and that the open Plain was
without danger of an Ambuscade: he drew up the Legionary Soldiers in close
Order, and being defended on each side with the light Armed Men, and the Horse
that made both the Wings. But the British Forces being drawn up here and there
in smaller Companies and Squadrons, appeared a great Multitude; being so fierce
and confident of Victory, that they carried their Wives along with them in
Wagons to behold it, which were placed in the outward Borders of the Field.

Let us here also add what Ibid.
Dion says of Boadicia, the Widow of Prasutagus, who chiefly stired up and
persuaded the Britains to make this War upon the Romans. Boadicia (says he) was
a British Lady of a Royal Race, who did not only Govern with great Authority in
Peace, but also ordered the whole War: Her Disposition was more Masculine than
became a Woman, being of a tall Statute, and a severe Countenance, having a
harsh Voice and yellow Hair, which being let loose, hung disheveled below her
Wast, wearing a great Gold Chain about her Neck, and having on a loose Coat
wrought with diverse Colors, and a thick Mantle buttoned over it, holding a
Spear in her Hand. Having now gotten together an Army of an Hundred Thousand
Men, which were drawn up ready to fight, the Queen getting up on a high heap of
Earth, made a Speech to her Soldiers, which, since it is tedious and most
likely to be made only to set out the Eloquence and Invention of the Author, I
shall pass over, and shall rather give you what she is supposed to have said,
out of Ibid. cap. 35.
Tacitus; as being shorter and more to the Purpose; who relates it thus.

Boadicia carried her Daughters with her in a Chariot, in which being driven
about to every Nation that composed her Army, she spoke to this Effect: That
since it was no new thing for the Britains to make a War under the Conduct of a
Woman, therefore for her part, tho descended of Noble Ancestors, she sought not
so much to Revenge the loss of her Kingdom and Treasures, but rather (as one of
the Common People) the loss of her Liberty, the bruising her Body with Stripes,
and the violated Chastity of her Daughters. That the Roman Lust was such, that
they did not leave either old Age or Virginity undefiled: That the Gods had
hitherto favored her just Revenge, one Legion being already cut off, which
dared to fight; the rest having hid themselves in their Camps sought how to run
away, as not being able to endure the Shouts and Clamours of so many Thousands,
much less their Power: So that if they would but consider their own great
Forces, they ought either to overcome or die in that Battle.

Ibid. cap. 36.
Neither was Suetonius silent in so great a Danger; and although he trusted much
in his Soldiers Valor, yet thought good to give them some Encouragement, to
this effect; That they should despise the empty, noisy Threats of those
Barbarians; That they beheld more Women, than Fighting Men among them; That
being unwarlike, and unarmed, they would presently give way, as soon as they
felt the sharp Swords and Valor of their Conquerors, by whom they had been so
often routed; and That of so many Legions, Anno Dom. LXIII.
a few would serve to gain the Victory; and that it would be an Addition to
their Honor, if so small a Force could obtain the same Glory as if it were an
entire Army. His Advice then was, That they should keep close together; and
having cast their Darts, should afterward continue the Slaughter with their
Pikes and Swords, not minding the Spoil, since the Victory once obtained, all
would be their own. The Soldiers were so encouraged with this Speech, that the
Veterane Soldiers, experienced by many Battles, urged Suetonius to give the
Signal.

Tacit. c. 37.
Yet all the Legion stood unmoved, keeping that strait Entrance as a Defense
before them: But when the Enemy had approached nearer, and had spent their
Darts, the Legion sallied forth all at once upon them, in the form of a Wedge.
The like Assault, was also made by the Auxiliaries; whilst the Horse, with
their Spears, routed all that stood before them: The rest turned their Backs
and fled, but could hardly escape, because their own Wagons had closed up all
the Avenues: But the Soldiers gave no Quarter, not so much as to the Women; and
the very Draught-Cattel being run thorough, increased the Heap of the dead
Carcases. This Victory was very eminent; and the Glory of it equaled those of
Ancient Times, since it is related, that not less than 80000 Britains were then
slain; but of the Roman Soldiers, not above 400, and about as many wounded.
Boadicia ended her Life by Poison: And Paenius Posthumus, the Commander of the
Second Legion, when he heard the good Success of those of the Fourteenth and
Twentieth, since he had defrauded his own Men of the like Glory; and had also,
contrary to the Rules of War, refused to obey the Orders of his General, run
himself through with his own Sword.

The Army, after a general Review, still kept the Field, to make an end of the
War; and Suetonius increased his Forces with 2000 Legionary Soldiers, and 8
Cohorts of Auxiliaries, together with 1000 Horse sent out of Germany; by whose
coming, the Ninth Legion was recruited: Whereupon, all those Cohorts, with some
others, were put into Winter Quarters: Whatsoever Nations continued either
Enemies, or Neuters, were now destroyed with Fire and Sword. But nothing
afflicted them so much as Hunger; having been careless to sow Corn, because
they reckoned upon the Roman Provisions as their own; all their Hands being
employed in the War. But these fierce Nations were the less inclined to treat
of Peace, because Julius Classicianus, who succeeded Catus, differing with
Suetonius, their private Animosities hindered the public Good; the former
giving out, that a new Lieutenant was to be expected, without the Rancour of a
Conqueror, and who would treat those that submitted to them with Mercy and
Clemency: Having also written to Rome, that there was no End to be expected of
this War, unless Suetonius were removed; attributing all Miscarriages to his
ill Conduct; and any happy Success, to the good Fortune of the Commonwealth.

Ibid. cap. 39.
Polycletus therefore, one of Nero's Freed-men, is sent to inspect the State of
Britain, with great Hopes that he might by his Authority, not only procure an
Agreement between the Lieutenant and the Procurator, but also work the Minds of
the Barbarians to a Peace. Polycletus, after having been burdensome, both to
Italy and Gaul, with his great Retinue and having crossed the Ocean, did not
omit to become terrible also to the Roman Soldiers. This gave Matter of Sport
to the Enemy, who then enjoying Liberty, had not yet known the Power of these
Freed-men; Anno Dom. LXIII.
but wondered that so great a General, and an Army who had fought such Battles,
could obey Slaves. But though all things were softened, and fairly represented
on the General's behalf; yet because (whilst he was otherwise employed in
Affairs) he had lost a few Galleys near the Shore; he was commanded, though the
War yet lasted, to deliver up the Army to Petronius Turpilianus, who was then
just out of his Consulship; who, neither provoking the Enemy, nor being
provoked by them, gave his own Slothfulness the honorable Title of Peace.

Cap. ^^
But Tacitus also, in the Life of Agricola, having given a short Relation of
this War with Boadicia, (whom he there calls Voadicia) owns, that Britain had
been lost if Paulinus had not speedily come to its Assistance, most of which he
restored by one Battle to its ancient Subjection: though many still continued
in Arms, whom either the Guilt of Rebellion, or the Fear of the Lieutenant,
still kept out; who, though he was a worthy Man, yet carried himself too
haughtily toward those that submitted; and, as a Revenger of his own Injuries,
imposed too hard Terms upon the Vanquished: Therefore Petronius Turpilianus was
sent in his stead, as being more exorable; who, as one altogether ignorant of
the Enemy's Failings, would be more easy to their Repentance; but all former
Differences being composed, he durst do nothing farther; and so delivered the
Province to Trebellius Maximus; who being a Man of an unactive Temper, and no
Experience in Military Affairs, governed the Province by a Softness and
Complaisance; yet nevertheless, he continued still in the Government till the
Reign of Vitellius.

But Ibid.
Tacitus here farther tells us, Anno Dom. LXIX.
That the Britains had now learnt to approve of the pleasant Vices of the
Romans, whilst the Intervention of their Civil Wars gave them a just Excuse for
their own Cowardice.

But one thing is by no means to be passed by without particular Notice; that
it was in the Reign of one of these Emperors, either Claudius, or Nero, though
uncertain in which, that Gildas, as do diverse other later Authors, supposes the
Gospel to have been first preached in the Island; though by whom, is also
unknown, no ancient Church-Historian making any mention of it: And indeed,
there is much difference in the Accounts of latter Writers about it; some
attributing it to St. James, the Son of Zebedee; some of the Modern Greek
Ecclesiastical Writers, to Simon Zelotes, or St. Peter; others of them, to St.
Paul, who is said to have Ordained one Aristobulus, (afterward a Martyr) to be
a Bishop in Britain; as you may see at large in the first Chapter of Archbishop
Usher's Antiquities of the British Churches. But though he there understands
those Passages in Gildas, where he speaks of Christ, the true Sun's affording
his Rays, i. e. the Knowledge of his Precepts, to this Island, then shivering
with Icy Cold, as if it referred to the very first Preaching of the Gospel, in
the Reign of Tiberius; yet the learned Dr. Stillingfleet, now Lord Bishop of
Worcester, has very ingeniously shown us in his learned Work, called Cap ^.
Origines Britanicae, that the Word interea, in the mean time, (with which
Gildas begins this Discourse) is to be referred to the Times beforementioned
by him, ( viz.) that fatal Victory over Boadicia and the Britains, by Suetonius
Paulinus; and the Slavery they afterward underwent in Nero's Reign. So that
the Doctor supposes Gildas to speak of a double Shining of the Gospel; one more
general to the Roman World, the other more particular to this Island: The
former, he says, was in the End of Tiberius's Reign, Anno Dom. LXIX.
the latter was interea, in the time that is between Plautius's coming over in
the Time of Claudius, and the abovementioned Battle between Boadicia and
Suetonius; and this the Dr. thinks to be most probably the Time which Gildas
has there pitched upon, for the first Preaching of the Gospel in this Island.
Since therefore there is so great a difference between those Authors, who have
taken upon them exactly to assign the time when it was first Preached (as you
may find by the Citations given us by the said Archbishop, it were to no
purpose crowd this History with those uncertain Relations, and therefore I
shall refer you to the said Learned Work, if you shall desire any further
Satisfaction.

To which period of Time may be also referred the Story of Joseph of
Arimathaea's and his Twelve Companions coming to Preach the Gospel in Britain,
which, tho it wholly depends upon some Legends and Traditions of the Monks of
the Abbey of Glastenbury, for no such thing is to be found in Gildas, Nennius,
or any ancient British Author; yet since they have been so commonly received,
it deserves a particular Notice, tho the said Archbishop in the Chap. III.
Book but now cited also tells us, That he believes those Stories to be not
antienter than the coming in of the Normans, as smelling plainly of the
Superstition of those latter Ages: For Will. of Malmsbury in his Treatise
concerning the Antiquities of the Church of Glastenbury, is the first that
mentions it; when drawing its History from the Apostles, he relates, that St
Philip coming into France to Preach the Gospel of Christ, and being willing to
spread it further, chose Twelve of his Disciples, over whom he set his dear
Friend Joseph of Arimathaea, and sent them to Preach the Word in Britain; and
that coming over hither in the Sixty-third Year after Christ's Passion, he
faithfully Preached the Gospel; but a British King (whom he does not name)
hearing things so new and unusual, utterly refused to hearken to their
Preaching, nor would change the Traditions of his Forefathers: yet because they
came from far, and showed great Simplicity of Life, he granted them a certain
Island to inhabit, encompassed with Woods and Marshes, called by the
Inhabitants Iniswitri^; where, by a Vision of the Angel Gabriel, they built a
small Church, making the Walls with Wattles, in Honor of God and the Virgin
Mary, where these Twelve Holy Men spent their Time in Devotions to God and the
Blessed Virgin, by Fasting and Praying. These things he says he had received
from a Charter of St. Patrick's, as also from the Writings of the Ancients; but
that Charter is by the Learned Dr. Stillingfleet proved to be a mere Forgery of
the Monks of Glastenbury: And as for ancient Writers, tho Malmsbury there cites
Freculphus as an Author, who relates Philip's sending Joseph hither, yet the
Archbishop there shows us, that this Author whom Malmsbury cites, had only
taken a Passage from Isidore's Book concerning the Fathers of both Testaments:
But in both those Authors it is only thus, That Philip Preached Christ to the
Gauls, and Converted many Barbarous Nations lying near the Sea, to the
Knowledge of the Gospel; but says not one word of Joseph's coming hither. So
that, tho Cardinal Baronius has placed this coming over of Joseph in his
Annals, and says, That he took it from a Manuscript History of England, which
was in the Vatican Library; yet the Archbishop proves in another Place, that
History to have been written in Modern Times. So that all the Romish Writers on
this Subject have barrow'd their Legends one from another, as the first of them
did from our William of Malmsbury.

The said Archbishop there likewise tells us, Anno Dom. LXIX.
as does also Sir Henry Spelman in the First Volume of his British Councils,
That in their time there was kept at Wells, in the House of Sir Thomas Hughs,
Knight, a brazen Plate, which was formerly fastened to a Pillar of Glassenbury
Church, wherein was Engraven this Story with diverse Additions, too long to be
here set down: Therefore I refer you to the said Authors Works, where you may
find it word for word, with the draught of it, as it was taken from the
Original, where you may also see that he there conclude; from the modernness of
the Character, as well as diverse other Circumstances in the Inscription it
self, that it could not be above Three Hundred Years old, and so plainly
betrays the Forgery of those Monks, who set it up, and contrived the Story of
St. David's Hand being pierced through with our Savior's Finger, as it stands
related in the said Inscription. But whosoever is not satisfied with this, that
is here set down, but desires farther Satisfaction in the uncertainty of this
Story of Joseph of Arimathaea, may, if they please, consult the said Doctor's
above cited Treatise; where you will find all the Authorities that have been
further made use of for this Story, learnedly confuted.

The short Reign of Galba affords us nothing relating to British Affairs, Anno
Dom. LXIX.
no more than that of Otho; only, that during this last Emperor's Reign, Ibid.
Tacitus relates, That whilst Trebellius Maximus governed Britain, he ^ell into
the Hatred and Contempt of his Army, for his sordid Covetousness; and that this
Aversion against him, was heightened by Roscius Caelius, Legate of the Twentieth
Legion, an old Enemy of his, insomuch, that oftentimes by flight and hiding
himself, he escaped the Fury of his Army: and that thus debasing himself in a
mean and abject manner, he exercised a precarious Authority, as if he and his
Army had had agreed, that they should enjoy a Licentiousness of Living, and he
his own Ease and Safety. But when the Civil Wars broke out between Otho and
Vitellius, then began Trebellius and Caelius to fly into greater and more open
Discords: Trebellius laying to Caelius's Charge the spreading of Sedition, and
drawing the Soldiers from their Discipline and Obedience; whilst on the other
side, Caelius upbraided him of defrauding and Pillaging the Legions. Amidst
those shameful Contentions, the Modesty of the Army was so Corrupted, and their
Insolence grown to that height, that the Auxiliary Forces stuck not publicly
to speak ill of their General, and most of the Cohorts openly deserting him,
went over to Caelius. Trebellius being thus forsaken, presently fled to
Vitellius, who being then Emperor, received him but coldly, without Restoring
him to his Command. After his Departure the Province remained for a time quiet,
though without a Lieutenant; the Commanders of the Legions Governing with equal
Authority; yet Caelius was most powerful, because most daring.

But Vitel^ius not long after he came to the Empire, Anno Dom. LXX.
sent hither Vectius Bolanus to succeed Trebellius: And it also appears by
several passages in Tacitus, that no small number of British Forces were
Commanded over Sea, to serve in those Bloody Civil Wars between Otho and
Vitellius; Tacit. H^stor. Lib. II. c. ^.5. Id. v^t. Agricolae, (...). 1^.
especially when he and Vespasian contended for the Empire; and pa^ticularly
the Fourteenth Legion, called the Conquerors of Britain, having been removed
from hence by Nero, to the Caspian War; were again sent into Britain by
Vitellius, but recalled by Mutianus, on the behalf of Vespatian.

Anno Dom. LXX.
But Bolanus during the Civil Wars, was not able to keep the discipline, much
less to attempt any thing upon the Britains; since the Factions continued as
great in the Army, as in the time of Trebellius; only with this difference,
that Bolanus was Innocent, and not hated for any public Vices; and carried
himself so obligingly, that though he had not the Authority of a General, yet
he Ruled by the Affections of the Soldiers. But now Vitellius fearing the
power of Vespasian, whose Forces began daily to increase; wrote to Bolanus for
supplies: but he deferred it, partly because the Britains were not sufficiently
quieted; but taking the advantage of these dissentions among the Romans, raised
continually new Commotions, by the instigation of Venutius; who had hitherto
carried on the War against the Romans, ever since they took part with his Wife
Cartismandua; but chiefly because the Soldiers of the Fourth Legion being
incensed against Vitellius, had sent over privately Letters of Submission to
Vespasian: In this condition was Britain, during the Government of Bolanus,
when Vitellius was deposed about the Tenth Month of his Reign.

Vespasian succeeded him, and as soon as he was declared Emperor, his great
Reputation easily brought over the Legions in Britain to his Interest; Anno
Dom. LXXI.
for he had served from a Youth in the British Wars, and being Lieutenant of
the Second Legion, under Claudius, had fought many Battles, Tacit. vi a
Agritol. 17.
and taken many Towns from the Britains.

But as soon as Vespasian was acknowledged in Britain, as well as in the rest
of the Provinces; Famous Generals and great Armies were sent hither, whereby
the Enemies hopes were quite defeated: For the Emperor presently sent into
Britain, Petilius Caerialis one of Consular Dignity, as his Lieutenant; under
whom Valor found not only a room to show it self, but also an Example in
himself: For in the first place, he attacked the State of the Brigantes, which
is counted the most Populous in the whole Island, in which Expedition many
Skirmishes happened, though sometimes not without much Bloodshed; he taking in
a great part of their Country by Conquest: But when Caerialis had indeed both
eclipsed the Fame, as well as prevented the Care of a Successor; Julius
Frontinus succeeded him, who did as worthily sustain that great Charge, being a
very brave Man; he subdued the Silures, overcoming both the difficulties of
Places, and the Valor of the Enemies.

In this State was Britain, when the Emperor sent hither Agricola as his
Lieutenant, Anno Dom. LXXVII.
who had learned his first Principles of War in Britain, under Paulinus a Mild,
yet diligent General, who made him his Tentfellow; neither did Agricola after
the manner of some Young Men, turn Warfare into Wantoness, or made use of the
Command of a Tribune, only for Pleasure and Luxury; but made it his business to
know the Province; to be known to the Army; to learn from the more Skillful; to
imitate the Best; to undertake nothing for Vain Glory; to refuse nothing for
Fear; but at once to Act both Cautiously and Stoutly. For Caerialis, had from
the beginning enured him to Labors and Dangers; and at last communicated a
share of Reputation often times for a Trial, giving him the Command of some
part of the Army, and sometimes encouraging his former Success, by giving him
the Command of greater Forces.

This is the Character, which Tacitus gives us of this Great Man; Anno Dom.
LXXVIII.
whose Daughter he had Married, and this was the State of Affairs in Britain,
when Agricola came over about Midsummer: When the Soldiers having laid aside
all thoughts of any Expedition, were grown secure, and the Britains on the
other side were as watchful for Advantages, the Ordovices a little before the
coming of this new General, had lately almost destroyed a whole Squadron of
Horse, that was Quartered in their Country, few escaping; whilst those
Britains, who were desirous of War, approved the Example; and others of them
rather observed the Temper of the new Lieutenant: Then Agricola, although the
Summer was spent, and the Soldiers dispersed into their Winter Quarters,
expecting nothing but Ease for the rest of the Year; and though he considered
the difficulties of beginning a War at that Season; (most of his Officers
thinking it sufficient to defend what was weakest, and least to be defended;
yet he resolved rather to obviate danger, than to expect it; so he gathered
together some of the chief Legionary Cohorts, with a small band of Auxiliaries.
But because the Ordovices durst not come down into the Plains; he Lead the Army
against them himself; that by exposing his own person to equal Dangers, he
might make them all a like Courageous: and having fought the Ordovices, he
almost cut off their whole Nation.

But, Agricola, knowing that reputation is chiefly gained by success; and that
as this first Enterprise succeeded, so it would give a countenance to those
that followed; He resolved therefore to subdue the Isle of Mona; from the
Conquest of which Paulinus was recalled by the revolt of the Britains, as you
have already heard; but wanting Ships for this Expedition, which was undertaken
on the sudden: He used this Policy for the Transporting his Men; he commanded
them all to lay aside their Baggage, sending over first the chief of the
Auxiliaries; who were acquainted with their shallows, and whose Countries use
had taught them to Swim, govern their Horses, and Fight all at once, which was
executed so on the sudden, that the Britains, who expected Fleets, and thought
without Shipping nothing could attack them, were now surprised and daunted;
since they believed nothing was difficult or invincible to Men, so resolutely
prepared for War; whereupon they desired Peace, and delivered up the Island.

This sudden Success gained Agricola a great Reputation; especially since he
employed even his first Entrance into his Province, in labor and War; which by
other Governors was spent in Ceremonies, or bestowing of Commands; nor did he
make use of his Prosperity for Ostentation, or call this Expedition a Conquest;
but only that he had reduced those to Obedience, who had been before subdued;
neither did he so much as adorn his Letters to Rome with Laurels: (as the
custom was) Yet even by this, slighting of Fame and Reputation, he at the same
time increased it; all Men admiring that, having such great presumptions of
future success, he could thus conceal such noble Actions. Ibid. cap. 19.
Having thus overcome the Britains, the next thing he set himself about, was to
understand the Minds and Inclinations of the People; having learned by long
experience, that little good was to be done by force, whilst open injuries and
oppressions were permitted; therefore he resolved to cut up this War by the
very Roots, so beginning with his Domestics, he first of all reformed his own
Family, which is not less difficult to some than to Govern a Province; he acted
nothing of public concern by his Freedmen or Servants; Anno Dom. LXXVIII.
nor did he nominate his Officers by his own private inclinations; nor on the
bare recommendations, or entreaties of others; but still chose the most
Virtuous and Faithful; he would both know and do all things himself; as for
small faults he pardoned them, but punished great ones; nor was he always
satisfied with punishment, but more often with Repentance; putting into Offices
and Commands, rather such who would not offend at all, than punish them when
they had: He also rendered the payment of Corn and other Tributes more easy by
the equality of the Taxation; cutting off those exactions which were invented
for private gain, and which were often more grievous, than the Taxes
themselves: for the People had been compelled to attend at the public
Granaries, which were on purpose kept locked against them; and when opened, the
Publicans obliged them to take greater quantities of Corn than their
necessities required, and that an at extravagant rate, and which they were
often constrained to sell again at a lower price to make Money for other
necessaries, or the payment of their Tribute; the Purveyors also commanding
them, when they pleased to carry it not to the nearest but remotest Markets,
compounding with such as would be excused: thus causing a scarcity where there
was none indeed, they made a particular gain to themselves: the reforming these
abuses in the very First Year of his Government, brought Peace into Reputation;
which either by the carelessness or connivances of his Predecessors, had
hitherto been not less dreadful than War.

Geoffrey of Monmouth, and those that follow him do about this time make
Arviragus a British King, (...) to have reigned in some part of this Island;
and then dying, that he was succeeded by one Marius, whom some will have to be
the same with Gogidun^^; all which being as uncertain, as whether there was
ever any such a Man or not; I shall not trouble my self to dispute, since this
Arviragus, whom they suppose to have been his Father, lived in the Reign of
Domitian, as I shall prove when I come to it.

Anno Dom. LXXIX.
About this time dyed the Emperor Vespasian, and was succeeded by his Son Titus,
who rather exceeded, than equaled his Father in Valor and Worth: He continued
Agricola in the Government of Britain: who when Summer was once come drew
together his Army, Ibid. cap. 10.
praising the good Discipline of his Soldiers, whilst they keept close to
their Ensigns, and punishing the Straglers; he himself always choosing the
places whereon to Encamp; and before hand searched the Woods, and Sounded the
Fords they were to pass; by which means he not only hindered the Enemy from
taking any rest, but so continually allarmed them with fresh Excursions, that
be prevented the pillaging of the Roman Territories: Having thus sufficiently
terrified them; he then began by sparing them to show them some allurements to
Peace; by which means many Cities that before stood upon Terms, Ib. c. 20.
now laid down their Arms, gave Hostages, and received Garrisons; which were
all placed with such care and foresight, and in such places of advantage, that
never any of them were attempted, whereas before no new fortified place in all
Britain escaped unattacked.

The following Winter was wholly spent in a wise and profitable design; for to
the end, that the Britains who then lived rude and scattered, and so apter to
make War, might be accustomed to pleasure, and living at ease; he privately
encouraged, and publicly promoted the building of Temples, Houses, and Places
for Public Assemblies; Anno Dom. LXXIX.
commending the Readiness of some, and quickening the Slowness of others,
whilst Emulation of Honor wrought more than Compulsion among them. He also
caused the Noble-Men's Sons to be instructed in the Liberal Sciences: And by
commending the Wits of Britain before these of Gaul, he brought them, who
before hated the Roman Language, to grow in love with the Latin Eloquence. And
now came the Roman Garb to be in fashion; and the Gown no Stranger among them.
Thus came in by degrees all the Allurements of Vice and Voluptuous Living; as
Porticoes, Baths, with the Luxury of Banquets; which was by the Ignorant called
Good Breeding, and Civility; when, indeed, it was but a Badge of their own
Slavery.

Ibid. cap. 22.
In the Third Year's Expedition, Anno Dom. LXXX.
Agricola discovered new Nations wasting the Countries as far as the Frith
called the Taus. Thus by the Terror of his Marches he so awed the Enemy, that
though his Army was much harassed by bad Weather, yet durst they not attack
him: so that he had time enough to build Forts: And those that were skilful
took notice, that no other General did more prudently choose Places fit to be
fortified. So that no Castle of Agricola's was ever taken by Force, or
deserted: But from these, being well provided with Provisions for a Years
Siege, his Men made frequent Sallies. So that the Enemy, who before used in
Winter to re-gain what in Summer they had lost, were now alike in both Seasons
straightened and kept short. Neither did Agricola, as too covetous of Honor,
attribute to himself things done by others; since every Officer or Centurion
had him for an impartial Witness, as well as Judge of his Actions; And though
he were taxed by some, as too bitter in his Reproofs, yet must it be granted,
that as he was gentle to the Good, so he was morose to the bad; but his Anger
did not last long: Nor needed one to have feared his Silence, or Reservedness;
for he thought it much better to displease a Man, than hate him.

The Emperor Titus, for these great Atchievments of Agricola, was fifteen times
saluted Imperator, or General: And the Honor he got by the Actions of so great
a Commander, he rewarded with Triumphal Ornaments. Not long after which, Titus
(styled for his Goodness, Deliciae humani generis, The Delight of Mankind) dyed
(as was suspected) by Poison.

Domitian, Anno Dom. LXXXI.
his Brother (a Man as wicked as the other was virtuous) succeeded to him. It
was now the Fourth Year of Agricola's Government in Britain; which was also
spent in securing what the Summer before had been gotten in this Island: And
had the Courage of his Soldiers been answerable to the Conduct of the General,
and the Fortune of the Commonwealth, he had now reached the utmost Bounds of
Britain; for Glota and Bodotria (now Dunbritain and Edinburgh-Fryths) running
from both Seas, far into the Continent, and being dis-joyn'd by a narrow Neck
of Land; these, together with all the Creeks and Havens on this side of the
Straight, were held by Roman Garrisons, and the Enemies, as it were, confined in
another Island.

Ibid. cap. 24.
In the Fifth Year of his Government, Anno Dom. LXXXII.
and as soon as the Season would admit passing over the Bodotrian Erith, he
subdued diverse Nations, (until then unknown) in frequent and prosperous
Battles; placing Garrisons in that part of Britain that lies over against
Ireland, though more in hopes of a new Conquest, than for fear of any Invasion:
For Ireland lying in the midst, between Britain and Spain, lies convenient for
the Gallick Sea, Anno Dom. LXXXII.
and would have united the vast Members of the Empire, and rendered them highly
useful to each other. This Island, if compared to Britain, is much less; yet
exceeds all the Islands of the Mediterranian Sea: The Soil and Climate,
together with the Dispositions and Mannners of the Inhabitants, being not much
different from those of the Britains; but its Havens are better known to
Traders, by reason of its greater Commerce. Agricola had received one of the
petty Kings of this Nation, who had been expelled by a Domestic Sedition; and
retained him under a Show of Friendship, till a fit Occasion. Tacitus further
says, That Agricola told him, that he believed Ireland might be both conquered
and kept with only one Legion; and that it might be useful even against
Britain, if the Roman Arms were extended thither, and Liberty were once, as it
were, banished quite out of sight.

This, though it be a Digression from our History of Britain, yet I thought
good not to omit, because it gives the best and most particular Account we have
in any ancient Historian concerning Ireland: As also, the Reason why so great a
General as Agricola thought it worth his Conquest.

Anno Dom. LXXXIII.
Ibid. cap. 24.
But the next Summer, which was the Sixth Year of his Command, he first
discovered by his Fleet those large Countries lying beyond the Bodotrian Frith;
and Incursions of all those Nations lying beyond it, were much feared by him.
This Fleet was by Agricola also made use of, to assist his Landforces; and
therefore still followed him, making a dreadful Show as it sailed along. The
War was thus carried on, both by Sea and Land; Nay, often in the same Camp, the
Foot, with the Horsemen, and Marine Forces, would meet, and make merry
together; where each in his Turn would extol their own Feats and Adventures;
comparing the Dangers of the Woods and Mountains, with the Accidents and
Hazards of the Waves and Tempests; and that as the Britains by Land, so the
Ocean it self was by them subdued: Thus they boasted in a Soldier-like way.
But, as Agricola afterward heard from some Prisoners, the Sight of his Fleet
so much disheartened the Britains, as that the utmost Secrets of their own Seas
being now discovered, the Conquered had even lost their last Refuge. But then
the Caledonians made great Preparations for War, though with greater Fame than
Reality; as it is usual for it to relate too much of things unknown, giving
out, as if they had assaulted and taken some Roman Fort. This News made some
afraid, who being Cowardly, under the Show of Prudence, took upon them to
advise the General, that they ought to retreat to the other side of the Frith;
and that they should rather do it voluntarily, than by constraint. But when
Agricola knew that the Enemy would invade him in many distinct Parties, lest he
should be environed by Numbers far exceeding his own, he himself divided his
Army into Three Detachments.

Ibid. cap. 26.
Which, when it was known to the Enemy, changing their Design on a sudden, they
in one entire Body broke in by Night upon the Ninth Legion, as being the
weakest, and killed the Sentinels between sleeping and waking; and now they
fought in the very Camp. When Agricola, having by Scouts learnt the Enemy's
March, followed them at the Heels, and commanded the swiftest of his Horse and
lightest Footmen to charge upon their Rear, whilst the whole Army presently
seconded them with Shouts. The Britains hearing the Enemy behind them, were
disheartened; especially when the Day appearing, discovered the glittering
Ensigns of the Romans, who then took heart, and renewed the Fight; Anno Dom.
LXXXIII.
not as Men doubtful of Victory; but ambitious of Honor: For now might be seen
some of the Roman Soldiers getting into their own Camp, whilst others fought to
get out; both contending, which should have the most Glory; the one, in
bringing a timely Assistance; the other, in not seeming to have needed it. In
this Fight the Britains were routed; and had they not betaken themselves to
their old Refuge, the Woods and Bogs, that Day had put a Period to the War.

Ibid. cap. 27.
By this constant Success, the Army gained fresh Courage; and they now all cried
out, That nothing was impossible for their Valor; that Caledonia was to be
passed through; and that at last they would fight their Way to the utmost
Bounds of Britain: And they who were lately so wise and cautelous, now seemed
as forward, and talked as big, after this Success, as the best. And this,
indeed, is the hard Fate of War; All challenge a Share in the Success, whilst
Misfortunes are laid upon a single Person. However, the Britains would not own
themselves beaten by the Courage of the Roman Soldiers, but by the Cunning and
Conduct of the General; and therefore they had no meaner Thoughts of themselves
than before, but made new Levies, in order to prosecute the War; and beforehand
carried their Wives and Children into Places of Safety, sending about, through
all their Cities, to enter into new Confederacy; which was afterward ratified
with solemn Rites and Sacrifices: And so their Spirits being thus heightened,
they at present returned home.

The same Summer, a Cohort of Vespasian's, raised in Germany, and sent into
Britain, having slain a Centurion, and other Soldiers that were appointed to
exercise them, deserted, and went to Sea in three Pinnaces; and having killed
two of the Masters whom they suspected, the other they constrained to do his
Duty. Having thus escaped, and none knowing what was become of them, and having
no Pilates, they were carried at random, as the Tides and Winds drove them to
and fro. Thus compassing the Island, they practiced Piracy where they landed;
and often fighting with the Britains, who defended their Goods, were sometimes
Victors, and sometimes worsted; till at last they were driven to that great
Extremity for want of Provision, that first they devoured the weakest of their
own Men; and then drew Lots, who of them should be eaten afterward. Thus
having floated round Britain, and lost their Ships for want of Skill to steer
them, getting on Shore, they were taken, and sold as Pirates, first by the
Suevians, and afterward by the Frisians, till at last they were sold into
Britain; where the strangeness of the Accident rendered this Discovery of the
Island more famous.

Ibid. cap. 28, 29.
But Agricola having in the beginning of this Summer lost a young Son, Anno Dom.
LXXXIV.
made use of War as a Remedy to vent his Grief; therefore he sent his Fleet
before, which by spoiling many Places on the Coast, struck a greater Terror
into the Enemy: He himself with a flying Army consisting chiefly of Britains,
whose Courage and Faith he had long experienced, following it, marched as far
as the Grampian Hills, upon which the Enemy had Posted themselves; for the
Britains nothing daunted with the ill Success of the last Fight, and expecting
nothing but Revenge or Slavery from their new Leagues and Confederacies, were
got together Thirty Thousand strong, more being daily expected; nay, the aged
themselves would not be exempted from this Days Service, but as they had been
brave Men in their time, so every one of them bore some Badge or Mark of his
youthful Achievements. Anno Dom. LXXXIV.
Among these was Galgacus, chief in Authority and Birth; who when the Army
cried out for the Signal of Battle, is brought in by Tacitus, making a long yet
noble Oration; which tho it is likely he never spoke, and that it is contrary
to my Design to stuff these Annals with long Speeches, yet since there is a
great deal of good Sense and sharp Satyr expressed in it against his own
Nation, I shall contract some part of it, Ibid. c. 30, 31, 30.

Galgacus his Sp^^ch to the Britains.


and render the rest word for word. In the first place having set forth the
Occasion of making War upon the Romans, from the Necessity of avoiding Slavery,
as being the last People of Britain that were yet unconquered, and that beyond
them there was no more Earth nor Liberty left: That now the utmost Bounds of
Britain were discovered, and no other Nations but them left to employ the Roman
Armies, whose Pride they might seek to please in vain by Services and
Submissions; those Robbers of the World, who having left no Land unplunder'd,
ransack even the Ocean it self. If the Enemy be Rich, they are greedy of his
Wealth; if Poor, they covet Glory; whom neither the East nor West could ever
satisfy; the only Men in the World who pursue both the Rich and the Needy with
equal Appetite: To Kill and Plunder, they call Governing; and when they have
brought Desolation on a Country, they term it Peace. That Nature, by nearest
ties, had linked their Children and Relations to them, yet even these were
taken away and pressed into their Service: That their Wives and Sisters, if
they escaped their Violence, yet could not avoid Dishonor; since when they
came as Guests into their Houses, they were sure to Debauch them: Their Goods
and Fortunes they made their Tributes; their Corn, their Provisions to supply
their Gran^ries; and wore out their Bodies in cutting down Woods, and draining
Fens, and paving Marshes; nay, and all this amidst a Thousand Stripes and
Indignities: That Slaves who are born to Bondage, were sold but once, and
afterward kept at their Masters Charges; but Britain daily bought its own
Bondage, and maintained it too.

He then proceeds to exhort them to be tenacious of their Liberty, lest (like
the last Slave in a private Family, who is the Sport and Scorn of his Fellows
when conquered) they should be flouted by those who had been used as Drudges
long before, advising them to take Courage and Example from the Brigantes, who
under the Conduct of a Woman had almost quite destroyed the Romans, and might
have driven them out of Britain, had they not failed in the Attempt by their
too great Security and Success. Then magnifying the Valor and Strength of his
own Nation, and lessening that of the Romans, as made up of diverse Nations, who
unwillingly served them, and as soon as they durst would turn against them; he
concluded with showing what Advantages they had above the Romans, to make them
hope for Victory, and the miserable Slavery they were like to undergo if they
were vanquished; and therefore going now to Battle, advised them to remember
the Freedom of their Ancestors, as well as the Danger of Slavery to themselves
and their Posterity.

Ibid. c. 33, 34.
The Britains received this Speech with great Testimonies of Joy, such as Songs
and confused Clamours, after the Custom of their Country; all which showed
their Approbation, and now their Arms began to glitter, and every one to put
himself in Array, when Agricola, scarce able to repress the Heat of his
Soldiers, yet thinking it convenient to say something to them, made a Speech to
this Effect, (for, being somewhat long, Anno Dom. LXXXIV.
I shall make bold to Contract it:) First he told his Soldiers, That this was
the Eighth Year that their Valor, protected by the Fortune of the Roman
Empire, had subdued the Britains in so many Battles, The Substance of Agricola
's Spe^ch.
and that as he had exceeded his Predecessors in Success, so they had all
former Armies. That Britain was now no longer known, only by Fame and Report;
and that as they have had the Honor to discover, so likewise might they to
subdue it: That he had often heard them ask, When they should meet the Enemy?
but now they had their Desires, now was the time to show their Valor, and that
as every thing would happen as they could wish if they Conquered; so all things
made against them, if they were overcome. That if it was Great and Noble to
have Marched so much Ground, to have past so many Woods, and both the Friths,
yet if they fled, the very same things would be their Hindrance and
Destruction: That as for his part he had been long since satisfied, that to run
away was neither safe for the Soldier nor General; and that a Commendable Death
was to be preferred before the Reproaches of an Ignominious Life; that Safety
and Honor were now inseparably conjoined: And let the worst happen, yet how
glorious would it be to die in the utmost Bounds of the World and Nature? Then
putting them in mind of their late Victories, and representing these Britains
they were now to fight with, as the Meanest and most Rascally of all the
Nations they had Conquered, so he doubts not but they will afford them an
occasion of a memorable Victory. Then concludes, in advising them to make an
end of the War, and to Fifty Years Labors add one great concluding Day, by
which means they should approve themselves to their Country; and that it should
never be justly laid to their Charge, that they had Protracted the War, nor let
slip any Opportunity of completing their Conquest.

Whilst Agricola was yet speaking, the Soldiers expressed great Signs of their
Eagerness and Resolution, but the Conclusion of his Speech was received with
loud and joyful. Acclamations, whilst every Man stood to his Arms, and showed
his Impatience to march on. Agricola ordered the Battle after this manner; his
Main Body was made up of Eight Thousand Auxiliary Foot, and Three Thousand
Horse were placed in the Wings, the Legions being set in the Rear before the
Camp, for the greater Glory of the Victory, if it could be won without any loss
of Roman Blood; if otherwise for Succor and Assistance.

The British Army, for the greater show and Terror, was drawn upon a rising
Gound; the first Battalion stood on the Plain, the next a degree higher, as the
Hill ascended, the Field rang with the Clattering Noise of Chariots and
Horsemen rangeing up and down. Agricola perceiving the Enemy exceeded him in
numbers, and fearing lest they might attack him in the Front and Flanks at
once, stretched out his Front in length; and although by that means his
Vanguard was somewhat thin, and that many Councelled him to take the Legions
into it, yet he stood firm to his first Resolution, and alighting from his
Horse, placed himself at the head of the Foot before the Ensigns.

Ib. cap. 36.
The Fight began at a distance, with missive Weapons, wherein the Britains
showed wondrous Skill and Constancy, for with their broad Swords and short
Targets they either avoided the Darts, or shook them off, and in return
liberally bestowed whole Showers of their own; Agricola perceiving this
Disadvantage, commanded Three Batavian Cohorts, and Two of the Tungrians, Anno
Dom. LXXXIV.
that they should bring it speedily to dint of Sword, which they easily
performed, as being fitted for it by long exercise, but the Britains on the
other side having little Targets, and huge unwildly Swords without points, lay
under a great disadvantage, nor could endure a close down right fighting; so
that when the Batavians came to exchange blows with them, and to make at their
Faces with the Pikes of their Targets, they easily bore them down, and
prosecuting their Victory, advanced to the side of the Hill; the rest of the
Cohorts being spurred on by Emulation, and striking at all that were near them,
run on in the same course, leaving for have many behind them, some half Dead,
others untouched; in the mean while as the Horsemen fled, the Chariots brake
in upon the Foot; so they who had lately terrified others, were now distressed
themselves, being penned in by their own close Ranks, as well as the unevenness
of the Ground.

But the manner of this Battle was not like a loose skirmish of Horsemen, but
all keeping their Ranks, endeavored by the weight of their Horses to bear down
the Enemy, and now might be seen Chariots without Drivers, and the affrighted
Horses running to and fro, without Riders, overturning all that met them, or
thwarted their way.

But when those Britains, who had not yet engaged but on the tops of the Hills
despised the paucity of the Romans, Ibid. 38.
began to draw down by degrees, and taking a compass to fall upon them in the
Rear; Agricola having foreseen their design, with Four Squadrons of Horse,
which he had reserved for such a purpose, opposed their Descent, and driving
them back with as great have as they had come forward, put them totally to
flight; so that now this project of the Britains was turned upon themselves;
some Troops of Horse being by the General's order taken from the Front of the
Battle, and sent to charge the Enemy in the Rear; then might have been seen in
the open Plain a great and dismal Scene of War, some pursuing, wounding,
taking, and then killing those that were taken; when other fresh ones came in
the way; now whole Regiments of the Britains, according to their several
dispositions, though Armed, and more numerous turning their backs, whilst
others though unarmed ran desperately upon the Swords of their Enemies; the
whole field was covered with scattered Arms, Dead Bodies, with mangled Limbs
and Blood; whilst many wallowing in their own gore, ceased not to give some
proofs of their last Anger and Revenge: But when the Britains, by running away,
had got nearer the Woods, rallying again, they circumvented those that pursued
them, as being unwary and ignorant of those places: Agricola (who was every
where) prevented this by sending out some Light Arms, yet strong Cohorts, and
as also by Commanding some of his Horsemen to alight, and scour the thickest
parts of the Wood; these might have suffered considerably for their rashness:
But when the Britains once saw that the Romans followed the pursuit close, and
in good order, they all fled, tho not as before in whole Troops and Companies;
but dispersed and straggling into remote and by-places until Night, and the
satiety of slaughter put an end to the chase: Of the Britains Ten Thousand were
Slain: Of the Romans Three Hundred and Forty; amongst which was Aurelius
Atticus, Commander in chief of a Cohort; who through Youthful heat, and the
overmuch mettle of his Horse, was carried into the midst of the Enemy. The
Night was spent with Joy by the Romans; Ib. 38.
being now flushed with Victory and Spoil; but the Britains ran wandering up and
down; Men and Women howling together, Anno Dom. LXXXIV.
some lug'd on the Wounded, whilst others cried for help, to those that were
not hurt; some forsook their Houses, and of their own accord set Fire on them,
searching out holes to hide themselves in for safety, which they as quickly
left, to find out others; sometimes in consult together they entertained some
glimmerings of hope, and then again fell into despair, being sometimes
dispirited, and some enraged at the sight of their dearest Relations; and it is
certain, that many out of a cruel compassion laid violent hands on their Wives
and Children to secure them from the cruelty of the Romans: But Day appearing
gave a plainer prospect of their Victory; every where reigned desolation and
silence; the Hills being forsaken, and the Cottages smoking afar off: when the
Scouts brought word that no body appeared, only that they found the uncertain
Footsteps of their flight. Whereupon Agricola, because the Summer was far
spent, and that no fit Season to divide his Forces; brought them in an entire
body into the borders of the Horesti: (supposed to be the Inhabitants of
Eske-Dale in Scotland) where having received Hostages, he Commanded the Admiral
of his Fleet to Sail round about Britain; furnishing him with all things
necessary, but the terror of the Navy was gone before, whilst he with slow and
easy marches, to the end he might strike the greater terror into the new
Conquered Nations, arrived at his Winter Quarters, whilst the Navy with
prosperous Winds and good Success, safely arrived at the Port Trutulensis
(supposed by Mr. Somner, to be Richborough, near Sandwich) from whence it had
set out, and coasting along the nearest side of Britain returned thither again.

And now the Romans first discovered the Isles of Orkeney, which others, with
less Reason following Orosius, ascribe unto Claudius.

Agricola, Ib. chapter 39.
having sent a plain account of these Transactions (and that without any vain
Glory or Amplification) the Emperor, as his manner was, received them with a
show of Joy, tho with an inward Trouble of Mind; for he was Conscious to
himself, that his own Counterfeit Triumph over the Germans was a ridiculous
piece of Pageantry (to set out which, for want of real Captives, Dion. lib. 67.
he was forced to buy such as by their Hair and Attire might personate them);
whereas the great and real Victorys of Agricola, where so many Thousand were
Slain, being applauded by all Men, would give him a vast Reputation: Thinking
it therefore dangerous, that the Glory of a private Man should Eclipse that of
his Prince, He secretly designed his Ruin, thinking it in vain to have
suppressed the Study of Oratory, and other Liberal Arts, thereby to depress
other Men's Fame; if he should suffer himself to be thus surpassed in the Art of
War, which he esteemed the peculiar honor of an Emperor, being daily
tormented with these Cares, and much alone in his Closet (which was always with
him still a sign of some ensuing mischief) he thought it best for the present
to hide his resentments, till the noise of Agricola's Victory, as well as the
Love of the Army toward him, was a little abated; he continued him therefore
in his Command for some time, and with all shows of acknowledgments for so
great Services, and ordering the Senate to decree him Triumphal Ornaments, with
the honor of a Statue; Ib. c. 40.
himself speaking highly in his Favor.

He also caused a Report to be spread abroad, that the Province of Syria, then
void by the Death of Attilius Rufus, and reserved for Persons of the highest
Rank, Anno Dom. LXXXIV.
should be bestowed upon Agricola; and it was also commonly believed, that a
Freed-man employed in the Emperors most secret Services, was sent to Agricola
with a Commission for the Government of Syria with private Orders, if he were
then in Britain, that it should be delivered: But that the Messenger meeting
Agricola at Sea, never so much as saluting him, returned again to Domitian;
whether this were true or only feigned (as agreeable to the humor of this
Prince) is uncertain.

However, Agricola delivered the Province peaceably and quiet to his
Successor; Anno Dom. LXXXV.
and least his entrance into the City should be too remarkable, by the crowd of
those that might go out to meet him, he came (as he was ordered) by Night into
the Palace, where being received with a short salute, and no particular
discourse, he presently drew off amongst the crowd of attendants.

But though it is not to our present Design, give me leave to wait on this Great
Man to his Grave, and give you Tacitus's last Account of him, since he is so
great an Example of Moderation in Prosperity, as well as of Patience under the
Slights and Affronts of an insolent Tyrant.

Ibid. 41, 42.
But Agricola, though he thus strived to lessen his own great Reputation, which
is ever grievous to those that are lazy and unwarlike, yet by his Retirement he
increased his own Glory, as well as his Virtues; still continuing modest in his
Garb, easy of Access, and never accompanied with more than one or two Friends:
So that most People, who are accustomed to esteem Great Men only by Titles and
outward Appearances, when they saw Agricola thus private, wondered at his great
Reputation, and few understood his Virtues. And though, not long after, when
absent, he had been accused to Domitian, yet he was also acquitted; there being
no Crime alleged against him, unless it were to have lived under a Prince who
was an Enemy to all Virtue. Besides, Had those worse sort of all Enemies,
Flatterers prevailed; there happened afterward such Times which would not
permit Agricola's Fame to be concealed, so many Armies being lost in Germany,
Pannonia, and other Provinces, through the Rashness or Cowardice of the
Commanders, that Agricola was again desired by all Men to command, comparing
his Constancy and Experience in War with the Sloth and Cowardice of others.
Which Discourses coming often to the Ears of Domitian, whilst some of his
Freed-men fairly represented his Merits, and others of the worst sort, through
Envy and ill Will, as much misrepresenting them, it provoked this Prince, too
apt of himself to do evil: So that Agricola, by his own Virtues, as well as the
Vices of others, was often near Ruin. And though some time after, when the
Proconsulship of Africa was void by the Death of Civica lately slain, the
Command of this Province was seemingly offered him, whilst some were privately
to offer their Assistance in making his Excuse; and others, more bold and open,
both persuading, and also terrifying him, brought him into Domitian's Presence;
who being already prepared to dissemble, haughtily (though willingly) accepted
his Excuses; nay, suffered himself to be thanked for his Accepting them; nor
blushed at his own Envy of so small a Benefit; nor did he so much as bestow
upon Agricola, who w^nted ^ Salary, which had been usually allowed to those
that had been Proconsuls; as either being offended that it was not asked him,
or out of Guilt lest he should seem to have bought that which he did not
desire; since it is the Property of too many Men's Natures to hate those that
have too much obliged them; Anno Dom. LXXXV.
yet Domitian, though prone to Anger, and (by how much the more hidden, so much
the more dangerous) was nevertheless mollified by this rare Moderation and
Prudence of Agricola, since he did neither augment his own Fame, by any vain
Boasting of his Merits; not yet accelerate his Fate by Contumacy or Sullenness.
So that all those whose Custom it is, only to believe things dangerous
unlawful, may be convinced that great and good Men may often live safe under
the worst of Princes; and that Obsequiousness and Modesty, attended with
Prudence and Industry, do far exceed all that Glory to which many by violent
Courses, but for no public Benefit to the Commonwealth, and by a too much
sought for Fate, have endeavored to attain. However, thus much is certain,
That not long after this, Agricola died, (whether by Poison, or not, is
uncertain,) to the common Grief of his Friends, as well as Strangers; and even
Domitian himself appeared to be concerned at his Loss, though he could more
easily dissemble his Joy, than Fear. Thus died the famous Agricola, who carried
the Roman Eagles to the utmost bounds of Britain; Conquering more Nations than
all his Predecessors before had done, and had also subdued Ireland, had not
the Jealousy of Domitian too soon recalled him: If Tacitus, or some other
faithful Historian had given us as exact an account of the Actions of these
other Lieutenants, that were sent into Britain, during the Reign of this
Emperor and his Successors, then we might have had a complete History of
those times; But we are now at so great an uncertainty, that we cannot tell,
who it was to whom Agricola resigned his Command; only we read in Suetonius of
one Salustius Lucullus, to have been Legate of Britain, in the days of this
Emperor; but nothing can be found of any others or of him, Domitian.
more than that he was slain by Domitian, for giving his own name to a ^ort of
Spears which he had invented.

But this seems more certain, that not long after Agricola's departure; the
Britains recovering fresh Strength and Courage, under the Conduct of Arviragus,
rebelled against the Romans, as some gather from that Speech, which Frabricius
Veiento, is supposed by Juvenal to speak in flattery of Domitian: Omen habes
inquit, magni clarique triumphi;
Regem aliquem capies, aut de temone Britanno
Excidet Arviragus --
-- See the Mighty Omen, see,
He cries, of some Illustrious Victory; As I find it Elegantly translated in
Mr. Dryden 's Juvenal. lib. 1. Sat. 4 v. 12^.

Some Captive King, thee his new Lord shall own,
Or from his British Chariot headlong thrown,
The proud Arviragus come tumbling down.


Dion also mentions C. N. Trebellius to have governed Britain, though in what
time is uncertain; but Tacitus in his Proem, to his First Book of Histories,
speaks of Britain, as though formerly Conquered, but as then lost; which though
it might be true, yet that it was again recovered is also as certain; since
during the Reigns of the succeeding Emperors, we find Britain, as far as the
Friths of Dunbritton and Edinburgh, entirely reduced into the form of a Roman
Province, which was not governed by any particular Praetor or Proconsul, but
was esteemed Praesidialis; that is, under the immediate protection and Eye of
the Emperor, and held by his Garrisons, and thus it continued as long as
Britain remained a Member of the Roman Empire.

Anno Dom. LXXXII.
But about the end of Domitians Reign, Arviragus is supposed by Geoffrey to have
deceased; and that his Son Marius, called by the British Historians Meurig,
succeeded him.

I have no more to observe during the Reign of Domitian, than that in his time,
Claudia Rufina, a British Lady, was the Wife of Pudens a Senator, and she is
famous in that Elegant Epigram of Martial for her Beauty, Wit and Learning; but
more excellent was she for her profession of Christianity, if she were the same
Woman St. Paul mentions in his Second Epistle to Timothy, as some of our
English Historians have (though without any great certainty) asserted, for it
is certain that St. Paul wrote this Epistle to Timothy, in the Reign of Nero;
and therefore it is not likely that this Claudia should be found for her
Beauty, in the latter end of the Reign of Domitian; or else of Trajan, above
Twenty Years after, since by that time, she must certainly have been a Woman of
more Years than Beauty.

Anno Dom. XCVI.
The short Reign of the Emperor Nerva, affords us nothing of certainty,
concerning the Affairs of Britain, only that in his Reign, as also in that of

Trajan his Successor, There were great Commotions in this Island, which may
be also gathered out of Spartianus's History. Anno Dom. XCVIII.
But in the Reign of this Emperor, the Britains are said by him to have
Revolted; yet were soon reduced again to Obedience. To his Reign, we may also
refer, that War which Geoffrey of Monmouth mentions, to have been made by
Roderick King of the Picts; who aiding the Caledonians, was overcome and Slain
by this King Marius above mentioned; which Victory, although it be only related
by this Historian; Yet Archbishop Usher in his above cited De Ec^les. Brit.
Antiquitat.
Work, does not think it unlikely; since William of Malmesbury, before ever
Geoffrey had published his History, makes mention of this Marius, in these
words, (There is in the City of Luguballia (now called Carlisle) a Room Arched
with Stone, which can neither by Weather or Fire be destroyed, the Country is
called Cumberland, and the Inhabitants Cumbri; and in the Front of this Room,
there is to be Read this Inscription, Marii Victoriae; but though Mr. Cambden
(speaking of this place) says, he has found it written Marti Victori in some
Copies, yet those could not be true, as being quite contrary to Malmesbury's
meaning; who presently after adds, What this should mean I much doubt, unless
perhaps some part of the Cymbrians planted themselves in these parts, after
they had been driven out of Italy by Marius: But Ranulph of Chester in his
Polychronicon, does thus rectify this mistake of Malmesbury, As who not having
seen the British History, attributed this Inscription to Marius the Roman; when
it indeed belonged to Marius the British King. This Battle is supposed to have
been fought in the great Moore, now called Stanmore, in Westmoreland; as a Monk
of Malmesbury, in the Book called Eulogium, has written.

We have nothing to Remark in the Reign of Trajan, unless it is what Geoffrey
of Monmouth relates to have been performed in Britain in his time: Which I
shall here give you. The public ways (says he) Trajan repaired by Pa^ing them
with Stone, or raising Causeways, even such places as were wet and boggy, or by
grubbing and clearing such as were rough and over grown with Bushes and Woods;
making Bridges over Rivers, where the way was too long; where by r^ason of some
steep Hill, the way was difficult, he turned it aside through more level
places; or if it ran through Forests, Wastes and Deserts, by drawing it from
thence, through places inhabited.

Aelius Hadrian, succeeded his Uncle Trajan in the Empire; he was also a
Spaniard, and these two were the First Emperors, Anno Dom. XCVII.
who were not by birth Romans; he differed from Trajan in his policy of
extending the Empire, and rather to imitate Augustus his Rule in restraining
its limits to render it stronger and more united, in so much, that he excluded
on the East all Armenia, Media, Persia and Mesopotamia, being the Conquests of
Trajan: yet excepted Britain alone from this retrenchment; which Province he by
no means would part with, although he somewhat straightened it, as shall be
shown by and by. D^on. Lib. 68.
Under him Julius Severus was Lieutenant, an excellent Soldier; and upon that
account called away to suppress the Jews then in Rebellion.

After his departure, the Britains till then kept in, Anno Dom. CXX.
had entirely revolted, had not Hadrian made a Journey hither in the Second
Year of his Empire, being then thrice Consul; where he reformed many things,
and seems by Force of Arms to have reduced the Britains to Obedience; as Mr.
Camden well observes, from a piece of Money of his Coining, where there is the
Figure of that Emperor, with Three Soldiers on the Reverse, whom he judges to
represent the Three Legions, of which the Roman Army in Britain then consisted,
and under them this Inscription, EXER: BRITANNICUS, and another of the same
Prince with this Motto, RESTITUTOR BRITANNIAE; but the greatest work done by
him in this Island was the building of a Wall Fourscore Miles in length, cross
the Island, Spartian in Adriano.
from Solway Frith upon the Irish Seas to the Mouth of Tine by New Castle, on
the German Ocean, laying the Foundation thereof with huge Piles, and Stakes
driven deep into the Earth, and fastened together in manner of a strong Rampire
or Mound; this he did to keep out the Caledonians from infesting the Roman
Province; who could not it seems be contained within those farther
Fortifications, raised by Agricola, between Glota and Bodotria, now the Friths
of Edinburgh, and Dun Britton; by which the Northern, and more Barbarous
Britains had more room to inhabit, and quitting those colder Countries,
enclosed only the warmer and richer parts of the Island; by which means the
bounds of the Empire, as well in Britain, as the East, were reduced to more
convenient compass.

In the Reign of this Emperor, Priscus Licinius, was also Propraetor or
Lieutenant in this Island, as appears by an Ancient Inscription, lately found
near this Wall; which mentions this Licinius to have been not only Propraetor
of Britain; but also before of Capadocia, and to have been Prefect over the
Fourth Legion, as also to have been honored with a Military Banner, by Hadrian
in his Jewish Expedition, as may be seen at large in this Inscription in Mr.
Camden's Britannia. I have nothing to add in this Reign relating to Britain,
more than that Geoffrey of Monmouth makes King Marius to have dyed, about the
Year of our Lord 132, and to have left the Kingdom to his Son Coil, who loved
the Romans, and was honored by them; so that paying his Tribute, and receiving
their protection, he filled up a long and peaceable Reign, governing Britain
many Years.

To Hadrian succeeded Antoninus Pius, at whose first coming to the Throne that
Law was made, Anno Dom. CXXXVIII.
whereby all the Subjects of the Roman Empire, were made free Citizens of Rome;
by which Edict the Southern Britains, Anno Dom. CXXXVIII.
within Hadrians's Wall, as well as other Provinces, enjoyed that Privilege;
but the Brigantes ever least patient of Foreign Servitude, breaking in upon
Genoani; (which Camden guesses ought to be read Guinethia, or North Wales,
(then part of the Roman Province) were with the loss of much of their
Territory, Pausan in Arcad.
driven back by Lollius Urbicus, Lieutenant here, who drew another Wall made of
Earth and Piles, beyond the former Wall of Adrian, and (as Mr. Camden proves)
from Capitolinus) extending it self between the Friths of Dunbritton and
Edinburgh, Capitolin in Autonin. Pio.
kept out the Incursions of the Northern Britains: for these Achievements,
this Emperor received the Sir Name of Britann^cus; tho the War was managed by
his Lieutenant, it is also recorded in the Digest, that Seius Saturninus, Lib.
39.
had then the charge of the Roman Navy on the British Shore.

Marcus Aurelius Antoninus (called also the Philosopher) succeeded Antoninus
Pius, Anno Dom. CLXII.
having been before, by him adopted and declared Caesar; in whose Time, Britain
impatient of Foreign Subjection, again raised new Commotions; for the appeasing
whereof Calphurnius Agricola was sent Lieutenant; the Surname of Agricola no
doubt, was terrible to the Brita^ns, who could not but remember the great
overthrows they had received formerly under a General of that Name; and indeed,
these Commotions lasted not long after his arrival, but seemed to have been
ended with Fortunate success; for which it is likely there was made that
Inscription, Ingratititude to the Syrian Goddess, which has been of late Years
dug up out of the Earth, near Adrian's (now called the Picts) Wall; but this is
more certain, that the glory of having dispatched this War so soon, In Eumenius
capitolinus.
is by Fronto the Roman Orator, ascribed to this Prince in a Panegyric made in
his Praise: where he tells him, that although sitting at home, in his Palace
at Rome, he had given Commission to another General for the War; yet like the
Pilot of a Galley sitting at the Stern, and guiding the Helm, he deserved the
Honor of the whole Expedition: Nothing else is recorded of Britain, during
Antoninus his Reign, saving that Helvius Pertinax, afterward Emperor, was
employed in these Wars; being called hither from his Service, against the
Parthians, and here for some time afterward remained Lieutenant.

About the end of this Emperors Reign (according to Geoffrey,) Coil the
Tributary King of the Britains dying, left his Son Lucius for his Successor,
who by Nennius is called Lhes, and Sir-named by the Britains Lever Maur, that
is, the Great Light.

To Marcus Aurelius succeeded Commodus his Son, having before been made partner
of the Empire with his Father, Anno Dom. CLXXX.
in the beginning of whose Reign King Lucius (above mentioned) is by Bid
supposed to have sent to Eleutherius, Bid lib. 1.
then Bishop of Rome, desiring that by his means he might be made a Christian,
the relation you may find more at large in Archbishop Chap. III.
Ushers De Brit. Eccles. Ant. from the old Book of Landaffe, which relates this
King sent Two Ambassadors to the Pope, beseeching him, that by his means he
might be made a Christian, and he did not long after obtain his request; and so
the Britains till the time of Dioclesian, maintained the Christian Faith
without any disturbance; this is the Account which Bid has given us, though
there are other, (but more Modern Historians) that take upon them to give a
much different and larger relation of this matter; and do not only take upon
them to tell us the Message, but also who where the Messengers that carried it:
The old Book of Landaffe, as also diverse other Monkish-writers, call them
Eloanus and Medwinus; Anno Dom CLXXX.
but Will. of Malemsbury in his Antiquities (lately printed at Oxford) of the
Monastery of Glastenbury, calls them Faganus and Deravianus, and others Faganus
and Damianus; yet though they differ about the Names of these Men, they all
agree that these being sufficiently instructed in the Christian Faith, and
Baptized, were sent back to Preach the Gospel here; who at their return
converted King Lucius, and his whole Kingdom to Christianity; but as for the
story it self, it is thought by several learned Men to be of very suspicious
Credit; for tho Bid places Lucius his writing to the Pope, in the Year of our
Lord, 156: and in the Reign of Marcus Antoninus, Verus and Aurelius Commodus
his Brother: yet it is certain from the best accounts in Chronology, that
neither Antoninus then succeeded to the Empire, nor was Eleutherius chosen
Pope, till near Twenty Years after that time; and besides all this, there is so
great a difference amongst our Historians, as well Ancient as Modern, about
this matter, that Arch Bishop Usher has given us above Twenty different
accounts, some whereof differ from this of Bid, as also from each other; some
Twenty, some Thirty Years, nay some Forty, and others near Fifty Years; only
this must be acknowleged, that they all agree that such an Embassy was sent by
Lucius, in the Papacy of Eleutherius, and that the Pope returned such an answer
to it; now it is certain that he was not chosen Pope till the Year of our Lord,
171 at the soonest; or according to Eusebius's Chronicle, till 176, and so
Lucius's Conversion must have happened in the Time of Marcus Aurelius, to which
time the English Saxon Annals, as also Bid himself, with diverse others of our
Ancient Historians, as well Foreign as English, do refer it; though Roger of
Wendover, and other Authors about the same Age, refer it to Anno Dom. 184;
which falls out in the Second or Third Year of the Emperor of Commodus, which
seems most likely, if it were ever done at all.

But that there was never any such King, seems to some learned Men very
probable; since Gildas makes no mention of any such thing; but says the time of
Christ's being first Preached in this Island, was as early as the first
Conquest of it by the Romans; besides which the Monks (who have since new dressed
up this Story) not only make him to have been King of all Britain; but to have
settled Christianity in all parts of his Dominions; and instead of Flamens and
Arch-Flamens in the chief Cities, as London, York, etc. to have placed the
Archbishops and Bishops in their rooms, which is impossible to be true: since
the Title of Archbishop was not then known in the Church; nor could Lucius
settle Christianity all over Britain, which was then either under the power of
the Romans, or else what remained unconquered, was absolutely Heathen and
Barbarous at the time of this supposed conversion.

But however I think we may safely follow Vid. Eccl. Brit. Antiquit.
Archbishop Usher, and Vide his orig. Britan. chap. 2. fol. 62.
Doctor Stillingfleet, in allowing the common Tradition of King Lucius, and
that he had Regal Authority under the Romans, in some part of this Island;
since the two Coins seen by the said Arch Bishop, the one of Gold and the other
of Silver, with the Image of a King on them, and the Letters LVC, with a Cross,
do sufficiently evidence it: But in what part of Britain he governed, whether
as Successor to Prasutagus among the Iceni, or else was King of the Belgae, or
was Successor to Cogidunus, over the Regni, in those parts that we now call
Surrey and Sussex; I will not take upon me to determine, tho I rather incline
to the last, (being Dr. Stillingfleet's Opinion) for the Reasons and
Conjectures, he gives us in the same Chapter; Anno Dom. CLXXX.
but as for the Letters pretended to have been writ by Pope Eleutherius to King
Lucius, tho they are inserted among the Laws of K. Edward the Confessor, and
are also to be found in an old Book of the Constitutions of the City of London;
I shall not trouble you with the Contents of them, since they plainly discover
their Imposture to any Man at all versed in Antiquities.

I have no more to add concerning this King, but that the Grisons make him to
have been their Apostle, and to have first preached the Gospel in their
Country, and show his Tomb at Cloir to this Day, which can by no means agree
with our British, as well as English Historians; who all suppose that he dyed
in his own Country without any Children.

Dion. Hist. lib. 72. about
But to return again to the civil History of Britain, we further find, that
under the Emperor Commodus, Britain as well as other Countries was much
infested with Wa^s and Seditions, Anno Dom. CLXXXVII.
for Xiphiline in his Epitomy of Dion relates, that the British War was the
greatest of all others, because the Britains having broken through the Wall,
which divided their Territories from that of the Romans, had laid wast many
places, and had cut off the Roman General together with his Army; whereupon
Commodus terrified with this Rebellion, sent Ulpius Marcellus against them, who
was a sober and modest Man, and lived after the rate of a Common Soldier, he
was also Stout an^ Magnanimous in his Warlike Expeditions, but tho he was not
to be corrupted with Money, yet was not at all complaisant in his Conversation;
but as for the other examples, this Author gives us of his great Vigilance and
Temperance, they are so trivial, that they do not merit any particular
relation; and I could have wished that Xiphilin his Epitomator would have been
more sparing in his Character, and larger upon the Actions of this great Man;
for all he tells us further of him, is, that he did very great mischief to the
Barbarous People in Britain, for which he was very near being made away by
Commodus, because of his Virtue; yet that nevertheless he let him alone.

Britain being again brought to Obedience by so worthy a Commander, after he
was recalled, began to fall into more dangerous Commotions; for Aelius
Lampridius in his Life of this Emperor, tells us, That now stubbornness began
to break into the Roman Camp, and the Military Discipline of the British Army,
being relaxed, the Soldiers began to refuse to Obey Commodus, and would have
set up another Emperor against him; for Perennis, who was than in highest
power with his Prince, removing Senators, set Men only of the equestrial Order
to Command the British Army; which being made known by their Lieutenant,
Perennis was declared a public Enemy by the Soldiers; for as Dion farther
relates the Army in Britain mutinying against Perennis, sent no less than 1500
of their own number into Italy, to represent their Grievances at Rome, and
being admitted to the Emperor's presence, they told him that the reason of
their coming, was to let him know, that Perennis had conspired against him, and
endeavored to make his Son Emperor; to which Commodus giving credit, at the
Instigation of Cleander, immediately delivered up Perennis (tho then Praefectus
Pretorii) to the power of the Praetorian Bands, whom he then commanded, who
soon dispatched him; but Commodus listed those 1500 (who were sent out of
Britain) among those Bands, who were his Guards. Perennis being thus
dispatched, Commodus sent H^^vius Pertinax (afterward Emperor) in to Britain,
(...) Pertia.
though he was then employed against the Parthians, who when he came hither,
did what he could to hinder the Soldiers from Sedition; Anno Dom. CLXXXVII
who would rather have had any other Man for their Emperor than Commodus, and
especially Pertinax himself; yet he then underwent the Censure of an envious
Person, because he was said to have accused Antistius Burrbus and Aristius
Antonius to Commodus, of affecting the Empire; so that though he quelled some
Seditions in Britain, yet he escaped a great danger, being almost killed in a
Mutiny of one of the Legions, and left for dead among the slain; which Fact,
though Pertinax severely revenged it upon the Mutineer, yet afterward he asked
leave to be dismissed of his Government, alleging, that the Legions were
displeased with him for holding them too close to Discipline; Having thus
received a Successor, he was, after some time, made Proconsul of Africa.

After, Pertinax Clodius Albinus, a Man of great Birth and Valor, Id^m in
Albino.
was made Lieutenant of Britain. He had before got himself a great Reputation,
whilst he governed Gaul; but routing the Frisians, and after his coming into
Britain, Commodus would have created him Caesar, and have given him the Honor
of wearing the purple Robe, even in his presence, though without the Golden
Embroideries; as appears by the Letters he wrote, recited at large in this
Author.

Albinus, having received these Letters, yet knowing how odious Commodus was,
because of his Vices, by which he not only destroyed the Commonwealth, but
disgraced himself; fearing, lest the Emperor being killed, himself might Perish
with him; he therefore prudently refused these Honors, saying, That Commodus
sought either who should perish together with him, or whom he might upon some
jealous pretense destroy: Yet however he still commanded the British Army; but
hearing, by a false Report, that Commodus was slain, thereupon going out to the
Soldiers, he made them a Speech to this effect:

That if the Senate of Rome had still preserved its ancient Power, and the
Supreme Authority had not been entrusted to a single Person, the public
Management of Affairs had never come into the hands of such as Nero, Vitellius,
and Domitian: Then reckoning up the greatest of his own Ancestors, the Albini
Postbumi, under the Government of Consuls; and setting forth the great
Additions the Senate had made to the Roman Empire by their Lieutenants, and
that they maintained their Authority to the days of Nero, whom they had not
feared to condemn as a wicked Prince: And concluded, that he utterly renounced
the Name of Caesar, which Commodus had profer'd him.

And yet this great Commonwealths Man; when time served, did not afterward
stick to assume the Titles and Honor, S.
which now for private Reasons he refused, and against which he so much
declaimed; and died in asserting to himself the Imperial Purple against
Severus, the wearing whereof he now so much reproved. This Oration being
brought to Rome, as it pleased the Senate, so it highly incensed the Emperor,
Id^m in Albino.
who thereupon presently wrote Letters to all his Pretors and Prefects, wherein
he let them know, That he supposed they had heard, that it was given out that
he was slain by a Conspiracy: And had likewise seen that Oration of Albinus to
his Soldiers, wherein he so much ingratiated with the Senate, and (says he,)
not without Reason, for he who deni^s that there ought to be one Prince over
the Commonwealth, and asserts that it ought wholly to be governed by the
Senate, Anno Dom. LXXXVII.
does by them seek the Empire for himself; therefore bids them beware of him,
for they knew the Man was to be voided both by the Soldiers and People. So
Commodus, immediately upon this, sent Orders to dismiss Albinus from the
Government of Britain, and to deliver it up to Junius Severus.

But Commodus being not long after poisoned by Martia his Concubine, Helvius
Pertinax, H^rod. l. 1. id. l. 2.
was thereupon created Emperor, who is supposed to have confirmed Albinus in
his Command of Britain; but being within the space of Three Months, slain by
the Praetorian Bands, Didius Julianus bought the Empire of them for so much
Money, to be given each Soldier; but kept it but Two Months, and was then
overcome, and slain by Sev^rus; who upon the news of the Death of Commodus; had
been saluted Emperor by the Pannonian Army; as was also Pescenius Niger in
Syria: so that Albinus in those troublesome times, under the short Reigns of
Pertinax, and Didius Julianus, found means still to retain the Government of
Britain, nor would surrender it to Junius Severus, whom Commodus had before
sent to take it, nor yet to Heraclitus, whom Septimius Severus, after he was
saluted Emperor, sent also hither to take possession of it.

Cap^tolin in Albino.
It is said of Albinus, That the Senate made Addresses to Pertinax, that he
would make him his Associate in the Empire, which Pertinax refused; fearing his
secret Ambition, and published that Letter which Commodus had before written to
the Prefects, that he might thereby bring Albinus into hatred and disgrace with
the Soldiers; who hated a Commonwealth, by which action Albinus was so
incensed, that it is said, he secretly excited Julian to Murder Pertinax, as
has been already related.

But Severus having got possession of Rome (the principal strength of the
Empire) and having now the Senate on his side, Spartianus in Nigro.
resolved first to make War against Pescenius Niger; but knowing himself too
weak to contend both with him and Albinus at once, was resolved at the present
to keep fair with the latter, as knowing him to be a Man of great Riches and
Power, fearing lest he should take Rome, whilst himself was busied in making
War against Niger in the East; therefore he thought it best under a show of
Friendship to draw him to his Party, wherefore he gave him the Title of Caesar,
anticipating his Ambition, by this voluntary Communication of Power; and sent
him very smooth Letters, beseeching him that he would take care of the Empire,
which now stood in need of such a worthy Person in the prime of his Years; that
as for himself he was now Old, and troubled with the Gout, his Sons being as
yet but Infants; to which fair Pretenses Albinus giving Credit, joyfully
received the Title of Caesar, telling his Soldiers in a Speech, he made them
upon this occasion; That though he had refused the Title of Caesar, when
offered by Commodus, yet now must obey in this the Emperor's Commands,
Capitol. in A^bino.
as well as their own desires; since it could not be denied, but that the
Commonwealth might be well governed by one single, Valiant and Good Man: So
much was his Mind charged by his Interest, so well was he pleased, that he had
obtained his wishes, without any danger; but Severus to make what he did appear
more credible, caused Statues to be erected, and Money coined with the Image of
Albinus, and also made what he had done to be confirmed by the Senate.

After which he marched against Niger, Anno Dom. CLXXXVII.
and having overcome and slain him, he had now Albinus only left to deal with,
and whom, as not thinking him for his turn, he was resolved by any means to
remove out of the way; therefore in the first place he raised a Report that
Albinus carried himself insolently, and ungratefully toward him; and that
there were diverse of the chief Senators, who had wrote to Albin^s, to return
and seize upon Rome in his absence: Herod in Alb^no.
Nevertheless Severus thought it not the safest way to act against him by open
War, especially when there appeared no sufficient grounds for it; and therefore
he sent certain trusty Messengers to him, who were privately ordered, that when
they had delivered their Letters, they should tell him. That they had something
more to say to him in private: But as soon as they had him alone, that they
should be sure to dispatch him; and besides, gave them Poison whereby they
should make him away, if they could not succeed by open force. Albinus being
warned of these treacherous Ambassadors, stood upon his guard, and would not
admit them till they had laid aside their Swords; but when they desired to
speak with him in private, he then seemed more suspicious, and having examined
them by Torture, forced them to confess the whole design, and then having
punished these Conspirators, he immediately declared War against Severus, and
took upon him the Titles of Emperor and Augustus.

Which as soon as Severus heard, he was extremely incensed, Anno Dom. CXCVIII.
and thought it not fit any longer to conceal his Anger; but having made a
sharp Oration to his Army against Albinus, and which was received with great
Acclamations; he presently began his Expedition against him, H^rod. l. 3.
who to defend himself, with the flower of Britain entered Gaul, and marching as
far as Lions, he and Severus there met at the head of their Armies; when the
Battle being joined, Albinus had at first the better, the British Soldiers not
yielding to the Illyrians, either in strength or courage; so that part of the
Army, which Severus Commanded, being routed, he himself was knocked down from
his Horse, and casting away his Purple Robe, was for some time supposed to be
slain; when Laetus Severus Lieutenant General, supposing him to have been
killed, came in with fresh Forces, with an intention to gain the Victory for
himself, for which treachery, he was afterward by Severus put to Death:
However, at present by his assistance, he won the Victory, and put his Enemies
to flight, pursuing and killing them with great slaughter; whereupon the City
of Lions being taken, Albinus was forced to fly from thence; but being pursued
by Severus's Soldiers, and driven into a House near the River Rhosne, was
there forced to run himself through with his own Sword, or (as others relate)
caused one of his Servants to do that office for him; but however he was taken,
and brought to Severus before he was quite dead, who quickly dispatched him,
and cutting of his head, sent it to Rome, to be set over the place of public
Execution; but he let the Body lie before the Praetorium till it stunk, and was
devoured by Dogs. A mean revenge, for so great an Emperor, to take upon so
Valiant a Person.

But now Sev^rus having by this Victory, obtained the whole Roman Empire; and
finding that Britain was a Province too great and powerful to be trusted in the
hands of one Man, he divided it into two Governments; committing the North part
thereof to Virius Lupus, Dig^st Lib. 28. Tit. 6.
as P^opraetor and Lieutenant (whom Ulpian names President of Britain) and to
Heraclitus the Southern parts, Anno Dom. CXCVIII.
as Mr. Speed gathers by a Coin of Severus Minted in his Second Consul-ship,
which fell in the Year of our Lord, 198, from whence it appears, that after the
Death of Albinus, Britain was not reduced under the subjection of Severus,
until he had won it by the Sword, the memory of which he left to posterity in
this Medal wherein is the Goddess of Victory represented, as sitting upon
spoils, with this Inscription, Victoria Britanniae; but this Victory must have
been then won by his Lieutenant, and not by himself.

But Virius Lupus, who had the Government of the Northern parts, was forced to
buy Peace of the Meatae a^ a great rate, Herod. lib. 3.
because the Caledonians, who had promised to check the Incursions of the
Meatae, had not performed that Article of their Agreement: This Author likewise
tells us, that the former of these Nations, lived next the Wall that divided
the South of the Island from the North; so that Lupus finding himself unable
alone to curb their Inroads, after great losses suffered from them, sent for
Severus, but he being at that time taken up with other Wars, Lupus was forced
to buy this Peace of the Meatae, as we have said; only some Roman Prisoners
were then set free: The Memory of this Virius Lupus is preserved, Vid. Camden
Britan.
in an Altar dug up, dedicated to the Goddess Fortune; upon the occasion of his
repairing a Bath, or Hot house, at a Town called Levatriae (now Bows) upon
Stanmoor, in Richmond shire: This was done for the sake of the Thracian
Cohorts, who lay there in Garrison with the Romans.

But Lupus hearing that Severus had at last put an end to his other Wars; he
wrote him plainly the state of things here, that the Britains of the North made
War upon him, broke into the Province, and harrassed all the Countries nigh
them; that there needed suddenly either more aid, or himself to come in person.

Severus was not much displeased at this news, being in his own nature greedy
of Glory, Ibid. lib. 3.
and being also desirous after so many Victories in the East, to raise also new
trophies for the Britains; and besides he thought at best to withdraw his Two
Sons from the pleasures of Rome, and inure the Young Men to hardship and
Military Discipline.

So this Emperor, though Old and much troubled with the Gout, yet with as
great Courage as any Young Man, made this expedition into Britain; and taking
his Journey for the most part in a Litter, staid long in no place; so that
having finished his Journey by Land, and having crossed the Sea sooner than
could be expected, he entered Britain, and having Mustered his Soldiers, and
brought great Forces together, he prepared for War: But the Northern Britains,
daunted with the Report of so great Forces brought over with him, and that more
were preparing, sent Ambassadors to treat of Peace, and to excuse their former
doings. The Emperor now loath to return home, without some memorable Action,
whereby he might assume to his other Titles the addition of Britannicus,
delayed his Answer; but quickens his preparations, till in the end, when all
things were in a readiness to follow them, they were dismissed without effect;
when he arrived, his principal care was to have many Bridges and Causeways laid
over Bogs and Moors, that his Soldiers might fight on firm ground, for many
parts of Britain, were at that time over run with Bogs and Marshes, (as Ireland
was some Years ago) now the Britains used to wade through these Marshes up to
the middle, not valuing it, because they went naked: But Severus prepared all
things which might be of any use for the Soldiers, or a damage to the
Britains: Anno Dom. CXCVIII.
And when he found all were ready to his Mind, having his Younger Son Geta to
govern the more Southern part of the Island, by the help of Papinian, the great
Lawyer; taking his Eldest Son Bassianus along with himself, he marched against
the Britains, and having passed the Wall that divided their Territories, there
only happened some tumultuary Skirmishes, in which tho the Romans were still
Conquerours, yet the Britains found an easy retreat, by hiding themselves in
the Woods and Bogs, which were well known to them, which contributed very much
to prolong the War. Yet did not Severus desist, till he had passed to the very
farthest part of the Island, and had compelled the Enemies to make Peace upon
this Condition, That they should give up great part of their Territory,
although he lost in this Expedition, by the sudden Assaults and Ambushes of the
Britains, as well as by Diseases, near Fifty Thousand Soldiers; which is also
confirmed by Lib. 76.
Dion, who further tells us, That he fought no set Battle, nor yet saw any
Forces of the Enemies in Battle Array; but that they did often leave their
Sheep and Oxen on purpose, that the Romans going out of the way to seize them,
might be the more easily taken and overcome: besides all this, the want of
Water much troubled the Romans, and Ambushes were laid for those that went
about straggling to find it: And when they were not able to march any further
for want of it, they were killed by their fellow Soldiers, least they should
be taken by the Enemy.

But in this Expedition, the wicked carriage of Bassianus gave Severus perpetual
trouble, not only because he lived debauchedly, but also for that it was
evident, as soon as he had Power he would kill his Brother; and had also made
some attempts against Severus himself; for he ran once all of a sudden out of
his Tent, crying out that he was much injured by Castor, who was the worthiest
Man in Severus's Court, and was privy to his most secret Councils, being the
chief of his Bedchamber, (the same with the Lord Chamberlain with us.) Now
there were before ready prepared some Soldiers on purpose, who upon Bassianus's
thus crying out came to his Assistance, and (as Herodian says) proclaimed him
Augustus; whereupon Severus immediately made himself to be carried to the
Tribunal, and having ordered all those Officers, and Soldiers who had been
engaged in this Action, as also his Son (who had taken upon him the Name of
Augustus) to appear before him, He commanded them all except his Son to be put
to Death, when they all begging pardon for their offense, fell down prostrate
before him; upon which he pardoned them, then touching his own Head with his
Hand, said, At last you will find that it is a Man's Head, and not his Feet that
Govern; but Dion says, he did put some of the most Seditious of them to Death;
who also further relates, that at another time when both the Father and the Son
were marching together into Caledonia, Bassianus did openly endeavor to kill
his Father, for as they rode at the head of the Army, the Enemies Forces being
in sight, he stopped his Horse, and privately drew his Sword, that he might run
his Father into the back; which when those perceived who followed them, they
presently cried out, at which Bassianus being startled stopped his blow; but
Severus thereupon turning about, saw his Sword drawn, yet then said nothing;
but returning to the Camp, went into the Praetorium, and there called before
him his Son (together with Papinian and Castor) then Commanding the naked Sword
to be laid before them, he sharply reproved him, that not only now in the sight
of his Army; Anno Dom. CXCVIII.
but also at other times he had attempted so great a wickedness, concluding
thus, if thou desire to kill me, kill me now, for thou art Younger and in
full strength, and I am Old and can scarce stir, which if thou refusest to do
with thine own Hand, here is Papinian our Prefect, whom thou may command to
kill me, for he will do what ever thou bidst him, since thou art already
Emperor. Tho Severus said all this, he did no more to his Son, notwithstanding
he had often blamed Marcus Aurelius, that he had not put his Son Commodus to
Death; but Severus, said this only in his passion, for his Son was dearer to
him than the good of the Commonwealth, tho by this means he did as good as
Sacrifice his Younger Son to the Elder: since he might easily guess what would
happen when ever he should die. Herodian confirms the same Story, and that
though several Grave and Wise Men had persuaded him to put his Son to Death,
yet he refused it, too much indulging his paternal Affection.

The War being thus happily ended, Severus in Memory of these Victories, caused
Coins to be Stamped with this Inscription, Victoria Britannica: and upon the
Frontiers of what he had now Conquered, built a Wall cross the Island, from Sea
to Sea, which our Author judges to have been the most magnificent of all his
undertakings, Spartianus in S^vero, Eutropius, Orosius lib. 7.
and that he thence received the Style of Britannicus. It was in length 132
Miles; Orosius makes it fortified with a deep Trench, and at certain Spaces, by
many Towers.

In Rege. XXVII.
Buchanan in his History of Scotland, will needs place it in Scotland between
the Friths of Bodotria and Glotta, in the same place which Lollius Urbicus, and
Agricola had fortified before, whilst In Britan.
Mr. Camden affirms it to be only Had^ianus's Wall re-edified, and which passes
through the higher parts of Cumberland, between the Rivers Tine and Eske; and
brings very good Authorties for this Opinion out of the Roman Authors, as well
as Inscriptions near the said Wall; in which the name of Severus is
particularly mentioned: which Wall is called by the English, the Picts Wall, by
the Britains, Gual Sever, and by the Scots, Mur Sever; all which denominations
do manifestly denote the name of its Founder: whereas the name of Greames Dike,
by which the present Scots call the Ruins of that Wall or Trench, which is
still to be seen in Scotland, does no way denote Severus to have been its
founder. There is also another Argument that this was the place where he built
this Wall we now treat of; for between Dun Britton, and Edinburgh Friths,
although there be many Ruins of continued Fortifications; See the Description
of this Wall in the New Edition of Came. Brit. Scotl. p. 958, 959.
yet are they not so visible as this of ours: nor does the Wall in Scotland
seem to have been of that strength and solidity, as this of Severus is related
by all Authors, and as by its Ruins still appears to be. But the former Wall
or Trench seems to have been only faced with Stone about Two Foot thick, and
then lined within with Earth: there are also diverse other Arguments to prove it
was the same with Hadrian's there built before, as first the number of Miles,
which Spartianus has truly reckoned to be Eighty; whereas between Edinburgh,
and Dunbritton there is not half that distance; but if any shall object that
Eutropius has reckoned the length thereof to be but Thirty Five Miles, and
Aurelius Victor Thirty two; yet how even this can agree with the distance
between the Friths of Edinburgh and Dunbritton, let them consider, who maintain
this Opinion, since even that will not agree with the distance between those
two Rivers; and tho it is true that Aurelius Victor (one of the most authentic
Authors that writes of this Matter) makes the space that this Wall extended it
self between the two Seas to be 30 Miles, and Eutropius 35, Anno Dom. CXCVIII.
whilst some later Authors have stretched it to 132 Miles; yet Archbishop
Usher, in his Learned Work already cited, Antiquitat. Eccles. Brita^. cap. xv.
has shown us, that these different Accounts may be reconciled, by supposing,
that both Victor and Eutropius at first writ LXXXII. Miles in Roman Figures,
and that afterward, by the carelessness of some Transcribers, the L. was left
out, whilst by others it was turned into a C, which if added to the following
Figures, viz. XXXII, make CXXXII; but with an L. before them, they make only
LXXXII. Miles, as they are indeed no more. But to conclude this Subject, on
which, I doubt, we have dwelt too long already, if Buchanan had not desired to
have been singular, and to have differed not only from our English Authors, but
from his own Countrymen, John Fordun, and Major, (who in their Histories of
Scotland are both of our side) he had never fallen into this Mistake.

Whilst this Peace with the Northern Britains lasted, Dion. Ibid.
it may well be supposed, that remarkable Meeting between the Empress Julia,
the Wife of Severus, and the Wife of Argentocoxus a British King, might have
happened; wherein the Empress upbraiding the British Ladies, that they lay with
so many Men promiscuously, according to their Custom, of one Woman's having
several Husbands, (as has been already related:) The British Lady made her
this quick Return; We British Women do much better satisfy the Desires of
Nature than you Roman Ladies, for we have to do only with the best Men, and
that openly, whilst you commit Adulteries with every mean Fellow in a corner. A
sharp Reproof, though no good Excuse for her Country-women.

But no sooner was Severus returned into the Roman Province, but the
Caledonians and Maeatae again took Arms, Id. Ibid.
which so incensed the old Emperor, that calling his Soldiers together, he
commanded them, (repeating a Verse of Homer) That they should enter the
Country, and kill all they met, both Men, Women, and Children; but being now
worn out with Years and Infirmities, he could not go himself, but sent
Bassianus, his Son, against them; yet whether he did any thing considerable, is
uncertain, since Severus died not long after: Whose End, whether it was
hastened by his Son's wicked Practices, or whether he died of meet Age or
Sickness, is not truly known, since Historians differ much about it; but before
he died, he is said to have spoke thus to his two Sons, Bassianus and Geta; See
that you agree between your selves, Herodian.
and pay your Soldiers, and then you need care for no body else. A notable
Maxim, which has been observed not only by them, but by all who are, or desire
to be absolute Monarchs. In Severo.
He is likewise said by Spartianus to have rejoiced before his Death, that he
left the Empire to his Sons, according to the Example of Antoninus Pius, who
left the two Antonini (his Sons by Adoption) his Heirs; whereas he had left two
Sons, gotten by himself, Rulers of the Roman Commonwealth. But he was deceived
in his Expectation, for the one by the Parricide of his Brother, the other by
his own evil Manners, were soon destroyed; and to expect otherwise, showed him
not to have been so Prudent in that, as in his other Actions: Upon which, the
Author last cited, in his Life of this Prince, makes this shrewd Observation;
That scarce any great Men had left behind them a Son good for any thing, but
either they have had no Children, or else such, that it had been better for
Mankind if they had died without any at all. Anno Dom. CXCVIII.
This Author also makes him to have further spoke these as his last Words: I
received the Commonwealth every where disturbed, but leave it even as far as
Britain, in Peace, a firm and stable Empire to my Antonines if they prove
Virtuous, but if otherwise, a weak one.

Ibid.
Dion tells us, That his Corpse being carried out in great Pomp, and laid upon
the Funeral Pile without the Walls of York, at a place called to this day
Sever's- Hoe, or Sever's- Hill, the Soldiers rid round it on Horseback full
speed whilst it was burning, his own Sons having first kindled the Fire.
Herodian gives us a long Description of his Funeral Pile, and of the manner of
burning the Body of a Roman Emperor, which being too tedious to be here
recited, those who are desirous of reading the Description of this Spectacle,
may find it at large in this Author. His Bones being put in an Urn of Porphiry,
were carried by his Sons to Rome, and placed in the Sepulcher of the Antonines:
It is also said by Dion, That Severus, a little before his Death, commanded
this Urn to be brought to him, and holding it in his hand to have spoke thus,
Must thou hold him, whom the whole World could not contain? Severus is
described by this Author to have been in his old age Corpulent, but of a strong
Constitution, tho much afflicted with the Gout; of a sharp and excellent Wit; a
Lover of good Letters, in which, tho he was a sufficient Master, yet was more
able to express it by Writing, than Words; grateful toward his Friends; most
cruel to his Enemies; diligent in Affairs, but careless of what Men said of
him; greedy of Money, which he gathered by all means, yet for that cause alone
he never put any Man to Death: He was magnificent in his public Expenses, and
built many new Edifices, and repaired the old ones; so that tho he spent
vastly, yet he left a great Treasure behind him. But to add somewhat farther
from others, he was a great Enemy to Incontinence and Adultery, and made strict
Laws against it; and had certainly as great a mixture of good and evil
Qualities as ever were found in any one Man: That he was both Perfidious and
Cruel, appears by his Dealing with Albinus, as also with the Wife and Children
of Niger, whom, tho innocent, he caused to be put to Death, whilst his own Son,
who had attempted upon his Life and Empire, he easily Pardoned; which whether
he did out of Love to him, or weariness of Life, as sated with Honor and
Power, may be doubted; and if he had been then a young Man, perhaps he would
have acted otherwise. I have insisted the longer upon the Character of this
Prince, as being one of the greatest and most fortunate of all the Roman
Emperors.

But having given you an account of the last Words and Actions of Severus in
Britain, I cannot but here take notice of a notorious Falsehood in Geoffery of
Monmouth in this part of his History, and whereby you may judge of his Skill in
the Roman History, Vid. the Lord Bishop of St. Asaph 's Preface ^o his
H^stori^al A^^o^nt of Church-Gove^nment in (...).
and I shall give it you in the Words of a Learned Bishop. Geoffery having
found that Severus the Emperor died in Britain, thought it most for the Honor
of our Country to kill him fairly in Battle, and therefore by power of Fancy he
creates one Fulgentius to be General against him, who being overpowered here at
home, went and fetched in the Picts out of Scythia, and with their Aid fought
Severus and killed him, and was killed together for Company: All which was
Geoffery's own proper Invention. And then having found that Severus left a Son,
Bassianus, that was his Successor in the Roman Empire, he makes his Britains
set up this Bassianus to be their King on his Mother's account, who (must be
the Sister of Fulgenius) then having found, Anno Dom. CXCVIII.
that Britain was Governed by Carausius some time after, tho he knew not when,
putting both these together, he makes the forementioned Emperor Bassianus
(being betrayed by the Picts that came in with his Uncle Fulgenius) to be
killed in Fight by this Carausius, tho there was a distance of some 70 Years
between them: But that was nothing with Geoffery, he writ (I dare say) what
might be true for ought he knew; nor has Geoffery erred alone, but has also
led John Fordun and Hector Boethius, the Scotch Historians, into the same
Error, who (as the said Learned Bishop observes) make this Fulgenius, whom they
call a British Consul, (his Name a little altered into Fulgentius) to have
headed the Scots and Picts in this War with Severus: But I need say no more of
this, for Geoffery being once exposed, (as he deserves,) those that write from
him will need no other Confutation.

After the Death of Severus, Anno D^m. CCXI.
his Sons Bassianus and Geta (having before taken the Surname of Antonini,)
succeeded in the Empire; and although the Elder pretended to hold it in common
with his Brother, yet he presently began to Reign alone, soon ending the War
with the Britains, and relinquishing the Garrisons; not long after left this
Island together with his Brother Geta, with whom when he had some Quarrels,
Julia the Empress, together with their Friends and Counselors, patched up a
Reconciliation between them, which was only in outward Appearance, and more by
Constraint than Good Will: So both of them enjoying the like Imperial Honors,
passed into Italy, leaving Virius Lupus as their Lieutenant in Britain; but as
soon as they came to Rome, their Hatred to each other breaking out afresh,
Herodian, l. 4.
Bassianus coming into his Brother Geta's Bedchamber, when he looked for no
such thing, cruelly murdered him in his Mother's Arms; and then bestowing a
great Donative upon the Soldiers to gain their Good Wills, was alone declared
Emperor, and his Brother Geta condemned as an Enemy, as having conspired
against him. But one thing is very remarkable; That when he had committed this
Parricide, he would have had Papinian, the great Civil Lawyer, to have wrote a
Defense of it; but he, like an honest Roman, utterly refused it, plainly
telling him, That it was easier to commit Parricide, than to defend it when it
was committed. But this plain Answer cost him his Life, Dion. lib. 77.
Spartianus in Caracalla.
the Emperor commanding his Soldiers to kill him in his Presence; which one of
them doing with an Axe, the Emperor chid him for it, saying, "That he ought to
have performed his Commands with a Sword.

The Reign of Antoninus B^ssianus Caracalla affords us nothing transacted in
this Island, only, that after the Death of his Bother Geta, he commanded his
Name to be razed out of all Monuments; which was accordingly observed in
Britain, as appears by an Inscription dug out of the Earth in Monmouthshire,
which was erected for the Safety of the then Emperor Severus, and Antoninus,
and Geta, Caesar's: wherein the Name of Geta, by the tract of Letters, may be
discovered to have once been there, though now razed out: The like is to be
seen, in another Stone mentioned by Camden, in Richmondshire.

The Emperor Caracalla, (so called from a Military Cloak he wore, Anno Dom.
CCXVII.
) being made away by Opilius Macrinus, who was then Praefectus Praetorii and
succeeded him, being chosen Emperor by the Army in his Reign, as likewise of
many other of his Successors. Capitolinus in Caracalla.
We find no mention made of Britain, Anno Dom. CCXVII.
whether it were that the Empire declining apace, good Authors grew scarce, or
are now lost; or, which is more probable, that the succeeding Princes being
advanced by the heady Affection of the Soldiers, and quickly again deposed and
murdered, had no time to perform any thing considerable in this Island, lying
so remote. Hence it is that for some years we are left in the dark, having only
a few Fragments left us, lying scattered here and there in diverse Authors,
which give us just Light enough to discover, that Britain as yet continued a
Roman Province, and still had its Propr^tors and Presidents: Nay, Geoffery
himself has here left wide Gaps and Interregnums for many years together. So
that if we would, we could not piece up a History of these Times, even out of
his Romances; and were it not undecent to leave so great a Breach in the midst
of this History, many of the following Emperor's Names might be sp^red* But
however we will give you the following Emperors in the order they stand in the
Roman Histories we have left us.

Anno Dom. CCXIX.
To Opilius Ma^rinus succeeded Anton. Heliogabolus, being, as the Soldiers
falsely believed, a Bastard Son of Bassianus Caracalla; but this Monster, after
three Years Reign, was killed by the Pretorian Bands, and

Herodian, lib. 4.
Alexander Severus, his Cousin-German, succeeded him, having been before
declared Caesar by the Senate. Anno. Dom. CCXXII.
It is thought by some, that he made an Expedition into Britain; for Lampridius
says, he was slain in a Town called Sicila, but whether it were in Britain or
Gaul he leaves it uncertain; howbeit somewhat we find in the same Author of his
Actions in this Island. That he first gave unto the Captains and Soldiers near
the Marshes, or Wall of Severus, those Lands which were won from the Enemy; so
that they should be their Propriety so long as their Heirs served as Soldiers,
and that they should not revert to private Men, supposing they would go to the
Wars more willingly, and take better Care to defend their own peculiar
Possessions: From whence, as Mr. Camden very well notes, may be deduced either
a kind of Feudum or Fee, or at least the the first Footsteps we can find of
Military Feuds, which were afterward so much in use amongst the Goths, and
those Nations derived from them, as the Normans and others. The same Author
also adds, that before his Death a Druid Woman cried out to him in the Gaulish
Tongue, Go on, but hope not for Victory, and trust not thy Soldiers: A good
Advice, if he could have taken it, for he Was slain by some of his own Army, at
the Instigation of Maximin, who succeeded him: The true cause of his Death was,
that the Soldiers, grown loose under Heliogabolus, could not endure the
Severity of his Discipline; so that though he were one of the best and most
virtuous Emperors that ever governed, yet he found the same Fate from his
Soldiers as the worst had done: In so sad a Condition are those Monarchs whose
Lives or Deaths depend upon the good or bad Humors of a standing Army. The
place of his Death is uncertain, for In C^ro^. Lib 7.
St. Hierom and Orosius suppose him to have been killed at Mentz by the
Conspiracy of his Soldiers, together with his Mother, whose covetouseness was a
great cause of his Ruin.

Julius Maximinus succeeded him, who was as wicked and cruel as his Predecessor
was good and gentle; Anno Dom. CCXXXV.
he, being condemned by the Senate, was slain by the Soldiers; but before his
Death, the two Gordiani, Father and Son, were made Emperors by the Army in
Africa; but being in a ^hort time both made away,

Pupienus Maximus, and Clodius Balbinus, Anno Dom. CCXXXV
were both together elected Emperors by the Senate, and were both slain by the
Praetorian Bands; during whose short continuance in Power, we find not the
least Remembrance of them in our Island. These two, before their Deaths, adopted

M. Anton. Gordianus, the Grandson of Gordian the Elder, who was also elected
Emperor by the Praetorian Bands; Anno Dom. CCXXXVIII
by whom though we find nothing done in Britain, yet that he had an Army here
under the Command of Nonnius Phillipus, his Lieutenant, appears by an
Altar-Stone found in Cumberland, at a place then called Castra Exploratorum,
with a votive Inscription for the Health of this Emperor.

Marcus Julius Phillipus, an Arabian, having deposed and murdered Gordian,
succeeded in the Empire, Anno Dom. CCXLIV.
but was himself also made away by his Army: He is said by Eusebius, Orosius,
and other Authors, to have been the first Christian Emperor; but this has been
confuted, and sufficiently exploded by Scaliger, and other learned Men. His
Memory is preserved in Britain by an Inscription upon a Pyramidal Stone dug out
of the Earth not far from Carlifle, which is dedicated to this Emperor, Vide
Cam^^. Britan. in. Cumberland.
as also to his Son Philip then Caesar.

I shall here omit two other Emperors which are mentioned by Zozimus to have
reigned at the same time with this Philip, one in the East, and the other in
Panonia: And shall pass on to

Quintus Trujanus Decius, Anno Dom. CCL.
who was elected Emperor by the Persian Legions. He was a great Enemy of the
Christians, and raised the Seventh Persecution against them; but having seen
his Son Decius, whom he had made his Associate in the Empire, slain by the
Goths, with whom he fought, Zozimus lib. 1. Or^sius lib. 7.
being betrayed by Hostilian his General, in his Flight, he fell into a Bog or
whirle Pool. To whom succeeded

Trebonianus Gallus Hostilianus, who had betrayed him into that ruin, Anno Dom.
CCLI.
but he being in a short time deposed and slain by the same Soldiers that had
advanced him to the Imperial Throne. Id. Ibid.


Then Aemilianus succeeded him, but enjoyed the Imperial Throne but three
months, and then the Legions near the Alps created

Publius Licinius Valerianus Emperor, Anno Dom. CCLIV.
who being taken Prisoner in a Battle against Sapores King of Persia, for 7
Years lived in a most miserable Captivity, being made the Footstool of that
Tyrant, till at last by being flead alive, he died. But before his Death,
Trebellius ^ollio in Valeriano.


Publius Licinius Galienus, his Son, Governed in his stead, (his elder Brother
of the same Name, Anno Dom. CCLX.
who had been Associate in the Empire with his Father, being dead long before;)
this Galienus being given up to Lust, Gluttony and Riot, and careless of the
common Danger, and through a haughty Ignorance unapprehensive of his own, met
with that Fate, Idem in Galliene.
which commonly attends such Princes: So that in his time the Empire was on all
sides invaded by the barbarous Nations bordering upon it, and had been utterly
ruined through his careless Neglect, had not diverse Generals in several places
undertaken the Defense of it; they were near Thirty together, who all assumed
the Imperial Purple, and are called by Historians the Thirty Tyrants: Six of
them, namely, Lollianus, Vid. Trebell^u^ Poll^o in XXX Tyrannis.
Victorianus, Posthumus, the two Tetrici, Father and Son, with Marius, are
conjectured to have ruled in this Island, as appears by many of their Coins
found in England, but especially about Colchester; whence Porphirius the
Philosopher, (who lived in those Times,) said, That Britain was a Soil fruitful
of Tyrants; Gallienus being slain by the Treachery of three of his own Captains.

Anno Dom. CCLXVIII.
Mar. Aurel. Flau. Claudius was chosen Emperor in his stead; who, having
performed several great Actions, and intending to reduce the Roman Empire again
under one Head, Idem in Claudio.
died suddenly as he was making Preparations against Tetricus, who then held
the Western Provinces, together with Britain.

Anno Dom. CCLXIX.
To whom succeeded L. Domitius Aurelianus, who, being chosen Emperor by the
Soldiers, and confirmed by the Senate, set himself immediately to reduce the
Empire again under one Head; a Work wherein Claudius his Predecessor had been
prevented by Death, which was at last worthily performed by this Emperor; for
Tetricus, who ruled in Gaul and Britain by the Terror of his Arms, being
brought to submit himself, was led in Triumph through Rome. Aurelian was
afterward killed by Mnesttheus, his Secretary. This Emperor raised the Ninth
Persecution against the Christians. After him

Anno Dom. CCLXXVI.
M. Claudius Tacitus, descended from Tacitus the Historian, was elected Emperor
by the Senate and Army, though much against his Will: He reigned but Six
Months, and died of a Fever; but before his Death he adopted

Anno Dom. CCLXXVI.
M. Aurelius Valor. Probus, who succeeded him; in whose Reign Bonosus, the Son
of a Pretorian Soldier, bred in Spain, (though by Descent a Britain,) and a
matchless Drinker, Vopiscus in Bonoso.
not so much to be blamed, if (as they write,) he were still wisest in his
Cups, having attained by the course of War to great military Honors, tho at
last, in his Charge over the German Navy, having (willingly as was thought,)
suffered the Ships to be burnt, trusting on his Interest with the Western
Legions, he joined with one Proculus, and seizing upon Spain, Gaul, and
Britain, made himself as Emperor for a time; but after a long and bloody Fight
near Collen, being vanquished by Probus, he hanged himself, and gave occasion
of that sharp Epitaph made upon him for his great Drinking; Zosimus lib. 1.
Here hangs a Tankard.

After this, Probus prevented a new Rebellion in Britain, by the severe Loyalty
of Victorinus, a Moor, (one of his Ministers) at whose Recommendation he had
placed a Lieutenant here, (whom Mr. Camden supposes to have been Cornelius
Lallianus, since his Coins are found in this Island, but in no other Country,)
who rebelled and set up for Emperor; but Probus upbraiding Victorinus with the
Disloyalty of him whom he had recommended, he undertook to rectify this
Mistake; so hastening over hither, and finding the Governor in actual Rebellion,
by some Contrivance, not mentioned by our Historians, he privately, in the
Night, found means to kill him. Eutropius also relates, that Probus was the
first Emperor who gave leave to the Spaniards, Gauls and Britains, to plant
Vines, and to make Wine: Zosimus ib.
But he having subdued the Vandals and Burgundians in a great Battle, sent over
many of them to inhabit in Britain, where they did good Service to the Roman
Empire, when any Insurrection happened in this Isle: They are supposed to have
had their Camp upon those Hills near Cambridge, Vide Camd. Britan. in
Cambridgeshire.
commonly called Gogmagog-Hills, where on the top of a Hill may be seen at this
day a Plain, encompassed round with Trenches of a large Circumference, with
only one Entrance.

But though this Emperor well deserved the Name of Probus, yet could he not
avoid the Fate of his Predecessors, being slain by his own Army; the occasion
whereof was that worthy Saying of his, That in a short time he hoped to bring
it to pass, that the Empire should want no more standing Armies: He was thus
made away.

M. Aurelius Carus was advanced to the Empire by the Army; Anno Dom. CCLXXXII.
he created his two Sons Carinus and Numerianus, Caesar's; to Carinus he gave
the Charge of Britain, with the rest of the Western Provinces, but taking
Numerianus along with him into the East, he invaded the Persians, where he died
suddenly, (as some relate,) being struck with Lightning; (tho In Aurelio Caro.
Vospiscus says, he died a natural Death; and that the Soldiers firing his
Tent gave occasion to the former Report:) His pious Son Numerianus was slain by
Aper, one of his Captains, and he again underwent the same Fate by Dioclesian,
who also in a set Battle not long after slew Carinus, who by his Riot and
Luxury had much wasted Britain, and the other Provinces: All these Transactions
happened within the space of two Years.

C. Aurel. Dioclesian being advanced to the Emp^re by the Choice of the Eastern
Army, adopted Mar. Aurel. Maximinianus, Surnamed Herculius, Anno Dom. CCLXXXIV.
his Associate in the Empire; five Years after which, the former of these
Emperors nominated Gal^rius, and the latter adopted Constantius Clorus,
Caesar's; constraining them to divorce their former Wives, and to marry their
Daughters.

In the beginning of this Emperor's Reign, Carausius, Anno Dom. CCLXXXVI.
a Man of mean Parentage born in Menapia, (that is) about the Parts of Cleves
and Juliers, who, through all Military Degrees, was advanced at length to be
Governor of Bononia, Admiral of the Belgic and Armoric Seas, Aurel. Victor
Eutropius, Orosius.
then much infested by the Francks and Saxons; but what he took from the
Pirates, he neither restored to the Owners, nor accounted to the Public,
whereby he much enriched himself; not so much as guarding the Seas, but rather
conniving at those Pirates, till at length he grew too great a Delinquent to be
less than an Emperor; therefore hearing that Maximinian had ordered him to be
slain, he then took upon him the Imperial Robe, and hearing that this Emperor
was marching against him with the Fleet under his Command, passed over into
Britain, where he built a new Fleet after the Roman fashion, Cumen. in Pa^ neg.
2.
getting into his Power the Legion that was left here in Garrison, with other
Outlandish Cohorts; he detained and listed the very Merchants and Factors of
Gaul, and with the Allurements of Spoil, invited great numbers of other
barbarous Nations to take his part, and trained them to Sea-Service; wherein
the Romans had so much lost their Skill, that Carausius with his Navy at Sea
did what he listed, robbing on all the Seacoasts, whereby Maximinian not able
to come nearer than the Shore of Bononia, (now Boloigne,) was forced to
conclude a Peace with Carausius, and yield him up Britain, as one fittest to
guard that Province against the Incursions of the Northern Britains. This is
the reason that in all Carausius's Silver Coins we find two Emperors taking
hands, with this Inscription on the Reverse, CONCORDIA AUGG.

But not long after, Maximinian sent Constantius Chlorus, now Caesar, against
Carausius, who in the mean while had made himself strong, both within the Land,
and without. Geoffery of Monmouth writes, that he made the Picts his
Confederates; to whom, as being lately come out of Scythia, he gave Albania
(now called Scotland) to inhabit: And it is indeed observable, that about his
time the Picts are found to be first mentioned by Eumenius in his Panegyric to
Maximinian, Ad hoc, Na^^c e^^am t^nc rudis. and soli Britanni Picti^ modo and
H^b^^nis assurta ^ost bu^ adh^c seminudis, fac^le P^^nanis armis (...)*
where he also mentions the Hiberni together with Picts, both which he there
calls Half-naked Enemies: But whether by those Hiberni are to be understood
Irish-men, (as that word Gramatically imports,) and as our English Antiquaries
understand it; Anno Dom. CCLXXXVI.
or else Scotch-men, (called Hiberni, because they first came out of Ireland,)
as Buchanan and Scaliger would have it, since it depends upon so nice a
Criticism in the Latin Tongue, as whether the words Soli Britanni were intended
by the Author for the Nominative Case Plural, or else for the Genitive of the
Singular Number, I shall not take upon me to decide; only the Reader may please
to take notice, that those who understand these words in the former sense, do
suppose the Scots to have first come out of Ireland into Britain after this
time; but I have given you the words themselves in the Margin, that you may
pass what Judgment you please upon them.

This is supposed to have been a Temple dedicated to the God Terminus, and is
seen to this day in Scotland near the said River. See its Description in Camd.
Brit. in Scotl. Tit. St^rling Sheriffdom: You may see also the Figure of it in
the new Editions, p. 1104.
But (as Nennius relates) Carausius repaired and fortified the Walls of Severus
with Castles, and a round House of polished Stone on the Bank of Carron, which
River, he says, was from him so called; also in Gaul he kept Bononia with a
Garrison, and all the Franoks which had by his permission seated themselves in
Belgia were at his command; but Constantius hasting into Gallia, besieged
Bononia, (now called Boloigne, as I said before,) and with Stones and Timber
blocking up the Harbor, kept out all Relief that could be sent in by
Carausius; but before Constantius with the Fleet which he had prepared could
arrive thither, Carausius was slain in Britain by the Treachery of Allectus,
one of his chief Friends and Commanders, who likewise for three Years usurped
the Empire; when Carausius worthily (as some say, or as others, Tyrannically)
had Ruled this Island 7 Years.

But Constantius presently took hold of that Opportunity before Allectus should
settle his Affairs, therefore, tho the weather were ill, he put his Army to Sea
with all expedition, An. CCLXIII.
and that from several Havens, the more to spread the Terror of his Landing,
and render it doubtful where to expect him; so in a Mist passing by Allectus
with the British Fleet unseen, that lay cruising near the Isle of Vecta, (now
Wight;) he no sooner got on shore but he fired his own Ships, to leave his Men
no hopes of Safety but in Victory; then forthwith the poor oppressed Britains
came flocking in to Constantius, offering themselves, together with their Wives
and Children, to him, as their Deliverer sent them from Heaven; which when
Allectus heard, being much dismayed at this News, he passed over to the British
Shore, where landing, he resolved to try his Fortune in a Battle on the Land;
where being encountered by Asclepiodotus Captain of the Praetorian Bands, and
desperately rushing on, being unmindful both of the well-ordering of his Men,
and of bringing them all in to fight, (except the noted Accessories of his
Treason, An. CCLXV.
and his Outlandish Hirelings:) He was overthrown, and slain with little or no
loss to the Romans, but great Execution on the Francks. Allectus having before
flung away his Imperial Robes, that he might not be known, his Body was found
almost naked in the Field; the rest of his Men flying to London, and purposing
with the Pillage of that City to escape by Sea, were met by another part of the
Roman Army, whom the late mentioned Mist at Sea had separated, and now by
chance had brought up the Thames, where landing, they killed almost all the
rest, even in the very City, whilst the Citizens had the pleasure to behold
their own Deliverance. By this Victory, this Province was totally recovered to
the Roman Empire, as Eumenius witnesses in his Panegyric abovementioned,
after it had been 10 Years in Rebellion. But before I dismiss this part of our
History, I cannot omit what Geoffery of Monmouth also adds, tho with no show of
probability, to this History of Carausius and Allectus his Successor in this
Usurpation, viz.

That Allectus going about to punish those Romans and Britains who had adhered
to the Party of Carausius, and been partakers in his Robberies; Anno Dom. CCLXV.
who resenting this Severity, chose one Asclepiodotus a Britain to revenge it,
exhorting him to set upon Allectus then in London, whilst he was celebrating a
Feast to his Gods; at whose arrival Allectus forsaking his Sacrifice, and
marching out with the choicest of his Soldiers, joined Battle with him, but
being slain, Gallus a Captain of Allectus still held London; to the reducing
whereof, Asclepiodotus (now made King) summoned the Daemetae and Venedoti (i.
e. the Inhabitants of that part of the Island now called Wales) to his
Assistance; with these Forces he beleaguered the City, and with warlike Engines
battered down great part of the Wall. Gallus perceiving himself not able to
hold out any longer, came to a Parley, and surrendered the Town upon condition
to march out Armed; which being agreed to, Asclepiodotus enters Walbrook,
whence it had its Name; but the Venedoti, contrary to the Articles, fell upon
Gallus and slew him, at a Brook's side within the City, now called from his
Name Galbrook, or Walbrook. But it is certain, there was never any King of
Britain called Asclepiodotus, who was indeed no more than the Prefect to
Constantius, nor had he any such Captain as this Gallus as we can any where
find, except in this Author.

But Eumenius who then lived, (and was of Constantius his Household, and who
upon this Victory made the Panegyric but now mentioned in Praise of Maximian
and Constantius, then Emperors,) relates this to have been done in the course
of one continued Action: So also Sigonius, a Judicious Historian, tho others
allow 3 Years to the Tyranny of Allectus. In those Times there was such great
store of good Workmen and excellent Builders in Britain, that during these
great Disturbances here, the Aeduans in Burgundy entertained them to build
their Temples and public Edifices.

Dioclesian having hitherto successfully showed his Valor against the Enemies
of the Roman Empire, Anno Dom. CCCIV.
now exerted his Rage in a bloody Persecution against his obedient and harmless
Christian Subjects; from the feeling whereof, this Island (though the most
remote) was not, Eusebius.
it seems, yet far enough off from having some share of his Rage; Socrates.
for our Historians, Gildas and Bid, relate, That in this Persecution, Albanus
a Citizen of Verulam suffered, as also Arron and Julius Citizens of the City of
Legions, (now Caerleon upon Uske,) and many others of both Sexes, in diverse
places, who were put to Death by various Torments. Of the Martyrdom of St
Alban, Bid gives us this particular Account, viz. That he being as yet a
Pagan, Hist. Eccles l. 1. c 6
when the Edict of those Heathen Emperors raged against the Christians,
received into his House a certain Priest who had then fled from his
Persecutors, whom whilst he beheld employed Night and Day in Watchings and
Prayers, upon a sudden (being touched by the Divine Grace) he began to emulate
his Faith and Piety, and being by degrees instructed by his saving Precepts, at
last leaving his Idolatry he became a Christian. Now when this Priest had lived
with him some time, it came to the Ears of the Roman Governor, That this
Confessor (who was not yet to be Martyred) lay hid in the House of Alban: The
Governor presently sent Soldiers to find him out, who when they came thither,
Alban offered himself to them in stead of his Guest, in that very Habit he used
to wear; and being immediately brought before the Judge, who at that very time
was standing at the Altar sacrificing to his Idols: Anno Dom. CCCIV.
when he saw Alban, he was highly incensed, because he had voluntarily
delivered himself up instead of his guest, so commanding him to be dragged
before the Images of those false Gods, he was then worshipping; said thus, For
that thou have rather chosen to conceal a Rebellious, Sacrilegious Fellow, than
to deliver him up to my Guards; that as a contemner of the Gods he might suffer
the punishment due to his Blasphemy; whatsoever torments therefore were due to
him, thou thy self shall endure, if thou persistest in this new Superstition.
But Alban, who had of his own accord owned himself to be a Christian, did not
at all fear the threats of the President; but plainly told him, that he would
not obey his commands (the rest of their Dialogue being somewhat tedious, I
omit) but the Judge being thereupon more provoked, told him again, that if he
intended to live, he must imediately offer Sacrifice to their Gods; which he
again not only refused, but also reproved others for so doing, and thereupon
was condemned to most cruel Torments, all which he manfully overcame; and
although they did all they could to invent new Tortures for him, yet he endured
them all with exquisite patience, till their weariness, not pity made them
desist. And here we must bewail our want of a true Story of this good Man's
Martyrdom, which the Monks have mixed with so many improbable Circumstances,
that it is even nauseous either to read or hear them. But I shall proceed to
relate what I find in Bid, without passing my word for the truth of the
following Miracles.

Alban being sentenced to be beheaded, much People flocked to the place of his
Execution; which was on a Hill (afterward called in English Holm hurst) to
which they were to pass over a River, where a narrow passage admitted of very
few abreast. Alban being to follow after all the company, and perceiving it
would be very late before he could attain his desired End, obtained by his
Prayers, that the River parting assunder, afforded a free passage for a great
many together; this Miracle so wrote upon him, who was appointed to be his
Executioner, that he utterly refused the Employment, desiring rather to suffer
himself for him, than to offer him any violence: But another soon took his
place.

Alban being come to the top of the Hill, where he was to suffer, found himself
very dry; when presently by his Prayer, as Spring brake forth at his Feet, to
the amasement of all that saw it, except the Executioner, who notwhithstanding
the Miracle, struck off his Head; when instantly his own Eyes fell out of his
Head, upon the ground, as a just punishment for his infidelity: and presently
after suffered also the Convert Executioner above mentioned.

The body of St. Alban was privately buried; That Age not knowing the Virtue of
keeping Saints Relics; but many Years after, Offa King of the Mercians, is
said to have discovered his Bones, and to have removed them into a stately
Shrine; where he built a noble Church and Monastery, as shall be particulary
shown in its proper place.

Not long after the Martyrdom of St. Alban, suffered also the Priest who
converted him, and whose Name Geoffrey will have to be Amphibalus; tho we had
never heard of it at all, but from this Author, that word signifying properly
not a Man's name, but a long shag Cloak, which it is supposed that good Man
wore: I shall also pass by the Martyrdoms of many other Christians, said to be
at Lichfield, and Winchester and other places, as being of very uncertain
credit, having no other Authors, but Geoffrey and our Monks; Anno Dom. CCCIV.
who lived and wrote at a great distance from those Times.

But the Emperors Dioclesian and Maximinian, having both on the same day (tho
in different places) resigned the Empire to the two Caesar's abovementioned,
and Constantinus choosing the Western Provinces (whereof Britain was one) for
his share, came over hither to settle affairs in this Island; and Eutropius
supposes Helena his Wife to have been a Britain by Birth; whereupon our
Geoffrey presumes further, and makes her to have been the Daughter of one King
Coil, whom he supposes to have succeeded Asclepiodotus: But since there is no
ground for this fancy in any Authentic Writer, I shall wholly slight it,
especially since Nicephorus and other Greek Historians relate her to be a
Bithynian; but to return to that which is more to our purpose; it is certain
that as soon as Augustus was declared, Eusebius. Chron. Zozom Eus^b. Hist. Eccles.
he immediately put a stop to the Persecution against the Christians in his
Provinces; and then passing over into Britain, Constantius not ^ong after made
an Expedition against the Caledonians, whom he overcame; and not long after
died at York: having been all his life time a great favourer of the Christians,
though no professed Christian himself: to whom succeeded

Constantine his Son, who came luckily Post from Rome to Boloigne, just about
the time (says Eusebius) when his Father lay Sick upon his Deathbed; where
being by him nominated for his Successor, Anno Dom. CCCVI.
he was immediately after his Father's Funerals, by the whole Army saluted
Emperor, tho he declined it all he could; concerning whom, De vita Constable. lib.
1.
there is a great dispute whether he were a Britain or not; our British
Historians produce a passage out Eumenius's Oration to Constantine, wherein he
calls Britain, the most blessed and fortunate of all Lands, quia Constantinum
Caesarem primum vidisti; which words may yet be thus interpreted, that is, it
did not behold Constantine Born; but saw him first created Emperor: which is
undoubtedly true, but since most of our English Historians understand it in the
former Sense; (there being nothing of conclusive certainty delivered by Ancient
Authors concerning it.) I shall leave it as I found it; tho it must be
confessed that the learned Dr. Stillingfleet in his Orig. Britannicae, Not only
from several passages in Eumenius's Panegyric, but also by other Arguments,
has made it highly probable that Constantine was born in Britain.

But this is more certain, that Constantine before his departure hence, seems
to have had some Bickerings with the Britains in the Northern parts of this
Island, which having in some time composed, he passed again into Gaul; where
leaving a great Army (many of whom were before raised in Britain) he from
thence went into Italy, and near Rome overthrew the Tyrant Maxentius, who had
seized that City, together with the rest of Italy; immediately after which
Victory, he declared himself a Christian in the presence of his whole Army,
which yet he would not have perhaps ventured to have done, had he not been sure
that a considerable Party of his Soldiers had been so before.

About the Fourth Year after, Constantine returned again into Britain, but what
he performed here is not left us by any Historian now extant, Anno Dom. CCCX.
more than what De vita Constant. lib. 1. cap. 25.
Eusebius tells us in general, That Constantine passed over to the Britains,
(who had it seems then revolted) whom, when he had subdued, he turned his Eyes
to those other parts of the World, that he might relieve those that wanted his
assistance; which this Author supposes to be the rest of the Empire then
oppressed by Mercurius, Anno Dom. CCCX.
tho all others make him to have been subdued in the very beginning of
Constantine's Reign.

But Geoffery (could he be believed) gives us a very plausible account, why
Constantine came now again into Britain, which is to this effect, That Octavius
Duke of the Gewisses, taking advantage of the Emperor's absence had seized upon
Britain for himself (the circumstances of which I omit, to shorten the Story)
as also how one Trahern (who is there supposed to be this Emperor's Uncle by
the Mother) obtained a great Victory over this Octavius; but that upon Traherns
being killed at Verulam, by the treachery of a Nobleman of Octavius's Party, he
again returned into Britain, and making a Confederacy with the Northern
Nations, renewed the War; whereupon Constantine coming upon Octavius on the
sudden, soon overcame him, yet suffered him though Conquered still to Reign
here as a Tributary to the Roman Empire: But it is not likely Constantine would
have given so great an encouragement to Rebellion; nay, what is yet more
improbable, he makes this Octavius to have Governed this Island, even to the
days of Gratian and Valentinian, which must needs be false; since the Coyns of
all those Roman Emperors, who succeeded between Constantine and Valentinian are
found in this Island; whereas no Coin or Monument of this Octavius, was ever
yet to be seen; and further none of the Historians of this Age do mention any
such King of Britain, as it is likely they would have done, had they known of
such a person.

But this is more likely, that the Emperor Constantine altered the Ancient
Divisions of Britain, by adding to the former Provinces, viz. Britannica Prima
and Secunda, Vid. Breviarium sexti Rufi.
Two others, viz. Flavia, and Maxima Caesariensis.

I have no more to add concerning Civil Affairs in this Emperor's Reign; but as
for Ecclesiastical History, it is certain, the British Church was now grown so
considerable, that Vid. Asserii Antiquitates Britan. Eccles. cap. 8.
it sent diverse Bishops to the Council of Arles in Gallia, which was held in
Year of our Lord 114, as you may see in the First Tome of Gallick Councils;
where Eborius Bishop of the City of Eboracum, in the Province of Britain, and
Restitutus Bishop of the City of London, and Adelphius Bishop of the City of
Colchester appeared as Deputies for the rest of the Bishops of Britain.

And though in the great Council of Nice, which was assembled Anno Dom. 325,
Id. ibid.
there is no express mention of the Names of the British Bishops which appeared
there, because the Subscriptions to that Council are lost; yet Athanasius, as
also Hillary Bishop of Poictiers do sufficiently confirm their being there, as
well as Constantine himself, who in his Letter to the Alexandrians, says; that
Easter was observed according to the manner prescribed in that Council, by all
the Nations he there mentions, among whom the Britains are reckoned for one.

Constantine dying, divided the Empire amongst his Three Sons, Constantinus,
Anno Dom. CCCXVII.
Constans, and Constantius; to the Eldest he gave Britain, France, and Spain,
with part of Germany; but he not content with his share in the Empire (though
most considerable) invaded the Right and Possession of his Brother Constans,
Amonian. l^b. 20.
and was by him Slain; he is reported to have been killed by his Brother's
Generals, near to the City of Aquileia in Italy.

Whereupon Constans his Brother seized upon his Dominions, Anno Dom. CCCXL.
and together with his Brother Constantius (though in Winter time sailed into
Britain, that they might quiet the Commotions of the Northern Britains, as
Libanius and Julius Firmicus witness; Id. ibid.
but as for Ecclesiastical Affairs in this Emperor's Reign, the Council of
Sardica being called by these Emperors, Anno Dom. 347, It is certain that the
Bishops of Britain appeared there, as is acknowledged by Athanasius in the
beginning of his Second Apology against the Arrians.

But Magnentius, whose Father was a Britain, conspiring against this Emperor;
and having beset him in a Town in Gaul, Anno Dom. CCCXLIX.
called Hellena as he was hunting thereabouts with a small Retinue, there slew
him; whereupon, Libanius in Basilic.
though the Western Empire o^ght by right to have fallen to Constantius; yet
Magnentius having possessed himself of it, and having drawn in the Britains to
side with him in his Rebellion, he maintained it for Three Years against
Constantius; the success at first was various; but at last the heat of the
Revolt being pretty well over, and Constantius still by degrees increasing upon
him, he was no longer able to hold up his Head; so that at last he slew himself
at Lions: The peaceable possession of this part of Britain being thereupon left
to Constantius.

About this time the General of all the Forces throughout Britain, was
Gratianus, Surnamed Funarius, Vid. Jul. Tiranicum.
from his great strength in pulling a Rope from Four Men, tho not long after
this (as Ammianus Marcellinus relates) one Paulus a notary was sent into
Britain, Lib. 14.
that he might enquire what Military Men were engaged in the Rebellion of
Magnentius, many of whom he maliciously prosecuted, carrying away like a Flood
the Fortunes of diverse Innocent Men, imprisoning the Freeborn Subjects, and
putting others into Irons and Fetters, heaping together false Accusations
against them, by which severity he committed such great oppressions, as cast an
eternal blot on the Reign of Constantius, who supported him in his Cruelties.

But one Martinus then Governing those Provinces as Prefect, grievously
lamenting the sufferings of these Innocent Men, often beseeching him, that he
would spare them; who, when he could not prevail, threatened that he would
depart hence, hoping that this malicious Inquisitor might at last cease from
his so violent prosecution: But Paulus fearing his trade might by this means
decay, being cruelly artificial in framing of Counterfeit Plots, (from whence
he obtained this Surname of Catena) brought the Prefect himself into a
participiation of those very dangers, resolving to send him with diverse
Tribunes and Prisoners to the Emp^rour, with which the Prefect being provoked,
endeavored to Stab Pa^lus; but missing his pass, he thrust the same Sword into
his own body, and so unfortunately perished this Honest Man, who lost his life
in trying to relieve the miserable Fortunes of others. All which things being
thus wickedly performed, Paulus stained with Innocent Blood, returned to the
Emperors Presence; against whose coming with his Prisoners, all sorts of
Tortures and Executioners were prepared, so that many of them were proscribed
and Out-lawed; some banished, and others most cruelly put to Death. But God
some Years after, justly punished this Villain; when by the Command of Julian
the Emperor he was burnt alive.

Sometime after this, the Council of Arimium was called by Constantius, Anno
Dom. CCCLIX.
being the most numerous that ever had yet appeared, as consisting of above
Four Hundred Bishops, both of the Eastern and Western Churches, Sozom^n l. 4.
and in which Council, Anno Dom. CCCLIX.
by the Emperor's long detaining the Bishops against their wills, till they
were quite tired out, the major part of them was forced to subscribe the New
Creed, made not long before at the pretended Council of Syrmium, wherein the
Word Omoousios being omitted; the Son of God was declared only to be
Omoiousios, i. e. of like substance with the Father: I have been the more
particular as to this Council, in respect to the Bishops sent from Britain; to
whom, as well as to the rest, Sulpicius Severus tells us, the Emperor allowed
all sorts of Provisions, which seemed undecent to the Aquitanian, Gallick, and
British Bishops to accept of; who therefore refusing the public allowance,
chose rather to live at their own Charges; only Three Bishops of Britain for
want of Revenues, were forced to make use of the public stipend, when they had
refused a Contribution offered them by the rest, thinking it more honorable
for a public Service to subsist on the public Treasury, than to be
burdensome to private Men; and this must be said in commendation of most of
the Western Bishops, that notwithstanding their being out Voted, yet (if
Athanasius tells true) in a Letter he writ to the Emperor Jovian, the most
part of them still persisted in the Faith professed by the Council of Nice.

But to return again to Civil Affairs, from whence we have made too long a
Digression; about these times Alypius, a Heathen, was Lieutenant of Britain,
who afterward bestowed much labor (tho in vain) to Rebuild the Temple of
Jerusalem; but the Year following this Council, Ammianus Macellinus relates,
Lib. XX.
that the fierce Nations of the Scots and Picts combining together, breaking
the Peace, wasted all places near the borders, by a cruel Incursion; so that
the fear of it terrified the other Provinces, already wearied out with a
continued succession of so many Calamities: Anno Dom. CCCLX.
But Julian then lately made Caesar (who was afterward Emperor) Wintering
then at Paris, hearing this ill news, was distracted in his Thoughts what to
do, fearing to leave Gaul to the Almans, then preparing for War; therefore he
resolved to send Lupicinus, at that time Keeper of the Arms and Warlike Stores,
into this Island to compose these Troubles, being a Man Warlike, and well
skilled in Military Affairs; but of a haughty boasting humor: Besides, it was
much doubted whether he were more Covetous or Cruel. But having raised an Army
of Light-armed Men, to which were added the This was the n^me of a Legion so
called.
Herculians, Batavians and many companies of Misians, being now made General,
and arriving at Bononia, having put all his Men on Board, passed over with a
prosperous Wind, and landed at Rutipae (now called Sandwich, near Richborough
Castle in Kent, V^de Mr. Somner 's Discourse of the Roman Ports and Forts in
Kent. p. 3.4.
) and from thence marched to London, and there taking Council according to the
exigency of Affairs, made haste to meet the Enemy; but what he did against
them, it is great pity this Author has not told us; all he says further of
this Lupicinus, being only this, that when the Army had saluted Julian
Emperor, and that a War was like to happen with Constantius; Lupicinus was
feared (tho absent,) being suspected as a Man of a haughty Spirit, that if he
should know these things (ruling then in Britain) he might hinder Julians
proceedings, and therefore a notary was sent to Boloign, on purpose to watch
that no body should pass over into Britain: So that all Intelligence being
stopped, between this Island and the Continent, Lupicinus returning back before
he knew any thing of these matters, could give him no disturbance here.

But Julian having now taken the Title of Emperor and Augustus, Anno Dom.
CCCLXI.
marched against Constantius; who coming out of the East to meet him, as far as
Mopsvestia, on the borders of Cilicia, there died of a Fever: Whereupon Julian
his Cousin was quietly received as Emperor, even by those who had been of
Constantius's side: who (from his renouncing the Christian Religion) was
commonly called the Apostate, of whom I shall say no more (since his short
Reign affords nothing relating to Britain) than that he was killed by an Arrow,
in a Battle against the Persians; but whether it were Shot by an Enemy, or by
one of his own Christian Soldiers who hated him, is uncertain.

Whereupon Jovianus, then an Officer of good note, Sozom^n, l. 6. c. 3.
was chosen Emperor by the Army; but he refusing to Command Heathens, the
Soldiers cried out with one accord, that they were all Christians; upon which
he accepted of the Empire; from whence it plainly appears, that his Army was
outwardly Heathens before, having complied for fear of the Emperor's
displeasure.

But Jovian Reigning but Seven Months, it is not to be expected that any thing
considerable could happen in Britain in so short a Reign; and therefore, all I
shall say further of him is, That in his Journey to Constantinople, at a place
called Dadustana on the Borders of Galatia, he died a very unusual Death; being
killed by the damp of a new-plaistered Chamber in which he lay, some Charcoals
having been kindled in it when he went to bed.

Whereupon, not long after, Anno Dom. CCCLXIV.
Valentinian was at Nice in Bythinia declared Emperor by the Army, being the
Son of Gratian, Surnamed Funarius, abovementioned; but Valentinian, not long
after he arrived at Constantinople, declared Valens, his Brother, to be his
Partner in the Empire; Id. Ibid.
in the beginning of whose Reign the Almans wasted Gaul and Rhaetia; the
Sarmatians and Quadi, Pannonia; the Picts, Saxons, Scots, and Attacotti, Amian.
Ma^cel. l. 26. c. 4.
also vexed the Britains with their continual Incursions.

Not to mention the Irruptions of the barbarous Nations into other parts of the
Empire, particularized by Ammianus Marcellinus, who is the first Roman Author
by whom we find the Scots to have been mentioned: tho St. Hierome (in his
Epistle against Ctesiphon the Pelagian) has given us a much more ancient
Passage, which he translated out of Porphyrie the Greek Philosopher, who writ
an Age before Ammianus, which is to this effect; That neither Britain, a
Province fertile of Tyrants, nor the Scottish Nations, nor all the barbarous
Nations round about to the very Ocean, did ever acknowledge Moses and the
Prophets: For tho Scaliger in his Notes upon Propertius, and afterward in his
Animadversions on Eusebius, takes upon him to correct the common Editions of
Seneca's Satirical Comedy upon Claudius, by reading in stead of the words Scuta
Brigantes, Scoto Brigantes; tho it be ingenious, and would make better sense in
that place; yet it is not to be relied upon, since no ancient Manuscript Copies
are found to countenance that Correction; nor do we any where read, that
Claudius made War against the Scots, or ever passed further than the Southern
Parts of Britain; nor can we find in Ptolomy, or other ancient Authors, any
mention of the Brigantes (much less of Scoto Brigantes) beyond the River of
Tweed. But as for Dempster's reading of Scoticas Pruinas in stead of Scythicas
in the Poet Florus's Verses to the Emperor Adrian, since it is backed by no
ancient Manuscript that any body ever saw but himself, it is not to be charged
upon his bare word, as the learned Archbishop Usher in his 16th Chapter of his
Ant. Eccles. Britan. very well observes: Anno Dom. CCCLXIV.
But who these Attacotti were who are joined in Ammianus with the Scoti, very
much perplexes our modern Critics, there being so many various readings of
this Word in diverse Copies of this Author, in some of whom it is written
Attacitti, and in others Attiscotti; and are supposed by Mr. Camden in his
Britannia to be the same Nation mentioned by St. Hierome by the Name of Scots,
Lib. 2. advers. Jovin.
some of whom this Father tells us, he saw eat Man's Flesh when he was in Gaul:
But in the ancient Notitia Imperii they are called Attecotti juniores, and
Attecotti seniores, tho in one Edition of the said Notitia they are written
Attacotti, (as Monsieur Labbe well observes;) whence the Learned Dr. Gale
conjectures them to have been a barbarous sort of Britains living in the North
of Scotland about Attarith; but of this, since we have no certainty, I leave
every Man to take which of these Readings he thinks most probable.

Am. Marcel. l. 27. c. 8.
But how the poor Britains were relieved out of these Difficulties, this Author
says nothing till four Years after, when he relates, That the Emperor
Valentinian in his Journey from the Ambians (in Gaul), to the Treviri (in
Germany, Anno Dom. CCCLXVIII.
) received the unwelcome News, that Britain was reduced to the last Extremity
by the joint Invasion of the barbarous Nations, and that Nectaridius Count of
the Sea Coast was slain; and Tullafaudes, another of his Commanders, being
circumvented by the Enemies Ambuscades there perished, which when he had heard
with a great deal of concern, he immediately dispatched away Severus (then
Comes Domesticorum, i. e. Lord Steward of his Household) to correct these
Disorders; who being a little after recalled without doing any thing, Jovinus
was sent into Britain, the Emperor having dispatched before with all speed all
such Provisions as were necessary for a powerful Army, and which the pressing
Necessities then required.

But at last, upon the News of such sad and fearful Calamities which then befell
Britain, Theodosius was chosen for this Province, who resolved to hasten
thither with all speed, who being a Man of great Reputation for Martial
Actions, and having raised a sufficient number of fresh, youthful Legions and
Cohorts, he set forward with much Resolution.

Id. Ibid.
At this time the Picts were divided into two Nations, the Decalidoniae, (or
rather, as Mr. Camden supposes, Deucaledonii,) and Vecturiones, with whom came
also the Attacotti (already mentioned,) together with the Scots, who roving up
and down through diverse places did a great deal of mischief; whilst at the same
time the neighboring Coasts of Gaul were grievously infested by the Francks
and Saxons, each of them striving (as it were) who should exceed the other in
Rapines, Burnings, killing and taking Prisoners. Theodosius being sent hither
to put a stop to those Incursions, taking Sea at Bononia, (or Bulloign) landed
at Rulpiae, whence, after the arrival of his Forces called by diverse Names
according to their several Nations and Legions, as the Batavi, Herculi, Jovii,
and Victores, he marched toward London, that ancient City, (which was
afterward called Augusta,) and dividing his Forces into several Parties, fell
upon these Rovers, whilst they marched scattered up and down laden with Booty,
so that easily routing them, the Plunder and Captives he quickly recovered; and
having restored all to their respective owners, except some small Portion
bestowed on the weary Soldiers, he returned to the said City in a triumphant
manner; and tho before it labored under many Difficulties, he hereby restored
it to its former Splendor, being emboldened with this Success to undertake
greater Matters; Anno Dom. CCCLXVIII.
entering into a ferious consideration what was further to be done, he found by
what he got out of the Prisoners and Fugitives, that the Enemy, consisting of
diverse Nations, was too fierce and numerous to be mastered by downright Force,
but rather by Stratagems, and sudden Attacks: He first therefore by Promises of
Pardon brought most of his own Deserters and Stragglers to return to their
Colors; but being himself taken up with diverse Cares, he sent for Civilis to
govern Britain as Vice-Praefect, a Man of a sharp Wit, and a strict observer of
Justice, with Dulcitius a Commander, very famous for his Military Skill.

Of which Expedition, the same Author gives us this short general Account in
another place, That Theodosius having by his Industry got together an Army of
well-disciplined Soldiers, marching from London, he extremely relieved the
Calamities of the Britains, seizing upon all Places from which he might infest
the Enemy, and commanding his common Soldiers nothing which he did not first
undertake himself; by which means he performed both the Duties of a valiant
Soldier, and a famous Commander, diverse Nations being put to flight, who had
before been encouraged by Impunity to assault the Roman Territories, and
repaired the Cities and Castles which had before suffered very much; so that a
firm Peace was hereby established for a long time.

But the Year following, whilst Theodosius was thus employed, Anno Dom.
CCCLXIX.
there happened a horrid Conspiracy, which had like to have proved of dangerous
Consequence, had it not been stifled in its very Birth: For one Valentinus of
Pannonia, a Man of an insolent and unquiet Spirit, Id. Ibid.
being for some great Crime banished into Britain; this wretch impatient of
rest, contrived a Plot against Theodosius, who was the only Obstacle to his
wicked designs; so that considering by what means he might bring them to pass,
(his Ambitious desires still increasing) he excited some Soldiers, and
Outlawed persons, by promising them both Pardon and Preferment: And now the
time drawing near for effecting his Treason, the General being informed
thereof, and being now become more bold to take Revenge on the Conspirators,
seized them, and delivered them all to Dulcius the Prefect to be put to Death;
but judging of things future, by that long Military Experience, (in which he
excelled all others of his time) he forbid any further enquiry into the rest of
the Plotters, lest many being thereby made afraid, those troubles which had
been already composed, should be again revived.

Then falling to the reforming more necessary things, now the danger was over,
and that it was evident, good fortune attended all his undertakings, he
restored the Cities and Garrisons (as we have already said) fortifying the
Borders with constant Watches and Guards, which though now recovered, had been
formerly given up to the Enemy; so that the Northern Province being restored to
its former condition, appointing a new Governor over it, he ordered that it
should for the future be called Valentia, in Honor of Valentinian the Emperor.

He also removed the Areans from their Stations, Id. Ibid.
a sort of Men Instituted in former times to good purpose, (tho who these Men
were we know not, but there seems here to be somewhat wanting in the Copy,) but
our Author tells us, That he had said somewhat more of them in the Acts of
Constans, which Book is lost; but these sort of Men now fallen into Vices, were
openly convicted, that being allured by Promises and Rewards, they were often
wont to betray to the Barbarians whatsoever was done among the Romans; Anno
Dom. CCCLXIX.
though it ought to have been their business, by running to and fro to give
notice to the Roman Generals of the Motions of the neighboring Nations: So
that all these actions being so well executed, when Theodosius was recalled, he
left this Province in Peace, and being attended with the general applause of
all Men to the Seaside, he passed over to wait upon the Emperor, who received
him with great commendations.

Nor can I here omit inserting that noble Eulogy, which Claudian the Poet has
given this renowned General Theodosius, in his Panegyric to his Grandson
Honorius, in these Verses, In III. Consulat. Honorii.
Facta tui numerabit Avi, quem littus adusti
Horrescit Lybiae, ratibusque impervia Thule,
Ille leves Mauros, nec falso nomine Pictos
Edomuit, Scotumque vago mucrone secutus,
Fregit Hyperboreas remis audacibus undas.
He shall relate thy Gransier's Acts, whose name
Burnt Libya dreads, and Thule known by Fame,
Who the light Moors and Painted Picts did tame:
And with his Sword the roving Scots pursued,
Whilst with bold Oars He Northern Seas subdued.


By which last Verses he seems to intimate that as he tamed the Picts by Land,
so he pursued the Scots by Sea; but what are meant by those Hyperborianae
Waters, whether the Irish Ocean, or the Friths of Dunbritton (called in the Old
Scottish Laws, Mare Scoticum) I shall not take upon me to determine.

But those Antiquaries, who would have the Scots to be planted in Ireland in
the time of Claudian, do urge these Verses of the same Po^t in the next
Panegyric to that Emperor; when speaking in praise also of his said
Grandfather, he thus proceeds, Claud. in IV. Consulat. Honor.
-- maduerunt Saxone fuso,
Orcades, in caluit Pictorum Sanguine Thule,
Scotorum tumulos flevit glacialis Ierne.
The Orcades were moistened with a Flood
Of Saxon Gore, and Thule by the Blood
Of Picts was warmed, nor did Ierne fail
Whole heaps of Scots (then slaughtered) to bewail.


^mian. Marcel. l. 29.
And about these times the Picts and Scots raising fresh disturbances, the Emp.
Valentinian sent Framarius King of the Almans (whose Country had been totally
destroyed by a late incursion) into Britain, though with no higher a command
than that of a Tribune over a Regiment of his own Country Men, then highly in
request for their Valor and Fidelity; but what he did here Ammianus ceases to
tell us: So that being for the future bereft of the help of good Historians, we
must be forced to take up with such scraps as we can pick up here and there out
of Zosimus, Orosius, and with other Epitomators of better Authors, now lost.

The Emperor now Valentinian, dying, his Sons Flavius, Anno Dom. CCCLXXXII.
Gratianus and Fl. Valentinianus succeeded him in the Western Empire, in the
Fifth Year of whose Reign the Emperor Gratian, created Theodosius Son to the
former, his Partner in the Empire, assigning him the East for his share. In the
Ninth Year of Gratian, Maximus a Spaniard by Birth, Id. Ibid.
(or Education at least) tho most of our own Writers suppose him to have been
Born in Britain, and one who had long served in the British Wars, being now
General of the Roman Armies, assumed the Imperial Purple; being either
discontented that Theodosius the Younger, who had served with him in Britain,
had been preferred before him to the Empire, or (as Orosius reports) being
constrained thereunto by the Soldiers, who hated and despised Gratian. The
first Essays of his usurped power were indeed employed to the good, and
preservation of this Island; Prosper. Chron.
for the Scots and Picts, who with their Inroads continually wasted the Roman
Territories, he subdued and drove back, the former into their own Country,
Ireland; the latter beyond the Picts Wall; and indeed all the Scottish
Historians do now acknowledge that the Scots were so beaten and quelled by
Maximus, that with their King Eugenius they were forced to quit Britain, and
did not return again to renew their Kingdom in Britain, till above Twenty Years
after, if they were here at all before that time, which many of our best
English Antiquaries utterly deny, as I shall show further, when I come to those
Times.

But the Year following, when Gratian had further provoked the Roman Soldiers;
who took it very ill that the Allans were listed for Soldiers. Anno Dom.
CCCLXXXIII.
Maximus taking hold of this occasion, carried over his Army (then much
increased with a multitude of British Youth) and landing at the mouth of the
Rhine, were there joyfully received by the Roman Soldiers, in Belgia and
Germany, where he made Triers the seat of his Usurped Empire; whence he is by
called Gregorius Turonensis, Trevericus Imperator; and then (says Gildas)
spreading one of his Wings as far as Spain, the other into Italy, with the very
terror of his Name, he brought under his Subjection the yet unconquered
Germans. Against this Usurper, Gratian raised what Forces he could of Mercenary
Allans, which the Romans, and especially the Moors, taking for a fresh
affront, as if those Barbarians had been preferred before them in Courage and
Fidelity, they deserted him, and went over to his Enemy; so that Gratian, being
quickly put to Flight by the Forces of Maximus, was forced to fly with Three
Hundred Horse toward the Alps; Maximus, tho glad of this advantage, yet
thought it not safe to let him escape, so he dispatched after him Andragathius,
then his Magister Equitum (or General;) who following him with all speed, with
some Light Horsemen overtook him near the Bridge of Singidunum, and there
killed him, by which Act he Established Maximus in his Usurped Empire. This is
the account which Zosimus gives us of this Action: Anno Dom. CCCXCI.
I know other Writers make a long relation of a Wile that Andragathius
invented, to make the Emperor believe that the Empress his Wife was coming to
see him; which he believing, and coming to the Litter where he thought she was;
Andragathius leaping out of the sudden, Murders him: But this dos not seem so
likely as the former Account Zosimus gives us of it; for if Andragathius were
stronger, as without doubt he was, What need was there of this device, or who
can believe that the Emperor should have no account of his Wives Motion, nor
of the Enemies coming in her stead?

Anno Dom. CCCXCI
All things thus succeeding, according to his wicked desires, having settled
Gaul, and cashiered those Officers, who had sided with Gratian, his Son Fl.
Victor, having been declared Caesar, and his Partner in the Empire, to which he
required (or rather demanded) of Theodosius to be admitted, which was for the
present consented unto by him, since he was not in any capacity to resist him;
so he received from him the Title of Emperor, and his Image was sent to
Alexandria, and set up in the public Marketplace, to be reverenced according
to the custom of those Times.

Maximus having thus by Treason and Murder, made himself Master of so great a
part of the Western Empire, he now pretended a great concern for the Catholic
Religion, and by that means drew many Pious Bishops into an acknowledgment of
his power; and therefore to show his Zeal, Sulpitius Severus Hist. Ec. Lib. 11.
he Sentenced Priscillia, and other Heretics of his party to Death, who being
Condemned in the Council of Bordeaux, and appealing to his Tribunal, were by
him Sentenced to be beheaded, although dissuaded from it by St. Martin, that
good Bishop of Tours, alleging it was sufficient, that they were
excommunicated by the Catholic Church, to which in matters of Faith they were
only answerable: These were the first that were ever executed by any Christian
Prince, for mere matters of Faith* which practice as it was only fit for such a
Tyrant and Usurper to have begun, so it had been well for the Church, if Lawful
Princes had not been too much led away by the intemperate Zeal of some
Churchmen to imitate so cruel an Example.

Neither did Maximus rest contented with what he had already got, but then
making War upon the Emperor, Valentinian drove him out of Italy; Orosius lib.
7.
who thereupon was forced to fly Constantinople, where he earnestly solicited
Theodosius to undertake his quarrel, who at last (tho with some difficulty)
granting his request, with all his Forces marched against the Tyrant, who then
lay secure at Aquileia, and in two Batles overthrew him; and not long after
being besieged in that City, his Soldiers finding his Affairs in a desperate
Condition, to make their own Peace, delivered him up to Theodosius, who by
Three days after, ordered him to be beheaded: Whereupon Andragatius his
Lieutenant, who was then at Sea, hearing this ill News, cast himself head long
out of the Ship, and so was drownded, and thereby prevented that public
Execution, which he so justly deserved, for thus murdering his Sovereign.

I have insisted the longer upon the Actions of Maximus, not only because he
first begun his Usurpation in this Island; but also to let you see that great
and prosperous Villainies do often meet with that punishment they deserve, as
well to the acters as contrivers.

But, I cannot quit the Reign of Maximus, without taking notice of that
notorious invention of Geoffery of Monmouth, who makes Dionotus Duke of
Cornwall (to whom Maximus at his departure committed the Government of Britain)
to have sent over his own Daughter Ursula with no fewer than Eleven Thousand
Noble Virgins for her Attendants, besides Sixty Thousand others of meaner
Condition, to Conan Duke of Britain, (on whom he with like truth supposes
Maximus had before bestowed Armorica) Ursula was to be the Wife of Conan
himself, and the rest to be bestowed upon the Britains, who came over with him:
of which Virgins a great part perished by Sea, and the rest being taken by
Guanurs King of the Huns, and Melgas King of the Picts, were either killed or
made Slaves: Yet this Fable (as improbable as it is) has been greedily
swallowed by Card In no^is ad Roman. Martyrolog. Oct. 21.
Baronius, who cites no better an Author than our Geoffery for it: Though
indeed, Brit. Eccles. Ant. cap. 5. and 8.
Archbishop Usher proves it not to have been he, but one of as little Credit,
viz. the Author of the Acts of King Lucius: However this is the only Authority
for this Legend, tho the Bones of these Virgins are pretended to be shown at
Cologne to this day.

After the Death of Maximus, Anno Dom. CCCXCI.
Valentinian II. was again restored to the Empire of the West by Theodosius,
though he held it not long; Eugenius being set up against him by Arbogastes his
chief Comes or General, and by whom this Young unfortunate Emperor, Zozimus
lib. 4. Oros. lib. 7.
was afterward strangled at Vienne in Gallia: but Eugenius was soon overcome
by Theodosius, and put to Death as he deserved, and Arbogastes made himself
away; upon which Theodosius took the whole Empire to himself both of East and
West; tho after this we find little mention made of the Affairs of Britain,
more than that during this Emperor's Reign, this Isle having been so lately
bereft of its choicest Men by Maximus, had for some time lain open to the
Incursions of the Picts and Scots, who took this opportunity to invade it; so
that Chrysanthius the Son of Marcian a Novation Bishop, is supposed to have
been sent over about this time by Theodosius as his Lieutenant to suppress
them; and governing with great reputation he did very much settle and restore
this Island; but not long after, this Emperor dyed unexpectedly in the prime
of his Years, leaving the Eastern Empire to his Eldest Son Arcadius, and the
Western to his Second Son.

Honorius, during whose Minority Stilico was appointed for his Governor, a Man
of great Reputation, having been an intimate Counselor to his Father, and
after his Death defended Britain, and is supposed by some to have sent a Legion
over hither, under the command of Victorinus, to repress the incursions of the
Scots and Picts in the beginning of About An. Dom. CCCXCVI. CCCXCVII.
Honor^ius's Reign, as appears from Claudian the Poet's Panegyric, upon
Stilico's first Consulship; where he introduces Britain, thus speaking in his
praise, Me quoque vicinis pereuntem gentibus, inquit,
Munivit Stilico, totam quum Scotus Iernem.
Movit, and infesto spumavit remige Tethys,
Illius effectum curis ne bella timerem,
Scotica, ne Pictum tremerem, nec littore toto:
Prospiscerem dubiis venientem Saxona ventis.
Me to ill Neighbors long a Prey exposed,
With safety now has Stilico enclosed,
Whilst the fierce Scots the Irish shore Alarms,
And with these Vermin all the Ocean swarms:
It Is through his Care no longer Wars I fear;
The Scots and Picts alike now dreadless are:
No longer on the Coasts I quivering stand,
Nor fear a Fleet of Saxons on the Strand.


From which words totam quum Scotus Iernem movit, etc. diverse of our English
Antiquaries have inferred that the Scots were not at this time planted in
Britain, since tota Ierne here mentioned, seems too large a place for one
single Province, viz. Strathern in Scotland, which the Scottish writers will
have to be understood by the word Ierne; nor is that Province, or the River
that gives name to it, called Ierne in any Ancient Author. But this is a
Controversy which I shall not take upon me to decide, being beyond the bounds
of our History; However this seems much more certain, That about this time,
according to the most Ancient Scottish Historians now extant, the Scots returned
again into Britain; For the Scots (says Scotichron. l. 3. c. 1.2.
Fordun in his Scotichron) now made a strict Alliance with the Picts, in order
to the recovering their Country, since (as they relate) Maximus had made use of
the Picts to drive the Scots out of Britain, and had put also Garrisons among
the Picts, Anno Dom. CCCCIII.
to keep them under; so that upon this agreement, Anno Dom. 403, in the Sixth
Year of Arcadius and Honorius, Fergus the Son of Erk, the Son of Ethodius,
Brother of that Eugenius who was driven out by Maximus, came with his Two
Brothers Loarnus and Cenegus (in all probability Loarn and Aengus, being the
names the Irish Annals give to the Brothers of this Fergus) bringing great
supplies of the Scots from Ireland and Norway, whither they had been driven by
the Romans; and then the Picts, to prevent all suspicion of Treachery,
surrendered up many of their Forts and strong places to Fergus,

Who thus became King of that part of Scotland, called anciently Albany,
North-west of the Mountains of Braid-Albain, though the same Author confesses
it does not appear whither he obtained these places by the Sword, or by any
other right, since none of his Predecessors had any power there before; but
the Picts and Scots being thus united, their first work was to drive out the
Romans and Britains from their Country, and then to Invade the Roman Province,
which was at that time left destitute of any defense: And so by their
incursions they either killed the Common People, or made them Slaves.

From which supposed return of Fergus with his Scots, Jo. Fordun begins to date
the certain Years of their Kings Reigns, for before that time he confesses he
had not found them any where set down; so that it seems he either had not so
good Intelligence, or else not so good an Invention as Hector Boethius, who
has given us the Succession of Forty Five Scottish Kings Reigning in Britain,
before this Fergus; together with the Years of their Reigns, and the exact time
when they began; and this he says he had from the writings of Uteremundus a
Spanish Priest, who is reported by him to have writ the History of Scotland; as
also from one Cornelius Hybernicus, Authors whom none but himself have seen as
I can yet hear of. But in a certain old Latin Manuscript, cited in Camden's
Britannia, in Scotland, P. 933.
this Action of Fergus is thus related, Fergus the Son of Eric was the first of
the Seed of Chonare that entered upon the Kingdom of Albany from Brun Albin (or
Drum Albin, that is, the Ridge of Scotland) to the Irish Sea, and Inch-Gal, and
that after him, the Kings of the Race of Fergus Reigned in Brun Albin, or
Brunhere, unto Alpinus the Son of Eochal.

So that according to this Author, the Ancient Scottish Kingdom of Albany,
reached from the farthest ridge of Mountains, called Braid Albain, all along
those Countries of Argile and Loghquhaber, etc. now called the Western
Highlands: And from whence the Genuine Scots still call all Scotland Albin;
p^rhaps from the Ancient Name of Albion, once given to the whole Island.

But to return to our History, Anno Dom. CCCCIII.
from whence we have made too long a digression; it must be confessed that the
History of this Island is very obscure and uncertain, (especially in point of
time when things were done) from the Death of Maximus, to the coming in of the
Saxons; for Gildas and Nennius either being wholly ignorant of the Emperors
that Ruled here, from that time to the Reign of Vortigern, suppose the Britains
to have from that very time cast off all Subjection to the Roman Empire, which
is not so, as has been already shown, and shall be made clearer by and by.

Forbid is more exact, Lib. 1. c. ^.
and takes notice of some of those Princes that Reigned in Britain, from the
Death of Maximus to the coming in of the Saxons, which Gildas and Nennius had
omitted.

But thus much is agreed on by Gildas, Nennius, and Bid, Anno Dom. CCCXCIII.
that Britain owed its first Ruin to Maximus his carrying over so great a
number of Britains and Romans into Gaul; from which time Britain being bereft
of all its Military Forces and choicest Youth who followed that Tyrant, and
never returned again, being either slain, or else planting themselves in
Armorica; so that (as Gildas says) the Island was thenceforth left to such
cruel Rulers as stayed behind, who being unexperienced in Warlike Affairs, were
still tormented by two transmarine Nations, the Scots from the Northwest, and
the Picts from the North. But Bid expressly tells us, Lib. 1. c. 12.
that he calls those, Transmarine Nations, not because they then dwelt out of
Britain, but because they were divided from its Southern Parts by two Streights
or Bays of the Sea; whereof one from the West, and the other from the East,
does separate the Regions of Britain, so that they do not join to each other;
these are the two Streights which were then called Glotta and Bodotria, (now
the Friths of Edinburgh and Dunbritton;) from which Passage of Bid it is
evident, that he supposed the Scots to beat this time settled in this Island:
Whereupon the British Nation being unable any longer to bear the continual
Incursions of the Scots and Picts, Id. Ibid.
sent Ambassadors to Rome with lamentable Letters, desiring some Military
Forces to be again sent to defend them; which if it were performed, and the
Enemy once repulsed, they vowed perpetual Subjection to the Roman Empire;
whereupon Stilico being at that time Tutor to the Emperor Honorius,
immediately dispatched to their Assistance a Legion sufficiently furnished with
Arms, and all Things necessary, which arriving in this Island, Anno Dom. CCCXCV.
and fighting with its Enemies, killed a great many of them, and drove the rest
out of the British Borders, and so delivered the Inhabitants both from Spoil,
and inevitable Captivity.

This Action, tho confounded by Gildas with the second Succors that were sent
in the time of the Emperor Honorius, In Dr Stillingfleet 's Antiquities of the
British Churches, chap. 5.
seems most likely to be sent by Stilico in his first Consulship, as has been
already said. The Britains being thus relieved, the Roman General, whose Name
is not told us, tho Camden supposes him to be called Victorinus, commanded them
to build a Wall cross the Island between the two Seas, which might be a Terror
to the Enemies, and a Defense to the Natives; Bed^* l. 1. c* ^^*
but the Britains not building it with Stones, but Turfs, as not having
Artificers sufficient for so great a Work, it served to no purpose, tho they
drew it between the two Streights or Bays already mentioned for many thousand
Paces; and where the Defense of Water was wanting, there they defended their
Borders from the Irruption of the Enemy with a Trench; of which Work, Bid
relates there remained most evident Tokens in his time: Anno Dom. CCCXCV.
For (says he) it begins near the space of two Miles from the Monastery of
Abercorne toward the East, in a place which is called in the Picts Tongue
Penvahel, in the English Penvellum, and which running toward the West, ends
near the City of Aldcluith: So far Bid. This I have set down to show, that as
yet the old Bounds were continued between the Picts and the Britains.

Anno Dom. CCCXCVI.
But this Legion returning home with great Joy and Triumph, the same Enemies, as
soon as they saw the Roman Soldiers, departed, passing over in their small
Vessels or Curroughs, entering the Borders, destroyed all before them.

How long they continued so to do, is hard to determine; but this is certain,
Id. Ibid.
that fresh Ambassadors were thereupon again dispatched to Rome, imploring new
Aids; and that they would not suffer this miserable Country to be destroyed,
nor a Roman Province, which had been long so famous, to be overrun by
barbarous and foreign Nations; whereupon another Legion was again sent over,
which coming unlook'd-for in the time of Autumn, made great slaughter of the
Enemies, and drove out all those who escaped beyond the Friths abovementioned,
over which they were wont to carry their Prey without any resistance. But the
Romans being now resolved to return home, plainly told the Britains. That they
would not be any more wearied out in such laborious Expeditions for their
Defense, admonishing them to take Arms, and to undergo themselves the Toil of
encountering their Enemies; nor should the Roman Ensigns march so far by Sea
and Land to curb a few unwarlike wandering Robbers, but that for the future
they should defend themselves by fighting manfully for their Country, in
defending their Wives and Children, and, which is more, their own Lives and
Liberties; and that they might do what good they could to these Confederates,
whom they were now forced to desert, they made them build a Wall of Stone from
Sea to Sea, with Towers, near the Shore, to hinder the landing of the Enemy;
and having exercised them in Arms, then took their Leave of them, telling them,
They must expect their return no mote. L^b. 1. c. 12.
This is the substance of Gildas his Relation, with whom Bid also agrees; yet
adds, that the Romans at their departure did not only give this sluggish People
fresh Encouragements by Words, but also left them Patterns of the Arms and
Weapons they would have them make; and then gives a more particular description
of this last Wall, and says, That it was 8 Foot in breadth and 12 in height,
and that it stood where the Wall of Severus was before, being made all of
Stone, and not of Turf, as that unserviceable Wall was, which the Britains had
before, without any Skill, built by themselves, betwixt the two Friths, Glotta
and Bodotria.

But before I quit this Subject, I cannot but take notice of the great mistake
of the Scottish Historian Buchanan, who persisting in his former Error, will
needs have this last Wall to be built in Scotland, in the same place where he
(tho falsely) supposes Severus's Wall to have been, and where Bid makes the
Turf Wall already mentioned to have been built: But Archbishop Usher plainly
proves in his above cited Work from the Authority of ancient Authors, Brit.
Eccles. Antiq. c. 15.
that Severus's Wall was built in the same place where Adrian's was before,
viz. between the Rivers Tine and Esk: So that if ^as Bid says) this last Wall
was built in the same place where the Wall of Severus stood, it must also have
been between those two last mentioned Rivers, and not between the two Friths,
(as Buchanan would have it; Anno Dom. CCCXCVI.
) who, if he had but carefully perused Bid, would have found, that he
sufficiently distinguishes between the place where this last Wall was seated,
and that of the former, which he supposes to have begun near Abercorne, and
reached to Alcl^id, (now called Dunbritton;) for in several other places As
Bed. Hist. l. 3. c. 2.

Ibid. c. 21, 22.


of his History he plainly shows, that by the Wall of Severus, he meant that
which is now called the Picts Wall, which began from the River Tyne; but since
the Passages in which he shows this to have been his meaning, are too long here
to be set down, I have put them in the Margin, for which the Reader may consult
the Author if he pleases. So that Bid is only mistaken in this, that being
deceived with the equivocal use of the words Murus and Vallum, which, as
Archbishop Usher very well proves, were used promiscuously in Roman Authors
either for a Trench or a Wall, Lib. 1. c. 12.
when he supposes that of Severus to have been no more than a Vallum or Trench
cast up of Earth and Turfs; whereas it was indeed a Wall of solid Stone, (as
has been already shown;) nor does the Archbishop think this Author less
mistaken, in supposing the first Wall of Turfs to have been in Scotland, but
this last of Stone to have been in England; whereas it was not at all likely,
(as the Archbishop very well observes,) that the Britains should have
retreated above 100 Miles backward, and have quitted so great an extent of
Ground as lies between the two Walls, if it could have been as easily
maintained and fortified as the other, much more when it was so much easier to
be done, the space between the two Rivers Tine and Esk being above thrice as
large as that between the two Friths abovementioned, had they not found that
they could not keep those Countries; and therefore were resolved to give those
Nations that invaded them as much Elbow room as possible, so that they might
have no occasion to invade their Territories.

But to return to our History, from which I hope we have not made too long a
Digression, since it has served not only to confute a Mistake in so eelebrated
an Historian as Buchanan, but also to settle so considerable a Point in
Antiquity. I suppose it was to this second departure of the Roman Legions, that
Claudian designed these Verses in his Poem De Bello Getico, when describing the
Forces which were mustered together for that War, to the General Rendezvous he
also mentions who came from this Island.

Venit and extremis Legio praetenta Britannis
Quae Scoto dat frena truci, ferroque notatis.
Perlegit exangues Picto moriente figuras.
Hither the Legion too from Britain came,
Which curbs the Scots, and does fierce Nations tame;
Who whilst the painted Picts expiring lie,
Surveys those bloodless Figures as they die.
But before I dismiss the History of these Affairs, give me leave to take
notice of a great Error in Hector Boethius and Buchanan as concerning this last
War between the Romans and the Britains, where, in the Year of our Lord 403,
he does not only make one Maximinian to have then commanded the Roman Legion
last mentioned, but also to have fought against Fergus King of the Scots, Anno
Dom. CCCXCVI.
and Durstus King of the Picts, together with one Dionethius a Britain, whom,
against all Reason and Probability, he makes to have brought them Aids against
his own Countrymen, and a Fight ensuing, that the Scots were repelled; and yet
that this Maximinian having but few Soldiers then in his Army, was forced to
retreat into the inland parts of his Province, whilst Dionethius made himself
King of the Britains, (without any Subjects to make him so;) but that
Maximinian being vexed at this Disgrace, reinforcing his Troops with fresh
Supplies, marched against the Scots and Picts; where a great Battle ensuing,
Fergus and Durstus were slain, but King Dionethius (whom I suppose to be the
same with Geoffery's Dionatus Duke of Cornwall, already mentioned,) was carried
off much wounded. But of this King, neither Gildas, Nennius, nor Bid, no nor
so much as Geoffery, says any thing; and therefore not being to be found in any
Historian before Hector, all this Tale concerning this imaginary King, is to be
looked upon as a pure Invention of his own.

But this is certain, that the Britains being thus deserted by the Romans for
19 Years after the Death of Maximus, (as Zosimus relates, viz. about the Year
406, or 407,) the British Army all in a mutiny Elected one Marcus to be their
Emperor, a Man of great Power in this Island, (and perhaps Lieutenant here)
whom, not answering their Expectations, they soon took off, and then set up one
Gratianus, making him put on the Imperial Purple, who seems to be a Native of
Britain, for so much Hist. l. 7. c. 40.
Orosius his words imply, when he calls him Municeps ejusdem Insulae; but he
not pleasing them, after 4 Months Reign, they deprived him both of his Life and
Empire. Nen. c. 24.
Of him, Nennius says nothing, but mentions one Severus, between Maximus and
Constantius, whom others omit; but Galfr. l. 2. c. 4.
Geoffery of Monmouth makes this Gratian to have assumed the Royal Authority as
soon as he heard of the Death of Maximus, and that he was so Cruel and
Tyrannical, that the common People rose up and killed him; and that after his
Death, the Britains sent to Rome to beg Help against the Picts and Scots. But
Zosimus and Orosius both relate, That after the Death of this Gratian, Anno
Dom. CCCCVII.
the Roman Britains set up one Constantine an ordinary Soldier, (chiefly for
the good Omen of his Name,) yet Procopius differs somewhat from the former
Authors, and calls this Constantine no obscure Man, but whether he meant for
Valor or Nobility, I will not determine; but however he being by them declared
Emperor, gathered what Forces together he could, (being the remainder of those
that had been carried away before by Maximus,) and putting to Sea from Britain,
landed at Boloigne, and by the Terror of his Name, and the Numbers of his
Followers, easily brought over to his Party all the Roman Forces on this side
the Alps: Valentia in France he manfully defended against the Puissance of
Honorius; the Rhine, which long time before had been neglected, he fortified
with Garrisons; and even upon the very Alps, and toward the Seacoasts,
wherever the Passages lay open, he built Forts and Castles; whilst in Spain,
under the Conduct of his Son Constans, (whom of a Monk he had made Caesar) he
waged War with the like good Fortune.

(...). in Bib. (...).
And now grown Insolent by this constant Current of Success, not content that
Honorius had admitted him his Partner in the Empire, and upon an Embassy sent
to him on purpose accepted his Excuse, That the Soldiers had advanced him to
the Throne against his Will; in hostile manner he passed the Alps, intending to
march directly against Rome, but on the sudden he returned to Arles, where he
settled his Imperial Seat, Anno Dom. CCCCVII.
and commanded that City to be called Constantia after his own Name.

Whilst with the like Success his Son Constans, by the Conduct of Gerontius his
General, he brought all Spain under his Obedience.

But when Constans upon some Suspicions turned Gerontius out of his Command,
(for the Cause is not expressed,) the Affairs both of the Father and Son
presently declined; for as he returned from Constantine out of Gaul into Spain,
by the way he received the unwelcome News of Gerontius's having revolted from
his Obedience, and set up one Maximus, Anno Dom. CCCCXI.
one of his own Creatures, for Emperor, and that having raised a powerful
Army, consisting of diverse barbarous Nations, that he was upon his march
against him. Constans allarmed with these Tidings, immediately dispatched away
one Eddobeccus unto the Germans, whilst himself attended with Decimius Rusticus
(who of the Master of his Offices was advanced to be Prefect,) and accompanied
with an Army of Francks, Almans, and other Nations, passed into Gaul, intending
with all speed to return again to his Father; but being intercepted by
Gerontius, and by him besieged in Vienna, (in Dauphine,) the City being taken,
he was there slain. Then Gerontius marching to meet Constantine, found him at
Arles, against which City he laid close Siege, but was hindered from taking it
by the sudden coming of Constantius Comes, Zosom. l. 9. c. 13.
whom the Emperor Honorius had newly made his General; at whose arrival with
an Army out of Italy, Gerontius, being deserted by his own Soldiers, retired
into Spain, where growing also into Contempt and Hatred with those few that
remained, his House in the Night being beset by them, he with his own Servants
manfully defended himself, and slew above 300 of them; and when his Darts and
other Weapons were spent, tho he might have escaped at a back Door as his
Servants had done, yet out of kindness to his Friend Allan, and his Wife
Nunnichia, he refused it: and having first cut off the Head of his Friend, (as
was agreed between them,) he then slew his Wife, (tho with great Reluctance,)
being prevailed upon by her Importunity so to do, refusing to out live her
Husband, and desiring to be freed from the Violence of the enraged Multitude;
for which her Resolution, Sozomen the Ecclesiastical Historian gives her great
Commendations: This done, Gerontius turned his Sword against himself, but
failing in his Design, he finished it with his Dagger. This Man being supposed
to be a Britain, I have been the more particular in his History; and Humphrey
Lloyd, in his Discourse concerning Britain, makes him to have been so famous
here, as to be celebrated by the British Bards, whose Verses upon his Death he
there gives you.

But in the mean while, Constantine now streighten'd on all sides, and
discouraged with the ill Success of Eddobeccus, (who was slain but a little
before,) after having been besieged 4 Months with his other Son Julian in the
City of Arles, there flings off his Purple Robes and entered into Priests Order,
hoping under that Protection to secure his Life, and so not long after
surrendered the Town. But his new Habit proved no Sanctuary to him, for he was
carried into Italy, and there beheaded by the Emperor's Order, together with
his Son Julian, and Brother named Sebastian. Whilst these Things were acting,
the Scots, Picts, and Vandals, taking advantage of the Negligence of
Constantine, (who whilst he stayed at Arles, and minded his Pleasures more than
public Affairs) invaded his Territories, the latter breaking into Gaul, and
then invading Britain; Anno Dom. CCCCXI.
but the Britains now destitute of the Roman Aids, and kept under by them who
had not Power to protect them, (as Zosimus relates,) as well the Gauls as
Britains, forthwith took Arms, and resolving to stand on their own Defense,
renounced all further Obedience to the Roman Empire, which they believed they
might justify, being then left without its Protection. Being thus harrassed by
their wonted Enemies, having before sent Messages to Honorius for Relief, but
all to no purpose, for he at that time not being able to defend Rome it self,
Anno Dom. CCCCX.
(which the same Year was taken by Alaric King of the Goths,) the Emperor
permitted them by his Letters to provide for their own safety, acquitting them
of the Roman Jurisdiction. They therefore being thus deserted, the Government
of course devolved to the People, who thenceforth betook themselves to live
after their own Laws, and to defend their Country as well as they were able.

But since the Chronology of these Times we are now Treating of is very
perplexed and obscure, by reason of the great scarcity of good Authors; and
since some Writers place the Britains casting off their Subjection to the Roman
Empire immediately after the Death of this Constantine abovementioned, and
others defer it 20 Years later, give me leave here to subjoyn what the Learned
Dr. Stillingfleet has said in his above cited Treatise concerning the time
when this great Change happened in this Island, Vid. Dr. Stillingfl^et 's
Antiquities of the Brit. Churches, c. 5. p. 295.
for it has been already proved; for though all Authors agree, that the
Britains petitioned the Emperor Honorius for the first Supplies against the
Picts and Scots that then invaded them, yet they differ about the time: I shall
therefore first take notice what Bid says concerning this matter, who makes
Gratianus Municeps to be set up two Years before the sacking of Rome by Alaric,
which happened Anno Dom. 410; and he also therein follows Orosius's Relation
concerning Constantine, and his Son Constans, without ever mentioning their
continuing to Govern here, and much less losing their Lives in Britain, (as
Nennius falsely supposes;) but then he applies that Passage in Gildas concerning
that lamentable condition of the Britains, and there first demanding Help from
the Romans to the Times immediately following the Death of Constantine; whereas
Gildas indeed mentions it as happening upon the Usurpation of Maximus, and his
withdrawing the Forces from hence; and that therefore this first Invasion of
the Picts and Scots was between the Death of Maximus, and the setting up of
Gratianus Municeps, when the Britains so earnestly suing for Assistance, had a
Roman Governor and a Legion sent to their Relief. And Mr. Camden, in his
Introduction to his Britannia, supposes, that Claudius Rutilius mentions
Victorinus as a Roman Governor here about that time; but this is very
uncertain, when he there only speaks of the taking Toulouse by the Goths, which
was done by Ataulphus some time after the Death of Alaric, and therefore could
not be before the time of Gratian and Constantine.

Now that the first Supplies that were sent over into Britain were all of them
sent before the Death of Stilico, the said Learned Dr. Stillingfl^et in his
above cited Treatise goes on to prove in the same place: It is evident (says
he) from many Passages in De (...). 2. v. 25.
Claudian, that Stilico took particular care of sending Supplies to the
Britains against the Scots and Picts, but Stilico was killed by the Army when
Bassus and Philippus were Consuls, Anno Dom. 408, before the first Siege of
Rome by the Goths, and therefore the Roman Forces sent by him must be before
the Usurpat^on of Gratianus and Constantine; Anno Dom. CCCCX.
Stillico being killed the same Year, that these Usurpers were set up in
Britain, it is not possible he should do it after their Death; and it seems not
probable, that any Supplies should be sent through Gaul, while Constantine
remained Master there; the Army in Gaul then taking part with him against
Honorius; and witha^ Gildas says, That the Roman Legion having driven out the
Picts and Scots, returned in Triumph. And so much is confessed by B^de: But at
what time can we suppose that to have happened? Is it likely that after the
Usurpation of Constantine, a Roman Legion should return in so much Triumph? For
immediately aft^r Constantine's Usurpation, the Roman Empire beg^n extremely to
decline in those parts, through which they were to pass; Gaul being upon
Composition Jornand. 30. Paul diac. l. 14. Seigeb. Chron. Anno Dom. 412.
not long after delivered up to the Goths by Honorius, and besides, the Franks
and Burgundians making continual incursions there: I conclude it therefore most
probable, that the first supplies sent to the Britains, were not after
Constantine's Usurpation, but between the Death of Maximus, and the setting up
of Gratianus Municeps.

Now let us see if we can hence discover when the second Assistance was sent to
the Britains, for which we must own our selves beholding to the aforesaid
learned Doctor in the same place, where he thus makes it out.

The Second time, the distressed Britains were forced to solicit the Romans
for supplies, is placed by Archbishop Usher, Ant. Brit. cap. 11. P. 318.
Anno Dom. 426; when Gallio of Raven^a was sent hither, (as he supposes;)
because the next Year Prosper says, that Gallio was sent against Bonifacius in
Africa; but then the Archbishop makes the first supplies to have been sent in
the latter end of Honorius's Reign for which the Doctor says, he can see no
reason; for the Lord Primate grants that immediately after the Death of
Max^mus, the Scots and Picts did waste Britain, and that then Stillico did send
assistance to them. Why then should the first wasting of the Island, mentioned
by Gildas, and the Legion sent thereupon, be that in the latter end of Honorius
his Reign, and not rather in the beginning? since the latter was very perplexed
and troublesome, the Alani, Swevi, and Vandali, having possessed themselves of
great part of Spain, whilst the Franks, Burgundians and Goths had all Gaul; so
that Honorius, the Year before his Death, was forced to send his Forces under
Castinus into Spain, against the Vandals, as Prosper in his Chronicle affirms:
And that also proved the occasion of new Troubles in Africa, by the difference
between Castinus and Bonifacius, who for his own security sent over the Vandals
thither. Is it not therefore most probable, that the first Supplies of the
Britains should be sent in the latter end of Honorius's Reign, especially since
the learned Primate confesses, that Honorius did not in his time recover the
Province of Britain: and he proves it against Sabellicus, from Procopius's
Authority, a much more ancient Author, besides that of Bid; so that the
single testimony of Sigebert; that Honorius sent assistance to the Britains at
the same time that he did to the Spaniards, (when Prosper, Idatius, and
Cassiodore, who all mention the latter, say not one word of the former) cannot
bear down the more weighty Reasons on the other side.

But it is certain that in this interval between the sending of the two
supplies, the Roman Affairs became so desperate, That the Saxon Annals, Anno
Dom. CCCCXVIII.
as well as Ethelward in his Chronicle, relates, that now the Romans hid their
Treasures in the Earth, or else carried them away with them into Gaul; so that
it seems most likely during all the rest of the Reign of the Emperor Honorius,
Anno Dom. CCCCXVIII.
the Britains did no more return to his Obedience; tho notwithstanding, they
did again endeavor to put themselves under the protection of the Roman Empire,
in the time of his Successor Valentinian III. as the learned Dr. above cited
makes it more than probable in the same place, from diverse other Circumstances
too long to be here particularly set down.

So that the second supplies which were sent upon the mighty importunity of the
Britains, were in all probability in the beginning of the Reign of Valentinian
III. after that Aetius had somewhat recovered the credit of the Roman Empire in
Gaul; for after his success there, both against the Goths and Franks, he had
liberty enough to send over a Legion to the assistance of the Britains, who
were again miserably harassed by the Scots and Picts: And at this time it was
that Gildas says, the Romans upon the sad representations of the British
Ambassadors, sent them speedy supplies. So far we have been beholding to the
learned Dr. Stillingfleet, now Lord Bishop of Worc^ster; but if I may interpose
my own Opinion, I should assign the sending of these last supplies by the
Romans, to have been in the Year of our Lord 435; when Aetius had good sucess
against the Burgundians in Gaul: To which Year also the Saxon Annals refer the
ceasing of the Roman Empire in Britain; only the Compiler was mistaken in two
things, the first in making Rome to have been taken this Year by the Goths; the
other in supposing the time of the Romans ruling here, to be but 470 Years;
whereas indeed it was 488 Years, as I shall presently make out.

So that from this last departure of the Roman Legion, (which no doubt was done
by the Emperor's express Order, Anno Dom. CCCCXXXV.
) I think, I may very well date the total dereliction of Britain by the Romans;
who now by refusing them their protection, left them by the Laws of Nature to
provide for, and defend themselves. And from hence I may also date the final
period of the Roman Empire in this Island; which had now lasted from Julius
Caesar's second landing in Britain, in the 53d Year before Christ, to this Year
(being the 435th Year after Christ) the space of 488 Years; but if you account
from the more absolute Conquest of it by Claudius, in the Forty Fourth Year
after Christ, it continued but 391 Years.

But that the Britains were at last very unwillingly cut off from being any
longer a part of the Roman Empire, appears by the last message they sent to
Aetius, again imploring assistance; which the Emperor not being able to grant,
they had no other way left, but to provide for themselves as well as they
could; which since it happened after the time that I suppose the Roman power to
have ceased in this Island, I shall refer the further Relation of it to the
next Book.

But before I conclude this, I shall give you a short account of Ecclesiastical
Affairs in this Island, in these Two last Centuries; where, after the last
Persecution under Dioclesian, Bid tells us, the British Church enjoyed a
perfect Peace, till the Arrian Heresy overran the whole World, and at last
infected this Island, though divided from the rest of it; but though neither
Gildas nor Bid has set down the Year when this Heresy first began to spread
it self here, yet he seems to refer it to the Reign of Constantius, when this
Pestilent Opinion carried the face of Authority, as having been confirmed in
several pretended Councils.

But in the beginning of this Century, though the Year be uncertain, Anno Dom.
CCCCXXXV.
yet between the Years 402, and 406, Pelagius a British Monk (whose Welsh Name
is supposed to have been Morgan, as being of the same signification with the
Latin Name of Pelagius,) broached his Heresy, Vide Archbishop Ushers
Antiquit. Brit. Eccles. cap. 8.
for absolute Free will, without the assisting Grace of God; which Opinion was
afterward condemned by diverse Councils in France and Africa, and was also
confuted by St. Augustine: About which times also flourished Festidus, a
learned Bishop (if not an Archbishop) of Britain, who writ a Pious Treatise,
De Vita Beata, and who by some late Romish Writers has been accused of
Pelagianism, from which imputation, he is justly vindicated by the said
Reverend Dr. Stillingfleet, in his above cited work. Chap. 4.


Nor did this Island remain long free from this Pelagian Heresy; for he having
(as it is supposed) perverted diverse of his Countrymen abroad, they afterward
returning home, brought it over and dispersed it here, and was especially
propagated by one Agricola, the Son of Severian a Pelagian Bishop, (as Bede
informs us) who farther says, Lib. 1. cap. 17.
that the Britains when they would by no means receive so perverse a Doctrine,
that blasphemes the grace of Christ, nor yet were able by disputing to refute
so settled an Error, they took a safer course, to send for aid in this
spiritual warfare, from the Bishops of France; for which cause a great Synod
being there assembled, it was proposed, who was most fitting to be sent to
succor the true Belief then assaulted; when by the common votes of them all,
Germanus Bishop of Auxerre, and Lupus Bishop of Troyes, were chosen to go and
confirm Britain in the Catholic Faith; who, when they had received the command
of that Church, passed the Sea, and Anno 329, according to Archbishop Ushers
account Vid. Brit. Eccl. Antiq. cap. 11.
landed here, though not without great danger from Storms, which Bid supposes
to be raised by the Devil, and which, he also says, were to be laid by the
Prayers of Bishop German; as soon as they landed, they were joyfully received
both by the Clergy and People, to whom they forthwith preached not only in the
Churches, but also in the Highways and Streets, whereby the Faithful
Christians were confirmed, and many Heretics brought back to the Truth; at
which the Heads of the Heretical party being very much concerned, though they
lay for a great while private, yet at last, fearing their silence would be
interpreted as a quitting of their cause; a public disputation was agreed upon
between them, which was (as some of our Authors relate) at Verulam, where the
Heretics appeared in a splendid garb, and encompassed with a great number of
Followers; so that there met a great multitude of People on both sides, to be
as well Spectators as Judges; where in the first place Germanus and Lupus
allowed their Adversaries a full liberty of disputing, which took up much time
to little purpose; then the Bishops with a Torrent of proofs drawn from the
Holy Scriptures, bore down all before them, backing their Reasons with Divine
Authorities, whereby the Pelagians being nonplus'd, had nothing to reply; so
that the People (being the Judges) could scarce refrain their Hands from them,
and testified their resentment by their great clamor against them.

Nor did these Bishops think this enough; but, as Bede further relates from one
Constantius (who lived within Fifty Years after this was done) they thought fit
likewise to confirm their Doctrine by Miracles; Constant. lib. ^^. chapter 13.
for a certain Magistrate bringing his Daughter of Ten Years Old, being Blind,
offered her to the Pelagians to be cured, who refusing to undertake it, the
Bishops were desired to do it; Anno Dom. CCCCXXXV.
who, (as this Author relates) after Prayers to God restored the Girl to
sight, by the Application of certain Saints Relicts to her Eyes; whereupon the
People were so astonished, that banishing all Error from their Minds, they
followed the Doctrine of these Holy Bishops; who it seems, were not however
very fond of these Relicts, but (as the same Authors have it) opening the Tomb
of St. Alban at Verulam, buried them all therein, to the intent that one Grave
might contain the Bones of all those Saints, collected from so many several
Regions, who being equal in merit, the same Heaven had also received; this
done, Germanus only took away in exchange a small lump of Earth, which was yet
stained with the Blood of the Martyr.

I shall pass over the rest of the real or pretended Miracles of these Bishops,
though related by Bid, as being of less moment, and come to that famous
Victory, which he from the same Authors relates, to have been obtained by
their means, which was thus; That not long after their coming, the Picts and
Saxons made a fierce Invasion upon the Britains, who marching out against them,
and mistrusting their own Forces, sent to Germanus and his Colleague to help
them, reposing more confidence in the Spiritual strength of those Two Holy Men,
than in their own Thousands; so these Bishops being arrived, their presence in
the British Camp seemed not less than if a whole Army had come to second them:
It was then the time of Lent, and the People instructed by the daily Sermons of
these Pastors, came flocking to receive Baptism, to which purpose a place in
the Camp was made up of Green Boughs like a Church, against the Day of the
Lords Resurrection; the Army being there Baptized marched out to Fight, and
contemning the Defense of Arms, only expected Divine assistance; the Enemy
hearing how they were employed, seemed assured of the Victory; when Germanus,
who also had intelligence of their approach, undertook to be their Captain, and
riding out with some select Troops, to discover what advantages the place might
offer, happened on a Valley encompassed with Hills, through which the Enemy was
to pass, and placing there an ambush, warned them, that what words they heard
him pronounce aloud, the same they should all repeat with an universal shout:
the Enemy marched on securely, and German Thrice aloud cried Halelujah, which
being answered by the Soldiers, with a sudden noise and clamor, was also much
increased by the Echoes from the Neighboring Hills and Woods; the Scots and
Picts startled hereat, and supposing it the shout of a Mighty Army, flung down
their Arms and fled, and for have many of them were drowned in that River they
had newly passed. The Victory thus obtained without fighting, yielded the
Britains great store of spoil, and procured to Bishop German greater Authority
and Reputation than before: The place of this Fight is reported to have been
near a Town called Guiderac in the British Tongue, but in the English Mould in
Flintshire, and the place is called Maes German, that is German's Field to this
Day: But there are two Objections to be made against the Truth of this
Relation. The first is, how the Britains could fight against the Saxons, before
their arrival here under Aingist, which was not till above Twenty Years after:
Secondly how the Britains, who had been Christians for above Three Hundred
Years, should need to be new Baptized. To the former of these Objections,
Archbishop Usher in his Ant. Brit. Ecclesiae, gives us a satisfactory answer,
viz. That before the coming in of the Saxons to settle here; it appears, Anno
Dom. CCCCXXXV.
that they made several Incursions by Sea, as has been already proved from
diverse Authorities; and further Paulus Diaconus in the Relation of this story
expressly says, That whilst these Bishops were here, a strong Army of Scots and
Picts Invaded Britain.

But as for the rest of the Miracles and Actions of Germanus and Lupus in
Britain, since they are only related by Nennius, and some of our English Monks
from certain Legends of little or no Credit, as written long after those Times,
I shall wholly omit them; only could wish that the Writers of this Story, would
have given us as exact a Relation of Civil Affairs in this Island, as they do
of those concerning the Religion of this Age, that we might have known what
Kings or Governors the Britains had, from the time of the last departure of
the Romans, to the making of Vortigern King; the want of which no doubt was a
great encouragement to Geoffery of Monmouth to forge so many Fictitious
Princes, during this interval.

But for the other Objection, it is, I confess, somewhat harder to be answered;
some Modern Writers suppose, that in that sad Confusion and Corruption of
Manners, that happened after the departure of the Romans, a great many of the
Britains turned Idolaters, or else (which is most likely) were Christians but
in Name, and so had never been Baptized at all till now.

I shall now conclude with the rest of the Ecclesiastical History of these
Times: This Year as our Saxon Annals (from Prosper's Chronicle) relate, Anno
Dom. CCCCXXIX.
Palladius the Bishop was sent by Pope Coelestine to the Scots, to confirm
their Faith, or as Bede in his Epitome, Lib. 1. cap. as well as in his Epitome
at the end (under the Year CCCCXXX.) expresses it almost in the words of
Prosper, viz. Palladius was sent the first Bishop by the said Pope, to the
Scots believing in Christ, but in one of the Vide the various Lections in the
margin of the Oxford Edition of these Annals. Cap^ 54.
Copies of the Saxon Annals (now in the Cottonian Library) it is thus: This
Year Palladius was sent by Pope Coelestine to Preach Baptism (i. e.
Christianity to the Scots), in which it agrees with Nennius, who speaking of
this matter, says, That this Bishop was first of all sent by the said Pope to
convert the Scots to Christ: But being hindered from God by certain Tempests,
departed from Ireland, and arrived in Britain, and there died in the Country of
the Picts; in which he is also followed by Probus and Joseline, in their Lives
of S. Patrick; who, tho they agree, that Palladius was sent to Convert Ireland,
yet differ from him in the account how he came to fail in his design, laying
the fault upon the obstinacy of the Irish, who would not receive his Doctrine;
but they both agree with Nennius, that thereupon he left Ireland, and died in
the confines of the Picts.

This difference in these Copies has bred a great dispute between the English
Antiquaries on the one side, and the Scottish Historians and Antiquaries on the
other; the former supposing from the Authority of Nennius, and the above cited
Copy of the Saxon Chronicle, besides that of the Irish Annals, that the Scots
were not converted to Christianity, till the Year above mentioned, and
consequently were not made Christians so early as their Historians relate;
which Opinion has been strenuously asserted by Archbishop Usher, in his
Britan. Eccles. Antiquitat. as also by the Bishop of St. Asaph (now Bishop of
Litchfield) in his Historical account of Church Government, Cap. 15. p. 41.
and been also further improved by the learned Dr. Stillingfleet (now Bishop of
Worcester) in his Antiquity of the British Churches, Anno Dom. CCCCXXX.
who all conclude, that the Scots were converted to Christianity long before
their planting in Britain, which they suppose not to have happened till about
the end of the Fifth, or the beginning of the Sixth Century.

Against which Opinions, though asserted by so many learned Men, Sir George
Mackenzy (late Lord Advocate of Scotland) has Written two Treatises, which he
calls a defense of the Royal-line of Scotland; in the former of which written
against the said Bishop, as well as the latter against Dr. Stillingfleet, he
alters the state of the Controversy from an Ecclesiastical to a Civil dispute;
making it a crime of loese Majesty so much as to question the reality of the
Kings of Scotland, before Fergus the Second; but omitting the Proofs that he
produces for the Antiquity of the Scottish Kings before that time, as also what
he writes for the Scots Conversion, as performed in Scotland, and not in
Ireland; being beyond the bounds of our History, I shall leave the Reader for
his farther satisfaction to peruse those Treatises, if he think fit, being writ
with great Wit and Smartness.

But since I found the time of Palladius's being sent by the Pope to the Scots,
mentioned not only in Bid, but in our Saxon Chronicles, I could not well omit
putting it down; yet without taking upon me positively to determine whither the
Scots of Scotland, or those of Ireland are there meant; since I confess the
Words are Ambiguous, and the Copies differ, as I have already showed.

But the Year after Palladius's being sent to the Scots (whether in Ireland or
Scotland) the Saxon Annals tell us, Anno Dom. CCCCXXX.
that Patrick was sent by the same Pope Coelestine, to Preach Baptism (i. e,
Christianity) to the Scots: Although I find in the Notes of -- upon Nennius, p.
129; a Chronicle noting, Anno Dom. 475, Venit S. Patricius ad Hiberniam.

Now that these were the Scots of Ireland, is agreed on by all; yet this
Controversy is made more intricate, by what Ranul. Higden writes in his
Polychron. (l. 4. c. 33. Celestinus Papa misit S. Patricium, ad Hiberniam
Convertendam; and Palladium Romanum Diaconum, ad Scotos Convertendos, Anno
Scil. Pontificatus sui IX.

And also by what is found in a Manuscript Copy of Dicetus thus; Celestinus
Papa ad Scotos Palladium Primum mittit Episcopum; Postquam ad eosdem, ab eodem
Celestino, missus est S. Patricius filius Conches Sororis S. Martini Turonensis.

For which last Notes I must own my self obliged to the Learned Doctor Gale;
but on the other side, if the Scots, to whom Palladius is said to have been
sent, were not the same with those in Ireland, but the Scots than living in
Scotland; it must then be confessed that the promiscuous use of the Name of
Scotia, sometimes for Ireland, and sometimes for Scotland, and of Scoti,
sometimes used by Bid, and other Writers of those times for Irish Men, and
sometimes for Native Scots, have so confounded the Histories of both these
Nations, that no Man without other Circumstances can tell when they mean the
one, or the other.

But since the Ecclesiastical History of Britain in these Times is very
obscure, and deficient, there being so little to be found concerning it, either
in Bid, or any other Writer, Anno Dom. CCCCXXX.
and the Age also being become very Corrupt and Ignorant, during the frequent
Wars and Revolutions that happened in this part of the Island; It is not to be
expected that we should be able to set down the Names of any Bishops, or
others. Remarkable in this last Age for Piety or Learning: So having given as
good an Account as I am able, and as the broken History of those Times will
allow, of the Rise and Fall of the Roman Empire in Britain, and the State of
Affairs, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, during the space of near 490 Years
that the Romans had to do here; I shall in the next Book give you a Prospect of
the lamentable State of this part of Britain, after the departure of the
Romans, and that the Britains had set up Princes of their own Nation.

The End of the Second Book.
THE General History OF BRITAIN, NOW CALLED ENGLAND: As well Ecclesiastical, as
Civil. BOOK III. From its Desertion by the Romans, to the Preaching of
Christianity by AUGUSTINE the Monk, being One hundred Sixty two Years.
BEING now come to the Third Period of this First Volume, it is fit we say
somewhat by way of Introduction before so great a Change as you will here find
to have followed the Desertion of Britain by the Romans: For with the Roman
Empire fell also what before were chiefly Roman, Learning, Valor, Eloquence
and Civility, and consequently History too, which is but the Product of these;
all which at first increasing by means of the Roman Power and Encouragement,
did also diminish and decline upon its Departure, till it was at last quite
extinct by the coming in of the Pagan Saxons, and the long cruel Wars they made
upon the Britains, as you may observe from the barbarous Latin of Gildas and
Nennius, which are the only Authentic British Historians that are now extant.

As for the English Saxons, they were at first so illiterate, that it is much
doubted, whether they had the use of Letters and Writing among them or not,
since we have no Histories or Annals of their Times elder than their receiving
Christianity; for tho there are some few Stones to be found in England
inscribed with the ancient Runick Characters, (as appears from the late English
Edition of Mr. Camden's Britannia,) yet that they are wholly Danish Monuments,
and made after the time of their Conversion, I need only refer you to the
Inscriptions themselves as they are to be found in the said Tit. Cumberland.
Britannia, with the Additions that follow it; so that it ought not to seem
strange, that the Saxon Annals are so short and obscure in many places, and
that the Relations of Things done before the entrance of Christianity among
them are contradictory to each other in point of Time, and other Circumstances;
since they were only delivered by Memory and Tradition, which must be
acknowledged for a very uncertain Guide in Matters of Fact, as well as of
Doctrine.

Nor is this Uncertainty to be found only in the Saxon Chronicles, but also in
those of the Britains of that Age, since from the Reign of King Vortigern to
that of Cadwalladar is indeed the darkest and most confused part of all the
British or Welsh History: Hence it is that we are forced in this Period, not
only to make use of Authors who lived long after the Things they treat of were
done, but also are otherwise of no great Credit; such as Nennius, and Geoffery
of Monmouth, whom we sometimes make use of for want of those of better
Authority. As for the English Saxon History, we have nothing more ancient than
Bid, and the Saxon Chronicle, which we shall here give you almost entire,
since it seems to be writ faithfully as far as it goes, yet being only Annals,
(extracted out of Bid as far as he goes,) they barely relate the Succession of
their Kings with their chief Wars and Actions, without expressing the Grounds
or Causes of either, or giving us any Account of their particular Laws, and
original Constitutions; so that I confess, they cannot prove so Instructive to
Humane Life, as is required of a just History.

Anno Dom. CCCCXXXV
Britain being thus deserted by the Romans, as you have seen in the last Book,
with an intention to return no more; and having caused the Britains to rebuild
the Wall in the manner already related, the Scots and Picts, tho in Manners
differing from each other, Gildas, and Bid, l. 1. c. 12.
yet still unanimous to rob and spoil, hearing that the Roman Forces were
withdrawn, landed in Shoals out of their Curroghs or Leathern Vessels, in which
they passed over that part of the Irish Sea, which lying next Britain, is
called by Gildas, The Scythic Vale; these (upon the Assurance that the Romans
would never return) becoming more bold than ever, took possession of all the
Northern Parts, even from the outmost Bounds of the Land as far as the Wall
already mentioned; in the mean time, the Guards which were placed upon it to
defend it being cowardly in Fight, and unable to fly, stood trembling on the
Battlements, keeping their Stations day and night to little or no purpose,
whilst the Enemy from below with long Hooks plucked them down, and dashed them
against the Ground, thus preventing by a speedy Death those languishing
Torments which attended their Countrymen and Relations. In short, both the Wall
and the Towns adjoining to it being deserted, the Inhabitants saved themselves
by flight, which yet could not long secure them, for the Enemy pursuing them, a
fresh Slaughter quickly followed more bloody than the former; and, which was
worse than all the rest, being tormented with Famine, to get Subsistence, they
fell upon and robbed each other; for they who came from the North, (as may
probably be supposed,) and had fled from the Enemy, being unable to pay for
their Quarters when they came into the Southern Parts, seized what they could
find; from whence rose Discords and Quarrels among them, and thence Civil Wars;
for this Nation, (as Gilda^ observes,) tho feeble in repressing Foreign
Enemies, yet in homebred Quarrels was very bold and obstinate.

But whilst they thus for some Years wore themselves out with continual Acts of
mutual Hostility, the Famine grew General upon all, Anno Dom. CCCCXLVI.
so that those half-starved Men that remained were forced to maintain their
Lives with what they could get by Hunting; Gild. Bid, Ib. c. 12, 13.
so that at last the miserable Remnants of this afflicted People having now no
other Remedy left, were constrained to write doleful Letters to In some
Manuscripts and Printed Copies it is written Agitius, but in the Bodleian
Manuscript it is written right, as thus.
Aetius, then the Emperor's Lieutenant in Gaul, directed, To Aetius, thrice
Consul, the Groans of the Britains; wherein they thus complain: The Barbarians
drive us to the Sea, whilst the Sea drives us back to the Barbarians; between
these two sorts of Deaths, we must be either slain, or drowned. What Answer
they received is uncertain, but Gildas expressly tells us, That they received no
Assistance by those Letters, because Aetius then expected a War with Attilla
King of the Huns.

And indeed about these Times a terrible Famine invaded not only Britain, but
extended it self as far as Constantinople, where the Famine, Vid. Chron.
Herman. Contracti.
together with the corrupt Air* produced a great Pestilence; whilst this
Scarcity prevailed in this Isle, it forced many of the Britains to yield
themselves up to their Enemies, that they might get wherewith to sustain
Nature, tho others of them chose rather to sally out and resist them, from the
Woods and Mountains to which they retreated; yet now it was, (as Gilda^ tells
us) that not putting their Trust in Man, but in God alone, Gild.
they first of all made some slaughter of their Enemies which had preyed upon
their Country for so many Years; but tho the Boldness of their Enemies was
abated for a while, yet so was not the Wickedness of the Britains, W^o (as the
same Author describes them) were very backward to perform the Duties proper to
Peace, viz. Justice and Truth, but were prone to Lies, and all Wickedness; so
that (says he) tho these impudent Robbers (the Irish) went home, yet it was to
return again within a short time whilst the Picts remained, being both then,
and long afterward, in the farther Parts of the Island, sometimes taking Prey
and making Incursions; so that during the Truce, whilst this Wound was slightly
skinned over, another Malady more Contagious was breeding.

For tho, during this short interval of Peace, Ibid.
there succeeded so great a Plenty of all sorts of Provisions that no Man's
Memory could parallel, yet was it attended with great Luxury, and all sorts of
Wickedness began also to increase, but chiefly Cruelty, together with the
Hatred of the Truth, and the Love of Lies, the taking Evil for Good, and the
Love of Darkness rather than Light; so that what was pleasing to God, or not
pleasing with them, weighed both alike; and the worst side of the Cause most
commonly prevailed, whilst all Things were done contrary to the Public Good
and Safety; nay, not only by Secular Men, but even the Clergy (whose Example
should have guided others) were grown Vicious and Corrupt, many of them being
given to Drunkenness, or swollen with Pride, or else full of Envy and Contention;
indiscreet and incompetent Judges of what in the common Practice of Life was
good or evil, lawful or unlawful.

This is the general Character that Gildas and Bid give us both of the British
Clergy and Laity of these Times; from whence we may easily conclude, that
People of this temper were not fit to be trusted with the Government of
themselves: Anno Dom. CCCCXLVI.
but being more fond of the Name of Liberty, than apprehensive of the Charge of
Governing well, they grew heady and violent in their Affairs, and positive in
what they understood not, none being more stout and daring in Councels, none so
fearful when it came to Action, all pretending to know what ought to be done,
yet all drawing back in the Performance. Thus in a short time, when the Heat of
Liberty was once spent, and the Enemy daily increased, they quickly found their
old Temper returning upon them, a slavishness of Mind, and slothfulness of
Body, then they might have perceived it was not mere Stomach, or a hot and
sudden Love of Liberty that could protect them; but that Diligence, Wisdom, and
a public Spirit, were still wanting; so that they shrunk by degrees into their
former tameness of Mind, and grew as weary of their new-tried Liberty, as they
had been of their old Subjection, which made them write those Abject Letters to
Aetius, but now mentioned.

What particular Kings or Governors the Britains set up after they were set
free from the Roman Empire, is hard to determine, only Gildas tells us in
general, That Kings were by them anointed, but none of God's anointing, but
such as were most cruel, who were soon after as inconsiderately laid aside
without any Examination of the Truth, whilst some were put to Death by their
Anointers, to set up others more Fierce and Tyrannical, but if any of them
seemed Milder, and more inclined to the Truth, against him as the Subverter of
his Country, the general Hatred of all Men was presently directed.

So that the Office of a King seems to have been a very dangerous Employment in
those wicked and turbulent Times, tho by what we can guess by Gildas's Epistle
setting forth the Faults of all Orders and Degrees of Men, there had been
diverse Kings ruling in Britain at once, not only in his own, but in former
Times, but who they were, he does not particularly mention.

But to fill up this Interval, Geoffery of Monmouth furnishes us with one
Constantine, Brother of Adroenus King of Armorica. This Constantine he makes to
have been elected King, and crowned at Cirencester, and being killed by a Pict,
was succeeded by his eldest Son Constans, who from a Monk at Winchester, was
made King; and that he being made away by the Procurement of Vortigern, he
caused himself, being at that time Consul or Count of the Gevises, to be
elected King in his room; but if you please to look back into the former Book,
you will there find how Constantine the Usurper, with his Son Constans the
Monk, the one being made Emperor, and the other Caesar, perished in France,
may easily confute the falsehood of this Story.

But since neither Gildas, Nennius, nor any other British Historian, make
mention of this Constantine or his Son, all that we can conclude to be true in
this Relation, An. Dom. CCCCXLV. CCCCXLVII.
is, That the Britains about this time finding themselves quite deserted by the
Romans, and being now without any Head, and hard pressed by the Scots and
Picts, chose this Vortigern, being then a popular Man, (tho he proved neither
Wise, Valiant, nor Virtuous,) for their King; in the beginning of whose Reign
God was willing to purge his Family, (as Gildas words it;) the Britains not
being amended with so many Corrections, were again frighted with a fresh
Rumor, that the Scots and Picts were returning with greater Forces than ever,
and that they threatened the Destruction of the whole Country, and intended no
less than to plant themselves from one end thereof to the other; but before
their arrival, Anno Dom. CCCCXLVII.
as if the Instruments of Divine Vengeance were at strife, which should first
destroy a wicked Nation, The residue that the Sword and Famine had left alive,
were now swept away with a sore Pestilence, insomuch that the living scarce
sufficed to bury their Dead; but neither were the Britains at all amended for
all this, for now it seems the time drew near, that the measure of their
Iniquities were full.

But before we relate how this Vengeance was executed, Anno D^m. CCCCXLVIII.
we shall here set down from the aforesaid Authors. Lib. 2. cap. 2.
Constantius and Lib. 1. cap. 21.
Bid, Germanus's Second Voyage to Britain; the substance of which is, That it
being told Germanus that Pelagianism prevailed here again, thorough some
promoters of it; the British Clergy (too weak it seems at dispute) renewed
their addresses to him, that he would come over and defend God's Cause, which
he had once before undertaken; which Petition he readily granted, taking along
with him as an assistant not Lupus, but his Scholar Severus, who being ordained
Bishop of Triers, then preached the Gospel to the Germans; as soon as it was
divulged, that Germanus was come over, one Elaphius a Principal Magistrate of
that Country, brought a Youth, (a Son of his) the Sinews of one of whose Legs
had been long shrunk up, and desired Germanus that he would restore them, who
granting his request immediately upon his stroaking the place with his hand his
Leg was restored, as the other, whereupon both the Priests and the People who
had followed Elaphius to the place, being astonished at the Miracle were again
confirmed in the Catholic Faith, which was followed by an admonition Germanus
made them to amend their errors; but the Authors of this apostasy, being by
the sentence of them all banished the Island, were delivered up to the Bishops
to be carried into the Continent, that so the People might quietly enjoy the
benefit of this Reformation, who for the future persisted in the true Faith.

But after this the Britains being again pressed and over power'd, Anno Dom.
CCCCXLIX.
by fresh invasions of the Scots and Picts, King Vortigern called a Council to
consider what was to be done, Gildas.
and where they might best seek assistance to repel these frequent and cruel
Invasions of the said Nations; whereupon all his Councillors together with the
King (being as it were blinded) found out such a defense as indeed proved the
destruction of their Country, which was that the Heathen Saxons, who were then
hateful both to God and Man, Bid, l. 1. c. 13.
and whom when absent they feared almost as bad as Death it self, should be
sent for to repel these Northern Nations, which seems to have been ordained by
Divine providence, to take vengeance on so wicked a People, as the event more
evidently proved. Though at present the Council seemed very specious, because
the Saxons were then a Nation who were very terrible to all others: this
Council being thus approved of, Ambassadors are immediately sent into Germany,
representing to the Saxons the Britains request, and promising them very
advantageous Conditions, if they would come over to their assistance;
Witichindus an ancient German Writer, in his History De gestis Saxonum,
represents these Ambassadors making a long Speech, wherein they promised an
absolute subjection to the Saxons; but this being not at all likely, nor
agreeable to the British account of it, I omit; only this is certain, that the
Saxons were very well pleased with this Proposal, and their Country being then
overcharged with People, beyond what it was able to bear, immediately yiedling
to this request, Anno Dom. CCCCXLIX.
made what haste they could to come away; and being as it is said chosen out by
Lot, were put on board Three long Ships or Vessels, Malmes. lib. 1.
called in their Language Chiules, under the conduct of Two Captains, Hengist
and Horsa, being Brothers, and descended from that ancient Woden, from whom
almost all the Royal Families of the Saxons derive their descent. These leaders
together with their followers arriving in Britain at a place called afterward
Towne's Fleet, are welcomed with great joy and applause both of the Prince and
People, the Isle of Thanet, Gildas p. 8. Bid lib. 1. cap. 15.
(where they landed) being given them for their habitation; and a League was
made with them on these Conditions, that the Saxons fighting for, and defending
the Country against Foreign Enemies, should receive their Pay, Hen. Hunt. l. 11.
and Maintenance from those for whom they Fought; this is said to have happened
in the beginning of the Reign of the Emperor Martian, and in the Four and
Twentieth Year of Pharamond, first King of the French: Anno Dom. 149, as the
Saxon Chronicle, and almost all our Historians agree. What the number was of
these Saxon Auxiliaries now brought over, is not related in the Saxon Annals,
or any other; but certainly they could not be above 1500, since they all came
over in Three Ships, and 500 Men was as much as one of those small Vessels
could well be supposed to carry.

But before I proceed further in this History, it is fit we should give some
account of the Name, Original, and Manners of this Great and Warlike Nation of
the Saxons, whose Posterity enjoy this Kingdom to this very day.

Lib. 1. cap 26.
Bid in the first place tells us, that these People came from Three Valiant
Nations of Germany, viz. the Saxons, Angles, and Jutes; from which latter were
derived the Kentish Men, and the Inhabitants of the Isle of Wight, and of the
Province lying over against the said Isle, (now called Hampshire) and which was
afterward part of the Kingdom of the West Saxons, was also Peopled by the same
Nation. From the Saxons (that is the Country which was then called old Saxony)
came the East Saxons, South Saxons, and West Saxons, and from the Angles, that
is, that Country which is called Angulus, and which lies between the Countries
of the Jutes and Saxons, are derived the East Angles, the Middleland Angles, or
Mercians, together with the whole Nation of the Northumbrians, that is, those
Northern People which live beyond the River Humber, so far Bid: But Ethelwerd,
one of our most ancient Historians in his Chronicle, tells us more plainly,
that Old England is feared between the Saxons, and the Jutes, having for its
Capital City that which is called in the Saxon Tongue Sleswic, but by the Danes
Heathaby, and that Britain taking its Name from its Conquerors, is now called
England.

But as for the Bounds and Extent of Old Saxony, there is a great difference
between the Writers about it; yet that it bordered upon Old England they all
agree: Archbishop Usher supposes Old Saxony to be that Country, Ant. Brit.
Eccl. cap. 12. p. 197.
that beginning with the River Ellis, is extended toward the North, and was
afterward called Northalbingia, being bounded in its lower parts by the Rivers
Albis, Billa and Trava, and in its upper by the Rivers Eidora, and Slia; for
Ptolemy appoints the same Southern Bounds to his Saxons, placing them between
the Bounds of the River Albis and Calusus, or Trava (which runs by Lubec)
but the Northern bounds Egenhardus has given us in his Annals, in the Year of
our Lord 808; where (speaking of Godefrid, King of Denmark) he sets it out
thus: Anno Dom. CCCCXLIX.
He resolved to fortify the Limits of his Kingdom which looked toward Saxony
with a deep Trench, in such a manner, as that from that Eastern Bay of the Sea
which they call Ostersalt, as far as the Western Ocean, this Trench should
defend all the Northern Banks of the River Eidor. And Adam of Bremen, in his
Treatise concerning the Situation of Denmark, and other Northern Nations,
divides Denmark from the Inhabitants of Saxony (whom he calls North Elbings) by
the River Eidor; of which Transelbian Saxons, in another Book, he reckons up
three Nations: The first, of Dithmars, lying upon the Ocean; whose chief Church
was Mildenthrope; the second, Holsteiners, through which runs the River Sture,
whose chief Church was Scolenfield; the third, who were more noble, are called
Stormars, whose Metropolis is Hamburgh; so that this Country was the farthest
part of Old Saxony. Herewith agrees the Anonymus Geographer of Ravenna,
writing thus of the Saxons; The Saxons came into Britain under their Prince, by
Name Ansehis, i. e. Hengist. And then in another place, having spoke of the
Frisians: After them (says he) are the Saxons, and on the back of them certain
Islands; then follows the Country of the Nortmanni, which is also called
Dania. Those Islands Ptolemy calls Insulae Saxonum. And therefore it was not
Westphalia, as Theodorit Engelhus, Wernerius, Lairius, Albert Kanez, and others
of the Moderns have supposed; yet the Archbishop does not deny, but that in
following Times that Country (as well as Frizeland) might be also possessed by
the Posterity of the ancient Saxons, but was then rather that which is now the
Duchy of Holstein, comprehending Dithmars, Stormar, and Wagria, in breadth
from Sleswick to the City of Hamburgh, seated in the further part of Old
Saxony; and in length is extended from the West of the Eastern Sea, or from the
German Ocean to the Baltic Gulf, having Old France next adjoining to it, then
lying between the Mouths of the Elb and Rhine; for as Ammianus Marcellinus
teaches us, the Franks then reached as far as the River Rhine, yet so, that
they had the Saxons next Neighbors to them; and Julian, in his Oration in
Praise of the Emperor Constantius, calls both these Nations the most Warlike
of all those that inhabit beyond the Rhine and Western Ocean.

Here give me leave to add what the Learned Dr. Stillingfleet, now Lord Bishop
of Worcester, in his Antiquity of the British Churches, has given us on this
Subject, Chap. 5. where he tells us, that Mr. Camden is of another Opinion,
who, in the Introduction to his Britannia, says, That the Saxons originally
came from the Cimbrick Chersonese in the time of Dioclesian; and after passing
the Elb, they partly went into those Parts of the Suevi, which is since called
Saxony, and partly into Frisia and Batavia; from whence he says, All the
Inhabitants of the German Shore, who used Piracy at Sea, were called Saxons; by
whom he understands, the People from Jutland to Holland, for which he produces
the Testimony of Fabius Ethelwerd's Chronicle, L^b. 1.
one of the Saxon Blood Royal, who says, That the Saxons lived upon the
Seacoast, from the Rhine, as far as Denmark. But Ammianus Marcellinus makes
them in his time to border upon the Parts of Gaul, which is much behither the
Bounds of Jutland, Holstein, or Sleswick. And the same Author farther says,
That the Chamavi* (whom he makes a part of the Saxons) had the Command of the
Rhine, that Jutland made Peace with them, because without their leave Corn
could not be brought out of Britain; as also Excerpt. Legate. p. 15.
Eunapius Sardianus says, Anno Dom. CCCCXLIX.
That the Saxons in Julian's time had the Command of the Rhine. Nor was this
only a sudden Incursion, since in Valentinian's time (when Ammianus wrote) they
still bordered upon Gaul.

Ubbo Emmius a Learned and German Historian, gives this Account of the Saxons
and their Neighboring Nations, Rer. Frisic. l. 1.
who inhabited on the North Parts of Germany. That the Fristi dwelt from the
middle Stream of the Rhine, about Utrecht, to the River Amasus, (or Eemas;)
from thence to the Elb lived the Chauci, divided into the Greater and Lesser by
the Weser; a great part of these leaving their Native Soil, joined with the
Sicambri on the Rhine, who from their affecting Liberty were called Franks:
beyond the Elb were the Saxons, and the Cimbri; the Saxons being pressed by the
more Northern People, or for their own Convenience, came Southwards, and took
possession first of those Places where the Chauci dwelt; and by degrees
prevailing over all the other People, who joined with, or submitted to the
Saxons, they were called by their Name, and among the rest the Fristi, from
whose Coasts he supposes, the two Brothers, Hengist and Horsa, to have gone
into Britain; and returning thither, carried over a far greater Number with
them, not so much to fight, as to inhabit there; therefore he thinks it most
probable, that Hengist and Horsa, by their descent, were originally Saxons; but
that the greatest part of the People, who went over with them, were rather
Frisians, than Saxons; which he proves, not only from the greater facility of
Passage from the Coast of Friseland, and the Testimony of their own Annals, but
from the greater Agreement of the English Language with theirs than with the
Saxon, Lib. 5. cap. 10.
or any other German Dialect; and also, because Bid reckons the Frisians among
those from whom the English Saxons are derived; and Wilfrid, Wickbert, and
Willibrod, all preached to the Frisians in their own Tongue, as Marcellinus, in
his Life of Suidebert; relates. But this Author says further, That the
Affinity of their Language continues still so great, that from thence he
concludes many more to have gone out of Friseland into Britain, than either of
the Saxons, Jutes, or Angles.

I^id.
But to all this, our Learned Primate answers, That Hengist and Horsa might be
truly called Frisians, there being a Frisia in the Southern Parts of Jutland,
which Saxo Grammatieus calls the Lesser Frisia, and is parted by the Eidore
from the Country of the Angli on the East, and the Saxons on the South; yet
even Ubbo Emmius quits the Point upon Bede's Genealogy, and grants they were
really Saxons, as being derived from Woden, from whom the Race of Kings of many
of those Northern Parts are descended. But yet for all this it may probably be,
that tho these Princes were not Native Frisians themselves, yet some of those
Nations that followed them, and were in a large acceptance called Saxons,
might come from Friseland, and the rest of the Seacoast as far as Old Saxony,
properly so called. I omit what other German Authors have said upon this
Subject, because I would not be tedious; but whoever desires farther
Satisfaction herein, may consult the Reverend Doctor abovementioned, to whom I
must own my self beholding for what I have now said concerning the Countries
from whence the English Saxons originally came.

But as for the Original of these Saxons that now came into Britain, Anno Dom.
CCCCXLIX^
there is a much greater Dispute. Cluverius in his ancient Germany, as also our
Countryman Verstegan, in his Treatise, called, A Restitution of decayed
Intelligence, Chap. 2. would needs have them to be derived from the Germans,
which is denied by the Learned Grotius in his Prolegomena to the Gothic
History, as also by Mr. Sherringham, in his Treatise De Anglorum Gentis
Origin, where he undertakes to prove, that they were a Branch of the ancient
Getae, who were the Posterity of Japhet; and coming out of Scythia into Europe,
first fixed themselves under the Conduct of one Eric their King in the ancient
Scandinavia or Gothland, which is now called Sweden and Norway; and from thence
some Ages, after under the Conduct of Berig, another of their Kings, sent out
Colonies into all the Isles of the Baltic Sea, and the Northern Coasts of
Germany, as far as the Cimbric (...); so that the Swedes, Danes, and Saxons,
had one and the same Scythic Original, as the Learned Grotius in his said
Prolegomena has fully proved; as also Mr. Sherringham, in Chap. 7. of his
last-cited Treatise, as well from the ancient Gothic Chronicles written in that
Language, both in Prose and Verse; as also from Jornandes de Rebus Geticis,
Chap. 4. that these Getae or Goths multiplying more than these Countries could
well bear, in the time of Filemar the 5th King after Berig, great multitudes of
them under his Conduct removed their Dwellings into the Asiatic Scythia, called
Oudin in their Language; from whence in process of Time they spread themselves
as far as the Palus Maeotis; and the Northern Countries near the Euxine Sea,
even to Thracia and Maesia toward the South, where they still retained the
Name of Getae or Gotti, tho they were also from the Countries where they lived
often called Thracians or Maesians, being divided into several Tribes, viz.
Visigoths or Western Goths, and Ostrogoths or Eastern Goths, the former of
which invaded Spain, and the latter Italy.

But some Ages before this, (as the Norwegians and Swedish Annals, cited by Mr.
Sherringham relate,) one Woden, Chap 1^*
King of a Territory and City in Asia, called Asgard, near the River Tanais,
led back a great multitude of these Goths out of the Asiatic Scythia into
Europe, and partly by good will, and partly by force, seized on all those
Countries afterward called Saxony; but that afterward leaving his Sons Princes
of those Regions, he returned into Swedeland, where after many Travels he ended
his Days, being counted a great Magician as well as Warrior, so that after his
decease his Subjects and Descendants worshipped him as a God. But diverse Danish
and Swedish Authors do very much doubt, whether this Woden, whom they thus
worshipped, were the same with him from whom the Saxon Princes drew their
Pedigrees; since thereby it appears, that Hengist and Horsa were the Sons of
Witgilfus, who was the Son of Witta, and he the Son of Vecta, and he the Son of
Woden. So that these Princes were no more than three Descents removed from him,
which could not amount to above 200 Years, and consequently was too short a
time for their multiplying into such great Multitudes, much less for their
worshipping him for a God; yet this is very probable, that most of the Goths
that came along with this Woden changed their Names to that of the Saxons, and
Peopled all those Countries already mentioned; and tho there may be a great
deal of Fabulous Stuff in this Story, as it is related in the Old Swedish and
Iselandish Histories called Eddas; yet thus much is certain, that there was
such a Prince who brought back the Goths out of Asia into those parts, Anno
Dom. CCCCXLIX.
since the Swedes, Danes, Norwegians and Saxons worshipped him as their common
Deity, and all agree in the same Tradition concerning him.

Yet since Cluverius, and Verstegan have both affirmed the Saxons not to be
derived from the Goths, Ibid.
but Germans; and that the former has endeavored to prove that the ancient
Getae or Goths were not the same Nation, I shall here give you the sum of
those Arguments, which Grotius and Mr. Sheringham have given us to prove, the
ancient Getae, and Gothi to have been all one Nation, and that the Saxons were
derived from them: For the first, they allege the Testimony of the most
ancient Latin and Greek Authors that make any mention of the Goths, as
Vospicus in his Life of the Emperor Probus, to whom may be also added diverse
Christian Writers, as Origin, St. Hierome* and St. Augustine; and of the
Greeks, Procopius, Photius the Patriarch; (...) Georgius, Syncellus, not to
mention the Gothic Writers themselves, as Jornandes and Issidore in his Gothic
Chronicle; who all agree that the Goths were anciently called Getae, and that
they were one and the same Nation; Secondly, from the places where these
ancient Getae or Scythians first inhabited, that they were the same from whence
the Goths afterward came, who overran the Roman Empire, ( viz.) from the
Countries about the Palus Maeotis, which are now possessed by the Chrim
Tartars; Lastly from their great agreement in Language; and Grotius in his said
Prolegomena brings diverse Instances (too long here to be recited) to prove that
the ancient Scythic or Gethic Tongue was the Mother of the German, which seems
to be further made out by Mr. Sherringham, from the Etymology of diverse
Scythian Words which are found to be the same with the Gothic and Saxon: Lastly
Busb^quius in his Turkish Epistles, Epist. 4.
mentions some remainders of the ancient Goths who dwell among the Tartars in
the Cimbric Cbersonese, some of whom he met and discoursed with at
Constantinople, and gives you not only their names of numbers, but also above
Forty Words which are very near the Dutch and English, signifying the same
things, and which argue a derivation from the same Gothic Original; and tho
this Author there doubts, whether these Goths were not some remainders of the
Saxons, brought thither by Charles the Great; yet Grotius in his said
Prolegamena fully removes that difficulty, and shows from the Testimony of
Josophat Barbarus a Noble Venetian, who had lived among them, that these People
called themselves not Saxons but Goths, and their Country Gothland; which is
also confirmed by the learned Scaliger in his Lib. 3.
Canoni Isagog; where he relates that they still lived under the Precopian
Tartars, and have the Bible in the same Characters, which were invented by
Ulphilas their Bishop.

But the learned Dr. Hicks has given us much greater light into this matter,
in his English Saxon, and Maesogothick Grammar; as also by reprinting the
Isleland Grammar of Ranulph Jones, in both which, by comparing the radical
Words of the English Saxon Tongue, as also the Declensions of the Verbs, and
Pronouns, any Man that will but take the pains to peruse it, must needs think
that not only the Old Maesogothic, and Scandian Gothic, were one and the same
Language, the latter being derived from the former, but that our English Saxon
comes from one, and the same Original.

But if the Getae and Gothi were one and the same Nation, Anno Dom. CCCCXLIX.
and if all the Danish, Swedish, and Saxon Writers have it that Woden was a
Goth, it will also follow that all those who came into Germany along with him,
were also Goths, and from whom that part of it was called at first Reid
Gothland, now Jutland; in which, as Grotius tells us, there is a River called
Guden Aa. i. e. the Goths River, which Country being deserted, by its ancient
Inhabitants, the Jutes and Angles, was not long after seized by the Danes, who
possess it to this day, and who, as we find by their Histories, had maintained
Wars upon that account with the Saxons for many Ages before: I shall not here
trouble the Reader with the particular Arguments and Objections that Verstegan
and Cluverius have brought to prove, that Sweden, Denmark, Nor^ay and Saxony,
were Peopled from Germany, and not vice versa; since it is not the part of an
Historian to dwell too long on Arguments pro and Con; so having given you, I
hope, (...) for this Opinion, I refer you for the more particular Answers to
their Objections, to Grotius's forecited Prolegomena, and to Mr. Sherringham's
said Treatise,

But, farther the very Name of Jutes, the ancient Inhabitants of Juteland, may
be used as another Argument, to prove their descent from the Getae or Goths;
since they are called by no Names other in our ancient Saxon Historians, then
Giotas or Jutes, and in King Alfred's Saxon Translation of Bede's History, they
are called Geatuin, i. e. Getes.

As for the Angles (who afterward gave their name to all the rest of the Saxon
Nations of this Island) they are supposed to be derived from the ancient
Cimbri, and to have passed by that Name in Julius Caesar's Time, or else they
might then make a part of the Swevi, Bell. Gal. l. 4. Vide Sherringham de orig.
G^nt. Angl. c. 2.
whom he in his Commentaries calls the most warlike of all the Germans, and
whom Tacitus and Ptolemy subdivided into diverse Nations, the latter making them
three distinct People, ( viz.) the Swevi Langobardi, the Swevi Semnones, and
Swevi Angili; whom Tacitus and other Latin Authors called Angli, and who, Lib.
2. c. 10.
Saffridus, in his Treatise De Origin Frisiorum, tells us, had as many
denominations with the Name of Angli added to them, as there were Countries
into which they were dispersed, and there reckons up a great many; and though
this Nation was not at first the same with that of the Saxons, nor dwelt in the
same Inland Country, in which they are placed by Ptolemy, yet they might,
according to the ancient custom of the Germans, change their seats after
Ptolemies Time (as Strabo observes they often did) and so removing their
dwellings from the Banks of the Elbi into Holstein, they might be there
conquered by the Saxons, and after make up one Nation or Commonwealth with
them, though still retaining their ancient Name, as the ancient Britains, or
Welsh, do among us at this day; so that I confess it remains a great doubt, why
they were at first called Angles; for tho most Writers think it sufficient to
derive their Name from the Latin Word Angulus a corner, because forsooth they
lived in a corner of Germany, yet this seems very forced, since Tacitus and
Ptolemy mention them by that Name, as then well known and given them a long
time before they came to be so called by the Romans; so that I still believe
that this Name may be derived from some Gothic Original, though what it was, is
now hard to determine.

As for the name of Saxons in general, there is a great dispute about it
amongst learned Men; Goropius Becanus, and Mr. Camden from him, suppose them to
have been first called Sacaesons, i. e. the Sons or Posterity of the Sacae,
Anno Dom. CCCCXLIX.
from whom he imagins them to be derived; but this Etymology is proved by Mr.
Sherringham, in his said Discertation, not only to be forced, but also false in
matter of Fact; for first the name of these People was never written, or
pronounced Sacasons in the Plural, but Sacen or Saxons, nor can we find in
Strabo, Ptolemy, or any other ancient Author, that ever the Sacae sent any
Colonies out of Asia, where they were planted near the Caspian Sea, not far
from Bactria; but Strabo tells us to the contrary, that this whole Nation being
set upon by the Persians at unawares, were totally destroyed.

Isidore has found out another derivation of this Name, from the Latin Word
Saxum a Stone, or Rock, because they were a strong and hardy Race of Men,
excelling all others in piracy; which were not improper, if this Name could be
proved to have been first given them by the Romans; whereas this Nation was so
called by their Neighbors (tho not by themselves) many Ages before the (...)
had any knowledge of them; so that the most likely Etymology of this Name,
seems to be that which Verstegan has given us in his said Treatise, from the
Opinion of the learned Lipsius, that it was first given them by their
Neighbors, from their wearing a sort of long Daggers, or short crooked Swords,
like Cymeters, called in their Tongue Saexen, and whence from their particular
use of it, they were called Saxons, and in the Dutch, Welsh and Irish Tongues,
the English are called Sacen to this day; and from whence probably the Arms of
Saxony are two such crooked Daggers, placed Saltire-wise, as Pontanus has very
well observed.

But whencesoever this name is derived, it is certain they are first mentioned
by Ptolemy, by the Name of Saxons, and he places them at the back of the
Cimbrians; tho they were not commonly known to the Romans by this Name, till
the Fourth Century after Christ, when they grew terrible by reason of their
many Piracies; Ammianus Marcellinus, and Claudian the Poet, (whose Verses
concerning them, I have given you in the former Book,) being the first Roman
Authors, who make mention of them; and the latter says, that the Saxons are
formidable above all other Enemies. After him, Orosius says, The Saxons were
terrible, by reason of their Valor; but in the Time of the Emperor
Theodosius, I. they were grown so formidable, that there were Ships and
Watch-houses appointed on purpose in the Coast of Britain to hinder their
depredations, and the Commander over them was called Comes littoris Saxonici,
Vide Not. Jon. Imperii.
in which times they became more known to the Romans.

As for the ancient Saxons Religion, it is likewise another great argument of
their Gothic Original, since the Danes, Swedes and Norweigans (who all derive
themselves from the Goths) worshipped the same Gods in Common with the Saxons,
Vide She^ringham d^ Anglor. Gent. Orig.
( viz.) Thor the God of Thunder, who answered the Roman Jupiter, (though he
was not the same.) Woden, who was their God of War, together with his Wife
Friga or Frea, who was their Goddess of Love and Pleasure: So that whoever will
but consider their Names of the Days of the Week, from which ours are derived
at this Day, will easily perceive the chief Gods they worshipped, and from whom
those Names are derived, to have been all the same; only I desire the Reader to
take notice, That whereas Verstegan, to prove the Saxons to come from the
Germans, would make our Tuesday to be derived from Twisto the God of the
Germans; Mr. Sherringham proves that Opinion not to be at all likely; since the
Germans (whose peculiar God this Twisto is supposed to be) do not call it
Twesday, but Dinsday, or Zinstag, Anno Dom. CCCCXLIX.
and the Swedes and Danes, Trisdag and Drisdag, and therefore Angrimus Jonas in
his History of Iseland, rather derives it from Tyr the Son of Woden, from whom
the Islanders call it to this day Tysdag, or Tyrsdag in their Language; but Ol.
Wormus in his learned Work, De monumentis Danicis, would rather derive this
Name from a Gothic Goddess, called Dysa or Thisa, the Wife of Thor, and whom
the ancient Swedes and Danes made their Goddess of Justice, who had her Temple
at Upsal; as for the Name of the last day of the Week, though Verstegan would
derive it from a God called Seater (whom the Danes call Crodo) yet whither he
was the same with the Roman Saturn, may be very much doubted; since the Danes,
Swedes, and Saxons Worshipped these false Gods, before they ever had any thing
to do with the Romans.

Besides these Seven greater Deities, from whom the days of the Week take
their Names, the ancient Saxons and Angles had many other less Gods and
Goddesses, such as Vide Voci^ de moribus Germ.
Hertha, who was the same with the Goddess Tellus; among the Romans Rheda, from
whom they call the Month of March Rhed Monach; Easter, from whose Feast falling
out in April, our Easter is derived; as also Mara, which was a Spectre,
supposed to have haunted People in the Night, and from whence comes our Word
Mare, or Disease so called; as for what Worship and Sacrifices they paid these
false Gods, they are very uncertain, only we find that the Swedes, and Danes
(and it is likely the Saxons too) sacrificed Men to Thor before any great
enterprise; but whoever desires to know more on this Subject, may consult
Verstegan, Wormius, and other German and Danish Writers.

But it is now time to return to our English Saxon History, Anno Dom. CCCCL.
from which I doubt we have made too long a digression; the Saxons being thus
arrived in Britain, as you now have heard, straight joined their Forces with
the Britains, and marching together against the Picts and Scots, Gild. Bid. H.
Hunt.
who were then entered into the Country, as far as the hither part of that
Province we now call Lincolnshire, and near Stanford they joined Battle with
them, where the former fighting with Darts and Lances, but the Saxons with
Battle-Axes and long Swords, they had very much the advantage; so that the
Picts could not bear their Force, but provided for their safety by Flight, the
Saxons obtaining a clear Victory with the spoil of the Field.

Hengist perceiving the Island to be Rich and Fruitful, but her Princes and
Inhabitants given to Vicious Ease and Luxury; Anno Dom. CCCCLI.
sends home word of it, inviting his Countrymen to share in this good success,
who coming over with Seventeen fresh Ships full of Stout men, were now grown up
to a sufficient Army, being entertained without suspicion, Nennius c. 3. Bid
lib. 1.
on those terms already mentioned; with which last supplies (as Nennius
relates) came over Rowena, the fair Daughter of Hengist; upon whose arrival
Hengist made a great Feast for King Vortigern, and his Courtiers; where was
also his Interpreter; (no Britain but he understanding the Saxon Tongue)
Hengist then commanded his Daughter to wait on them, and to serve the King with
Wine, with which growing Merry, he fell violently in Love with her, and
demanding her of her Father, told him he should have what ever he pleased, even
to the half of his Kingdom, on condition he might obtain her; whereupon Hengist
taking Council with those Chief, or Ancient Men, who had come over along with
him, what he should ask of the King for his Daughter; Anno Dom. CCCCLI
they all agreed that he should demand the Country of Kent, which was presently
granted him, one Guorangonus then Ruling there, being ignorant that his
Government was given away to the Saxons: So the Damosel being by her Father
given to the King, he Married her, and grew so extremely fond of her, that he
Divorced his former Wife, by whom he had several Sons of great hopes.

Anno Dom. CCCCLII.
But Hengist, not satisfied with this, told the King farther, That being now his
Father-in law, he must take upon him to advise him; and therefore, if he would
not slight his Counsel, he need not fear being overcome by any other Nation,
N^n. ibid.
as long as that of the Saxons was so potent; That therefore he would send over
for his own Will. of Malmsbury calls this Octa the Brother of Hengist; from
whom he suppos^s the Northumbrian Kings to have be^n descended.
Son and his Nephew, who being Warlike young Men, would fight stoutly against
the Picts and Scots, if the King would bestow upon them those Countries in the
North lying near the Picts Wall. So the King gave him leave to send for Octa
and Ebusa with 40 Vessels, who sailing round about the Picts Country, coasted
the Isles of Orcades, and came and possessed many places on the other side of
the Frith or Straight, even to the Borders of the Picts; Hengist still sending
by degrees for more Men and Ships, till at last the Countries from whence they
came were left almost without any Inhabitants: And now they being sufficiently
increased in Number and Strength, they wholly planted the Country of Kent with
Jutes. Bid.
But by the flocking in of such numerous Troops into this Isle, of all the
abovementioned Nations, they began so exceedingly to increase, that they soon
became a Terror to those who had invited them over, and now began to pick
Quarrels with their Entertainers,; and first they demanded larger Allowances of
Corn, Gildas, Sect. 23.24.

Nenn^us c. 36. Bid lib. 1.


and other Provisions, openly declaring, unless this were allowed them, they
would break the League, and waste all parts of the Country.

Anno Dom. CCCCLIV.
The Britains refusing to give them what they demanded, desired them to return
home, since their Numbers were increased beyond what they were able to
maintain: Whereupon the Saxon Commanders resolved to break the League, and
having made Peace secretly with the Picts, they immediately turned their Arms
against their Confederates, wasting the Country with Fire and Sword from the
Eastern to the Western Sea, none being able to hinder them, so that they
overran almost the whole Island; the Buildings, as well public as private,
were ruined; the Priests were commonly slain at the very Altars, and the
Bishops were destroyed without any Respect, together with the People; nor were
scarce any left to bury the dead: Whilst some of the miserable Remains of the
Britains, being taken among the Mountains, were slain in Heaps, others pined
away by Famine, yielded themselves to their Enemies, and to get Food were
forced to undergo perpetual Servitude, if they could so preserve their Lives;
others being forced to seek for Refuge among Foreign Nations; but those that
remained at home, living in perpetual Fear, led a hard and miserable Life among
the Woods and Mountains. Will. of Malmesbury supposes the League between the
Britains and Saxons to have lasted Seven years; and the first Battle between
them is placed in the 6th year after; but it is most likely that they fell out
some time before that.

This Flight of these Britains not only our own, but Foreign Writers relate;
for some fled to Armorica, and peopled it (as some suppose,) with Britains,
from whom it was called the Lesser Britain; though others think it was called
so long before, either by the Gift of the last Constantine the Great, Anno Dom.
CCCCLIV.
or else of Maximus, to those British Forces who had served them in their
Foreign Wars: To whom came those also that did not miscarry with the latter
Constantine at Arles, and now last of all by these Exiles, driven out by the
Saxons, who fled thither for Refuge.

But that the Britains of Armorica were settled there long before the Britains
here were driven out by the Saxons, chap. 5. p. 55^.
is proved by the above cited Doctor Stillingfleet in his Antiquities of the
British Churches, which he proves by these Authorities; First, from Sidonius
Appollinaris, in whom there are two Passages, which tend to the clearing this
matter: The first is concerning Arn^ndus, accused at Rome of Treason, in the
time of Anthemius, for persuading the King of the Goths to make War upon the
Greek Emperor, (i. e. Anthemius,) who then came out of Greece: And upon the
Britains on the Loir, as Sidonius Appolinaris expressly affirms, who lived at
that time, and pitied his Case. This happened about Anno Dom. 467, before
Anthemius was the second time Consul; from whence it appears not only that
there were Britains then settled on the Loir, but that their Strength and Forces
were considerable, which cannot be supposed to consist of such miserable People
as only fled from hence for fear of the Saxons; (and not being able to keep
their own Country, it is not likely they could that of others:) And it is
farther observable, that about this time Aurelius Ambrosius had success against
the Saxons, and either by Vortimer's Means, or his, the Britains were in great
likelihood of driving them quite out of Britain; so that there is no
probability, that the Warlike Britains should at that time leave their native
Country. A second Passage is concerning Riothamus, a King of these Armorian
Britains, in the time of Sidonius Appollinaris, (and to whom he wrote,) who
went with 12000 Britains to assist the Romans against Euricus King of the
Goths, but were intercepted by him, as Jornandes relates the Story; and
Sigibert places it Anno Dom. 470: Now, What clearer Evidence can be desired
than this, to prove, that a considerable number of Britains were there settled,
and in a condition not only to defend themselves, but to assist the Romans?
which cannot be imagined of such as merely fled thither for Refuge after the
Saxons coming into Britain. Besides, we find in Sirmondus's Gallican Councils,
Mansuetus, a Bishop of the Britains, subscribing to the first Council at Tours,
which was held Anno Dom. 461, by which we see the Britains had so full a
Settlement then, as not only to have Inhabitants, but a King and Bishops of
their own; which was the great Encouragement for other Britains to go over,
when they found themselves so hard pressed by the Saxons at home: For a People
frighted from hence would hardly have ventured into a Foreign Country, unless
they had been secure before hand of a kind Reception there; And if they must
have fought for a Dwelling, had they not far better have done it in their own
Country? From whence I conclude, that there was a large Colony of Britains in
Armorica, before those Numbers went over upon the Saxon Cruelties, of which
Eginhardus, and other Foreign Historians speak: Though how it should come to be
settled there, unless some Colonies were carried over before by Maximus, or
Constantine, the last Usurper of the Empire, I know not, but as for this, it
being very obscure, I determine nothing. N^n. c. 38.


K. Vortigern, nothing bettered by these Calamities, is said to have added this
to his other Crimes, that he took his own Daughter to Wife, who brought forth a
Son, who (according to Nennius) was called Faustus, and proved a Religious Man,
Anno Dom. CCCCLIV.
living in great Devotion by the River Rennis in Glamorganshire; but for the
rest of his Stories concerning the Dialogue between Vortigern and St. German,
and that the King was condemned for this Incest, in a great Synod or Council of
Clergymen and Laics, in which St. German presided, is certainly false; he
being then dead, (as appears from the best approved Authors,) the year before
the Saxons arrived in Britain. And indeed this whole Story of Vortigern's
committing Incest with his own Daughter seems altogether unlikely; for when
should he do it? Not before he married Rowena, for Nennius places it
afterward; nor could it well be during the time of his Marriage with her,
since, as the same Author relates, she continued his Wife long after, when he
was taken Prisoner by Hengist; and it is very strange he should fall in love
with his own Daughter, when at the same time he had another Wife, whom he is
said to have loved so well, that he was divorced from his first Wife for her
sake.

Geoffery of Monmouth relates, That the Nobles of Britain being highly
displeased at King Vortigern for the: great Partiality he showed to the Saxons,
Geoffery of Monm.
and for the ill Success that followed it, beseeched the King wholly to desert
him; but he refusing so to do, they deposed him, and chose his Son Vortimer
King, Nennius, c. 38.
who following their Advice, began to Expel the Saxons, pursuing them as far as
the River Diervent, or Darent, in Kent, where obtaining the Victory, he made a
great Slaughter of them; besides which, that he fought also another Battle with
them near the Ford which is called in the Saxon Tongue Episford, and in the
British Tongue Sathenegabail; Anno Dom. CCCCLV.
which is also confirmed by the Saxon Annals, which say, That Hengist and Horsa
fought with King Vortigern at a place called Eglesford (now Aylesford) in Kent,
and that Horsa was there slain ( Nennius says by Cartigern the Brother of King
Vortimer,) Camden in his Britannia, ( Tit. Kent) says, He was buried near
Horsted, ( to which he gave Name.
and that afterward Hengist and his Son Aesk obtained the Kingdom of Kent; and
Matthew of Westminster relates, that after the Death of his Brother Horsa, the
Saxons chose Hengist for their King, being 8 Years after his arrival in England.

And yet after this, Nen. c. 46. Ran. Higden. Polychron.
Nennius supposes Vortimer to have fought a third Battle with them in a Field
which was near the Stone Titulus, which was fixed near the Shore of the Gallic
Sea, which place Archbishop Usher will have to be Stonar in the Isle of
Thanet; but Mr. Somner, in his Treatise of the Roman Ports and Forts in Kent,
supposes it should be written Lapis Populi, in stead of Tituli; and then
Folkstone in Kent is most likely to be the place where this Battle was fought,
it having the same Signification as Lapis Populi in the Latin. Geoffery of
Monmouth, and from him Matthew Westminster, further relate, That Hengist not
being able to withstand the Valor of K. Vortimer, was made to retire into the
Isle of Thanet, whither he was also pursued by the Sea; and that at last the
Saxons being forced on board their Ships, returned into Germany. Nennius adds,
That they durst not return again into this Island till after the Death of
Vortimer, which, tho not mentioned in our English Saxon Annals, yet is very
likely to be true; since Bid relates, That about this time the Saxon Army
returned home, when the Natives, tho before driven out or dispersed, began
again to take fresh Courage, and come out of their Hiding-Places and Retreats.

This Year Vortimer having obtained many Battles against the Saxons, Anno Dom.
CCCCLVI.
is supposed by our British Historians to have died. Geoffery makes him to have
been poisoned by the Procurement of his Mother-in-Law, Rowena: and Nennius
adds, That Vortimer lying upon his Deathbed, Geoff. Monm. Mat. West.
desired his Servants to bury him near the place where the Saxons used to land,
saying, If that were done, tho they might take some other Haven in Britain, yet
they should never have that; but notwithstanding, he is said (contrary to his
own will) to have been buried at Lincoln. After whose Decease, Nennius and
Geoffery make Vortigern to have been again restored to the Throne.

It is much more certain which the Saxon Annals relate, Anno Dom. CCCCLVII.
that Hengist and his Son Aesk this Year fought against the Britains in a place
which is called Creecanford, and there killed four principal Men, (but in
Florence of Worcester's Copy of these Annals, which seems to have been truest,
it was 4000 Men;) and the Britains then left Kent, and fled in great fear to
London.

From which Victory, Ran. Higden in his Polychronicon dates the beginning of
the Kingdom of Kent under Hengist, who Reigned Twenty four Years.

For Hengist being now returned out of Germany, Nennius, cap. 47.
(as it is related by Nennius,) King Vortigern still maintained the War against
the Saxons, who thereupon took Council, how they might entrap Vortigern and his
Army; wherefore they sent Ambassadors to him offering Peace, and that the
former Friendship might be renewed between them; whereupon, Vortigern, taking
Advice with his wise Men, they all agreed to make Peace: So it was consented to
on both sides, That the Britains and Saxons meeting together without any Arms,
Ibid. c. 48.
a firm League should be made between them But the treacherous Hengist
commanded all his Followers to take their Daggers or Seaxes along with them
under their Coats, and that when he gave the Word, and cried out in his own
Tongue, Nimed yeur Saexes, that is, Pull out your Daggers, that they should
then fall upon the Britains and kill them, but spare their King, and (for his
Wife's sake) only take him Prisoner, because it would be more for their
advantage so to do, that he might be Ransomed. And thus being met according to
Agreement at a Feast, or Drinking-bout, they talked at first very Friendly
together, being placed every Saxon by a Britain; but Hengist giving the Word,
they rose up on a sudden and dispatched 300 ( Geoffery says 470) of the British
Nobles. Vortigern alone being then taken alive and put in Fetters, was forced
for his Ransom to surrender to the Saxons all those Countries that were
afterward called Eastsex, Middlesex, and Sussex; which is also recited by
William of Malmesbury, who adds, That at this Entertainment the Company growing
in drink, Hengist on purpose picked a Quarrel, and some hard Words passing,
they fell to blows, where the Britains were slain.

But here being a considerable Interval in the Saxon Chronicle, Anno Dom.
CCCCLXV
we may very well fill it up with British Affairs, for it is about this time
that the Welsh Chronicles suppose, that Aurelius was elected General of the
Britains, Vortigern being as yet King, tho but in Name, having retired (as
Nennius relates) to a Castle built by him in South Wales. And to this time we
may refer that Passage in S^ct. ^5.
Gildas, That when those cruel Robbers the Saxons were gone home, the
Remainders of the Britains being strengthened by GOD, came together from diverse
Places, and praying to him with all their Hearts, Anno Dom. CCCCLXV.
that he would not totally destroy them, chose Ambrosius Aurelian, a modest
Man, for their General, and who alone was found stout and faithful, as being of
Roman Race, who in so great a confusion remained alive, his Parents who had
enjoyed the Crown having been killed; but whether by the Scots and Picts, or
else (which is most likely) were murdered by their Subjects, he leaves it
uncertain. But Cap. 14.
Nennius says little more than that Vortigern was afraid of him; and then
immediately he confounds himself with Merlin, who being a Boy, tells Vortigern,
(after the Story of his being born without a Father,) That he had concealed his
Father's Name out of fear, but that he was one of the Roman Consuls; whereupon
Vortigern gave him a Castle, together with all the Western Parts of Britain,
which is as true as being born without a Father. But if Geoffery were to be
believed, he tells us very plainly, That he was one of the Sons of Constantine
King of Britain, who was forced to fly from Vortigern after the murder of their
Brother Constans by his contrivance: but we know that Constantine, and his Sons
Constans and Julian, were killed abroad many Years before; and it is not
probable the Romans would have permitted any one of his Sons to have remained
here; or if they did, this Ambrosius must have been by this time near 60 Years
of Age, supposing him to have been but One Year old when his Father died. And
besides, it is certain that Constantine was slain in the Reigns of Honorius and
Theodosius the Second, An. Dom. 411; and Aurelius is not supposed to be chosen
General, or King of the Britains, till the Year 465.

But immediately after Aurelius was thus made General of the Britains, it is
certain that he obtained a great Victory over the Saxons, Gildas.
tho the place where be not named by Gildas. But afterward (he says) sometimes
his Countrymen and sometimes their Enemies prevailed, and that thus it
continued till the Year of the Siege of Mount Badon, where was the latest and
not the least slaughter made of the Pagan Saxons; but that the Saxons about
this time received a great defeat, their own Annals intimate though they are
ashamed to confess it in express words, being thus related under this very
Year, Sax. Ann.
[ Hengist and Aesc fought with the Britains near Wippedes Fleat, and there
slew Twelve British Commanders; but lost one Man of note on the Saxons side,
Anno Dom. CCCCLXV.
whose Name was Wypped (who it seems left his name to that place) H. Huntington
adds, that this Victory was very fatal even to the Saxons themselves, both
parties being thereby so weakened, that neither the Saxons durst enter the
British borders for a long time; nor yet the Britains presume to Invade Kent,
however the Britains, tho Foreign Wars were now for a time intermitted, did not
cease to raise Civil ones among themselves: But this much appears even from the
silence of Saxon Annals, that for Twelve Years following, there was no
considerable action passed on either side, or else that the Britains had the
better of it, under the conduct of Aurelius Ambrosius, which is most agreeable
to Gildas's Relation.]

It is also very probable which Geoffery of Monmouth now relates, and which is
followed by many of our English Historians, Vid Dr. Stillingfleets Orig.
Britan. Chap. 5. from whence this ensuing pas^age is borrowed.
that Aurelius Ambrosius after his first Victory over the Saxons, called the
Princes and Great Men together at York, and gave Order for the repairing the
Churches which the Saxons had destroyed; and that after due care taken in other
places, he marched to London, which had suffered as well as other Cities; and
having called the dispersed Citizens together went about the repairing of it;
Anno Dom. CCCCLXV.
all his design being the restoring the Church and Kingdom; from thence he went
to Winchester and to Salisbury, doing there as he had done at other places: But
in the passage thither Geoffrey launches out to purpose in his History of
Stonehenge, translated (says he) by Merlin out of Ireland, to make a Monument
for the British Nobles slain there by Hengists Treachery: Which is such an
Extravagancy that it is to be wondered any should follow him in it, and yet
Mat. Westminster transcribes the main of it, and MS. Penes R. Episc Wig^^.
Walter of Coventry sets it down for Authentic History; but he adds two
Circumstances, which make it seem probable that Stonehenge had some relation to
Ambrosius, (viz.) that here Ambrosius was Crowned, and was not long after
buried; Polydore Virgil makes it the Monument of Ambrosius; and John of
Tinmouth in the Life of Dubricius, calls it Mons Ambrosii; and the name of
Ambresburg, a Town near it, does much confirm the probability, of its being
founded by Ambrosius, rather than either by the Romans or Danes, as some of our
late Antiquaries and Architects have supposed. But I shall not insist any
longer on this Subject; Geoffery adds yet further concerning Ecclesiastical
Matters in his time, that at a solemn Council he appointed two Metropolitans
for the two Sees, at that time vacant, ( viz.) Samptson one of Eminent Piety
for York, and Dubricius for Caer-leon; but Matthew Westminster says, that
Samptson was afterward driven into Armorica, and there was made Archbishop of
Dole, among the Britains, which is very likely to be true, being confirmed by
Sigebert in his Chronicle, Anno Dom. 566.

It is observed by H. of Huntington that after the Britains had a little
respite from their Enemies, they fell into Civil dissentions among themselves,
which is very agreeable to what Gildas has said; of this Geoffrey gives us no
improbable account, when he relates that one of Vortigerns Sons called
Pascentius, raised a Rebellion in the North against Ambrosius among the
Britains, who were overcome by him and put to flight; what became of Vortigern
is uncertain, nor can the British Writers themselves agree ^ither about the
time or the manner of his Death; Nennius, has two several stories about it,
the one certainly false, and the other very improbable; The first is, that St.
German followed him, into a Country in South Wales (which was called by his own
Name Guorthigernian) where he lay hid with his Women in a Castle which he had
built, called Din Guortigern, near the River Thebi; to which Castle when St.
German came, he prayed, and fasted there with his Clergy three whole Days and
Nights (it seems without any intermission) when the Castle about Midnight was
set on Fire from Heaven, and Vortigern with his Wives and Family were all
burnt, and this Nennius says, he found in the Book or Legend of St. German; yet
he declares, That others relate how that Vortigern becoming hateful to all
sorts and degrees of Men, none would keep him company from the greatest to the
least; till at last, as he wandered from place to place, his Heart was broken (I
suppose for grief) but Geoffery of Monmouth with more probability relates, that
Vortigern, being again deposed, was besieged and burnt in this Castle by his
Successor Aurelius Ambrosius, who set it on Fire.

But now it is time to return to our Saxon Chronicle; Anno Dom. CCCCLXXIII.
where after Eight Years interval, without any action mentioned, [We now find
Hengist and Aesc joined Battle with the Britains, and took many Spoils, Sax.
Ann.
and the Welshmen vanished before the English like Stubble before the Fire, as
the Saxon Chronicle words it.

After this there is no more said of any Victories gained by Hengist; but now
after Four Years interval, Anno Dom. CCCCLXXVII.
began the Kingdom of the South Saxons; for Aella with his Three Sons, Cymen,
Wlencing, or Pleting, (as Huntington calls him) and Cissa, landing in Britain
at a place called Cymens ora (which signifies in the Saxon Tongue Cymens Shore
or Coast,) there they slew a great many Britains, and made the rest fly into
the Wood or Forest, called Andredes Leage (supposed to be part of the wild of
Kent, and the Woody parts of Sussex) where now are, or were lately Aishdowne,
and Arundel Forests, with several others now disforrested. Henry Huntington
gives a large account of this Action, and tells us that upon the Saxons first
landing, a great many Britains immediately drew together at the Alarm, and
straight ways a great Fight was begun, but the Saxons being taller and stronger
Men, received them courageously; and the Britains coming on very rashly in
small straggling Parties were killed by the Saxons, who were drawn up in close
Order, and so the Britains were routed upon the first encounter; whereupon
these Saxons possessed themselves of all the Sea Coast of Sussex, enlarging
their Territories more and more, until the Eighth Year after their coming; when
Aella fought against the Britains, near Mearcredes, Burnamstede or
Mecredesburne (but where it lies is uncertain) now it seems (as H. Huntington
relates) all the Kings and Princes of the Britains were got together, Anno Dom.
CCCCLXXXV.
and fought with Aella and his Sons, where the Victory remained doubtful, for
both Armies returned home very much weakened; whereupon Aella sent unto his own
Country for fresh supplies.

The same Year also Aurelius Ambrosius, is supposed by the Welsh Chronicles to
be chosen King (having been before only General) of the Britains, Vid. Dr.
Powel 's Catalogue of the Kings of Wales
and to have Reigned Nineteen Years. Nennius tells us, That he being King of
all Britain, bestowed Buelt, and another Country in South Wales, upon Pascent
Son to Vortigern.

About Three Years after this, Hengist King of Kent dyed; For this Year (as the
Saxon Annals relate) Aesc (who is also called Oisc, and by our Historians,
called Osric) his Son began his Reign, which continued Twenty Four Years; but
of Hengist his Father, Will. of Malmesbury very well observes, that he obtained
a Crown by Craft, as much as Valor; but Aesc his Son (who succeeded him)
maintained his Kingdom by the Valor of his Father, rather than his own Merit,
and did not much increase his Dominions: This happened in the Time of Zeno the
Emperor. Nor can I here omit what Geoffery of Monmouth, and (from him) Mathe^
of Westminster falsely relate, concerning the Death of Hengist; That fighting
against Aurelius Ambrosius, he was taken Prisoner near Coninsburgh in
Yorkshire; and not long afterward beheaded by Eldol (a feigned) Duke of
Gloucester; which since it is not found in the Saxon Chronicle, nor in any
other Authentic Historian, deserves little credit.

Anno Dom. CCCCXC
Aella and Cissa having now received fresh recruits out of Germany (wherein
they much confided) did this Year besiege Andredesceaster (supposed to be that
we now call Newenden in Kent) and took it by Force, putting all the Britains to
the Sword; but H, Huntington is very particular in the manner of this Siege,
and tells us that the Britains raised a great Army to relieve it, and made many
assaults upon the Saxons Rear, whilst they lay before the Town; who thereupon
raising the Siege, Anno Dom. CCCCXC
turned all their Forces against the Britains; whilst they being more nimble,
presently ran away to the Woods, when the Saxons returning again to the Siege,
they were as soon upon their backs; Sax. Ann.
by which means the Saxons being for a time tired out, received a great loss,
till they divided their Army into two bodies; so that whilst the one assaulted
the City, the other should defend the Assailants: whereby at last the Citizens
being quite spent with hunger and fatigue, could no longer endure the Force of
the Besiegers, and all perished by the Sword, even to the very Women and
Children, none escaping; and the Saxons quite destroyed that City, which
remained a vast heap of Ruins in his Time, tho the Town of Newenden was
afterward built where it stood in the Reign of Edward the I.

But news being carried into Germany, of the good success of the Saxons; it
gave occasion for new Commanders, together with their Armies to come over
hither to try their Fortunes; and thus Five Years after began the Kingdom of
the West Saxons.

For now Two Commanders, viz. Cerdic, and Cynric his Son, Anno Dom. CCCCXCV.
landing in Britain, with Five Ships at a place, called Cerdicisora, (i. e.
Cerdic's Shore) the same day fought with the Britains: this Cerdic was the
Tenth in descent from Woden; His pedigree (which is needless here to be
recited) I have referred to another place; but in Six Years after their coming,
he and his Sons conquered all the Country of the West Saxons: This Cerdic
reigned Twenty Five Years; to his Son Cynric whom succeeded.

Then follows, in the Saxons Annals, the whole Succession of these Kings as far
as K. Edward (called the Martyr,) Son of Edgar, which I have omitted, because
it serves for no other use, but to let us see about what time these Annals were
drawn into the form we now have them; but to return to the History, H.
Huntington further informs us, that the same day in which Cerdic landed, there
assembled a great multitude of Britains to oppose him; the Saxons standing in
Battle array before their Ships, the Britains boldly assaulted them, but were
forced to return without any great Execution, because the Saxons could not be
over come, though they fought till Night parted them; whereupon the Britains
finding the Saxons too strong to be dealt with, were forced to retreat, it
proving a drawn Battle; but after this, Cerdic and his Son seized all the
Countries upon the Sea Coast, though not without diverse Battles.

But about Six Years after came over to their assistance, Anno Dom. DI.
Porta with his Two Sons Bleda and Megla, who landed in Britain with two Ships
at a place, which (from him) is still called Portsmouth: Here as soon as they
landed, they slew a Young British Prince, or Commander, who (as H. Huntington
relates) being then Governor of this Province, advancing with a great
multitude, without any Order they all perished in the twinkling of an Eye, so
that Port and his Sons obtained a great Victory; but in Anno Dom. 500.

Aurelius Ambrosius King of the Britains, Vi. Dr. Powel^ Ca^alogue of British
Kings.
is said by the Welsh Chronicles to have dyed, being poisoned as ( Geoffery
relates) by the procurement of Pascent, Son to Vortigern, who had before
rebelled against him; Tho who succeeded him is uncertain: for as to his
supposed Brother Uther Pendragon, whom Geoffery of Monmouth would here bring
in, he is looked upon even by the British Antiquaries, as a mere imaginary King
of his own; Therefore this must be owned for the most obscure time of all the
Welsh History; but this is certain, that for about the space of Seven Years,
there is no mention made of any Wars between the Saxons and the Britains, until

Anno Dom. DVIII.
Cerdic and Cynric slew the great British King, Natanleod or Nazaleod, together
with 5000 Men, from which time that Province is called Natanleage, as far as
Cerdicsford; but H. Huntington is more particular in this War, and tells us,
That this Natanleod was the greatest and most powerful King of the Britains;
who having gathered together his whole Forces, Cerdic and his Son were fain to
send for aid to Aesc King of Kent, and Aella King of the South Saxons, as also
from Port (who came lately over) and that before the Battle, the Saxon Army was
divided into two bodies, whereof Cerdic Commanded the one, and his Son Cynric
the other; that the Battle being begun, King Nazaleod, seeing the Saxons Right
Wing to be the strongest, fell upon it with all his Forces, and immediately
routed it; whereupon Cerdic being put to flight, there happned a great
slaughter on that side, which, when it was perceived by his Son Cynric from the
Left Wing, he rushed upon the backs of the pursuers: So that the Battle being
again renewed, King Nazaleod was Slain, and his Army totally defeated, whereby
the Saxons obtaining a great Victory, remained undisturbed for a long time, and
then came to them some Years after many Valiant assistants out of Germany.

But to make some Reflections upon this Story, before we proceed further, it is
worth our enquiry, who this Nazaleod was; some think him to be Ambrosius aboved
mentioned, but others take him for his pretended Brother Uther Pendragon,
whilst others again suppose him not to be any King at all, but only the
General of the King of the Britains, tho what King that was, remains as
uncertain, and since it is so much in the dark, I shall not undertake to
determine it.

It is also as uncertain who now succeeded this Nazaleod; most of the Vid.
Those Annals at the end of Dooms- Day Book in the Exchequ^r.
Welsh Annals here leave an inter-regnum of about Six Years, and do not begin
the Reign of K. Arthur, till the Year 514, or 515. So likewise, whether he was
sole King of the Britains is much questioned; since some ancient Manuscripts,
Welsh Chronicles and Poems, make him to have been only King of Cornwall. As to
his Father, Archbishop Usher very well conjectures, that this Uther, who is
said to have been his Father, was no other than Nazaleod above mentioned; who
for his great Actions was called in Welsh, Uther, which signifies as much as
Wonderful or Terrible; and thus (as Nennius tells us) Artur (whose name
signifies in Welsh an horrible bear) was also called Mabuter, that is a
horrible Son, because in his Childhood he was very cruel, or rather because he
was the Son of this Nazaleod, Surnamed Uther: out of which Geoffery of Monmouth
forged the Name of Uter Pendragon; if this could be proved, as it is an
ingenious conjecture of the learned Lord Primate, it would go a great way to
clear the British History of these obscure times: But since we are now treating
of King Arthur, and that it is certain he gained many considerable Victories
over the Saxons, tho the particular Years are not set down by Nennius, or any
other Author; I shall here set them down altogether as they are found in
Nennius; his first Battle was fought near the Mouth of the River, which is
called Glein or Gleni (which is supposed by some to have been in Devonshire,
but by others (and that more likely) to have been Glein in Lincolnshire): the
Second, Third, Fourth and Fifth Battles were near another River called Dugl^s,
which is in the Country of Linvis or Linnis, (by some supposed to be the River
Dug or Due, Anno Dom. DVIII.
in Linc^lnshire, but others place it in Lancashire, where there is a River
called Dugles near Wigan;) the Sixth Battle was by a River called Bassas (which
is supposed to run by Boston in Lincolnshire) the Eighth Battle was near the
Castle of Gunion or Guinion, in which Arthur carried the Picture of Christ's
Cross, and of the Virgin Mary upon his back, or as Mat. Westminster has it
painted on his Target; and the Pagans were that day put to flight, and many of
them slain, so that they received a very great overthrow, the Ninth Battle was
fought near the City of Legions, that is in the British Tongue Kaer-Leon, (now
Chester;) the Tenth was near a River called Ribroit or Arderic; the Eleventh
was upon the Mountain, which is called Ag^ed Cath Reginian (which is some place
in Somersetshire, but by Humphrey Lloyd it is supposed to have been
Edinburgh;) H. Huntington confesses these places to be unknown in his time, and
therefore can be only guessed at in ours: As for the Twelfth Battle, since the
certain time of it is fixed, we shall speak of that by and by: but the learned
Dr. Gale (to whom we are beholding for this last Edition of Gildas, and Nennius
printed at Oxon, as also for the various readings, and Notes at the end of him)
supposes that all the Battles here reckoned up, were performed in the space of
Forty Years, aforegoing, and although they may be here attributed to King Arthur,
yet might be fought under Vortigern, Ambrosius and others; but that some of
these Battles were really fought by King Arthur, against the Saxons, is
acknowledged by all our English Writers; and Ranulph Higden in his
Polychronicon expressly relates, that it is found in some ancient Chronicles,
that K. Cerdic fighting often with Arthur, tho he were overcome, yet still came
on again more fiercely; until Arthur being quite wearied out, after the Six and
Twentieth Year of Cerdic's coming over, gave him up Hampshire and
Somersetshire; which Countries he then called West-Sexe: And Thomas Rudburne,
in his greater Chronicle about this time we now treat of, relates, That Cerdic
fought oftentimes with King Arthur, who being at last weary of War, made a
League with Cerdic, who thereupon granted to the Cornish-men to enjoy the
Christian Religion under a Yearly Tribute; which is likely enough to be true,
supposing, as we have already said, that he was only King of Cornwall, and which
shows this Prince not to have been such a mighty Monarch, as Geoffery of
Monmouth would make him. Which is likewise confessed by the Welsh Historian
Caradoc of Lancarvan, in his Life of Gildas; where he relates, That Glastenbury
was in Gildas his time besieged by King Arthur with a great Army out of Cornwall
and Devonshire, Vid. Usher de Ant. Britan. Eccl. c. 13.
because Queen Gueniver, his Wife had been ravished from him by Melvas, who
then Reigned in Somersetshire, and that she was there kept by him because of
the Strength of that Place; whereupon King Arthur raising a great Army out of
Cornwall and Devonshire, marched to take the Town, when the Abbot of Glastenbury
accompanied with Gildas went between the two Armies, and persuaded Melvas his
King to restore the ravished Wife; which being done, both Kings were
reconciled: Which plainly shows this Arthur to have been but of small Power, as
well as Reputation, who could thus tamely swallow such an Affront. But to
return to the Saxon Annals, which relate, Sax. Ann.
[That Stufe and Withgar (Nephews to King Cerdic) arrived in Britain with three
Ships at the Port called Cerdics-Ora, and fighting against the Britains, put
them to flight. Anno Dom. DXIV.
H. Huntington makes a long Description of this Battle, which, since it is not
much to the purpose, I omit, Anno Dom. DXIV.
only he tells us, That the British Army was drawn up on a Hill side, as also
in the Valley; which at first put the Saxons in much fear, till recovering
themselves, they put them all to the Rout. Under this Year also Ranulph Higden,
in Polychron, places the Death of Aesc the Son of Hengist, to whom succeeded
Otta his Son, who Reigned 22 Years, without any thing related of him, either in
the Saxon Annals, or any other History.

About this time also, (tho without assigning the Year,) the same Author places
the Death of Aella King of the South Saxons, who had all the Kings and chief
Men in Britain under his Command, to whom succeeded his Son Cyssa; but in a
short time, his Posterity (whose Names are no where mentioned) grew weaker and
weaker, till they became subject to other Kings.

Anno Dom. DXIX.
This Year Cerdic and Cynric took upon them the Title of Kings of the
West Saxons, and the same Year fought against the Britains at a place called
Cerdice's-Ford, (now Charford in Hampshire), from which time the Royal Race of
the Saxon Kings have reigned there; and the same Year the Emperor Justin the
Elder began to reign.

It seems King Cerdic was hitherto very modest, for tho he had now been a
Conqueror for 24 Years, yet did he never take upon him the Title of King till
now, when he had gained a very large Territory, and his Affairs were well
established by this great Victory at Cerdice's-Ford; but the Time when this
Kingdom began is the more observable, because at last it conquered all the
other six Saxon Kingdoms, and so obtained the sole Command of all England; so
that (says H. Huntingdon) the Times of all other Kingdoms being applied to
these Kings, may be by them the better distinguished.

Anno Dom. DXX.
In this Year, as all the best British Manuscripts, as well as printed
Chronicles, relate, was fought the great Battle of Badon-Hill, (which is
supposed to be the same with Banesdown near Bathe,) where the British Writers
suppose King Arthur to have Commanded in Person; tho diverse of our Authors make
him to have been only General to Aurelius Ambrosius, which is not at all
likely; since according to the best British Accounts Aurelius died above 20
Years before this Battle, This Nennius makes to be the twelfth Battle he had
fought with the Saxons; yet since Mr. Milton, as well as others, have been
pleased to question, whether there was ever any such King who Reigned in
Britain, it were not amiss if we did a little clear and establish that Point
before we proceed any further, since so great and remarkable a part of the
History of the British Kings depends upon it. The Objections that are made
against Arthur's being a King in Britain are these: First, That Gildas makes no
mention of him. Secondly, That he is not so much as mentioned by any ancient
British Historian, except Nennius, who lived near 300 Years after, and whom all
grant to have been a very credulous, trivial Writer, and to have vented a great
many Fables. Thirdly, That tho William of Malmesbury and H. Huntington both
make mention of this Arthur, and his Victories over the Saxons, yet that the
latter took all he has written concerning him from Nennius, as the former did
either from him, or else from some Monkish Legends in the Abbey of Glastenbury;
and that he knew no more of this Arthur above 500 Years ago, when he wrote his
History, than we do at this day. Lastly, That the pretended History of Geoff^ry
of Monmouth has made such incredible Romances concerning this Prince's Actions
and Conquests, not only in Britain, Anno Dom. DXX.
but in France, Scotland, Ireland, Norway, and other Countries, as are
sufficient to shock the Credit of his whole History: It being a likely matter,
that he, who could not maintain his own Country, should have Forces and Leisure
sufficient to conquer the Kingdoms of so many Foreign Princes.

To each of which Objections we shall return these Answers. That in the first
place, as to Gildas his not mentioning him, it is at the best but a Negative
Argument, since it is evident that he did not design any exact History of the
Affairs of his Country, but only to give a short Account of the Causes of the
Ruin of it by the Scots, Picts, and Saxons, the chief of which he ascribes to
GOD's Vengeance upon the Britains for their great Wickedness, and corruption of
Manners; nor does he mention any Kings or Commanders of those Times, except
Vortigern, and Aurelius Ambrosius. As for Nennius, tho what is objected against
him be true, yet since he lived near 300 Years after Arthur's Death, (as
appears by the Preface to his History,) it is highly probable he set down what
he there wrote, if not from some other more ancient Writers, yet at the least
from the general Tradition of his Countrymen at that time, who can never be
supposed to have been able to forge this whole Story of K. Arthur, and the
Battles he fought; and tho it be true, that the Saxon Annals make no mention of
this King, yet if these were also written from Traditions long after these
Things were done, being not put into the Form we now have them till long after
the Saxons became Christians, it is no wonder if there be no mention made of
him; especially since they could not do it without Recording to Posterity the
many Defeats he gave them; but notwithstanding this, diverse of our best and
most ancient, English Historians, as Radulphus de Diceto, and Thomas Rudburn,
do menti^n King Cerdio's fighting diverse Battles with King Arthur. But as for
William of Malmesbury and H. Huntington, tho it might be true, they neither of
them knew any thing of them, but what they had from Nennius, or the Legends of
Glastenbury; yet are not the ancient Registers of that Monastery to be wholly
slighted as false, since King Arthur was there buried: But William of
Malmesbury, in his Book of the Antiquities of that Church, makes King Arthur to
have begun his Reign over the Britains in the Tenth Year of King Cerdic, in
which he is also followed by Ran. Higden in Polychronicon, and Joh. Tinmuth in
his Golden History; and tho the Tomb of King Arthur was not found in the time
of William of Malmesbury, yet was it some Years after discovered, about the end
of the Reign of Henry the Second, as Giraldus Cambrensis relates at large, both
in his Book De Institutione Principis, and in his Speculo Ecclesiastico; where
he gives a large Account of the manner of finding his Coffin, (which was made
out of a solid Oak,) as also of the largeness of his Bones which he saw and
handled; together with an Inscription upon a Leaden Cross of about a Foot long,
fixed to the lower side of a broad Stone laid three Foot above the Coffin, on
which was inscribed this Epitaph, Hic jacet sepultus inclytus. Rex Arthurus in
Insula Aualonia; which Cross being preserved in the Monastery of Glastenbury
till Leland's time, he saw and took a Copy of it, Somersetshire, New Edit. p.
65.
and is the very Inscription which Mr. Camden has given us the Draught of in
his Britannia.

But as for the last Objection, tho it be true what William of Malmesbury very
well observes, that the Britains had vented a great many Fables of him, yet he
still acknowledges him to have been a Prince more worthy to be celebrated in
true Histories, Anno Dom. DXX.
than Romances; and tho it must be confessed, that the Stories the Welsh had
then made of him, encouraged Geoffery of Monmouth to write those incredible
Fables of his Conquests; yet does it not therefore follow, that all that is
written of him must be Lies; since a true History may be corrupted, and yet the
Substance of it remain true. But whoever desires to see more in justification
of the History of King Arthur, how much of it is true, and what most likely to
be false, Cap. 5. p. 332.
may, if they please, consult Dr. Stillingfleet's Antiquities of the British
Churches. But to return to our Saxon Annals, in which, for the space of 7
Years, there is nothing at all mentioned until the time

Sax. Ann.
When Cerdic and Cenric fought against the Britains, in a place called
Cerdics-Leah. To which Year also H. Huntington refers the beginning of the
East-Saxon Kingdom by Erchenwin the Son of Offa. (...) D^XXVII.
He seems to be the only Prince who is derived from one Saxnat, and not from
Woden; tho of this Prince they tell us nothing, except his Name and Pedigree,
relating neither the Number of his Forces, the Place of his Landing, nor so
much as the least Encounter he had with the Britains. In the same Obscurity we
might have also passed over Sledda his Son, had he not married Ricicla Daughter
of Emerick, King of Kent, and Sister to Ethelbert the first Christian King; so
that this Kingdom being at first Tributary to that of Kent, and then to that of
the Mercians, never came to be very considerable, tho it had London (the chief
City of England) under its Dominion; But in the Year^

Anno. Dom. DXXX.
530, Cerdic and Cenric conquered the Isle of Wight, and slew a great many Men
in Withgarabyrig.

But 4 Years after, Cerdic King of the West Saxons died, and Cenric his Son
succeeded him, Anno Dom. DXXXIV.
and Ruled 26 Years.

These two Kings bestowed the Isle of Wight on Stuf and Withgar, who were
Nephews to Cerdic. This (according to H. Huntingdon) happened in the time of
Justinian the Emperor.

Anno Dom. DXXXVI.
Offa King of Kent dying, his Son Ermeric succeeded him. Ran. Higden places it
(tho falsely) An. 544.

Anno Dom. DXXXVIII.
This Year the Sun was Eclipsed the 14th of the Calends of March, from early in
the Morning, to the third Hour, ( i. e. till nine of the Clock.) And the Year
following,

Anno Dom. DXL.
The Sun was again Eclipsed the 12th of the Calends of June, and the Stars
showed themselves for near half an hour after nine in the Morning. But to take
a View of the British History.

Anno Dom. DXLII.
King Arthur died this Year, (as all the British Writers agree,) but as for the
manner of his Death, it is uncertain. The British Chronicles suppose him to
have been slain in a Fight at Camala against his own Nephew Mordred, who had
usurped the Crown in his absence. It is more uncertain who succeeded him;
Geoffery of Monmouth makes Arthur at his Death to have bequeathed the Crown to
one Constantine his Cousin, Son of Cador Duke of Cornwall, whom he makes to have
fought several times with the Sons of Mordred, that he slew them, and after 4
Years Reign died: But diverse of the ancientest British Chronicles we have seen
make no mention of this Constantine, but leave here an Inter-regnum of near 11
Years. But to return to our Saxon Annals.

Sax. Ann.
Withgar died, and was buried at Withgarasbyrig; which Place being called after
his own Name, was certainly some Place in the Isle of Wight; and is supposed to
be the same with Caresbrook Castle in the same Island. Ann. DXLIV.


Let us now look back to the British Affairs: Anno Dom. DXLIV.
King Constantine being supposed by Geoffery to have died about this time, he
makes his Nephew Aurelius Conan to have succeeded him, who Reigning about two
Years, was followed by Vortipore; who also dying four Years after, was
succeeded by Malgo, (called by Gildas, Malgoclunus,) and is supposed to be the
same with Maelgwn Guined, (so often mentioned in the Welsh Annals;) so that
according to Geoffery, these three Princes reigned successively after one
another, which can by no means to reconciled with Gildas's Epistle, who speaks
to all of them, as living and reigning at one and the same time; so that it is
most likely that Malgo, or Malgocunus, was only King of North Wales, or else of
the Northern Parts of Britain, (as some of the Welsh Chronicles affirm;) but
that Vortipore was King of that part of South Wales called Demetia, Gildas
himself relates, whilst Aurelius Conan ruled in Powis Land, or some other
Southern Province, (as Archbishop Usher with preat probability supposes;) but
Gildas's Epistle, wherein he so sharply inveighs against all these British
Kings abovementioned, is to this effect.

Britain has Kings, yet Tyrants; it has Judges, but preying upon, and
oppressing the Innocent; their Kings have Wives of their own, yet are
Whoremongers; often Swearing, yet as often Perjuring themselves; often making
Wars, but those unjust, or Civil Ones; prosecuting Thieves, yet having the
greatest near them, even at their own Tables; sitting in the Seat of Justice,
yet not observing the Rules of right Judgment; despising the Innocent and
Peaceable, and countenancing the Bloody and Adulterous; keeping Men in Prison,
whom they have put there rather out of Malice, than Desert. And then proceeds
particularly to all the Kings then reigning, beginning with Constantine, whom
he calls The Tyrannical Whelp of an impure Damonian Lioness; and accuses him
this very Year, in which he wrote that Letter, to have been guilty of murdering
two innocent Youths of Royal Blood at the very Altar, and under the Cope of the
holy Abbot: (These are supposed to have been the two Sons of Mordred.) He
likewise accuses this Prince, that being polluted with frequent Adulteries, he
had, contrary to Christ's Precept, put away his own Wife.

In the next place, applying himself to Aurelius Conan, he accuses him of the
like, if not worse Parricides, besides Fornications and Adulteries; and that
hateing the Peace of his Country, he had out of desire of Prey fomented Civil
Wars.

In the third place he comes to Vortipore, whom he calls The wicked Son of a
good Father, and Tyrant of the Demetae, (that is, South-Welshmen) and whom he
accuses of the like Faults; and that tho his Head were then gray, yet he was
guilty of Adultery, his Wife being put away; him he also advises to Repentance.

Next he proceeds to Cuneglasus, (who is supposed by some Antiquaries to have
been King of the Northern or Cambrian Britains;) but this is to be observed,
that Geoffery of Monmouth takes no notice of him; which shows, that either he
never saw this Copy of Gildas, or else, if he did, knew not where to place this
Prince; having already made as many Kings to succeed each other, as the Time he
had to bestow upon them would allow: But whoever he was, Gildas accuses him for
fighting both against GOD and Men; against Men, by taking Arms against his own
Countrymen; against God, by infinite Wickedness; and besides his other Faults,
that having put away his own Wife, Anno Dom. DXLIV.
he had married her Cousin who had vowed perpetual Chastity.

Then he concludes with a sharp Reproof of Maglocunus, whom he calls the Island
Dragon, and the Expeller of many other Tyrants; he also accuses him of Sodomy,
asking him, Why, being taller in Stature, and greater in Power than all the
rest of the Princes in Britain, he had made himself, in stead of being better,
far worse than they? Upbraiding him, that in his Youth he had murdered the King
his Uncle, with many of his Men. After many other Reproofs, threatens him with
speedy Destruction unless he repent.

This is the Substance of Gildas's Reproof to the British Princes; from which
all that we can gather is, First, that there were no less than five Kings at
this time in Britain, tho by what Means or Title they came to the Crown is
uncertain; more than that it seems probable, some of these Princes here
mentioned were descended from Aurelius Ambrosius; tho (as Gildas observes)
highly degenerated from the Virtue of their Ancestors: But what great Actions
these Kings did during their Reigns, or what good Qualities they were endued
with, is not known, so that there is but a slender Account of them in the Rolls
of Fame; which may make us suspect they were guilty of but very few good
Qualities, because we here find a large Catalogue of their bad Ones. Who
succeeded each of these Kings in their distinct Territories, the most
authentic British Chronicles do not mention; and therefore, tho Geoffery makes
one Careticus to have now governed that part of Britain which was still left
unconquered by the Saxons, and whom he will have to succeed Malgo; and that
thereupon the Saxons sent for one Gormund an African King with a great Army of
his Countrymen, who making a League with the Saxons, set upon Careticus, and
besieged him in the City of Circester, and taking and burning it, afterward
fought with Careticus, and forced him to fly beyond the Mountains of Wales:
Yet since neither in our Saxon Annals, nor any other good Historian, there is
any thing to be found concerning these Kings, or any Africans that ever invaded
Britain, it is to be looked upon as no better than one of the bold Inventions
of this Author.

But as I have given you Gildas's Character of their Kings, so I shall now give
you that of their Clergy, whom he thus reproves. Britain (says he) has
Bishops, but without Discretion; many Ministers, but those Impudent; many
Clerks, but subtle Prowlers; Pastors in Name, but indeed Wolves; i^tent upon
all Occasions not to feed the Flock, but to pamper and well line themselves,
making use of their Churches only for Lucre's sake; teaching the People sound
Doctrine, but they themselves showing evil Example; rarely Officiating at the
Altar, and then scarce ever standing there with pure Hearts; not correcting the
People for their Sins, as guilty of the same themselves; despising the Precepts
of Christ, and fulfilling their own Lusts; usurping the Chair of Peter, but
through the blindness of their own worldly Lusts stumbling upon the Seat of
Judas; deadly haters of Truth, and lovers of Lies; looking upon the poor
Christians with Eyes of Pride and Contempt, but fawning upon the wickedest rich
Men without Shame; great Promoters of other Men's Alms with set Exhortations,
but themselves ever contributing least; concealing, or slightly touching the
reigning Sins of the Age, but highly aggravating their own Injuries as done to
Christ himself; seeking Preferments and D^grees in the Church more than Heaven;
and having so gained them, make it more their study how to keep, than to
illustrate them by their good Examples; dull, and stupid to the Reproofs of
holy Men, (if ever they hear them at all, Anno Dom. DXLIV.
) but show themselves very attentive to the trivial Discourses of the Laity;
ready to act any unlawful Things; carrying their heads a loft, but having their
affections (nothwithstanding the checks of their own Consciences) as low as
Hell; sad at the loss of a penny, but joyed if they can get one in Apostolical
Censures, either through their own Ignorance, or the greatness of the Sins;
Dull and Mute, but very skillful in the cheating Tricks of Worldly business;
from which wicked sort of Conversation many run into Priests Orders, which they
buy for Money, taking the Priesthood, without observing its Rules and
Institution, or knowing what belongs to matters of Faith or Manners. And then
proceeding in a tedious invective against Simony, he at last thus addresses
himself to the Laity: What can ye expect, O unhappy People, from these Beasts,
all Bellies! Shall these amend thee, who (as the Prophet says) weary themselves
in commiting Iniquity? Shall thou s^e with their Eyes, which regard only those
ways that lead to Hell; leave them rather, (as bids our Savior), least ye fall
both blindfold into the same Perdition. But are all thus? Perhaps not all, or
not so grossly: But what did it avail Eli, to be himself blameless, whilst he
connived at his Sons, that were wicked? Who of these has been envied for his
better Life? Who of them have hated to cons^rt with such, or withstood their
entering into the Ministry, or zealously endeavored their casting out? This is
the Sense of what he there says, it being not only tedious, but impossible to
Translate Verbatim, so barbarous and obscure a Writer, tho otherwise he seems
to have been a Man of great Wit, and ardent Piety, above what that Age would
admit of: But hence we may learn what the State of the Government and Religion
among the Britains was in that long Calm of Peace, which the Victory at Badon
Hill had produced.

Also at the end of his History, he gives a farther account of the sad state of
Affairs, and great corruption of Manners in those Times;

And complains, That the Cities of his Country were not then inhabited, as
before, but lay ruined and deserted; for though Foreign Wars were ceased for a
time, yet so were not the Civil, so that there did still remain upon the face
of the Island evident marks of so miserable a destruction; but that also as
long as the memory of that unlooked for assistance lasted, their Kings, as well
as their Bishops and Priests did pretty well observe due Orders; but those
deceasing, as the next Generation succeeded, which had not seen the former
Calamities, and were only sensible of the present Prosperity, all the
Principles of Truth and Justice were totally shaken and subverted: So that
scarce any footsteps remained of them in all the Orders and Degrees of Men
above mentioned, except some, and those but few, very few in respect of those
who go to Hell; so that although they are the only true Sons of our Mother the
Church, yet by reason of the smallness of their number, she can scarce take any
notice of them, albeit they lie in her very Bosom.

This much may suffice to give an account, as well of this Epistle of Gildas,
as of his History, which Caradoc of Lancarvon in his Legendary Life of this
Author supposes to have been writ whilst he lived at Glastenbury. But these
passages, I thought good to Transcribe from him, as not unuseful to be inserted
in these Annals; not out of any desire to rip up, or expose the faults of the
ancient British Clergy or Nation, much less to insult over their Calamities;
but rather to serve as a warning to us, who live in this loose and corrupt Age,
that we may avoid the like Sins, lest we provoke God to send the like Judgments
upon us: But to return to the Saxon Chronicle;

Sax. Ann.
[This Year began the Northumbrian Kingdom, or in the Words of our Annals; Ida
began to Reign, from whom is derived the Royal Family of the Northumbrian
Kings; Anno Dom. DLXVII.
the Saxon Annals here give us a long pedigree of this Ida, who reigned Twelve
Years, and built Bebbanburgh (now Bamborough Castle in Northumberland) which
was at first encompassed only with a Trench, and afterward with a Wall.

H. Huntington says, This Prince was always in War, and Will. of Malmesbury,
and Mat. Westminster, make him to have had Twelve Sons partly by Wives, and
partly by Concubines: And the latter also tells us that he together with his
Sons came into Britain, and landed at Plensburgh with Forty Ships.

But though Ida was the first that took upon him the Title of King, yet there
were Princes of the Saxons, in that Country many Years before; for the same
Authors tell us, That Hengist had long before sent his Brother Ottha, and his
Son Ebusa, Men of great Experience in War, to Conquer the North Parts of
Britain; who pursuing his directions, met with a success answerable to their
endeavors; for fighting often times with the Natives of the Country, and
conquering all those who endeavored to resist them, they received the rest
into their Protection, and so enjoyed the fruits of Peace. But though they had
by their own industry, as well as the consent of their Subjects, gained some
Power in those Parts; W^ll. Malm. lib. 1. cap. 3.
yet did they never till now take upon them the Title of Kings, the same
moderation descending also to their Posterity: So that for near an Hundred
Years, the Princes, Earls, or Dukes of Northumberland lived like Vassals, under
the Protection of the Kings of Kent. But this Nation being naturally haughty,
in the Year above recited, (that is Sixty Years after the Death of Hengist)
this Principality was changed into a Kingdom, Ida first reigning there; who
without doubt was a very gallant Man, being then in the prime of his Youth; but
whether he enjoyed that Principality in his own Right, or whether he had it by
Election, our Author will not take upon him to determine, because the Truth was
very obscure; only it was certain, that tho he was descended of an Ancient and
Royal Family, yet by his Great and Noble Qualities, he added much to the
greatness of his Birth, and that being invincible in War, he tempered the
Severity of Kingly Majesty with his own natural affability. To return now to
the affairs of the West Saxons, Anno 552.

After Five Years, Cynric fought against the Britains, at a place which is
called Searebyrig (i. e. Old Sarum) and put the Britains to flight; then
follows a Repetition of his Pedigree, as far as King Ethelbert, who was the
first Christian King; which shows that these Annals were continued by several
hands, at several times long after those Kings lived.]

About this time, some British Chronicles place the Death of Malgoclunus, or
Mailgwn Gwined, tho Mr. R. Vaughan a Learned Welsh Antiquary would rather
understand this of his Civil than Natural Death; that is, to his resigning the
Crown, and professing himself a Monk, as Gildas in his Epistle says he did;
For it is certain he lived and reigned long after; and he is in the Welsh
Annals reckoned as the Supreme, or sole King of the Britains; being, (as it
seems) after the breach of this Vow, Chosen by the Welsh Nobility and People to
that Dignity, some Years after: So that diverse of the Welsh Chronologers, begin
his Reign over all Wales and Cumberland from this very Year, tho Humphrey Lluyd
in his Description of Britain, out of an ancient British Law-Book, begins it
about the Year 560, which is most likely. He is said by John Rosse, in his
History, to have built Bangor near the River Menai, where now is an Episcopal
See. But to return to our Saxon Annals,

This Year Cynric, and Ceawlin his Son, Sax. Ann.
fought a Battle against the Britains at Berinbyrig, (now Banbury in
Oxfordshire,) and put them to flight. H. Huntington is very large in the
Description of this Battle, relating, Ann. DLVI.
That the Britains having gathered together all their Forces to revenge the
Losses they had received for five Years aforegoing, marched as far as
Beranbury, where they drew up their Men in nine Divisions; but the Saxons being
drawn up in one great Body, and setting boldly upon them, having broken their
Lances, finished the Victory with their Swords, which remained doubtful till
night drew on. Some Years after this, ( viz.)

Ceawlin began also to reign over the West Saxons in the room of Cynric his
Father; the same Year Ida dying, Anno Dom. DLX.
Aella began to reign over the Northumbers. His Pedigree likewise follows, tho
needless to be inferred; but it terminates in Woden, tho from another Ancestor
than Ida's.

But you are here to observe, Sax. An.
That now the Northumbrian Kingdom became divided into two, for this Aella
reigned over the Kingdom of Deira, while Adda, the eldest Son of Ida, reigned
at the same-time over the Bernicians, (as Florence of Worcester testifies.)

This Year also Ethelbert succeeded in the Kingdom of Kent, which he held for
53 Years. In his time Pope Gregory sent us Baptism, (that is, made the English
Saxons Christians,) in the 32d Year of this King's Reign.

This Year (as Bede, and also the Saxon Annals relate, Anno Dom. DLXV.
) Columba the Priest or Presbyter came out of Ireland, (which in his Epitome he
also calls Scotland,) to preach the Word of GOD to the Northern Picts, that is,
Lib. 3. c. 4.
those that were divided from the Southern by a large Tract of high Mountains;
for the Southern Picts had been already converted from Idolatry to the
Christian Faith by Nynias, a Reverend Bishop of the British Nation, (as has
been already declared.) But Columba came into Britain in the 9th Year of the
Reign of Bridius the Son of Meiloch King of the Picts, and having converted the
said Nation to the Christian Faith, received the Island [of Hy], therein to
build a Monastery. Then Bid, after giving us a short Description of this
Island and Monastery, Ibid.
has this remarkable Passage, viz. But this Island ( viz. Hy,) is always wont
to have for its Governor the Abbot or Presbyter, to whose Authority all the
Province, and even the Bishops themselves, after an unusual Order, ought to be
subject, according to the Example of their first Teacher, who was never a
Bishop, but a Monk. But the Saxon Chronicle is more express, and says, That
there must be always in Hy an Abbot, and not a Bishop, and that all the Bishops
of Scotland ought to be subject to him.

From the abovementioned Passage in Bid, some Writers have inferred, That
Bishops were not then thought so necessary, since the Church of Scotland was
able to subsist so long without them; and the Abbot of Hy, without being
ordained Bishop, exercised Episcopal Authority over those that were Bishops; to
which, Archbishop Usher in his before-cited Work, De Britan. Eccles. Antiquit.
answers, Cap. 16. p. 367.
That this Authority of the Abbots of Hy, their exercising Jurisdiction over
the Bishops of Scotland, was a Superiority of mere Jurisdiction, Anno Dom. DLXV.
and not of Order; and he there cites certain ancient Annals of Ulster, to
prove, That this little Island had always a Bishop residing in it, either in or
near that Monastery: Which is also further enforced in the Learned Bishop
Lloyd's Historical Account of Church Government, Cap. 5.
etc. where he brings several Authorities to prove, that this Columba received
his Orders from Finean Bishop of Mead in Ireland, before ever he came from
thence; and that if he refused being made a Bishop, it was out of a pure
Monkish Humility, having from his Youth devoted himself to a Monastic Life; but
that he himself did own the Order of a Bishop to be above that of a Presbyter,
is urged from Adamannus his Successor, who wrote his Life; particularly
mentioning Columba's refusing to break the Bread to be received at the
Communion, together with a concealed Bishop, (as two Priests used to do in
their way of Consecration) but would needs make him break it alone, (as a
Bishop ought to do,) asking him, Why he had endeavored to conceal himself,
that they might give him due Veneration? Which Words of Columba a Presbyter to
a Bishop, are supposed sufficiently to show, that he acknowledged the Episcopal
Order superior to his own; and that the Scots ever acknowledged, that Bishops
were necessary for the Ordaining of others in the Ministry, the said Bishop
further urges from Bid, Lib. 3.
who there tells us, There was a Bishop of all that Province; as also from
another place in the said Author, where he relates, That when King Oswald
becoming a Christian, desired to have a Bishop from Hy. to plant a Church among
his Northumbrians; Aidan was sent to him, having first received the Degree of a
Bishop, in the time when Segenius, Abbot and Priest, was over that Monastery;
and also, that after he came into Northumberland, he chose the Place for his
Episcopal See in the Isle of Lindisfarn, where he was with his Clergy; and
there he was Abbot with his Monks, who all belong to the Care of the Bishop,
where he was also succeeded by diverse other Bishops; till that Church being
destroyed by the Danes, the Bishop's See was removed to Durham. I need say no
more upon this Subject, but shall refer the Reader to the said Learned Bishop's
Dissertation, Ibid. cap. 5, 6, 8.
to prove, that no other Church Government, but Episcopal, was ever settled
amongst the Scots, Picts, or Saxons, upon their Conversion to Christianity. But
that we may return again to our Saxon Annals.

Sax. Ann.
Adda King of Bernicia dying this Year, (as Florence of Worcester and M^tthew
of Westminster relate) one Glappa reigned in his stead two Years; but who he
was, An. DLXVII.
or how descended, these Authors do not tell us.

The same Year died Maelgwn Guineth King of the Britains, after five Years
Reign over all that part of Britain that was left them: This is according to
the account of that Learned Antiquary Mr. Robert Vaughan; tho Mat. of
Westminster, Dr. Powell, and Sir John Price, make him to have began his Reign
long after, viz. the former of these in 581, and the latter in 590; both which
Opinions the said Mr. Vaughan Learnedly confutes in a Manuscript I have now in
my possession; but who succeeded Maelgwn Guineth as King of all the Britains,
since the Welsh Annals are silent, I shall be so too; for as to those
Successors which Geoffery has given him. I have already said sufficient to
destroy his Credit in this matter; and Will. of Newberie's Censure of him is
not less sharp than true: That concerning the Successors of Arthur, he does not
lie with less Impudence, when he gives them the Monarchy of all Britain, even
to the 7th Generation.

The next year Ceawlin, and Cutha his Brother, Anno Dom. DLXVIII.
beginning a Civil War, fought with King Ethelbert, and drove him back into
Kent, and killed two of his Commanders, Oslac and Cnebba, at Wibbendon, (now
Wimbledon in Surrey.) This King Ethelbert (as Will. of Malmesbury observes) was
in the beginning of his Reign a Scorn to the Neighboring Princes; for being
beaten in one or two Battles, he could scarce defend his own Territories: But
when in his riper Years he learned more Experience in War, in a short time he
brought under his Subjection all the Nations of the English-Saxons, except the
Northumbrians; and that he might also gain the Friendship of Foreigners, he
became allied to the King of the Franks by the Marriage of Bertha his Daughter.
But of this King we hear no more for many years, till his Conversion to the
Christian Faith.

Glappa King of Bernicia dying, Theodwulf succeeded him for one year. Anno Dom.
DLXIX.
But then he also deceasing,

Fr^othwulf reigned after him for seven or eight years more. Anno Dom. DLXX.
We are beholding for the Succession of these two Kings, to Florence of
Worcester and Rog. Hoveden, being omitted by all other Authors; they are also
more exact in distinguishing this Kingdom from that of Deira, most of the rest
confounding them together.

Cuthwulf the Brother of Ceawlin (as it is in H. Huntington) fought against the
Britains at Bedicanford (now Bedford), Anno Dom. DLXXI.
and took four Towns, viz. Lugeanburh (now Loughborough) in Leicestershire, or
else Leighton in Bedfordshire; and Eglesburh (now Ailesbury) in Bucks; with
Bennington and Egonesham (now called Bensington and Enisham) in Oxfordshire.

About this time, as is supposed, Anno Dom. DLXXV.
(for the Year is not set down in the Saxon Annals, nor any other Historian)
began the Kingdom of the East Angles under Vffa (the Eighth from Woden) tho it
seems there were before him diverse other petty Saxon Princes, Vid. Will.
Malmesb. l. 1. H. Huntingd. l. 2.
who had invaded and fixed themselves in the Countries we now call Norfolk and
Suffolk; for in one Copy of Matthew. of Westminster which Mr. Twine had seen,
(tho it be not found in our printed ones) he says, That Anno 527. the Pagans
came out of Germany and took possession of the Country of the East Angles, and
tormented the Christians with all sorts of Cruelty; but it seems this Vffa in
Strength and Policy overpowering the rest of those Petty Princes, got himself
made sole King, and governed with that Glory, that H. Huntingdon tells us, the
Kings descended from him were called Vffings, though how long he reigned is
uncertain, only that dying he left the Crown to Titul or Titillus his Son, of
whom likewise nothing is recorded, and therefore Will. of Malmesbury takes no
notice of these two Princes: The first he speaks of is Redwald, the Tenth from
Woden, whom he calls the greatest King of the East Angles; but since his Reign
began after this Period, I shall reserve the speaking further of him to the
next Book.

To return to the Saxon Annals: Anno Dom. DLXXVII.
This year Ceawlin and Cuthwin his Son fought with and slew three British Kings
viz. Commail, Candidan, and Farinmaile, at a place which is called Deorham (now
Durham) in Gloucestershire, and then took three Cities, Glewancester (now
Gloucester), Cirencester, and Bathoncester, (now Bathe.)

Who these three Kings were, is very doubtful; some suppose the first and
second of them to be Cuniglasus and Aurelius Conan, both mentioned by Gildas;
Anno Dom. DLXXVII.
but for the third, I cannot tell what to make of him, there being no such King
mentioned in any of the old British Chronicles; so all that we can guess is,
that he was some Petty Prince, whose Name is wholly omitted in the Welsh
Annals, or else mistaken in ours. From the time of this Battle, the Britains or
Welshmen (as the English call them) being driven into that rough and
mountainous Country we now call Wales, lying beyond the Rivers of Dee and
Severn, made fewer Invasions into (what we call) England.

This year, as the Welsh Chronicle, called Triades, relates (being an Ancient
Manuscript written near 1000 years ago), the Battle of Arderydd was fought on
the Borders of Scotland, between Aeddan Vradog, (i. e. the Treacherous) and
Guendelew Son of Keidiaw, British Princes of the North Parts of Britain, on the
one side; and Reiderch-hoel, (i. e. the Liberal) a British King of Cumberland,
on the other side, and that upon a very slight occasion, a Lark's-Nest, and two
Dogs: In which Battle Guendelew was slain, though his men fought and skirmish'd
with the other Britains for Six Weeks to revenge his Death. After which Fight
Aedan being there overcome, fled into the Isle of Man.

The like Story is related by Hector Boethius, concerning the Battle between
Aedan King of the Scots, and the Picts, upon the like occasion; so that either
the Scots borrowed it from the British History, or else this had it from them;
though the former be the most likely. But how this can agree with our Saxon
Annals, who make Adda King of Bernicia to have died Ten Years before, I know
not; one of them must certainly be mistaken, since there was but one King of
Northumberland who was called Adda.

This year, or the next, King Freothwulf dying, Theodoric the Son of Ida
(according to Florence of Worcester and Matthew. Westminster) succeeded him in
the Kingdom of Bernicia, Aella still reigning in Deira. This Theodoric and his
Sons (according to the Ancient Author of the English-Saxon Genealogies at the
end of Nennius, lately put forth by Dr. Gale) fought with Vrbgen, or Vrien,
King of Cumberland, and his Sons, with various Success, who besieged Theodoric
in the Isle of Medcant, (now Turn Island) until by the means of Morgant, a
Prince of the same Country who envied his Valor, Vrien was in that Expedition
murdered by his own men: But the Succession of these Kings of Northumberland
is very obscure and uncertain.

For the Author of the abovecited Genealogies makes one Freodguald to have
succeeded this Theodoric or Deoric (as he calls him); but whether he was the
same with Freothwulf, mentioned by Florence, is hard to determine; and after
this Freodguald, who reigned seven years, one Hussa is said to have succeeded,
who reigned seven years likewise; but whether in Deira or Bernicia, he does not
say; in which he is also followed by Rog. Hoveden, in his Prologue to his
History; but the Succession of these Kings having no certain Time assigned
them, I can only set them down as I find them. Here is a large Gap left in the
Saxon Annals, where nothing occurs further of English Affairs for seven years.
To supply which, we must have recourse to the British Affairs in those
Countries we now call Wales. Where (to show you the Uncertainty of the British
Chronology),

Anno Dom. DLXXXI.
According to Matthew of Westminster, Malgo, or Magoclunus, whom the Welsh
Annals call Mael Guineth, was elected King of all the Britains of Wales (having
been long before King of North Wales, Anno Dom. DLXXXI.
as the word Gwineth in the Welsh Tongue signifies). And Humphrey Lloyd, in his
Fragment of the Description of Wales, from an Ancient Book of British Laws,
thus gives us the manner of his Election.

After the Saxons had obtained the Kingdom and Crown of London upon the
Expulsion of the Britains, all the People of Wales met at the mouth of the
River Dee to Elect a King; and thither came the men of Gwineth (or
North Wales), the men of Powis-land, the men of Dehaubarth, Glamorgan, and
diverse other Countries; who all elected Mael Gwineth King:

Whom Geoffry of Monmouth fables to have been King not only of all this Island,
but also to have conquered Ireland, Iceland, Gothland, Norway, Denmark, and the
Orcades; a story so ridiculous, that the very telling it is a sufficient
Confutation: And all this he collects from those words of Gildas, wherein he
calls him the Island-Dragon, and a driver out of many Tyrants; and because to
express his great wickedness he says, He was drunk with the Wine of Sodom;
Geoffry will needs conclude him to have been guilty of Sodomy. This Prince is
supposed to have reigned as Supreme King of Wales about six years.

Ceawlin King of the West Saxons, and Cutha, Anno Dom. DLXXXIV.
fought against the Britains at a place called Frethanleag (now Frethern) in
Gloucestershire, where Cutha was slain; yet Ceawlin now took many Towns, with
great Treasures, and other Spoil, and so returned home: As H. Huntington
relates, the Britains had at first the better, but Ceawlin having sent for
fresh Recruits, overcame the Conquerors. William of Malmesbury mentions a Son
of Ceawlin's, of the same Name, to have been killed before his face; but either
the Copy he had of these Annals differed from those we have left us, or else he
was no other than this Cutha here mentioned, who was his Brother.

About this time began the Kingdom of the Mercians, Anno Dom. DLXXXV.
(according to H. Huntington and Matthew. of Westminster) whose first King was
Crida, or Creoda; this, though the last erected, yet was one of the largest of
the English Saxon Kingdoms, and was also one of the last that was conquered by
the West Saxons.

This Year also (according to the Welsh Annals) happened a great Slaughter of
the Britains of the North; for now Gurgi and Fredur, two British Princes, being
Brothers and Twins, the Sons of Oliver Gosgard Vawr, (i. e. Oliver with the
great Train) a Prince of Cumberland, fought with Aedda, or Adda, the Saxon King
of Northumberland, at a place called Caergrew, where both the Brothers were
slain, many of their men treacherously deserting them the Night before the
Battle.

'This year Aella King of Deira died [after 30 years Reign], Anno Dom.
DLXXXVIII.
and Athelric succeeded him, and reigned 5 years over all Northumberland,
having (as Will. of Malmesbury relates) obtained the Kingdom in his Old Age,
his Youth being spent in a very narrow Fortune; yet having, according to
Florence of Worcester's Account, reigned two years over Bernicia in Aella's
time. And this year also, according to Matthew. of Westminster, this Athelric
(for so I suppose it should be, and not Ethelfrid, who had not yet begun to
reign) married Acca, Daughter to Aella King of Deira, and on her got seven
Sons, whose Names he there gives us.

Anno Dom. DLXXXVIII.
Also this year in the Welsh Annals, as well as those of Vlster, Constantine is
mentioned to be converted to the Lord; whom Archbishop Usher understands to
have been that wicked Constantine, King of Devonshire and Cornwall, whom Gildas
has before inveighed against, and who at this time, being now bereft of his
Wife and Children, was also weary of his Kingdom, and therefore went privately
into Ireland, and there building a Monastery, took upon him the Habit of a
Monk; as John of Tinmouth, in his Life of St. David, relates. And this
Constantine Hector Boethius in his Lib. 9.
Scottish History, will have to have been sent over by a certain Irish Bishop to
preach the Gospel to the Scots, and being by them martyred, to have been some
Ages after canonized for a Saint: But this sounds like a Legend, since the
Scots had been long before converted by St. Patrick to the Christian Faith.

Anno Dom. DXCI.
This year there was a great and bloody Battle fought at Wodensbeorge (now
called Wodensburg, a little Village in Wiltshire) between the Britains and the
Saxons, though it is not here said who were the Generals on either side; only
H. Huntington tells us, that the Britains having drawn up their Army after the
Roman manner, and the Saxons charging them boldly, but confusedly, there
followed a sharp Battle, in which GOD gave the Victory to the Britains; for the
Saxons being wont to have the better in all their Wars, being now grown more
careless, were vanquished, and the whole Army almost destroyed, which (as W. of
Malmesbury relates) happened through the English joining with the Britains
against him (though of what Country the English were, he does not tell us); so
that Ceawlin being driven out of his Kingdom, and Ceolric Son to his Brother
Cuthwalf obtaining it, reigned five years. Ceawlin being thus expelled after 31
years Reign, was forced to take Refuge in some other Kingdom; but whether in
this Island, or else beyond Sea, our Histories are silent: He had been a little
before the greatest and most powerful of all the English-Saxon Kings, his
Achievements being a Wonder to the English, and till then a Terror to the
Welsh or British.

About this time Geoffry of Monmouth makes Careticus above mentioned to have
succeeded Malgo (who perhaps was the same with Mael Gwineth) in the Kingdom of
the Britains, whom he describes to have been a lover of Civil Wars, and to be
hateful to God and all the Britains; so that the Saxons seeing his weakness,
invited Gormund an African King out of Ireland, to Invade England with Six
thousand Africans, who joining with the Saxons invaded the Territories of
Careticus, and beating him in many Battles, at last besieged him in the City of
Cirencester, which being taken and burnt, he again joined Battle with
Careticus, and forced him to fly beyond Severne into Wales; and then Gormund
destroying all the Neighboring Cities, never left till he had destroyed the
whole Island from Sea to Sea; and so for a time obtained the Supreme Dominion
of the whole Kingdom.

But of these Kings Gareticus and Garmund, since not only the most Authentic
Welsh Chronicles, but the Saxon Annals are wholly silent, I suppose them to
have been only Romances, and invented by Geoffrey to fill up this Gap in his
British History; not that I will deny that one Gormund a Danish King might
reign in Ireland about this time; but that he ever reigned in England, is
utterly false, no other Historian but himself, and those that borrow from him,
making any mention of it.

This year Gregory was made Bishop of Rome. Anno Dom. DXCII.


Ceawlin (late King of the West Saxons) died in Banishment; and the same year
died Cwichelm (his Brother), Anno Dom. DXCIII.
together with Cryda [King of the Mercians, to whom succeeded his Son Wipha or
Wippa]; and Ethelfred began also to reign over both the Northumbrian Kingdoms,
being the Son of Ethelric the Son of Ida. Mat. Wes^m in hoc Anno.
This Prince did not only defend his own Territories, but also invaded and
seized those of others. But the third year after was very remarkable,

For now Pope Gregory sent Augustine into Britain with many Monks to preach the
Word to the English Nation. Anno Dom. DXCVI.


As for the British Affairs, we have but little more to remark ever since the
Death of Maelgwin Gwineth, for the space of 24 years; only we find in the Book
of Landaffe, that about this time Tudric King of Glamorgan, who was still
Victorious, is said to have exchanged his Crown for an Hermitage; till going in
Aid of his Son Mouric, whom the Saxons had reduced to great extremity, taking
up Arms again, he defended him against them at Tinterne, by the River Wye, but
he himself received a Mortal Wound.

But about the end of this Century (as Geoffry of Monmouth relates) when the
Britains could not agree for 24 years who should be their Governor, at last
they chose Cadwan Prince of North Wales to be King of all the Britains; but the
year of this Election is not set down by Geoffry, nor is this Prince mentioned
by any other British Author or Chronicle, before he wrote. But I shall defer
speaking farther of this Prince, till I come to the next Book.

Ceolwulf began to reign over the West Saxons, Anno Dom. DXCVII.
who making continual Wars all his time, fought sometimes against the other
English-Saxons, sometimes against the Britains, or else against the Picts and
Scots; but (what is more remarkable) this year Augustine the Monk, with his
Companions, arrived in Britain.

But before I conclude this Period, I cannot omit taking some further notice of
the Civil as well as Ecclesiastical Affairs, in that part of Britain, now
called Wales, where the Remainders of Christianity in this side of our Island,
were now wholly confined; Bangor in the North, and Caer-Leon upon Vsk in
South Wales, being the chief Places for Learning, as well as Religion, the last
of these being also the Sea of an Archbishop; where was likewise a College of
Philosophers, Vid Uss^r^^ Br^t^in. Eccles. Antiqiut. cap. 5.12, 13.
of which (as Alex. Elsebiensis relates) Dubritius, Archbishop of that City,
was the Founder; who resigning his Bishopric, became an Anchoret in the Isle
of Bardsey; to whom succeeded David (afterward Sainted), who flourished about
the year 509, and is said to have been Uncle by the Mother's side to King
Arthur; he removed the Episcopal See from Caer-Leon to Menevia, now called St.
David's, in Pembrockshire. Nor can I pass by several Learned and Holy Men among
the Britains of this Age; as first, Daniel the most Pious Bishop of Bangor;
Cadocus Abbot of Lancarvan in Glamorganshire, whose Life is written by John of
Tinmouth. In the same Age also flourished Iltutus, a Pious and Learned Man of
that Country; to whom we may also add Sampson his Scholar, consecrated Bishop
by Dubritius, Successor to St. David; this Sampson was afterward Archbishop of
Dole in Britain, having upon his leaving Britain carried away the Pall along
with him, (as has been already mentioned): Not to omit Pattern and Petroc, the
former a Preacher at Llan Pattern in Cardiganshire, and the other in Cornwall;
besides Congal Abbot of Bangor, and Kentigern the famous Bishop of Ellwye in
North Wales, as also Asaph his Scholar, and Successor in the same See, now from
him called St. Asaph; to whom I may also add Taliessen, the famous British
Poet, whose Verses are preserved to this day. All these flourished from the
beginning till the middle of the Sixth Century, which now as much abounded in
Learned and Pious Men, as the former Age was wanting of them.

Thus, omitting Fables, we have given you a View of whatever we find can be
relied on for Truth, transacted in Britain since the Romans first conquered and
then forsook it: Wherein we may observe the many Miseries and Desolations
brought by Divine Providence on a wicked and perverse Nation; driven (when
nothing else would reform them) out of a Rich Country into a Mountainous and
Barren Corner, by Strangers and Heathens: So much more intolerable in the Eye
of Heaven is the dishonouring the Christian Faith and Religion by Unchristian
Works, than downright Infidelity. Yet am I not of Bede's Opinion, That the
Britains omission to preach the Gospel to the English-Saxons (though they
inhabited the same Island) was any of their crying Sins; since it was not to be
expected, that they could either Preach, or the Saxons would ever Receive the
Gospel from those who were their utter Enemies, and had taken their Country
from them by Violence: Yet God was not wanting to this Nation, but appointed
other Preachers to convert it to the Christian Faith; which how it was brought
about, shall be the Subject of the ensuing Book.

The End of the Third Book.
Least the Names of the English-Saxon Kings which have been in t^^ former Book
set down promiscuously according to the Years in which they began to reign,
should render their Succession perplexed, and hard to be remembered; I have from
the Saxon Annals, Florence of Worcester, and Mat. Westminster, placed the
several Kingdoms of the Sa^^n Heptarchy, together with their Kings, in a
Chronological Order, as far as the End of this Period, (viz.) Anno Dom. 597.
Note, The Years in this Table do not always follow the Printed Text of the
Saxon Ann^^, since the Copies often differ, sometimes one year, and sometimes
more; and then I have always followed that which I thought to be the best
Account. The Succession of British Kings is acc^^^ing to the Account I received
from the Most Reverend Father in God, Humphrey Lord Bishop of Bangor.

Anno Dom. Kings of Kent. Anno Dom. Kings of the South Saxons. Anno Dom. Kings
of the West Saxons. Anno Dom. Kings of the East Saxons. K^^gs of Northumberland
in the Provinces called Anno Dom. Kings of the East Angles. Anno Dom. Kings of
Mercia. Anno Dom. Kings of the Britains. (...) Bernicia. Anno Dom. Deira. 457
He was not chosen King till above seven years after his arrival, which was An.
449.
Hengist reigned 31 years. 445 Vortiger. 454 Vortimer his Son; his Father being
Deposed. 488 Aesk, or Oric, his Son, 24 years. 491 Aella reigned 24 years. 458
Vortiger again restored after the Death of his Son. 512 Otha, or Oisc, his Son,
20 years. 465 Aurelius Ambrosius made General of the Britains, Vortiger still
living. 532 Ermenric, his Son, 29 years. 515 Cissa reigned, uncertain how many
years. 519 Cerdic reigned 15 years. 527 Erkenwin, or Escwin. (...) Ida, Son of
Eoppa, reigned over both Kingdoms 12 years. 481 Aurelius chosen King, after the
Death of Vortiger. 534 Cynric, his Son, reigned 26 years. Sigebert. (...) Adda,
or Odda, his Son, reigned 5 years. 559 Aella, the Son of Yffi, reigned near 30
years. After whom reigned diverse Kings, whose Names are not to be found in our
Annals or Historians. 535 Swithelm. (...) Clappa 7 years. Uffa reigned
uncertain how long. 508 Nazaleod, (or Nathanleod) Chief King of the Britains;
who whether he was not the same with Aurelius Ambrosius, is doubtful. 561
Ethelbert, his Son. 560 Ceawlin, his Son, 31 years. (...) Theodwulf 1 year.
(...) Freothwulf 7 years. 578 Titylus, or Tytila, his Son, reigned uncertain
too how long. 587 Sledda, 9 years. (...) Theodoric 7 years. 585 Crida, or
Creoda, how long he reigned is uncertain. Here follows an Inter-regnum of about
six years. (...) Aethelric 2 years. These two last were Sons of Ida, and ruled
here, whilst Aella reigned in Deira. 589 Edwin, his Son, who being soon
expelled by Aethelfrid King of Bernicia, reigned over both Kingdoms 14 years,
till Edwin was again restored. 515 K. Arthur reigned twenty seven years. 591
Ceolric, his Kinsman, 5 years. This Aethelric last mentioned, began also to
reign over both these Kingdoms, after the death of Aella, and reigned in all 5
years. Wippa, or Pybba, his Son, the like. 542 After whose Death followed Nine
years Interregnum. 593 Redwald, his Son. 551 Mailgwin Gwined was elected King
of all the Britains. 597 Ceolwulf 14 years. 596 Seaber^. (...) Aethelfred his
Son reigned 24 over both Kingdoms. Ceorl the like. 586 Mailgwin died; after
whom was a 17 years Interregnum.

THE General History OF BRITAIN, NOW CALLED ENGLAND: As well Ecclesiastical as
Civil. BOOK IV. From the Preaching of the Christian Religion by AUGUSTINE the
Monk, to ECBERT, the first Chief or Supreme King of ENGLAND; containing Two
Hundred and Three Years.
THIS Fourth Period will give us a new and more pleasant Prospect of the
Affairs of Britain: For as the Gospel of Christ did now dispel that Egyptian
Darkness of Paganism, under which it had so long labored; so, together with
Christianity, Human Learning (and consequently the Art of composing Histories
or Annals) entered also with it; the Monasteries, which were not long after
founded, being then the only Universities in which the Liberal Arts and
Sciences were in those times chiefly taught and professed; which though it was
not without a great mixture of that Gothic Barbarism that had then overspread
all Europe, and even Italy it self, yet was it sufficient (in some measure) to
instruct men not only in Divine, but Civil Knowledge; the Monks of that Age
possessing the greatest share of Learning, and being almost the only Historians
as well as Divines: Therefore we must be beholding to them for what Accounts we
have, not only of the Ecclesiastical but Civil Affairs of those Times; forbid, our first English Historian, was himself a Monk: And the Saxon Annals
(which we here give you) were first collected and written in diverse Monasteries
of England; and to which is to be ascribed that difference which is found
between the Copies of that Chronicle, as to the Dates of Years, and other
Matters; for before there was scarce any thing remembered by Tradition, but the
great Wars and Battles fought by the Saxon Kings against the Britains; so,
after the Monks came to commit things to writing, they began to make us
understand somewhat of their Civil Constitutions, and the Acts of Peace as well
as War; tho it must be confessed they are not so exact in the former as they
might and ought to have been; minding more the relating of Visions and
Miracles, which they supposed to have happened and been done in those times,
for the Confirmation of some new Doctrines then not fully received: Yet
however, I doubt not but from those Remains they have left us, both the
Constitution of their Government, and the manner of the Succession of their
Kings, may be clearly made out; of both which, in the former Period, we were
wholly ignorant: But for this we are chiefly beholding to those English-Saxon
Laws that are left us, which were made by the S^preme A^thority of each Kingdom
^n their Witten^ Ge^ot, Myce^ Gemot, or great Coun^il (which we now ca^^ a
Parliament); from which times most of the Laws made in those Councils were
carefully preserved, and would have been conveyed to us more entire, had it not
been for the loss of so many curious Monuments of Antiquity, at the suppression
of Monasteries in the Reign of King Henry VIII.

But since it must be confessed, that it was to the Learning which Christianity
brought in, that we owe the knowledge we have of the History of our Ancient
Times, we shall begin where we left off in the former Book, and show you by
what means this part of Britain was brought to the knowledge of Christ, and all
the Kingdoms of the Saxon Heptarchy became, by degrees, united in the same
Faith: For the doing of which it is necessary that we look some years backward,
and give you Venerable Bede's Relation, how Pope Gregory (surnamed The Great,
to whom the English Nation owes its Conversion) came to send Augustine the Monk
to preach the Gospel here in Britain; which he thus relates, as he received it
down by Tradition.

Bid, l. 2. c. 1.
The Report is, That many Merchants coming to Rome, great store of Commodities
being exposed in the Marketplace to be sold, Chapmen flocking in apace,
Gregory also himself going thither (tho rather out of Curiosity than to buy),
saw among other things, certain handsome Boys exposed to sale; whom, when he
beheld, he demanded from what Country they were brought; and answer being
made, That they came out of the Isle of Britain; then he asked again, Whether
those Islanders were Christians? To which it was answered, They were Heathens;
when, fetching a deep sigh, he said, It was pity the Father of Darkness should
be Master of such bright Faces: They also told him, that they were called
Angles, of the Kingdom of Deira, and that their Kings were named Aella: On each
of which Names Bid either invents, or else had heard, that Pope Gregory made
diverse Latin Allusions; which since, if translated, they would seem dry or
trivial to most Readers, I therefore pass by. But Will. of Malmesbury further
adds to this story, That it was then, and long after, the Custom of the Nation
of the Northumbers, to sell their own Children, or other near Relations, to
Foreign Merchants; which shows them then to have been either extraordinary
necessitous, or else to have been as barbarous and void of Natural Affection,
as the Negroes of some parts of Africa are at this day.

Gregory going immediately to the then Bishop of Rome, (for himself was not so
as yet,) entreated him to order some Preachers of God's Word to be sent to the
English Nation, by whose means it might be converted to Christ; and that he
himself was ready to undertake the Performance of this Work, in case it would
please the Pope to send him; who, although he was willing to grant his Request,
yet the Citizens of Rome (who had a great value for him,) would by no means
permit that he should go so far from that City.

But Gregory being not long after himself advanced to the Papacy, Li^. 1. c^ap.
23.
he performed by others his so long desired design; for in his Fourth Year,
being admonished (says Bid) by Divine instinct, he sent Augustine, whom he
had designed for Bishop of the English Nation, and other Zealous Monks along
with him, to preach the Gospel in Britain; who being now upon their way, and
discouraged by some false Reports, dispatched Augustine in all their Names,
beseeching the Pope that they might return home, and not be sent a Journey so
full of hazard to a fierce and Infidel Nation, whose Language they understood
not: But the Pope immediately sent back their Messenger with Exhortatory
Letters to them, not to be discouraged by vain Reports; but vigorously to
pursue the work they had undertaken, since their labors would be attended with
lasting Glory; both in this life and that to come, and that they should obey
Augustine, whom he had appointed for their Abbot; besides which Letters the
Pope Wrote also to Eutherius, Archbishop of Arles, wherein he recommended them
to his Care and Protection, and that he would furnish them with what they
wanted; also recommending to him Candidus a Presbyter, whom he had sent to
receive and dispose of the Churches Revenues in France; besides which there is
nothing remarkable in these Letters, except the date which is in the Tenth of
the Kalends of August, in the Fourteenth Year of the Reign of our Lord,
Mauritius Tiberius Augustus, and the Fourteenth Indiction, which falls out in
the Year of our Lord 596; though the Author of the old Gregorian Register has
for some Reasons omitted to put down the dates of these Epistles; perhaps lest
Posterity might understand that the Pope at that time called the Emperor his
LORD, and dated his Letters by the Year of his Reign.

Agustine and his Companions, being thus confirmed by the Pope's Exhortation,
proceeded in their Voyage, and passing thorough France took Sea, and landed in
the Isle of Thanet, (lying on the East part of Kent) with about Forty Persons
in his Company, together with some Interpreters of the French Nation: Ethelbert
was at that time King of that Country; being the most powerful Prince that had
Reigned there, as having extended the bounds of his Dominion, as far as the
banks of the River Humber: As soon as Augustine arrived, he sent to King
Ethelbert, giving him to understand, that he came from Rome, and had brought
good tidings of Eternal Happiness to all them that would receive it; the King
hearing this, commanded that they should remain in the place where they landed,
and that all necessaries should be plentifully supplied them, till he had
determined what to do; for he had heard of the Christian Religion long before,
as having married a Christian Lady, called Bertha, Sister to the King of
France, (as has been already said) upon this condition, that she should have
the free Exercise of her Religion, and liberty to have a Bishop of her own,
named Lethard, whom she brought with her to assist and strengthen her in the
Faith.

The King after some Days came to the Island, and fearing Enchantments, sat
down in the open Air, commanding that Augustine and his Companions should be
brought into his presence; for he was persuaded by his Country Superstition,
that if they brought with them any Enchantments, they could not there so easily
work upon him; but Augustine and his Companions Armed with the Power of God,
and bearing a Silver Cross before them, with the Image of our Lord and Savior
painted on a Banner, came on singing (as in a solemn Procession) the Litany as
they went, and praying unto God for the Eternal Salvation of those to whom they
were sent: But when sitting down with the King, they had preached the Word of
Life to him and his Nobles, the King thus spoke; The Doctrines and the promises
ye have made, are indeed fair and inviting; But I am not as yet resolved to
embrace them, since I cannot suddenly consent to quit that Religion I have so
long professed, together with the whole English Nation; yet because ye are
Strangers, and come a long Journey, and as it seems would impart to us the
knowledge of that Religion you believe to be the best, we will not give you the
least Molestation, but rather will protect you, and take care that all things
necessary shall be provided for your Maintenance; neither shall we prohibit you
from gaining as many as you can, to the belief of your Religion.

And accordingly he allotted them their residence in the City of Canterbury,
(which was the Metropolis of his Kingdom) neither did he hinder them from the
freedom of Preaching publicly to whom they would.

When they came to the place provided for them, they began to imitate the
Innocent Life of the Primitive Christians, by applying themselves to continual
Prayers and Fasting, and especially to the Preaching the Word of God, to all
that would hear them; despising the things of this World as superfluous; being
content with the bare necessaries of Life; living exactly according to the
Rules they taught others: the success of which, was, That many believed, and
were baptized, admiring the simplicity of their Lives, as well as the Purity of
their Doctrine.

There was near this City, toward the East, an old ruinous Church anciently
Built in honor of St. Martyn; whilst the Romans inhabited Britain, in which
the Queen was wont to perform her Devotions: Here they first began to assemble
and exercise their Spiritual Functions, until the King being converted, they
obtained a full liberty of Preaching, and building Churches. But when the King,
by the pure Lives of these Holy Men, as also by the Miracles they wrought, (as
our Author relates) became convinced of the Truth of their Doctrine, and was
thereupon Baptized, many flocking in, from all Parts to hear the Gospel, and
leaving their Heathanism, joined themselves to the Church of Christ, (so
powerful a Motive is the Example of a Prince to his Subjects.) At whose Faith
and Conversion, the King extremely rejoiced; yet nevertheless would not compel
any to receive Christianity; only those that believed, he cherished with a more
tender regard; for he had learnt from the Authors of his Salvation, That the
Service of Christ ought to be voluntary, and not constrained; neither did he
defer long the giving his Teachers places fitting for their employment, in his
City of Canterbury; and conferred upon them large Possessions: But this was not
done till some time after, being confirmed in a great Council of his Kingdom,
as shall be shown in its proper place.

But as soon as Augustine had by his Preaching converted the greatest part of
the Kentish Nation, he returned into France, Anno Dom. CCCCXCVIII.
where he was ordained Archbishop of the English Nation, by Eutherius,
Archbishop of Arles, according to the commands they had received from Pope
Gregory; Ibid.
but upon his coming back into Britain, he sent immediately to Rome, Laurence a
Priest, and Peter a Monk, to certify the Pope, that the Christian Faith was
now received by the English, and that he was now made Bishop; desiring also his
Opinion in certain Questions, he thought necessary to be resolved. To all
which, he speedily received such Answers from the Pope, as were proper to the
Question proposed; some of which we have thought fit to insert into our
History, because they show us, what was the State of Religion in the Western
Church, when Augustine came over hither.

His first Question was, how the Bishops should converse with their Clergy, as
also concerning those things that are Offered at the Altar, by the Oblations of
the Faithful? And how many Portions there ought to be made of them? And how a
Bishop ought to behave himself in the Church? To these things the Pope answered
to this effect.

That as for Bishops, how they ought to carry themselves in the Church, the
Holy Scriptures teach, and especially the Epistles of St. Paul to Timothy; in
which he endeavors to teach him, how he ought to behave himself in the House
of God: also that out of every thing that shall be Offered at the Altar, there
ought to be made four divisions, viz. One for the Bishop and his Family, for
Hospitality, and Entertainment of Strangers; the Second for the Clergy; the
Third for the Poor; and the Fourth for Repairing of Churches: But as you are
well skilled in the Monastic Rules, nothing ought to be possessed by any
Clergymen in particular in the English Church, which lately by God's Grace is
brought to the Faith; but you ought to imitate the Primitive Converts, among
whom none enjoyed any thing as his own, of those things he possessed, but all
things were in common among them.

In the second Question, Agustine desires to be informed, whether Priests, not
able to contain, may Marry? And if they shall Marry, Whether they must return
to the Secular Life?

This Question Bid has not, but preposterously joins the following Answer to
the first Question: Yet Sir Henry Spelman has added it, out of the Paris
Edition of Councils, Anno 1518.

Where the Answer of Pope Gregory is thus, That if there be any of the Clergy
out of Holy Orders that cannot contain, they ought to Marry, and still to
receive their Stipends, concluding great care ought to be had of the Stipends
of the Clergy, that they may be diligent in Service; and that there was no
occasion of making a long discourse concerning their keeping Hospitality, when
all the overplus ought to be bestowed upon Pious and Religious uses?

Anno Dom. CCCCXCVIII.
The third Question of Augustine was this, that since there is but one Faith;
Why are there diverse customs of Churches? One manner of saying Mass in the Holy
Roman Church, and another in those of Gaul?

To which Pope Gregory answered to this effect: You know very well the custom
of the Roman Church in which you were bred, but it is my pleasure, That if you
can find either in the Roman Church, or those of Gaul, or in any other
Churches, any thing more pleasing to God, carefully choose it, and what things
soever you can gather from any other Churches, of Good and Pious Example, bring
them into the English Church; for things are not to be beloved for the places,
but places for the good things that are in them.

Augustine's fourth Question was, What Punishment ought to be inflicted on him
that commits Sacrilege?

The Pope's Answer to this Question being somewhat long, I shall only give you
the substance of it. In the first place, He distinguishes between those who
commit Theft out of a wicked intent, and those that offend out of necessity;
from whence it follows, that some are to be punished with Fines, others with
Stripes, and some more severely; and when (says he) you proceed against any
with more rigor than ordinary, you must do it out of Charity, not out of
Anger; because the punishment is inflicted to this intent, that the party
punished may be saved: Then shows the end of such punishments from the Example
of Fathers correcting their Children, purely for their good, though they love
them very well; he admonishes him to use a mean in chastising them, and not
without the Rules of Reason: But if you ask how things taken from the Church
are to be restored? God forbid that the Church should receive any increase for
the loss of mere Earthly things, or go about to make advantage of such trifles.

The three following Questions, concerning in what degrees of Consang^i^ity Men
and Women may Marry, I shall omit, as being impertinent to our purpose; and
shall proceed to the Eighth Question which is this.

If, for the great distance of places, Bishops cannot easily meet, Whether a
Bishop may be ordained, without the presence of other Bishops?

The Answer of Pope Gregory is to this effect; Certain it is, That in the
English Church, wherein as yet there is no other Bishop but your self, you can
ordain a Bishop no other way than without Bishops: for how can Bishops come
from Gaul, that may assist at the Ordination of a Bishop in Britain? But we
would have you so to appoint Bishops, that they be not too far asunder from one
another, that there may be no hinderance; but that at the Ordination of a
Bishop others may be present, and such other Presbyters also, whose presence is
requisite, ought to have easy means of access; when therefore Bishops shall be
so ordained in places near one another, the Ordination of a Bishop ought never
to be without Three or Four Bishops assisting, etc.

Augustine's Ninth Question was this, How ought we to behave our selves toward
the Bishops of Gaul, and Britain? Anno Dom. CCCCXCVIII.


The Pope's Answer was to this purpose, for being somewhat long, we shall also
contract it.

In the first place, The Pope allows him no Authority over the Bishops of Gaul,
any further than by Advice, or Spiritual Admonition, if they should happen to
be guilty of any faults, because they were no ways subject to his Authority:
and concludes thus; But all the Bishops of Britain we commit to your
Brotherhood: That the Ignorant may be Taught, the Weak by persuasions
strengthened, and the perverse corrected by our Authority; The remaining
Questions, concerning Women with Child, and other unnecessary, if not immodest
things, I omit.

This Year also, according to Florence of Worcester, Ceolric, King of the
West Saxons dying, Ceolfus, or Ceulphus succeeded him, and Reigned Twenty Four
Years.

This Year Red^ald, King of the East Angles, dying, his Son Eorpenwald Reigned
in his stead, as Mat. Westminster re^ates.

But Bid proceeds to tell us, That Augustine having settled his Archiepiscopal
See at Canterbury, Anno Dom. DXCIX.
rebuilt that old Church which had been first, erected by the Christian Romans,
and having dedicated it in the Name of Christ our Savior, he appointed it as a
See for himself and his Successors; he likewise founded a Monastery toward
the East, Anno Dom. DC.
not far from the City, where also Ethelbert, by his persuasion, built the
Church of St. Peter and St. Paul; in which the Bodies of St. Augustine himself,
and of all the other Bishops of Canterbury, Ibid.
as also of the Kings of Kent should be interred: Peter a Presbyter was made
the first Abbot of this Monastery, who was drowned going on a Message into
France; but Augustine never lived to to finish this Church, which was
afterward Consecrated by Archbishop La^rence his Successor.

But the Reader is desired to take notice, That according to a fair, but
indifferent ancient Manuscript, concerning the Foundation of the Church and
Monastery of St. Peter and S. Paul (afterward called St. Augustine's) in
Canterbury, which is now preserved in the Library of Trinity Hall in Cambridge
(part of which is printed in P. 111. (...) Dein.
Sir H. Spelman's Vol. of Councils) it appears that though the Cathedral of
Christ Church be first mentioned by Bid; yet that according to the same
Author, it was not the first built, but rather the Church of St. Pancrace,
which from a Heathen Temple was turned into a Christian Church, where King
Ethelbert himself was Baptized; and upon the ground belonging to which, the
Church and Monastery of St. Peter and St. Paul were first founded, as has been
already related from Bid.

Augustine having about this time sent the Pope word, that the Harvest indeed
was great, but the Laborers few, Anno Dom. DCI.
he therefore sent him more Preachers of the Word; among whom the chiefest were
Mellitus, Justus, Paulinus, and Rufinian; and with them all those things which
were necessary for the Service or Ornament of the Church, (such as) Holy
Vessels and Altar-Cloaths, as also Sacerdotal Vestments, together with diverse
Relicts, and a great many Books; he also signified to him in his Letters, That
he had sent him an Archiepiscopal Pall; and thereby he gives him power to
ordain Twelve other Bishops in several places, all which should be subject to
his jurisdiction; only the Bishop of London was to be chosen by his own Synod,
Anno Dom. DCI.
and should receive his Pall from the Apostolic See (for it seems the Pope then
intended London for an Archbishopric, but as for York (when converted) he
gives him power to ordain whom he pleased Bishop there; who should likewise
ordain Twelve Bishops more, and should enjoy the honor of a Metropolitan; yet
so, that as long as Augustine lived, he should be subject to him, but after his
Decease, he should not be at all subject to the Archbishop of Canterbury, or
any other Bishop; only, that he should have the precedence who was first
ordained; then exhorts him to transact all things by a common consent, yet
gives him a jurisdiction over all the Bishops of Britain, that they might learn
how to perform their duties, as well by his Instruction as Example; this Letter
bears date in the Eighteenth Year of the Emperor Mauritius, which falls out in
the Year of our Lord Sixty, with which also the Saxon Annals agree; for under
this very Year.

They place Pope Gregory's sending to the Pall to Arch Bishop Augustine, with
many holy Teachers to assist him: Sometime after the sending these Messengers
with these Letters, the Pope also writ other Letters to Mellitus, Wherein he
gives him Instructions concerning the Temples of Idols, which the Pope would
not have pulled down, but only new Consecrated by the sprinkling of Holy Water,
and erecting of new Altars; and as for the Oxen that used to be sacrificed to
their false Gods, he would have such kind of Solemnities so to be observed,
That on the days of the Dedication of their Churches, or of the Holy Martyrs,
whose Relicts were there preserved, Booths should be made up of boughs near the
said Churches, where having killed those Oxen (that were formerly wont to be
sacrificed) they might make merry, in giving God thanks; since it was certain,
that it should be impossible to take away all vain and Superstitious customs at
once, out of Men's minds so prejudiced by long Education.

At the same time also the Pope returned an Answer to other Letters which
Augustine had before wrote to him; wherein, having congratulated his great
success in the Conversion of the English Nation, and also taking notice of the
great Miracles that Almighty God had done by him; he tells him, That though he
may rejoice in some measure for that Heavenly gift, yet with such a joy, as
ought to be allayed with fear; for as he might rejoice, that the Souls of the
English were through Miracles drawn to an inward Grace, so he ought to be
afraid, least by the Miracles that were now wrought, his Mind might be puffed
up by vain Glory; Therefore that he ought still to remember, that when the
Disciples, returning from their preaching with joy, said to their Heavenly
Master, Lord, in thy name the Devils be subject unto us, they presently
received a rebuke; rejoice not for this, but rather rejoice, that your Names
are written in Heaven.

Bid also tells us, That Pope Gregory about this time sent King Ethelbert many
noble Presents, together with a Letter full of good Advice and Instructions;
Ib^d
Exhorting him to cultivate that Grace which he had received by the especial
providence of God; to make haste to propagate the Christian Faith among his
Subjects; to increase the fervency of his own Faith, by furthering their
Conversion, to destroy the Worship of Idols; to establish the Manners of his
Subjects, in the purity of Life, by Exhorting, Encouraging, and Correcting
them, and by showing himself as Example of good Works, that so he may find his
Reward in Heaven: Then proposing to him the Example of Constantine the
Emperor, Anno Dom. DCI.
who had freed the Commonwealth from Idols, to the Worship of our LORD Jesus
Christ, advising him to hearken to, and perform the good Advice, which should
be given him by Augustine the Bishop, and that he should not be troubled in
Mind, if he should see any Terrors, or Prodigies from Heaven, contrary to the
ordinary course of the Seasons, as Tempests, Famine, and the like; since the
Lord had already foretold that such things should happen before the end of the
World; then concludes with wishing a more perfect Conversion of the whole
Nation, and that God would preserve and perfect him in the Grace he had begun,
and after a course of many Years would receive him into the fellowship of the
Saints above. These Letters bear the same date with the former, and so must be
wrote in the same Year.

I have dwelt the longer on these things, to let you see that the primitive
Christian Temper, had not yet left the Bishops of the Roman Church, tho
infected with some Superstitions.

Let us now return to our Civil History, Anno Dom. DCII.
from which we have so long digressed: About this time, when Ethelbert and his
People were wholly taken up in Acts of Piety, Ethelfrid still governed the
Kingdom of Northumberland; who being a Warlike Prince, and most ambitious of
Glory, Bid Lib. 1. Cap. 34.
had wasted the Britains more than any other Saxon King of his time; winning
from them diverse large Territories, which he either made Tributary, or planted
with his own Subjects: whence Adian (as Bede or Aedan, or Aegthan, as the Saxon
Chronicle calls him) growing Jealous of Ethelfred's great Success, came against
him with a great and powerful Army, to a place called Degsa-stan (or Degstan)
and was there routed, losing most of his Men; but in this Battle Theobald the
Brother of Ethelfrid was slain, that part or wing of the Army which he
commanded, being unfortunately cut off; yet nevertheless the loss was so great
on the Scottish side; that no King of the Scots durst any more in hostile manner
march into Britain, to the time that Bid wrote his History, which was above a
Hundred Years after: He also tells us, That this happned in the first Year of
the Reign of the Emperor Phocas. Buchanan in his Scotch History writes, that
this Ethelfrid assisted by Keawlin (whom he mistiles King of the East, instead
of the West Saxons) had before this time fought a Battle with this Adian,
wherein Cutha, Keawlin's Son was slain; but neither the Saxon Chronicle, nor
any of our English Historians mention any such thing; for this Cutha (as
appears by the said Chronicle) was slain in the Year 584. fighting against the
Welsh.

The number of Christians beginning now to multiply, not only in Kent, Anno
Dom. DCIV.
but other Countries; Augustine found it necessary to ordain two other Bishops;
Mellitus and Justus, sending Mellitus to Preach the Gospel to the Kingdom of
the East Saxons, Id. Lib. 11 c. 3.
which was divided from that of Kent by the River Thamesis, (over which Nation,
Sebert, the Son of Richala, the Sister of K. Ethelbert then Reigned) tho under
his Authority, Sax. Ann.
for he had then the supreme command over all the Nations of the English
Saxons, as far as the Banks of Humber; but when this Province had by the
preaching of Mellitus received the Gospel of Christ, K. Sebert (also baptized
Ethelbert) caused the Church of St. Paul to be built at London, where Mellitus
and his Successors, should fix their Episcopal See.

But as for the other Bishop Justus, Augustine ordained him Bishop in the
Kingdom of Kent, of a certain little City, then called Rofcaester (now
Rochester) being about Twenty Miles from Canterbury, Anno Dom. DCIV.
in which King Ethelbert built the Church of St. Andrew, and bestowed good
endowments on it.

Hitherto Augustine had labored only to convert Infidels; but now he took upon
him, Bid Ib. c. 2.
by virtue of his Archiepiscopal, or rather Legatine Authority, which the Pope
had conferred upon him, over all the Bishops of Britain, (properly so called)
to make a general Visitation of his Province, and coming as far as the borders
of Wales, (being assisted by the power of King Ethelbert,) he summoned all the
British Bishops of the adjoining Provinces, to a Synod, at a place called in
Bede's time, Augustines Ache, (or Oak) then Situate on the confines of the
Wecti, now the Diocese of Worcester, and the West; Saxons (supposed to be
somewhere on the edge of Worcestershire,) and began to persuade them by
brotherly Admonitions, that they would maintain the Catholic Unity, and also
join in the work of Preaching the Gospel to the Infidel Nations.

For there was then a great difference between them about the Rule of keeping
Easter, which Bid tells us, The Britains did not keep at a right time; but
observed it from the Fourteenth to the Twentieth Day of the Moon, which
Computation is continued in a Cycle of Eighty Four Years; which account being
somewhat obscure, I shall, for the clearing of it, set down what the learned
Bishop of St. Asaph has given us upon this subject, in his Historical Account
of Church Government (already cited in the last Book) where he takes notice,
Page 67.
that this Cycle of Eighty Four Years, which was also called the Roman Account,
Bucher de Canone Pasch. 138, and 139. Usher's Religion of Ireland, c. 9. p. 93.
Vi. Dr. Stillingfleets answer to S. C. p. 319, etc.
so lately as in Pope Leo's Time, the Scots and South Picts used the same
Cycle, from the time of their Conversion, and so did the Britains, without any
manner of alteration; but about Eighty Years after the rending in pieces of the
Roman Empire, the Romans having left off the use of that Cycle, took up another
of Nineteen Years: which, though it was better in many respects, yet was new in
these Parts, and made a great difference from the former; and when the Romans
had used this new Cycle another Eighty Years, coming then to have to do with
these Northern Nations, (who were yet ignorant of it) they would needs impose
the use of it upon them, as a necessary condition of their Communion, and so
bore them down with two things which were really false; Bid Lib. 3.25. ^. 235,
2^6.
one, that the Romans had received their Cycle by Tradition from St. Peter; the
other, that it was made use of every where, except in these Islands; to the
first of these Assertions, the Scots, for want of knowing better, opposed only
the Authority of St. John for their Cycle; as to the other, they could not tell
what to say; whereas in truth (though they did not know it) the Roman account
came but an Age or two before from Alexandria, and was not yet received in all
the Western Church, Bucher Ibid.
no not in some Parts of France it self; but that in use among the Scots was
the same Cycle that they and the Britains had ever used since their Conversion;
and was the same that was anciently used in the Roman Church.

But to return to Bede's Relation of this Synod, where, when after a long
Dispute, the British Clergy could neither by Entreaties, nor Reproofs of
Augustine, be brought to a Compliance, but that they would prefer their own old
Traditions before the Consent of the Christian ( i. e. the Roman) Church; the
Archbishop (as Bede relates) offered to decide this Controversy by a Miracle,
desiring that some sick or impotent Person being brought before them, his
Doctrine by whom the Man should be cured was to be followed, and believed to be
from GOD; Anno Dom. DCIV.
which when the other Party had at last, (tho unwillingly) consented to, there
was then found out a certain Englishman who was quite blind, and being offered
to the British Bishops, could receive no Cure from them; when Augustine, moved
by a just Necessity, prayed to GOD, That he would restore this blind Man to his
Sight; whereupon he was immediately cured, and Augustine was cried up by all,
as the only Dispenser of God's Word. Then the Britains confessed indeed, That
they believed that the Doctrine which Augustine preached was the Truth; but
that they could not, without the general Consent of their own Nation, quit the
ancient Rites and Customs of their Country; wherefore they desired, that more
of their Clergy being assembled, there should be a General Synod held about it;
which when it was agreed to, there came (as they relate) several British
Bishops, (their Annals relate them to have been Seven in all,) together with
several Learned Men, especially from the Monastery of Bangor, over which one
Dinoth is said to have been then Abbot, and in which there was so many Monks,
all living by their own Labor, that being divided into seven Divisions under
as many Rectors, each of these Divisions had not less than 300 Men.

But their Abbot Dinoth, and his Clergy, a little before their going to the
aforesaid Synod, went first to a certain Man both Holy and Wise, who led an
Anchorite's Life among them, whom they asked, Whether they should lay aside
their ancient Traditions at the Preaching of Augustine, or no? Who made this
Answer, If he is a Man of God, follow him. They said, 'How shall we know this?
He replied, The Lord says, Take my Yoke upon you, for I am meek and humble in
Heart: Perhaps that he himself bears the Yoke of Christ, and offers the
same to be born of you; but if he be cruel and proud, it is apparent that he is
not of God, neither need you to regard what he says. They said again, But how
shall we make a Discovery of that? He replied, Contrive it so, that he and his
Company may come first into the place of the Synod, and if he shall rise up to
you when you approach, know then that he is the Servant of Christ, and
obediently hear him; but if he shall despise you, nor will rise up to you, when
you are more in number, let him be slighted by you also. They did as he
directed them; and it fell out that Augustine bearing himself as the Pope's
Legate, and their Metropolitan, as they drew near sat still in his Chair;
which when they saw, they grew presently angry, accusing him of Pride, and
endeavoring in all Things he said to contradict him. But

He began thus to discourse to them: Whereas ye do many Things contrary to our
received Customs, and the Consent of the Catholic Church; nevertheless, if ye
will obey me in these few Things, to wit, That ye celebrate Easter in its
proper Time; That ye perform the Ministry of Baptism according to the Custom
of the Holy Roman Apostolic Church; That ye preach the Word of GOD together
with us to the English Nation: Then, as for all other Things which ye practice,
although contrary to our Customs, we will quickly tolerate them. But they made
answer, That they would do none of those Things, neither would they acknowledge
him for their Archbishop. And discoursing further among themselves, they said,
If he would not just now rise up unto us, how much more, when we shall be
subject to him, will he then look upon us as nothing? To whom Augustine is
reported thus threatningly to have denounced against them: If ye will not now
accept of Peace with your Brethren, ye are like to find War from your Enemies;
Anno Dom. DCIV.
and since ye would not pr^ach the Way of Life to the English Nation, ye shall
suffer by their hands the Punishment of Death. Which in every Thing (the Divine
Judgment concurring) was fulfilled as he had foretold; tho Bid here further
tells us, that Augustine lived not to see the Issue of this Prediction, for he
died a good while before; but of this, we shall speak in its due time: And
though Bid places the fulfilling of this Prediction immediately after its
Relation, yet since I intend to refer every thing to its proper Time wherein it
happened, I shall defer the speaking of this for some Years.

But Sir Henry Spelman, out of an ancient British Manuscript of Mr. Peter
Moston's, Vi. Spelman 's Council. p. 108.
a Welsh Gentleman, gives us a much more particular Account of the Answer which
the Abbot of Bangor then made to Archbishop Augustine, which being Translated
out of the Welsh Original, is to this effect. Be it known, and without doubt,
unto you, that we all are, and every one of us, obedient and subject to the
Church of GOD, and the Pope of Rome, and to every godly Christian, to love
every one in his Degree in perfect Charity, and to help them by Word and Deed
to be the Children of GOD: And other Obedience than this I do not know due to
him, whom you name to be Pope, nor as the Father of Fathers, to be claimed, and
to be demanded. And this Obedience we are ready to give, and to pay to him, and
to every Christian continually: Besides, we are under the Government of the
Bishop of Caerleon upon Uske, who is to oversee under GOD over us, to cause us
to keep the way Spiritual.

From whence we may observe, that the Christian Religion came not first into
Britain by the Preaching of any Persons sent from Rome, for then they would
still have owned Canonical Obedience to the Pope, as well as the English did
afterward; therefore it is most likely, according to the Traditions given you
in the Second Book, that it was first preached and propagated here by some
Apostle or Disciple of the Eastern or Asiatick Church: And tho a late Romish
Writer very much arraigns the Credit of this Manuscript, as made since the Days
of King Henry the Eighth, and cavils at the Welsh thereof, as Modern, and full
of false Spelling, yet is not this any material Exception against it; since the
Welsh used in it is not so Modern as he would make it, as I am credibly
informed by those who are Critics in that Language; and as for the Spelling,
that may be the fault of the Transcribers: And tho the Archiepiscopal See was
then removed from Caer-Leon to St. David's, yet it might still retain the
former Title, as of the first and most famous Place.

Anno Dom. DVC.
About which time Archbishop Augustine is supposed by the best Vi. Annals
Baron. Florence of Worcester.
Chronologers to have departed this Life; tho the certain Year of his Death is
not to be found, either in Bid, or the Saxon Chronicle. His Body was buried
abroad near the Church of St. Peter and St. Paul, till that could be finished
and dedicated; which, as soon as that was done, was decently buried in the
Porch on the North-side of the Church, in which were also buried all the
succeeding Archbishops, except two, viz. Theodore and Birthwald, who were
buried in the Church, because the Porch would contain no more; but his Epitaph,
tho it mentions his being sent by the Pope to convert the English Nation, and
his being the first Archbishop of Canterbury; and that he died in the 7th of
the Kalends of June, in the Reign of King Ethelbert; yet omits the Year of that
King's Reign, as well as that of our Lord, in which he died; (I suppose,
because the Year of Christ was not then commonly made use of, either in the
Ecclesiastical or Civil Accounts of that Time; Anno Dom. DCV.
) but of this, we shall treat further hereafter.

Under this Year Bid also places the Death of Pope Gregory the Great, of whose
Life and Actions he gives us a long Account, to which I refer you; but the
Saxon Chronicle puts off the Death of this Pope to the next Year; but I rather
follow Bid as the ancienter and more authentic Author.

The same Year is also very remarkable for Civil, as well as Ecclesiastical
Affairs in this Island; for now King Ethelbert summoned a Mycel Synod, Vi
Spelman 's Council, 1 Vol. p. 118, 119, 120.
or Great Council, as well of the Clergy as Laity, wherein by their common
Consent and Approbation all the Grants and Charters of this King, whereby he
had settled great Endowments on Christ-Church, and that of St. Pancrace in
Canterbury, were confirmed, which had been before the old ruinous Church of St.
Martin without the City already mentioned; but the Charters now made and
confirmed by King Ethelbert in this Council are almost word for word the same
with those he had made by himself before, with heavy Imprecations against any,
who should dare to infringe them, as you may see in Sir H. Spelman's
First-Volume of British Councils; where this Learned Author in his Notes
farther shows us, that these Charters abovementioned are very suspicious of
being forged in many respects; as First, That this King there styles himself
King of the English in general, whereas indeed he was no more than King of
Kent: Secondly, Because the Year of our Lord is expressed at their Conclusion,
which was not in use till long after: Besides, an old Manuscript of the Church
of Canterbury says expressly, That the Monks of the Monastery had their Lands
and Privileges by a long and peaceable Possession according to Custom, until
King Wightred, Anno Dom. 693; made them a confirmation of all their Privileges
by a Charter under his Soul. There are also other Exceptions against the Bull
that is there recited to be Archbishop Augustine's, which you may see at large
in those Learned Notes abovementioned.

In this great Council or Synod, among many other Secular Laws and Decrees,
these deserve particularly to be taken notice of; the first Law assigns the
Penalty of Sacrilege, appointing what Amends is to be made for Things taken
from a Bishop, by a Restitution of nine times the value; from a Priest by a
Ninth, and from a Deacon by a Threefold Restitution.

The Second Law is, That if the King summoned his People, and any Man should
presume then to do them Injury, he shall make double Amends to the Party, and
besides shall pay Fifty Shillings to the King.

The Third Law is, That if the King shall drink in a Man's House, and there be
any Injury done in his Presence, the Party so doing it shall make double
Satisfaction; the rest that follow, since they belong only to the Correction of
Manners, are omitted.

To these Laws Bid relates, when he says, That King Ethelbert, amongst other
good Things which he conferred upon his Nation, appointed certain Laws
concerning Judgments, by the Council of his wise Men, according to the Example
of the Romans, which being written in the English Tongue, were yet kept and
observed by them to this time; and then mentions some of those Laws to the same
effect as they are already expressed.

Anno Dom. DCVII.
This Year was fulfilled Archbishop Augustine's Prediction upon the Britains;
for (as Bede and the Saxon Annals relate) Ethelfrid King of Northumberland now
led his Army to Leger-Ceaster, and there killed a great multitude of Britains,
Ibid. cap.
and so was fulfilled the Prophecy of Augustine abovementioned; and there were
then killed 200 Priests or Monks, who came thither to prey for the British
Army; (but in Florence of Worcester's Copy it was 2200;) but Brockmaile, who
was to be their Protector, escaped with about 50 Men.

Lib. 11.
H. Huntington gives a more particular account of this Action, and says; That
King Ethelfrid, having gathered together a powerful Army, made a great
Slaughter of the Britains near the City of Legions, which is called by the
English Lege Cestre, but more rightly by the Britains Caerlegion; so that it is
evident it cannot be Leicester, as our common Historians write, but
West-Chester, which lay near the Borders of King Ethelfrid's Kingdom, where
this Battle was fought: This Author further adds, That when the King saw those
Priests or Monks of the Abbey of Bangor, who came out to pray for the Army,
ranged by themselves in a place of Safety, having one Brockmaile for their
Defender, and that the King knew for what end they came thither; he presently
said, If these Men pray to their GOD against us, though they do not make use of
Arms, yet do they as ^eally fight against us, as if they did: And so he
commanded his Forces to be first turned upon them, who being all cut off, he
presently defeated the rest of the Army without any great difficulty; and he
also agrees with Florence of Worcester's Relation of the number of the Monks
there slain, and accuses their Defender Brockmaile of Cowardice, who left the
poor Monks, whom he was to defend, to be cut to pieces. But William of
Malmesbury relates this Matter somewhat otherwise, tho he says expressly, Lib.
1. cap.
that this Fight was at Chester, (then in the hands of the Britains;) which
when King Ethelfrid went about to besiege, the Townsmen resolving to suffer any
thing rather than a Siege, trusting in their Numbers, sallied out to fight,
whom when by an Ambush laid near the City, he had easily overcome; he then
falling upon the Monks, who were come in great Numbers to pray for the Success
of the British Army, of which (says this Author) there must certainly have been
an incredible Number, since even in his time there were left such vast Remains
of Churches and Cloisters, and so great a heap of Ruins, as you can scarce
(says he) find any where else: The Place is called Bangor, which was then an
Abbey of Monks, but is now turned into a Bishopric; yet here our Author was
mistaken, for this Bangor, where the Monastery was, is in Flintshire, not far
from the River Dee; whereas that which is the Seat of the Bishopric is in
Caernarvanshire, not far from the River or Straight of Menai, which parts that
Country from the Isle of Anglesey. But of all these great Ruins mentioned by
Malmesbury, there is now nothing left, save those of the two principal Gates of
this old City, the one of which is on that side toward England, and the other
toward Wales, being about a Mile asunder, the River Dee running betwixt them.

But before we proceed further, it is fit we enquire into the Truth of that
Story of Ge^ffe^y of Monmouth, who will needs have Archbishop Augustine to
have persuaded King Ethelbert to incite Ethelfrid King of Northumberland thus
to make War upon the Britains, and to destroy these Monks, as you have heard,
in which he is also followed by other later Writers, and particularly by
Nicholas Trivet, an ancient Author, Anno Dom. DCVII.
in his History, (lately printed at Paris among the Collections of Monsieur
Dachery;) as also by Archbishop Parker, Author of the Latin History De
Antiquitate Ecclesiae Anglicanae; and likewise in Bishop Jewel's Apology; the
former of which, tho Bid has expressly told us, that Aug^stine was dead long
before this happened, yet will have these Words of Bid to have been foisted
in, contrary to the old Saxon Manuscripts which is not so; for it is found in
them all, tho not in the Saxon Version; but besides the Respect which we ought
to have for so good a Man as Augustine is supposed to have been, and which
inclines us to believe, that it was not likely he should have a Hand in so
cruel an Action; I doubt not but to prove from other Arguments, (supposing this
Passage of Bid not to be his,) that Augustine died about the Year 605, where I
have already placed it. In the first place therefore, I shall not deny, that
William of Malmesbury, in his First Book De Gest. Pontif. Anglor. as well as
diverse other Historians of later Times, suppose Augustine to have sat
Archbishop 15 (and in some Copies 16) Years, and then he must certainly have
survived this Massacre of the Monks of Bangor; but if I can prove they were
mistaken in this Account, all that had been said to prove Augustine guilty of
it, will signify nothing: For First, Bid relates, Lib. 2. c. 4.
that Augustine, being yet alive, ordained Laurence for his Successor, lest
himself being dead, the yet weak State of that Church, if vacant, (tho for
never so small a time) might happen to suffer, which it must be supposed he
did, when he found himself in a declining condition, and not like long to
survive. Now that this happened in the Year 605, may be also proved by these
Circumstances: Bid has already told us, that Augustine, in the Year 604, had
ordained Mellitus and Justus Bishops; immediately after which Relation, follows
that, concerning Augustine's Death, which he would scarce have mentioned there,
had not one followed the other within a short time; and that it was so, appears
in the Manuscript Text of Adrian, the Abbot of Canterbury, who lived within
less than 60 Years after, and who obtained a Privilege from Pope Deusdedit,
concerning the Free Election of the Abbot of that Monastery, at the end of
which there is this Passage: Anno Dom. 605. died the holy Bishop Gregory IVo
Idus Martii, and in the same Year also Bishop Augustine VIIo Kal. Junii; with
whom also agree Marianus, Scotus, and Florence of Worcester, in their
Chronicles; the former of whom, under Anno Dom. 605, has these Words:
Augustine having ordained Laurence the Presbyter Archbishop in his stead,
after a short time departed to the Heavenly Kingdom; tho in Florence's Copy it
is placed under the Year 604, which Difference might easily happen by the
carelessness of Transcribers. This is also observed by Will. Thorn, the
Historian and Monk of Canterbury, Vi. X. Scr^pt col.
(from an old Book of the Life and Miracles of this St. Augustine, that now is
lost,) who in his Chronicle says expressly, That many have erred concerning the
Death of St. Augustine, thinking him to have died Anno Dom. 613, The cause of
which Error is owing to the false Dates of some Chronicles, who make him to
have sat Archbishop Sixteen Years; whereas Bid in his second Book says, That
he ordained Mellitus and Justus to be Bishops a little before his Death, and
there gives us the same reason as I have already done; with whom also agrees an
ancient Anonymous Chronicle in the Library at Lambeth; as also the short Annals
of the Church of Rochester, which contain the Successions of the Archbishops
of Canterbury, both which place the Death of Archbishop Augustine, and the
Succession of Laurentius, in Anno Dom. 604; but of this you may see more in the
First Volume of Anglia Sacra, published by the learned Mr. Wharton deceased;
wherein you may also find a short dissertation on this Subject, and to whom I
own my self obliged for the light, I have had toward settling this obscure
Question. Now having cleared Archbishop Augustine's Memory of that Crime,
which is laid to his Charge; I shall proceed to the Ecclesiastical History of
this time.

Laurentius, who succeeded Augustine in the Sea of Canterbury, having seen the
English Church not only found^d, Anno Dom. DCVIII.
but much increased, began about this time to bestow his Pastoral care, not
only upon the English and British Inhabitants of this Island, but also upon the
Scots who inhabited Ireland; Bid Lib. 2.
because he knew that at that time they, as well as the Britains, did not
observe Easter according to the Nicene Canon (the occasion of which
Controversy I have already given you), Therefore the new Archbishop thought
it fit to write an Epistle on purpose to the Irish Bishops, wherein he exhorted
them to maintain the Catholic Unity, in the observation of Easter; in which
Letters this is remarkable, That they are directed to all the Bishops, per
Universam Scotiam, That is, through out all Ireland (for so it was then
commonly called for near Four Hundred Years after this) and he therein
complains of Draganus an Irish Bishop, who coming over hither would not so much
as Eat in the same House with him; at which time also Laurentius wrote Letters,
not only to his fellow Bishops in Ireland, but also to the British Clergy in
Wales, to the same purpose as the former; but how well he succeeded therein,
the present time (says Bid) declares; about which Year also Mellitus Bishop of
London was sent to Rome to confer with Pope Boniface, concerning the necessary
Affairs of the English Church, when the Pope held a Synod at Rome with the
Bishops of Italy, concerning the Life and Conversation of the Monks, where he
sat with them: This Synod was held in the Eighth Year of Emperor Phocas, and
the Bishop at his return, brought back the Decrees of that Council, together
with the Pope's Letters to Archbishop Laurence, and all the Clergy, as also to
King Ethelbert, and the whole English Nation.

Anno Dom. DCXI.
This Year also, Sebert King of the East Saxons, Founded the Church and Abbey of
Westminster, and Mellitus the Bishop Dedicated it to St. Peter, tho for what
Order of Monks is uncertain, since they were driven out after the Death of
Sebert, Vi. Monast. Ang. T. 1. p 5.
by his Successors, who continued Pagans for many Years after.

This Year (according to Florence) Ceolwulf dying, Cynegils began to Reign over
the West Saxons, (for Thirty One Years) being the Son of Ceolric, who was the
Son of Cutha, who (as we have heard) was slain fighting against the Britains
some Years before.

Cynegils and Cwichelme, fought against the Britains at Beamdune (now Bindon in
Dorsetshire; Anno Dom. DCXIV.
) and there slew Two Thousand and Forty Six Men; which Battle H. Huntington
thus describes; The Saxon and British Troops being drawn up in Battle Array,
the Fight immediately began, when the Britains fearing the weight of the Saxon
Battle Axes, and long Lances, turned their backs, and fled; so that the Saxons
obtained the Victory, without any great loss on their side; and he also agrees
pretty near in the number of the slain, with our Saxon Annals; This Cwichelme
here mentioned is by Will. of Malmesbury said to be Brother of Cynegils, and to
be by him taken as his Partner in the Royal Power. Anno Dom. DCXIV.
But Florence of Worcester, and Mat. Westminster do make Cwichelme to have been
the Son of Cinegils, tho the former Opinion be the more likely; but let it be
either of them, it is certain that they were both of them Stout and good
natured Persons, who governed with that mutual Love and Concord, as it was a
wonder to the Age in which they lived, so ought it to be an example to all
future times.

Tho the Cathedral of Christ Church in Canterbury, had been already built about
Twenty Years; Anno Dom. DCXV.
yet it seems the Monastery adjoining to it was not founded till this Year, as
appears not only from the Manuscript above mentioned (once belonging to the
Monastery of St. Augustine) but also from Will. of Malmesbury; that in the time
of Archbishop Laurence, De Just. P^nt f. Lib. 1.
and about this very Year that it was first replenished with Monks, as appears
by a Letter of Pope Boniface to King Ethelbert; whereby he approves of, and
confirms the Foundation of the said Abbey, by the said Archbishop; which
Letter, though Will. of Malmesbury had promised to recite, yet being by him
forgot, or else ommitted in our Printed Copies, is to be found at large in the
said Manuscript; concerning which Monastery the aforecited Author farther adds,
That though some had said that Archbishop Aelfric had thrust out the Clerks (
i. e. secular Chanons) out of that Church, and had placed Monks in their rooms,
yet was it not at all probable, since it appeared by the said Epistle of Pope
Boniface, that there had been Monks in the Church of St. Savior, from the
first foundation of that Monastery, in the time of Archbishop Laurence, who
succeeded St. Augustine.

But it has been denied, by Cardinal Baronius, in his Annals, as also by some
later Antiquaries, of what Order these Monks were, whom Augustine and
Laurentius placed in these two Monasteries above mentioned; and that a late
ingenious Author in his Preface to a Treatise, called Notitia Monastica, has
questioned whether they were of the Benedictine Order, since he rather
supposes, That the Benedictine Rule was scarce heard of in England, till some
Hundreds of Years after, and never perfectly observed, till after the Conquest;
but he should have done well to have told us, what other Order they were of,
since the general Tradition in most of the Ancient English Monasteries of the
Bened^ctine Order, was, That they had observed that Rule from their first
foundation: And the Saxon Annals under the Year 509, do expressly affirm, That
St. Benedict, the Father of all the Monks dyed that Year: And he had long
before his Death founded his Order in Italy, and of which Augustine himself is
supposed to have been: and though I also acknowledge, that all the ancient
Monasteries of England were not at first of that Order, since those that were
founded in the Kingdom of Northumberland, by the Bishops Aidan and Coleman
followed the same Rule with the Monks of Ireland, and Scotland, viz. That of
St. Basil, which all the Eastern Monks did then, and do to this day observe;
yet even these did about an Hundred Years after quit that Rule, and follow the
more Modern one of St. Benedict; and therefore Stephen Heddie, in his (...). 14.
Life of St. Wilfred Bishop of York, (lately published by the learned Dr.
Gale,) has expressly told us, That the said Bishop returning home into his own
Country ( i. e. the Kingdom of Northumberland) and carrying along with him the
Rule of St. Benedict, very much improved the Constitutions of God's Churches;
by which he meant the Monasteries of those Parts: And therefore the Chronology
once belonging to the Abbey of St. Augustine's in Canterbury, Anno Dom. DCXV.
(printed in the December scriptores after Will. Thorns Chronicle) under Anno
666, upon very good grounds thus observes, That this Year Bishop Wilfred caused
the Rule of St. Benedict to be observed in England, That is in the North Parts,
Coll. 2229.
into which he then went; for if that Rule had not been observed in the
Southern Parts before, How could it be said that he carried it out from thence
along with him? but to conclude; there having been a dispute among the Roman
Catholics beyond the Seas, about Seventy Years ago concerning this matter;
some of them affirming, that all the ancient English Monks, before the Conquest
were of the Order of St. Equitus, or else of some other Order; whereupon those
of the Benedictine Order wrote over to our Antiquaries in England, (viz.) Sir
Robert Cotton, Sir H. Spelman, Mr. Camden, and Mr. Seldom; appealing to their
Judgment herein: From whom they received a Letter under all their Hands,
wherein they expressly certified, that there was never any such Order as that of
St. Equitus; and further affirm, That there were only Two Orders of Monks in
use amongst our Ancestors of the English Saxon Church; One of those who
followed the Rites of the Egyptian Monks, and the other of Benedictine's who
came over with Augustine, and so continued from that time to their dissolution
under King Henry the Eighth; to which Letter, or Certificate, all the said
learned Persons above mentioned did put their Hands, as appears by the
Certificate it self; which you will find Printed in Clem. Reyner de Appostolatu
Benedictini in Anglia. P. 220.
This, though perhaps it may seem an impertinent digression to some; yet, I
hope, will not prove so to those, who are lovers of Ecllesiastical Antiquities.

This Year Ethelbert King of Kent dyed, who was the first English King that
rec^ived Baptism; Bid tells us, That this King dyed above Twenty Years after
his Conversion, and was buried in St. Martin's Porch, in the Church of St.
Peter and St. Paul; after whose decease Eadbald his Son succeeded to him in the
Kingdom. The beginning of whose Reign I shall give you out of Bid, being much
more particular than that in the Chronicle.

This King did not only refuse the Faith of Christ, but also polluted himself
with such Fornication, which the Apostle says, ought not to be heard of among
the Gentiles, in that he Married his Father's Wife; by which wickedness he gave
occasion to those to return to their former Heathenism, who had embraced
Christianity in his Father's Reign, either out of Fear, or hopes of Favor; tho
God's Judgments were not wanting to Correct this Infidel King, for he was
tormented with frequent fits of Frenzy, and the possession of an unclean
Spirit; but the Death of Sebert King of the East Saxons, happening also about
this time, extremely increased the present Storm of Afflictions; for he left
Three Sons Heirs to his Kingdom, who all relapsed to Paganism, having in their
Father's lifetime seemed Christians, but now permitted all their Subjects the
free license of worshipping Idols; and when they saw the Bishop Administering the
Eucharist to the People in the Church, they thus spoke to him in their
Barbarous folly; Why do thou not give us this White Bread, which thou were
wont to Minister to our Father? To whom the Bishop replied, That they must
first be washed in that saving Font, in which their Father had been Baptized,
and then they might partake of the same Bread; which though they denied to do,
yet would they not desist from requiring this Bread at his hands; which he
still refusing them, they then plainly told him, Anno Dom. DCXVI.
That if he would not yield to them in so small a matter, he must not stay any
longer in their Dominions; and so commanded them to be gone; who being thus
expelled, went thence into Kent to consult with the Bishops Laurentius and
Justus, what was best to be done on this occasion; where it was decreed by
common Consent, That it was better that all of them should return into their
own Country, there to serve God with freedom of Conscience, than to live
without any Fruit of their Labors amongst such Barbarous Rebels to the
Christian Faith; thereupon Mellitus and Justus departed first, and went into
France, there resolving to expect the issue of these things; but not long
after, these Three Princes, who had driven out a Preacher of the Truth, and
relapsed to the Worship of Idols, marching out to Battle against the
West Saxons, were all cut off, together with their Army: However, though the
Authors of this Apostasy were destroyed, yet the common people being once
inured to wickedness, could not easily be brought back to the Faith of Christ.

But when Laurentius was about to leave Britain, Bid, Ibid.
to follow Mellitus and Justus, he ordered a Pallet to be laid for him in the
Church of St. Peter and Paul, on which (after many Prayers and Tears poured
forth to God, he laid down to take his rest; where, (if credit may be given to
Bede's relation) St. Peter, in whose Church he had spent great part of the
Night in watching and Prayer, appeared to him, and to make the Vision more
sensible, gave him many stripes for thus offering to desert his Flock; at sight
whereof the King (to whom next morning he showed the marks of what he had
suffered, and by whom, and for what cause) relenting, in great fear renounced
his Incestuous Marriage, and applied himself to the Christian Faith more
sincerely than before, together with all his People; but the Londoners refusing
again to receive their Bishop Mellitus, this King had not so much power as his
Father to force them to it, whether they would or not; yet nevertheless, he
with all his Nation, from the time that he was thus re-converted to Christ,
endeavored wholly to submit himself to the Divine Precepts, and then near the
Monastery of the Apostles built a Church, in honor of the blessed Virgin,
which was consecrated by Archbishop Mellitus: But to return again to Civil
Affairs.

This Year also Edwin, of the Blood Royal of Northumberland, Id. Ibid.
having been forced to fly from Ethelfrid, then King of that Country, had
wandered for some Years as a banished Man, through diverse Kingdoms, till at
last he took refuge with Redwald, King of the East Angles, beseeching him to
save his Life from so cruel and unjust a Persecution; who thereupon receiving
him into his protection, granted his Request; but whilst he thus sojourned with
King Redwald, he had a Vision or Apparition, which was the cause of his future
Conversion, and which though it looks very much like a Monkish Legend, yet
since it is related by so grave an Author as Bede, I shall here from him set
down.

So soon as Ethelfrid heard where Edwin was, he sent Ambassadors to Redwald,
offering him a great Sum of Money to put him to death; which being refused, he
still repeated, and increased his offers, twice or thrice threatening War, if he
were refused; till at last the King being either prevailed upon by his great
proffers, or terrified by his threatenings, yielded, promising either to kill
Edwin, or to deliver him to his Ambassadors; which when a certain Friend of
Edwin's, then near the King, came to know, Anno Dom. DCXVI.
the first hour of the Night he went in haste to his Chamber, and calling him
forth for better secresy, revealed to him his Danger, and offered him his Aid
to make his Escape, where neither Redwald nor Ethelfrid should ever find him:
But he not approving of that course, as seeming dishonorable, without more
manifest cause to begin first to distrust one who so long had been his only
Refuge, chose rather to dye by his Hand, than by any other more Ignoble:
Whereupon his Friend departing, Edwin being thus left alone without the
Palace-Gate, full of sad and perplexed Thoughts, discerns about the dead of
Night a man approaching toward him, neither by Countenance nor Habit to him
known, who after a short Salutation asked him, Why at this Hour, when all
others were at Rest, he alone sat so sadly waking on a cold stone? Edwin
wondering not a little who he might be, asked him again, What his sitting
within doors or without, concerned him? To whom he again replied, Think not
that who thou art, or why sitting here, or what danger hangs over thee, is to
me unknown. But what would you promise to that man who would free you out of
all these Troubles, and persuade Redwald not to molest you, nor give you up to
your Enemies? All that I am able, answered Edwin to the Unknown: Then he
proceeds thus; What if the same Person should promise to make you greater than
any English King has been before you? I should not doubt, replied Edwin, to be
answerably Grateful. But what if to all this he would inform you (says the
other) of a way to Happiness beyond what any of your Ancestors had known? Would
you hearken to his Counsel? Edwin, without any Hesitancy, promised he would.
Then the other, laying his right Hand on his Head, said, When this Sign shall
next befall you, remember this Night, and this Discourse; nor defer to perform
what thou have now promised. And with these words disappearing, he was not only
convinced that it was not a Man, but a Spirit that had thus talked with him:
But the Royal Youth was also much revived, when on the sudden his Friend, who
had been gone all this while to listen farther what was like to be resolved
concerning him, comes back, and joyfully bids him go to his Repose, for that
the King's Mind, tho for a while drawn aside, was now fully resolved, not only
never to betray him, but to defend him against all his Enemies, as he had
promised: In short, the King was as good as his word, and not only refused to
deliver him up, but also raising Forces, thereby helped him to regain his
Kingdom: For the next Year, as the Saxon Annals relate,

Anno Dom. DCXVII.
Ethelfrid King of Northumberland, was slain by Redwald King of the East
Angles; and Eadwin the Son of Aella succeeded him (in that Kingdom), who
subjected all Britain to him, (except only Kent): He also banished the Royal
Youths, the Sons of Ethelfrid, (viz.) Ealfrid the eldest Son, as also Oswald
and Oswin; with many other Princes, whose Names would be tedious here to be
repeated.

But Will. of Malmesbury gives us a more particular Account of this Fight; and
that since War had been denounced by Ethelfrid, upon his refusing to deliver
Edwin, that thereupon Redwald determined to be beforehand with the Danger, and
with an Army raised on the sudden, surprise Ethelfrid (being not aware of an
Invasion), and in a Fight near to the East side of the River Idel, on the
Mercian Border (now in Nottinghamshire) slew him, dispatching easily those few
Forces which he had got to march out over-hastily with him; who yet (as a
Testimony that his Fortune, and not his Valor, Anno Dom. DCXVII.
was to be blamed) slew with his own Hands Reiner the King's Son. And H.
Huntington adds, That this Battle was so great and bloody, that the River Idel
was stained with the Blood: And that the Forces of King Redwald being very well
drawn up, the King of the Northumbers, as if he had been sure of the Victory,
rushing in among the thickest Ranks, slew Reiner (abovementioned,) and wholly
routed that Wing of the Army: But Redwald not terrified with so great a Blow,
but rather more incensed, renewed the Fight with the two remaining Bodies,
which being not to be broken by the Northumbers, Ethelfrid having got among the
thickest of his Enemies, further than he ought in Prudence to have done, was
after a great Slaughter there slain, upon which his whole Army fled; but his
two Sons, (by Acca, King Edwin's Sister,) Oswald, and Oswi, escaped into
Scotland. This End had King Eth^lfrid, a Prince most skilful in War, tho
utterly ignorant of the Christian Religion. By this Victory Redwald became so
far Superior to the other Saxon Kings, that Bid reckons him as the next after
Aella, and Ethelbert, who had all England on this side Humber under his
Obedience.

But to look back a little to Ecclesiastical Affairs; about this time
Laurentius the Archbishop died, and was buried near Augustine his Predecessor;
to whom succeeded Mellitus, who was Bishop of London; this Mellitus is related
by Bid, to have by his Prayers stopped a great Fire in Canterbury, by causing
the Wind to blow the quite contrary way to what it did before; which at last
quite falling, the Fire ceased with it. He sat Archbishop only five Years.

This Year Cadwallo is supposed by Radulphus de Diceto to have succeeded his
Father Cadwan in the Kingdom of Britain; Anno Dom. DCXX.
though some of the Welsh Chronicles make him to have began to reign four Years
before. But as for Geoffery of Monmouth, who gives a large and very improbable
Account of this King's Martial Actions, (and therefore needless to be here
repeated,) it is not his Custom to cite any Authors, nor give any Year or
Account when his Kings began to reign, or when they died.

This Year Mellitus deceased, and was buried with his Predecessors; Anno Dom.
DCXXIV.
to whom immediately succeeded Justus, who had been hitherto Bishop of
Rochester, but the Year following Paulinus, a Roman, was consecrated by Justus
to be Bishop of the Northumbers; forbid tells us, ^e^e, l. 11. c 8. An. DCXXV.
he had before received Authority from Pope Boniface to ordain what Bishops he
pleased, and as the present occasion should require; the Pope sending also a
Pall to bestow upon him at the same time. To this Year Bid also refers the
Conversion of the Northumbers, (that is, all those English-Saxons who lived
North of the River Humber,) together with Edwin their King, to the Christian
Faith; who, as an earnest of his future Faith, Ib. chap. 9
had the Power of his Empire already so increased, that he took the utmost
Borders of Britain under his Protection; but the occasion of his Conversion was
through his Alliance with the King of Kent, by his marrying Ethelburga the
Daughter of King Ethelbert; whom, when he sent to desire of her Brother
Eadbald, for his Wife, it was answered, That it was not Lawful to bestow a
Christian Virgin in Marriage with a Heathen: Which, when the Messengers related
it to King Edwin, he promised he would act nothing contrary to that Faith which
the Virgin professed, but would rather permit a free exercise of her Religion
to all those Priests and others, who should attend her: Neither did he deny to
receive the same Religion himself, provided, (upon a just Examination,) it
should appear more Holy, and worthy of GOD. Anno Dom. DCXXV.
Upon these Terms the Lady was sent to Edwin, and Paulinus being ordained
Bishop, (as was before resolved on,) was sent as a Spiritual Guardian to the
Virgin; who, when he came to King Edwin's Court, used his utmost Endeavor to
convert the Pagans to the Christian Faith, but to little purpose for a long
time, though at last he prevailed by this occasion. For the year following,

When Cuichelme, (at that time one of the two West Saxon Kings,) envious of the
growing Greatness of King Edwin, Anno Dom. DCXXVI.
sent privily one Eomer, an hired Cutthroat, to assassinate him; He, under
pretense of delivering a Message from his Master, with a poisoned Weapon stabs
at Edwin whilst he was discoursing with him in his House, (by the River
Derwent in Yorkshire,) on an Easter Day; which Lilla, one of the King's
Attendants, at the lucky instant perceiving, having no other Means to defend
him, interposed his own Body to receive the Blow, through which, notwithstanding,
it reached the King's Person, with a dangerous Wound; the Murderer being now
encompassed with many Swords, and made more desperate by his own Danger, slew
another of the King's Servants in the same manner.

That Night the Queen brought forth a Daughter, who was called Eanfled; and
when the King, in the presence of Paulinus, gave Thanks to his Gods for the
Birth of his Daughter, the Bishop, on the contrary, gave Thanks to our Lord
Christ, that the Queen was safely delivered by his Prayers: At which, the King,
being well pleased, promised the Bishop to renounce his Idols, and become the
Servant of Christ, if he would grant him Life, and Victory against that King
who had thus sent a Murderer to kill him; and as an earnest thereof, he gave
his newborn Daughter to be bred up in that Religion; who, with 12 other of his
Family, on the day of Pentecost, was baptized; and by that time, being well
recovered of his Wound, to punish the Authors of so foul a Fact, he marched
with an Army against the West Saxons; whom having subdued, and put some of
those to Death who had conspired against him, and received others to Mercy, he
returned home victorious.

But I cannot omit here taking notice of a great Mistake in Mat. Westminster's
Flores Historiarum, who, under this Year, makes K. Cuichelme, abovementioned,
to have been killed in this Battle, though from what Authority I know not;
whereas it will appear by our Annals, that he was alive, and Christened near ten
Years after.

But tho after this Victory K. Edwin forbore to worship Idols, yet ventured he
not presently to receive Baptism, but first took care to be instructed aright
by the Bishop Paulinus in the Principles of the Christian Faith; still
conferring with himself, and others of his chief Men whom he thought most wise,
what was best to be done in so weighty an Affair; and he himself, being a Man
of a piercing Understanding, when he was alone often considered with himself
which Religion was best to be followed.

Id^m. c. 10.
About this time also he received Letters from the Pope, wherein having briefly
set forth the Doctrine of the Trinity, as the Foundation of the Christian
Faith, and having extolled the Conversion of King Eadbald, and Piety of the
Queen his own Wife, he exhorts him to imitate their Examples, and casting away
his Idols to receive Christ. The Pope writ also Letters at the same time to
Queen Ethel^urga his Wife, wherein he congratulated her Conversion, and praised
her Piety, exhorting her to persist in the Course she had begun, Anno Dom.
DCXXVI.
and to do her Endeavor to reclaim her Husband from his Infidelity. But tho
the King joyfully received these Letters, yet did they not so much prevail with
him, as the wonderful fulfilling of the Prediction of the Vision
abovementioned; for when the King still deferred the declaring himself a
Christian, Bishop Aidan (as it is supposed) had that Transaction revealed to
him; for one day coming in to the King, on a sudden he laid his Hand upon his
Head, and desired him to remember that Sign; whereupon the King being much
surprised, fell down at his Feet, but the Bishop raising him up, said thus: GOD
has delivered you from your Enemies, and given you the Kingdom as you desired;
perform now what so long since you promised him, and receive his Doctrine,
which I now bring you, and that Faith which will not only save your Soul from
perpetual Torments, but also make you a Partaker of Eternal Happiness. Which,
when the King heard, he confessed, That he would, nay, Id. c. 13^
ought to receive this Faith; but ( said he) I must first consult further with
my chief Friends, and Counselors, concerning this Matter, that if they should
likewise receive it, we might all be Converted, and Baptized together. Which
Paulinus agreeing to, and the King there holding a Council with his wise Men,
asked them severally, What they thought of this new Doctrine and Worship, which
had been as yet unknown among them? To whom Coifi, chief of the Idol-Priests,
presently answered; You may, Sir, consider what is now preached to you, but to
tell you freely my Opinion, the Religion we profess is good for nothing; for
although no Man has more studiously observed the Worship of our Gods than my
self, yet nevertheless there are many who have received greater Benefits and
Dignities from you than I have done, and have been more Happy and Prosperous in
all their Undertakings; whereas, if these Gods had any Power, they would rather
have assisted me, who took such care to serve them: Wherefore if, upon a good
Examination, you find, that the New Doctrine now preached is far better than
the Old, let us then receive it without delay. To which Opinion, another of the
great Men also yielding his Assent, further said; It seems, Sir, to me, that
the present Life of Man upon Earth, in comparison of that Time which to us is
unknown, is like unto a little Sparrow, which, whilst you feasted in your
Presence Chamber, flew in at one Window, and out at another; we saw it that
short time it remained in the House, and it was then well sheltered from Wind
and Weather; but as soon as it got out into the cold Air, whither it went, we
were altogether as ignorant, as from whence it came: Thus we can give some
Account of our Souls, during its abode in the Body, whilst ho^sed and harbored
therein; but where it was before, or how it fares afterward^, is to us
altogether unknown. If therefore Paulinus his Preaching can certainly inform us
herein, it deserves, in my Opinion, to be well received. To which Discourses,
Coifi also further added, That he desired to hear Paulinus himself preach
concerning his God: Which, when he had performed, (as the King had commanded
him,) Coifi cried out, I have long since understood, that what we worshipped
was nothing, for the more I sought to understand the Truth in that Religion,
the less still I found of it. So that it is in this Doctrine alone, that Truth
clearly shines, and which is able to confer upon us Eternal Happiness. In
short, the King not only gave Paulinus his Consent to preach publicly, but
also, renouncing his Idolatry, received the Christian Faith. But Coifi the
Chief Priest did not only declare. That the Temples and Altars of their false
Gods should be pulled down, and destroyed; but when the King asked him who
should undertake it, he freely offered himself to do it; and so desiring of him
a Horse and Arms, Anno Dom. DCXXVI.
taking a Lance in his Hand, he went to destroy the Idol Temples; the People at
first thought him mad, because it was not lawful for their Priests, either to
bear Arms, or ride on Horseback: But as soon as Coifi came to the Idol Temple,
he commanded those that came with him to burn and utterly destroy it; and the
place where it stood was shown in Bede's time, lying not far from York,
Eastward near the River Darwent, being then called Godmundingham, where this
Priest, by thus demolishing the Altars of his former Gods, made some Amends for
his teaching Men to adore them. But the Year following,

Anno Dom. DCXXVII.
King Edwin, with all his Noblemen, and a great many common People of his
Kingdom, received Baptism; the King himself being baptized at York on Easter
Day in the Church of St. Peter, which he had commanded with all speed to be
built of Wood for that purpose, Ibid. c. 14.
in which City he also settled the Episcopal See, Paulinus being the first
Bishop; there; but not long after the King had received Baptism, he himself
took care to build a large and noble Church of Stone round about the former,
which was still left standing till the other was finished; but before the Walls
of it could be raised, the King being killed, left the Work to be perfected by
Oswald his Successor: So Paulinus continued, during all the rest of this King's
Reign, (which was about the space of 6 Years,) to preach the Word of GOD in
that Kingdom; in which Church there were also baptized diverse others of Note,
as Osfrid and Eadfrid, the Sons of King Edwin, both which his former Wife
Quenburga, the Daughter of Ceorle King of Mercia, had brought forth in their
Banishment. There were likewise afterward baptized diverse others of the King's
Children by his last Queen, who not long after dying, were buried in York
Minster. Besides these, there were baptized Iffi the Son of Prince Osrid, and
several other Noblemen; and it is reported, that the People's Desires to
receive Baptism were then so fervent, that when on a time Paulinus came with
the King and Queen to a certain Town of the King's, called Adefrin, he there
spent a Month in doing nothing else but Catechizing, and Baptizing those that
came to him from far and near to that end; for after his Instructing them, they
were strait baptized in the River Gleni, which he made use of as being
convenient for that purpose.

These Things were transacted in the Province of Bernicia; but in that of
Deira, where he used to remain most commonly with the King, he baptized in the
River of Swale, for in that present Infancy of the Church, Oratories and Fonts
were not yet erected: But in the Country of Done he built a Church, which was
burnt not long after by the Pagans when they killed King Edwin. These Things,
tho happening in several Years, Bid here relates all at once. But to return to
Civil Affairs.

This Year Cynegils and Cwichelm, Kings of the West Saxons, fought with Penda
King of Mercia at Cirencest^r, where also a League was made between them.

H. Huntington is larger in the Relation of this Fight, and tells us, that when
both Armies had fought from Morning till Sunset, neither of them giving
Ground; the next Morning perceiving they should be both ruined if they stood
another Fight, they treated of a Peace, and so parted Friends.

It were to be wished, that the Monkish Writers, who have left us the only
Relations of these Wars, would also have told us the particular Causes and
Grounds on which they were mad^; for want of which, we are left to guess in
general, Anno Dom. DCXXVIII.
that Revenge or Ambition (the common Incentives to War among Princes) did also
produce these we now treat of; but within two Years after (as the Saxon Annals
relate) Eorpwald [King of the East-Saxons] was baptized.

This Bid relates to have been done by the Persuasion of King Edwin, who after
the Death of Redwald, Ibid. c. 15.
had the Kingdom of the East Angles voluntarily delivered up to him by the
People of that Province; but he out of Gratitude to his old Benefactor,
permitted his Son Eorpwald quietly to hold that Kingdom, tho as his Tributary;
who now casting away his Idols, was baptized, together with many of his
Subjects: His Father King Redwald had been also baptized in Kent by the means
of King Eadbald, tho in returning home he was again perverted by his Wife and
some others of her Superstition, from the true Faith; so that he had at once in
the same Temple one Altar for Christ, and another for Devils: But King
Eorpwald, not long after his receiving the Faith, was slain by one Richbert a
Heathen, but who he was, or why he did it, is not told us; so that the Kingdom
for three years returned to Paganism, until Sebert, Brother to the last King, a
most Learned and Christian Prince, obtained the Crown; who whilst his Brother
lived being banished into France, did there receive Baptism, of which as soon
as he began his Reign he made his Subjects also Partakers: But to this Prince
we shall speak more largely anon.

About this time Paulinus also preached the Word to the Province of Lindissi,
(now Lincolnshire) and converted the Governor of Lincoln, Idem Ibid.
whose Name was Blecca, with all his Family, to the Christian Faith: In which
City he built a Church of Stone of curious Workmanship, whose Roof being fallen
down, either by length of Time, or Hostile Incursions, the Walls were only
standing in Bede's time: And concerning the Propagation of the Christian Faith
in this Province, a certain Priest and Abbot of the Monastery of Barteneu told
Bid, That he himself was baptized by the Bishop Paulinus, together with a
great Multitude of people in the River Trent, near a City then called
Tiowulfingceaster (where it was, we know not) King Edwin being present; of whom
Bid also tells us, That in his time a Woman with a Child in her hand might
have gone from Sea to Sea; and that the King at certain Fountains near the
Highways, caused Drinking-Pots of Brass to be set upon Posts, for the
refreshment of Travelers, which none either out of Love or Fear would presume
to meddle with; he also caused to be carried before him when he went through
the streets, a sort of Banner which the Romans called Tufa, and which the
English then called a Tuff.

About this time too Pope Honorius succeeded Boniface in the Roman See; Id c.
17.
and as soon as he heard that the Nation of Northumbers had received the
Christian Faith by the Preaching of Paulinus, he sent him an Archiepiscopal
Pall, together with Exhortatory Letters to King Edwin, persuading him to
persevere in the Faith which he had received; which Letter you may find at
large in Bid; wherein it also appears, that Honorius Archbishop of Canterbury,
and Paulinus of York, had this Trust lodged jointly in them, That whenever
one of them died, the Survivor should immediately consecrate another Archbishop
in his stead; for not long before, Archbishop Justus deceasing, Honorius had
been elected in his room; who coming to Paulinus as far as Lincoln, Id. c. 18.
was there by him ordained Archbishop of Canterbury.

Anno Dom. DCXXXIII.
Cadwallo, King of the Britains, having been (as Geoffrey of Monmouth relates)
conquered by King Edwin, lost so great a part of his Kingdom, that he was
forced to fly into Ireland, from whence soon after returning with a great Army
of Irish, he overcame Penda King of the Mercians in fight, and then made him
join his Forces against King Edwin: All which is probable enough; for Ibid.
cap. 20.
Bid also tells us, That Cadwallo this year rebelling against King Edwin,
together with Penda, invaded the Kingdom of Northumberland, when King Edwin
raising an Army met them at a place called Hethfield (now Hatfield in
Yorkshire) and there fought a bloody Battle, wherein King Edwin himself was
slain, and his whole Army quite routed; in which Fight Osfrid his Son, a
Warlike Young Prince also fell; but Edfrid the Younger being compelled by
necessity to surrender himself to Penda, was afterward by him murdered,
contrary to his Oath. This happened in the 17 th. year of King Edwin's Reign,
having till now been successful in all his Undertakings.

But there now ensued a very sad Destruction of the English Nation of the
Northumbers, since of these two Generals, the one was a professed Pagan, and
the other, though a Christian in Name, yet showed himself worse than a Pagan;
for Cadwallo, although he professed Christianity, yet was so barbarous, that he
spared neither Age not Sex, but put all to death with great Cruelty; tyranizing
for a long while over all those Provinces, and seeming resolved quite to
extirpate the English Nation; nor did he show any respect to Churches or other
Sacred Places; it being then the custom of the Britains (in Bede's time) to set
at naught the Faith and Religion of the English-Saxons; neither would they have
any thing to do with them, more than with Pagans: But the Head of the slain
King was brought to York, and there deposited in the Church of St. Peter, which
he himself had begun, and Oswald his Successor finished. All things being thus
in confusion in those parts, and no Refuge or Safety any where to be expected,
Queen Aethelburga returned by Sea into Kent, together with Paulinus the
Archbishop, and was there received with great Honor by King Eadbald and
Archbishop Honorius; she was conducted thither by Basse, a Valiant Captain of
King Edwin's, who also brought with him Eanfrede the King's Daughter, as also
Vscfrea his Son, and Iffi his Grandson by Osfrid; whom their Mother afterward,
for fear of the Kings Eadbald and Oswald, sent into France to King Dagobert to
be brought up, where they both died in their Infancy.

At which time also the Church of Rochester wanting a Pastor, (Romanus the
Bishop having been drowned in going on a Message to Rome) Paulinus at the
request of King Eadbald and Archbishop Honorius, took upon him the care of that
Church, which he held as long as he lived.

Anno Dom. DCXXXIV.
After the Death of King Edwin, Osric the Son of Elfric, his Uncle by the
Father's side, obtained the Kingdom of Deira, who had been before received by
Paulinus; Ibid. Lib. 3. Cap. 1.
whilst Eanfrid, of the same Blood Royal, as being the Son of Ethelfrid the
last King before Edwin, ruled the Kingdom of Bernicia; so that during the Reign
of Edwin, all the Sons of Ethelfrid, with many more of the Young Nobility of
that Country, lived in Exile either with the Scots or Picts, by whom they were
instructed in their Religious Rites, whilst both these Kings last mentioned
abjured the Christian Religion, which they had before learnt and professed; and
relapsing to their old Idolatry, were shortly after cut off by Cadwalla, King
of the Britains; Anno Dom. DCXXXIV.
for the next Summer Osric having besieged him in a certain Town, Cadwallo
sallying out with his Men, cut him off on a sudden with all his Army; and then
when he had ravaged the Northumbrian Provinces, nor as a King, but a cruel
Tyrant; and that at length Eanfrid came to him imprudently, with only Twelve
Select Knights in his Company to treat of Peace, he put him to Death as he had
done his Cousin before.

That Year, says Bid, Is still at this day accounted unlucky, Ibid cap. 3.
and hateful to all good Men, both in respect of the Apostasy of these Princes
who renounced their Baptism; as also for the Tyranny of this British King:
Whereupon it was agreed by those who computed the Reigns of the Northumbrian
Kings, to abolish the Memory of these Infidels, and to cast this Year into the
Reign of the Pious King Oswald, who succeeding after the Death of his Brother
Eanfrid, and marching with a small Force, (but fortified by Faith in Christ)
routed Ceadwalla, Id. cap. 1.
that Prince of the Britains, with his vast Army, which nothing could resist,
as he boasted; and, who was slain in a place, which in the English Tongue is
called Denisesbourn, or Brook, the place (says our Author) is shown at this
day, and had in great Veneration; where Oswald being to give Battle erected a
large Wooden-Cross, and he himself labored in setting of it up; which when he
had finished, he thus spoke to his Army; Let us now kneel down, and jointly
pray unto the Omnipotent, and only true God, that he would mercifully defend us
from this proud Enemy; for he knows that we undertake a just War for defense of
our Nation and Religion: The place is in the English Tongue called Heofenfield
(or Heavenfield), lying near to the Wall which the Romans built from Sea to
Sea, (which we now call the Pict's Wall:) The rest of Bede's Miracles
concerning this place, and Cross, I omit, as very incredible and Superstitious.

But before we leave this great Action of the Death of Cadwallo, I cannot omit
taking notice of the Confidence of Geoffrey of Monmouth, who (notwithstanding
this express Testimony of Bid to the contrary,) will make this Cadwallo not
only to have overcome Edwin, and other Saxon Kings in diverse Battles, and to
have forced them to submit themselves to him, and do him Homage at London, and
that living and dying Victorious, he was there buried, and his Body being put
into a Brazen Statue of a Man on Horseback, was set over Ludgate for a terror
to the Saxons, having Reigned Forty Eight Years; all which is notoriously
false, for London had been part of the East-Saxon Kingdom, for above One
Hundred Years, when this King was killed, who did not Reign Twenty Years in all.

But the same King Oswald, as soon as ever he came to the Kingdom, desiring
that all his Subjects might profess the Christian Faith, Id. cap. 2.
sent to the Scotch Bishops (for so I suppose the Words Majores natu, in Bid
are to be rendered) among whom, whilst he was in Banishment, he had together
with his followers received Baptism, desiring them that a Bishop might be sent
him; by whose Preaching the People whom he Governed might be grounded in the
Christian Religion, and receive Baptism; nor was he long without an answer to
his request, for they soon sent him Aidan, a Man of great Meekness, Piety and
Moderation; only Bid finds ^ault with him, That he had Zeal, but not according
to Knowledge, in that he observed Easter day according to the custom of his own
Nation, and that of the Picts, of which I have sufficiently spoken already: But
so soon as this Bishop came to him, Anno Dom. DCXVI.
he gave him a place for his Episcopal See, in the Isle of Lindisfarn, where he
himself desired it, which place is Pena-Insula, except when the Sea quite
overflows that neck of Land which joins it to England: But this King took care,
by hearkening to the Instructions of this good Bishop, to propagate Christ's
Church in his Kingdom, which during his Reign, extended over both Deira, and
Bernicia, being then both united into one; and it was often observed as an
unusual spectacle, that whilst the Bishop Preached (who being a Scot did not
speak English, so as to be well understood,) the King being present, and with
his Courtiers and Officers, having learned the Scottish Tongue, during the time
of his banishment, would himself interpret the Bishops Sermon to them, and many
Scottish Priests coming into those Provinces of Britain where King Oswald
Reigned, began to Preach, and Baptize those that believed; so that now Churches
were built in diverse places, to which the People assembling rejoiced to hear
the Word of God; there were also given by the King several Lands and
Possessions to build Monasteries, for they were chiefly Monks, who now came
hither to Preach; for Bishop Aidan was himself a Monk sent from the Monastery
of the Isle of Hye, of which we have said enough in the last Book.

Id. Cap. 5.
But of the Humility and Piety of this Bishop Aidan, Bid gives us a very large
account, in several instances of it; for he seems to have been an excellent
pattern for succeeding Bishops and Clergy Men to follow: For he tells us, That
all who traveled with him (I suppose in his Visitation or Conversions) were
they professed Monks or only Lay Brethren, were obliged to bestow their time
either in reading the Scriptures, or else in learning the Psalms by heart: but
to let you see how much more Humility and Condescension are able to prevail
than Pride and Austerity, Bid tells us, That the King of the Scots first sent
another Bishop to King Oswald, who being of a very rough Austere Temper, could
therefore do but little good among the English* so that being forced to return
home again, he laid the fault upon their Rude, Irreclameable Dispositions;
whereupon the Scotch Clergy being grieved at hi^ return, called a Synod to
consider what was best to be done in this case; when Aidan, who was then
present, told this Bishop, That he thought he had been too harsh and severe to
his Ignorant Auditors, and had not, according to the Apostle's Rule, first
given them the Milk of milder Doctrine, till by degrees they should be able to
receive, and digest the more perfect and harder precepts of God's Word; which
as soon as they heard, they all turned their Eyes upon him, and resolved he
should be sent to Convert the Ignorant, unbelieving English, because he was
endued with Prudence, the Mother of all other Virtues, tho he was not wanting
in those also.

Id. Cap. 6.
The same Author, also gives us as high a Character, with many Examples of the
great Humility, Affability and Charity of King Oswald; as that being once at
Dinner, it was told him, There were a great multitude of Poor People at his
Gate, desiring Alms; whereupon he immediately sent them a large Silver Dish
full of Meat from his own Table, and order'ed the Dish afterward to be broken
into small pieces and distributed among them; upon this Bishop Aidan taking him
by the Right Hand, said thus; Let this Hand never corrupt, which saying gave
occasion to the Miracle, (whether false or real I shall not now dispute)
concerning the incorruptibility of King Oswald's Right Arm, which Bid has
given us so many strange Relations of, Anno Dom. DCXXXIV.
and that it was preserved incorrupt in the Church of Peterburgh in his time:
Of this King he also tells us, That by his Industry the Provinces of Deira and
Bernicia, which had been almost in perpetual Discord, were now (as I may say)
united into one People, so that he received all the Nations and Kingdoms of
Britain under his Protection: He was Nephew to King Edwin by his Sister Acca,
and it was fit that so great a Predecessor should have one of his own Blood to
succeed him.

But we shall proceed now to the Conversion of the West Saxons, Anno Dom.
DCXXXV.
which the same Author thus relates: At this time the Nation of the West Saxons
(which were anciently called Gewisses) received the Christian Faith in the
Reign of Cynegils, by the preaching of Byrinus an Italian, Id. c. 7.
who being ordained Bishop by Asterius Bishop of Genoua, by the Order of Pope
Honorius, came into Britain; and tho he had promised the Pope to preach the
Gospel in the most inland parts of the Island, where it never had been heard of
before, yet landing in the Country of the West Saxons, and finding them to be
altogether Heathens, he thought it better to preach the Gospel there, than to
seek further; which, when he had done for some time, and that the King (being
sufficiently instructed) was to be Baptized, with his People, it happened that
Oswald, the Victorious King of the Northumbers, was there present, and received
him coming out of the Font as his Godfather, intending also to make him his
Son-in-Law, and then both Kings joined in conferring on the said Bishop a City,
which was called in Latin Dorinea (now Dorchester) in Oxfordshire, there to fix
his Episcopal See; but diverse Years after, when many Churches had been built,
and much People converted to Christ by his means, he at last deceased, and was
buried in that City, (for so Bid styles it,) tho it be now but a poor Country
Town.

Will. of Malmesbury adds to this Relation of Bid, That King Cynegils was
quickly persuaded to submit to the preaching of the Bishop, but that Cwichelme
his Brother, (and Partner in the Kingdom,) did for some time refuse it; till
being admonished by Sickness, that he should not neglect the Salvation of his
Soul, he was at last baptized, and the same Year died, which is confirmed by
the Saxon Chronicle under the Year following; tho omitting the Baptism of
Cynegils, it only mentions that of Cwich^lme, adding, That the same Year he
departed this Life, and that Bishop Felix preached the Faith of Christ to the
East Angles: This Felix was a Burgundian, the first Bishop in Dunwich in
Suffolk, where he founded his Episcopal See.

His Conversion was thus: Anno Dom. DCXXXVI.
Sigebert having succeeded his Brother Eorpwald in the Kingdom of the
East Angles, and having, whilst he was banished into France by his Brother's
Jealousy, there received Baptism, did now, by the Assistance of Bishop Felix,
erect a School, Bid, Id. c. 18.
(like those he had seen in France,) where Youths might be taught Letters,
having received Schoolmasters out of Kent; but two Years after, this King being
weary of Worldly Affairs, resigned the Kingdom to his Cousin Egric, and became
a Monk in a Monastery of his own founding: Nor can I here omit taking notice,
that from Bed^'s thus mentioning King Sigebert's founding this School, Pol^dore
Virgil and Leland conclude, that this School was in Cambridge, and that it gave
Being to that University; and all the reason they have for it is, only because
Cambridge was in the Kingdom of the East Angles; whereas neither Bid, nor any
other ancient Author, Anno Dom. DCXXXVI.
specifies the Place where it was erected: And so it might be any where else,
as well as in Cambridge; or if there, it was no better than a School to teach
Boys the Latin Tongue: And it is certain, that in the time of King Alfred there
was no School, much less an University there.

But before I leave this King's Reign, I cannot forbear mentioning what Bid
there tells us, Ibid.
That in his Reign one Furseus (or Fursee) came out of Ireland, and preached
the Gospel to the East Angles, converting many, and confirming diverse others in
the Faith; and having had a terrible Vision of the Pains of Hell, did, by the
Assistance of King Sigebert, erect a Monastery in a Town called Cnobsbury;
which afterward Anna, King of the East Angles, enriched with noble Buildings
and Revenues.

Anno Dom. DCXXXIX.
This Year is remarkable, for Byrinus baptized King Cuthred at Dorceaster, and
at the Font received him for his Godson. This Cuthred, tho here called King,
yet was only a Prince of the Blood Royal, the Title of Cyning being often given
to those Princes in our Saxon Annals.

Anno Dom. DCXL.
This Year Eadbald, King of Kent, departing this Life, having reigned 25 Years,
left the Kingdom to Earcombert his Son, who held it 24 Years and some Months.
The Saxon Annals say, This King Eadbald had two Sons, Id. c. 8.
Erme^red, and Earcombert; but Mat. Westminster (I know not from what Author)
adds, That the Younger craftily supplanted the Elder, and got the Kingdom from
him. This Earcombert was the first English King, who commanded Idols to be
destroyed throughout his whole Kingdom; and who also by his Authority ordained,
That the Forty Days before Easter (now called Lent) should be observed; and
that it should not be contemned, appointed competent Punishments for those that
should dare to transgress it.

Ibid.
This seems to have been the First Lent that was observed in England by a Law;
this King's Daughter, called Earcongath, or Earcongota, being a Virgin of great
Piety, constantly served God in a Monastery in the Kingdom of the Franks,
founded by a noble Abbess in the Town called Brige (now Bruges) in Flanders,
for there being at that time not many Monasteries in Britain, many who desired
to undertake those Vows, used to go over to the French Monasteries, or else
sent their Daughters to be taught and professed there, chiefly in the
Monasteries of Brige, Cale, and Andelegium.

The Saxon Annals here also mention, one Ermenred to have been Brother to King
Earcombert, and to have begot two Sons, ( Ethelbert, and Ethelred,) who
afterward suffered Death by the Hands of Thun^re, one of his Thanes, whom the
King employed in this cruel Execution.

When Oswald, the Most Christian King of Northumberland, had now reigned 9
Years, Anno Dom. DCXLII.
(taking in that Year in which the two Apostate Kings were killed,) who were
left out of the Catalogue, (as has been already said, Bid, Id. c. 9.
) he fought a great Battle with Penda, the Pagan King of the Mercians, in a
place called Maser-Field (now Oswestre) in Shropshire,) and was there
unfortunately slain in the 38th Year of his Age; the Greatness of whose Faith
and Devotion toward GOD, appeared (says Bid) by the many Miracles there
wrought after his Death; which being both tedious and improbable, I omit, and
refer those that are Curious in such Matters to the Author himself; but that
they were long after generally believed, appears by these Passages in the Saxon
Chronicle, ( viz.) That his Holiness and Miracles were afterward highly
celebrated through the whole Island, Anno Dom. DCXLII.
and that his Hand was still preserved at Bebban-burg incorrupt. For Penda had
most inhumanly caused his Body to be dismembered, and his Head and Arms being
cut off, to be set upon a Pole for a Trophie of his Victory.

The same Year also Penda, King of Mercia, Bid. l. 3. c. 18.
making War against the East Angles, and still getting the better of them; they
urged Sigebert, who had been formerly their King, (but was now retired into a
Monastery,) to come out to Battle, to encourage the Soldiers; and so fetching
him out whether he would or no, as hoping that the Soldiers would be less apt
to fly, having with them one who had been so stout a Commander: But he being
mindful of his Vow, carrying nothing but a Staff in his Hand, was there slain,
together with Egric the present King, and all the whole Army was routed, and
dispersed: But Anna, the Son of Eni, of the Royal Stock, succeeded them, being
an excellent Man, but who also underwent the same Fate from this Pagan King, as
shall be shown in due time.

This Year Cenwall, or Cenwalc, Anno Dom. DCXLIII.
succeeded Cynegils his Father in the Kingdom of the West Saxons, and reigned
31 Years.

This King commanded the old Church of Vid. Monast. Ang. T. 1. p. 31. Angl.
Sacra, T. 1. Annal. Winton in Bib. Cotton.
Winchester to be built, which had been designed by his Father Cynegils, tho he
never lived to finish it; but Hedda sat there as the first Bishop. This King
also gave to this Church, and Bishopric, all the Lands lying about Winchester
for the space of 7 Leucas, or Leagues; which Grant was also confirmed by King
Kenwalk.

Note, That at the first Foundation, this Monastery was for Secular Chanons,
till the Year 963; that Bishop Ethelwold, by the Command of King Edgar, turned
out these Chanons, and placed Benedictine Monks in their rooms.

This Year Paulinus deceased at Rochester, Anno Dom. DCXLIV.
who had been first Archbishop of York, and afterward Bishop in this City,
and was Bishop 21 Years, 2 Months, and 12 Days Oswin, the Son of Osric, the
Cousin of Edwin, was made King of Deira, and reigned 7 Years. The next Year,

In the room of Paulinus, Anno Dom. DCXLV.
Archbishop Honorius consecrated Ithamar a Kentish Man, who was equal to his
Predecessors in Learning and Piety. Cenwalc was driven out of his Kingdom by
Penda King of the Mercians.

Of which, Bid gives us a more particular Account, L. 3. c. 7.
That refusing to receive the Christian Faith, he not long after lost his
Kingdom; for having divorced his Wife, the Sister of Penda King of the
Mercians, he had therefore not only War made upon him, but was driven out of
his Kingdom upon that account; so that he was forced to retire to Anna King of
the East Angles, with whom remaining 3 Years in Banishment, he came first to
the knowledge of, and there received the true Faith, for that King was a good
Man, and happy in a pious Issue.

'This Year King Cenwalc was baptized: And, Anno Dom. DCXLVI.
as William of Malmesbury relates, after 3 Years banishment, gathering fresh
Forces, recovered his Kingdom, and proved the greatest of the West Saxon Kings
that had reigned hitherto, as shall be in due time related: But Bid tells us,
Ibid.
That after this King had been some time restored, there came out of Ireland a
certain Bishop called Agelbert, a French Man, who offered himself to the King
to preach the Gospel, whose Learning and Industry when the King understood, he
offered him the Bishopric of that Province, and consenting to the King's
Desires, Anno Dom. DCXLVI.
he remained there Bishop several Years; till the King finding he could not
learn English, and growing weary of his bad Pronunciation, introduced another
Bishop, one Wini of his own Nation, over his Head, who had been ordained in
France, and so dividing the Province into two Diocesses, settled the latter in
his Episcopal See at Winchester; at which Agelbert being offended, because the
King had done it without his Knowledge and Consent, he returned into France,
and there accepting of the Bishopric of Paris, died an old Man; but not many
Years after his daparture, Wini being driven from his Bishopric, retired to
Wulfer King of Mercia, and buying of him the Episcopal See of the City of
London for a Sum of Money, sat there Bishop as long as he lived; thus Simony
crept very early into the English Saxon Church: So the Kingdom of the
West Saxons, was no small time without a Bishop, whereupon King Cenwalc being
afflicted with great losses in his Wars, sent Messengers into France, to Bishop
Agelbert, desiring him to return, and reassume the Bishopric he had left; but
he excused himself, that he could not return, being already engaged in another
Charge; yet to comply as far as he could to the King's desires, he sent him his
Nephew Elutherius a Priest, to be ordained Bishop if he pleased; who being
Honorably received by the King and People, and having been ordained Bishop by
Theodorus, Archbishop of Canterbury, did for many Years Govern alone the
Diocese of the West Saxons. This, tho happening in a course of some Years, is
by Bid related as one continued Story.

This Year Cenwalc (King of the West Saxons,) gave Cuthred his Cousin Three
Thousand Hides of Land, Anno Dom. DCXLVIII.
near Aescasdune, (now called Aston near Wallingford): This Cuthred was the Son
of Cwichelme, and he the Son of Cynegils: But two years after,

Anno Dom. DCL.
Aegelbyerth, a Bishop, (who came from France,) after Byrinus undertook the
Bishopric of the West Saxons, as has been already related at large by Bid.

Anno Dom. DCLI.
This Year K. Oswin was slain, xii. Kal. of September: And within twelve days
afterward died also Aidan the Bishop.

But the manner of this King's Death is by Bid thus related, That King Oswin
(who succeeded K. Oswald his Brother, Lib. 3. c. 14.
) had, from the beginning of his Reign, a Consort, or Sharer of the Royal
Dignity of the Northumbrian Kingdom, called Oswi, the Son of Usric, of the
Posterity of King Edwin; whilst Oswin governed the Province of D^ira for Seven
Years with great Happiness and Love of his Subjects; But Oswy, who reigned in
the Kingdom of Bernicia, would not long maintain Peace with him; 'till at last
fresh Dissentions still arising between them, he destroyed Oswin by Treachery;
for both their Armies now lying near each other, as ready to fight, when Oswin
saw, that being weaker in Force, he was not able to wage Battle with him who
came against him with a much greater Army, he judged it better to lay aside all
Thoughts of fighting, and to preserve himself and his Men for some better
Opportunity: So he sent home his Army from a place called Wilfers Dun, and
himself retired with only one faithful Follower, to lie concealed in the House
of Earl Hunwald, whom he supposed to have been faithful to him; but it proved
far otherwise, for by him he was betrayed, and there slain by the Command of K.
Oswi, together with his faithful Servant Tondhere, in the ninth year of his
Reign, at a place called I^gerlingum.

This Fact of King Oswy, as it was detestable to all Men, Anno Dom. DCLI.
so it afterward proved most hateful to himself; who, repenting of it, built
there a Monastery to expiate the Crime, and to pray, as well for his own Soul
as for that of the King he had killed. This King Oswin was a Man of a beautiful
Aspect, tall of Stature, affable, and very bountiful; all which excellent
Endowments, both of Mind and Body, procured him such Reputation, that he was
generally beloved; and many Noble Persons, out of all the English Provinces,
thought themselves happy if they could get into his Service; but above all, his
Humility and singular Modesty were most remarkable, whereof Bid gives us this
Instance: K. Oswin had bestowed an excellent Horse upon Aidan, (that charitable
B of Lindisfarne,) but the Bishop, when a poor Man asked an Alms, gave him the
Horse with all the rich Furniture upon him: The King hearing of this, as they
were going to Dinner, said to him, My Lord Bishop, Why would you give that
Noble Horse, that I bestowed upon you for your own Saddle, to a poor Man? Have
we not many worse Horses, and other Things, which would better serve the Poor,
instead of this Horse I made choice of for your own riding? The Bishop
instantly replied, Sir, What do you say? Is that Son of a Mare more dear to you
than the Son of GOD? With that they went to Dinner, the Bishop took his Seat,
but the King, being newly come in from Hunting, fate down by the Fire with his
Attendants; but remembering what the Bishop had said, he rose suddenly up, and
giving his Sword to his Servant, ran hastily to the Bishop, and falling down at
his Feet, besought him not to be angry, affirming, he would never after speak,
or concern himself, whatever he gave to the Children of GOD. The Bishop being
wonderfully amazed, and rising hastily from his Seat, raised him up, telling
him, he was very well pleased if he would but sit down to Dinner, and be
cheerful: The King then, at his Request, began to be merry; but the Bishop to
be sad, in so much that he shed Tears; of which his Priest taking Notice, and
in their own Language (being the Scottish, which neither Oswin nor his Servants
understood,) demanded the Reason: I know (says he,) that the King will not
live long, for till now I never beheld an humble King; whence I apprehend, that
he will speedily be taken away from us; for this Nation is not worthy of such a
Governor. Not long after, this Prelage of the Bishop was fulfilled in the
Murder of Oswin (as you have heard); But Aidan lived 'till the twelfth day
after his Death, and then died himself on the last of August: Of the Miracles
of which Bishop, Bid gives u^ too long and (...) incredible Account either to
be believed, or inserted here.

This Year Cenwal, (King of the West Saxons,) fought at Bradenford, Anno Dom.
DCLII.
near the River Aft^ne (in Wiltshire); but it is pity that our Annals had not
told us against whom he fought, which I cannot find in any Author, tho it is
most likely to have been against the Mercians; for Ethelward, in his Chronicle,
says, That Conwal, about this time, was engaged in a Civil War, which must be
understood with those of his own Country, and the Mercians were his next
Neighbors. The next Year

The Mid-land English (or Mercians) under Peadda their Eolderman or Governor,
received the Faith of Christ: Anno Dom. DCLIII.
Which Conversion Lib. 3. c. 21.
Bid relates more at large; when, speaking of this Peadda, the Son of Penda,
as being a young Man, most worthy of the Name of a King; was, by his Father,
set over a Province of that Nation; Will. of Malmesbury calls it part of that
Kingdom; and that this Prince went to Oswy, desiring Alfreda his Daughter to
Wife, but could by no means obtain her, unless he, together with his whole
Nation, Anno Dom. DCLIII.
would receive Baptism; but he having heard the Preaching of the Gospel,
through the Hope of a future Immortality, voluntarily professed that he would
be a Christian, whether he had married the Virgin or not; being chiefly
persuaded to receive the Faith by Alcfrid, the Son of King Oswy, who was his
Friend and Relation, having married Cymburge his Sister: So that King was
baptized by Bishop Finan, together with all his Train, in that famous Town of
the King's, which Bid calls Admurum (that is, Walltown, near the Picts Wall);
and taking with him four Priests to teach and baptize his Nation, he returned
home with much Joy; these Priests coming with the King into this Province
preached GOD's Word, and were as willingly heard and received; and both, the
Noble as well as the inferior sort, renouncing their Idolatry, were baptized;
nor did King Penda himself prohibit them from preaching in his own Kingdom, if
they would, if they would, but rather hated and despised those, whom,
professing the Faith of Christ, he found not to perform Works suitable to it;
calling them miserable and contemptible Wretches, who failed to obey that GOD
in whom they believed. These Things fell out two Years before the Death of King
Penda.

About the same time the East Saxons, at the Instance of King Oswy, again
received the Christian Faith, which they had formerly rejected, having (as you
have heard, Bid Ib. c. 22.
) driven away Mellitus their Bishop; for Sigebert, who was now King of that
Nation, having succeeded Sigebert, Surnamed The Little; This Prince being a
Friend to King Oswye, and using to come sometimes to visit him into the Kingdom
of Northumberland, he was wont often to tell him, That those could not be GODS
that were the Works of Men's Hands; but that GOD was an Incomprehensible Being,
Invisible, Omnipotent, and Eternal, who governed all Things both in Heaven and
Earth, and would judge the World in Equity; and that all those who would learn,
and do His Will, should receive Eternal Rewards: These and many other such
Things, when King Oswy had often inculcated with a Brotherly Affection, at last
by the Persuasion of that King, and of diverse of his Friends, he also Believed,
and was baptized, with all his Followers, at the same place where Peadda had
been Christened before, ( viz. at Wall-Town abovementioned). King Sigebert,
being thus made a Christian, returned to his own Kingdom, only asking of King
Oswy to appoint him some Teachers, who might convert and baptize his Nation
into the Faith of Christ; so the King sent to the Kingdom of the Mercians, and
called back Cedda, who had been before sent thither; and giving him a certain
Priest for his Companion, sent him to preach the Word to the East Saxons: When
these had passed through all places, and had gathered a very large Church, it
happened some time after, that Cedda, returning home, went to Lindisfarne, to
confer with Bishop Finan; who, when he found the Work of the Gospel to have so
well prospered under his Ministry, calling to him Two other Bishops, ordained
Cedda Bishop over the Nation of the East Saxons; who thereupon returned into
his own Province, and finishing the Work he had begun with greater Authority,
Built Churches in many places, and ordained Priests and Deacons, who might help
him in the Preaching of the Word and Baptism; especially in a City, which is
called in the English Tongue, I^hancestir, as also in that which is called
Tylabury; the former of which places was upon the Bank of the River Pent, and
the other is near the Thames (now called Tillbury) in which having gathered
together a small company of Christ's Servants, he taught them the Discipline of
a Monastic Life, as far as they were capable to receive it.

This Year, (according to the Saxon Annals) Anna, Anno Dom. DCLIV
King of the East Angles was Slain; being overcome in Fight by King Penda, of
whom H. Huntington gives us but a slender Account, only that Anna and his whole
Army perished in a moment, by the edge of the Sword; so that scarce any of them
remained

This Year also, one Bottulf began to Build a Monastery at Icanho (supposed to
be Boston in Lincolnshire). As also Honorius, Archbishop of Canterbury,
Deceased on 20. Kal. October. The same Year likewise (according to Mat.
Westminster) Ercombert King of Kent Deceasing, Egbert his Son Succeeded him; in
the beginning of whose Reign, Aethelbert, and Aethelred, the Sons of his Uncle
Ermenred, being but Youths, were cruelly Murdered by one Thanor, the King's
Servant, without his privity; whose Bodies were strangely discovered, where
they were buried, by a Light from Heaven: whereupon their Bodies were removed
to the Monastery of Warinens: The Miracles that followed in the doing of which,
I omit as incredible.

This Year King Penda was Slain at Winwidfeld, with Thirty others of the Royal
Blood. Anno Dom. DCLV


Of which Battle Bid gives us a particular account; That Oswi having long
endured the Ravages, and Devastations of his Country by the Inroads of King
Penda, Lib. 3. c 1^
and having had his strong City of Bebbanburg (now Bamburrough Castle)
assaulted, and set on Fire, and thereby very near taking, found himself too
weak to resist, and offering him many Rich Presents, desired to buy a Peace;
which Penda proudly refusing, and resolving nothing less should satisfy him
than this King's destruction; Oswi upon that turning his Gifts into Vows to
God, implored the Divine Assistance; devoting his Daughter (then but one Year
Old) to be a Nun, and with Twelve Portions of Land, (whereof each maintained
Ten Families,) to build and endow Monasteries: So it seems, his Vows proved
more successful than his Treaties; for hereupon, he with Alfred his Son,
gathering a small Army, therewith encountered, and discomfited the Mercians,
having then Invaded and wasted the Northumbrian Kingdom, tho they were Thirty
times more in number, and led by experienced Captains: This Battle was fought
near a place called Loyden (now Leeds in Yorkshire;) besides this Ethelwald,
the Son of Oswald, who ruled in Deira, took part with the Mercians, but in the
Fight withdrew his Forces, and in a safe place waited for the Event; with which
unseasonable Retreat, the Mercians perhaps, being terrified, and misdoubting
greater danger fled; their Commanders together with Penda himself, being almost
all Slain; amongst whom was Ethelher, King of the East Angles, who forgeting
the Death of his Brother K. Anna, formerly Slain by Penda, now took part with
him, and was the chief Author of this War; many as they were flying were
drowned in the River Winved, then swollen above her Banks: The death of Penda,
that Cruel, and Heathen King, caused a General rejoicing among the Christians,
according to the Old English saying, (mentioned by Matthew Westminster) at
Winved* So that after Penda had been the death of no less than Four or Five
Christian Kings, whom he slew in Battle, he himself underwent the same Fate; so
little Difference is there between the deaths of Good, and Bad Princes; only
the former are called God's Corrections, but the latter his Judgments.

Anno Dom. DCLV.
But to Ethelher, succeeded Ethelwald his Brother, and to Penda his Son Peadda,
who being a Christian and Son in Law to Oswi himself, he allowed him to hold
the Province of South Mercia, divided from the Northern, by the River of Trent,
then containing (according to Bid) Five Thousand Families,) to be held as
Tributary to the Northumbrian Kingdom.

After this the Mercians became all Christians, by the means of King Oswi, and
Peadda: and here that Copy of the Saxon Chronicle, Written in the Abbey of
Peterburgh, gives us a large account of the Foundation of that Abbey, which is
thus; That in the Time of this Peadda, he and Oswi, the Brother of King Oswald
met, and conferred about building a Monastery, in honor of Christ and St.
Peter, which they afterward did, and gave it the Name of Medeshamsted, from a
certain Well, which is there, called Medeswell; so they laid the Foundations,
and when they had near finished the Work, they committed it to the Care of a
certain Monk, called Saxulf, who was dear to God, and beloved of all the
Nation; for he was a Rich, and Noble Person in his time, but is now much richer
in Christ.

This Year also, ( Honorius the Archbishop deceasing, on the 7th of the Calends
of April) Ithamer Bishop of Rochester, Consecrated Deus Dedit to be Archbishop
of Canterbury. This was the first English Monk, that had ever been chosen
Archbishop of Canterbury, and was also the first that was Consecrated but by
one Bishop; for the better sound sake, he changed his Name to Deus Dedit,
having been before called Fridona, or Fridon.

Anno Dom. DCLVI.
This Year was Peadda Slain about Easter, by the Treachery of his Wife, the
Daughter of K. Oswy, and Wulfher (his Brother) the Son of Penda succeeded him.

Tho not until some Years after; for upon the Death of Peadda, King Oswi seized
also that part of the Kingdom, and held and laid it to his own Dominions.

Here the Saxon Chronicle proceeds to give us a further account, concerning the
finishing of the aforesaid Monastery of Peterburgh; but tho it was done some
Years after, and the Relation be somewhat long, yet because it shows more
plainly than any other History, the Form and Manner of erecting such a
Foundation, I shall give you the substance of it, omitting what is not
pertinent to our purpose. The said Chronicle proceeds thus,

That in his ( viz. Wulfher's) Reign, the Abbey of Medeshamsted was greatly
increased in Riches, for that King favored it very much, for the sake of his
own Brother, Peadda, and of Oswie, his Brother in the Christian Faith; as also
of Saxulf the Abbot; wherefore he said that he would render it yet more famous,
and would highly adorn it, being thereunto persuaded By his Brothers, Ethelred,
and Merwalla, and his Sisters, Kyneburg, and Kyneswith, as also by Archbishop
Deus Dedit, and all his Wise Men, both Clerks and Laics that were in his
Kingdom; then the King sending for the said Abbot, told him, that since his
B^other Peadda, and his Friend Oswie had begun this Monastery and that he was
Departed this Life, therefore the Abbot should, take diligent care to see it
finished, and he would provide all things, as both Gold and Silver, Lands and
possessions, and whatever else was needful for it; whereupon the Abbot went
home, and setting to the Work, so far advanced it, that in few Years it was
finished; which when it was told the King, he was very joyful, Anno Dom. DCLVI.
and sent to give notice of it to all his Thanes throughout the whole Nation,
as also the Archbishop, Bishops Earls and all who loved God, that they should
come to him; so he appointed them a day when the Monastery should be
Consecrated; at which Consecration King Wulfer, and his Brother Ethelred, and
his Sisters were all present, as was also Archbishop Deus Dedit, and Ithamer
Bishop of Rochester, together with Wina Bishop of London, and several other
Bishops: There were also present all the Thanes that were in his Kingdom, when
this Monastery was Consecrated, in the Names of St. Peter, St. Paul, and St.
Andrew: Then the King rising up from his Chair, spoke thus, with a loud Voice
before all his Thanes; Thanks be to the most High and Omnipotent GOD, for this
honor which he has done me, and I will, That you all confirm my Words; I
Wulfer do give this Day to St. Peter, and to Saxulf, and to the Monks of this
Monastery, all these Lands, Waters, etc. and all the Territories lying round
about them, which are of my Royal Patrimony; so freely that no Man shall have
thence any Tribute or Revenue, besides the Abbot and Monks, which Gift is this;

Then the King proceeded to declare the Meets and Bounds of the Lands, which he
had given; which because they are not to our purpose, I omit, only that they
reached as far as Stamford, and were above Threescore Miles about: then said
the King. The Gift indeed is small, but I will, that they hold it so freely,
that none may exact any Gueld or Tribute out of it, but what is paid to the
Monks; and I do hereby free this Monastery, from being subject to any, but the Sea of Rome; but I will also, That all those who cannot go thither, should here
implore to St. Peter: When the King had spoke these things, the Abbot made a
request to him, in the behalf of certain Religious Monks, who desired to lead
the Lives of Anchorites and therefore prayed, that on a certain Island, a small
Monastery should be Built, wherein they might live in Peace and Solitude; which
was presently granted by the King; then he also desired his Brothers and
Sisters, that for the good of their Souls, they would be witnesses to his
Charter; conjuring all thos^ who should succeed him, to preserve his Gift
Inviolate, as they hoped to be partakers of Eternal Life, and would escape
Eternal Torments; then follow the Names of the Witnesses, who were present, and
who subscribed, and with the sign of the Cross confirmed it, by their consents;
that is, King Wulfer, who first of all confirmed it with his Word, and then
signed it with the Cross, and then spoke thus, I King Wulfer with the Earls,
Heoretoghs, and Thanes, being Witnesses of my Gift, do confirm it with Christ's
Cross, before the Archbishop Deus Dedit: Then follow the Subscriptions of the
Kings, and others of the Blood Royal, ( viz.) Oswi, King of Northumberland,
King Sygar, King Sibbi; Ethelred the King's Brother, together with his Sisters
above named, as also of Deus Dedit, Archbishop of Canterbury; after whom
follow the Subscriptions of the rest of the Bishops, together with some
Presbyters and Saxulf the Abbot; as also of diverse Eoldermen or Governors of
Countries, who with diverse others of the King's great Men, did likewise confirm
it: This Charter was made in the Year after our Lord's Nativity, 664, being the
Seventh Year of King Wulfer's Reign: they did then also denounce the Curse of
God, and all his Saints against all that should violate any thing that was
there done; to which they all answered, Amen. As soon as this was over, the
King sent to Rome to Pope Vitalian, desiring him to confirm all that he had
granted by his Letters; or Bull, which the Pope immediately performed, being to
the same effect, with the King's Charter already mentioned; in this manner was
the Monastery of Medeshamsted Founded, which was afterward called Burgh (now
Peterburgh.

But to return again to Civil Affairs, having dwelt I doubt too long upon
Ecclesiastical.

This Year, Kenwalk (King of the West Saxons) fought against the Welsh, Anno
Dom. DCLVIII.
at a place called Peonnum, and pursued them as far as Pedridan. Of which Fight
H. Huntington gives us this further Account; That at the first Onset, the
Britains were too hard for the English; but they abhoring flight as bad as
Death it self, persisted in fighting with them, till the Britains growing
tired, and disheartened, fled, and were pursued as has been already said, so
that they received a very great blow.

This Year; according to Florence of Worcester; Hilda the Abbess Founded a
Monastery at a place called Streanshale; Anno Dom. DCLIX.
wherein she lived and dyed Abbess.

The same Year also, according to the same Author, Inumin, Eaba, and Eadbert,
Eoldermen of Mercia, rebelled against King Oswi; and proclaimed for their King,
Wulfer, the Son of Penda, whom they had hitherto kept concealed; Also
Aedelbert, or Ag^^bert the Bishop left King Cenwalch, and took the Bishopric
of Paris; and Wina held the Bishopric of Winchester, of both which Bid has
already given us a particular account.

The same Year also (according to Florence of Worcester,) Cuthred the Son of
Cuichelm a Cousin to King Cenwalch, as also Kenbryht the Eolderman, great
Grandson to King Ceawlin, and Father of King Cadwalla dyed.

This Year (according to the Saxon Annals) King Cenwalch fought about the time
of Easter with King Wulfher at Posentesbyrig [supposed to be Pontesbury in
Shropshire; Anno Dom. DCLXI.
] and Wulfher the Son of Penda wasted the Country as far as Aescesdune, now
Aston near Wallingford; and Cuthred the Son of Culthelm, as also King Kenbryht
dyed.

The same Year, according to Lib. 11. Cap. 13.
Bid, Wulfher took the Isle of Wight, with the Country of the Meanvari, and
gave them to Athelwald, King of the South Saxons, because he had been that
King's Godfather at his Baptism; and Eoppa the Priest, at the Command of Bishop
Wilfrid, and King Wulfher, first of all offered Baptism to the Inhabitants of
that Island; whether they accepted it or not, is very uncertain: But I cannot
but here observe the uncertainty of the History of these Times; for Ethelwerd
in his Chronicle under this Year, and at this very place above mentioned
relates, that Cenwalk had the Victory, and carried away Wulfher Prisoner.

These Meanvari here mentioned by Bid, are supposed by Mr. Camden in his
Britannia, to have been the People of that part of Hampshire, lying over
against the Isle of Wight.

This Year also Sigebert, King of the East Saxons, (tho standing firm in the
Christian Faith) was (as Bede tells us) wickedly Murdered by the Conspiracy of
two Brethren in places near about him, who being asked what moved them to do so
wicked a Deeed? Id. cap. 22.
gave no other than this Barbarous Answer; That they were angry with him for
being so gentle to his Enemies, as to forgive them their Injuries when ever
they besought him: But the occasion of his death is much more remarkable; for
one of those Earls who slew him, living in unlawful Wedlock, Anno Dom. DCLXI.
stood thereof excommunicated by the Bishop; so that no man might presume to
enter into his House, much less to Eat with him; the King not regarding this
Church-Censure, went to a Feast at his House, upon an Invitation, whom the
Bishop meeting in his return, tho penitent for what he had done, and fallen at
his Feet, yet gently touched with the Rod in his Hand, and being provoked thus
foretold: M.
Because thou have neglected to abstain from the House of this Excommunicate,
in that House thou shall dye, and so it fell out, not long after, perhaps from
that Prediction; God then bearing witness to his Minister, in the due power of
Church Discipline, when Spiritually executed on the Contemner thereof: Yet Bid
is so Charitable as to believe, that the unfortunate Death of this Religious
Prince did not only atone for his fault, but might also increase his merit: To
Sigebert, Swidhelm the Son of Sexbald, succeeded in that Kingdom, who was
Baptized by Bishop Cedda in the Province of the East Angles, in the Royal
Village, called Rendlesham, Edelwald King of that Country (who was the Brother
of King Anna) being his Godfather.

The Sun was now eclipsed Vo: Non Maij; and Ercenbryht King of Kent departed
this Life, Anno Dom. DCLXIV.
and Ecgbryht his Son succeeded him in that Kingdom.

As for King Ercombert, Will. Malmesbury gives him a very good Character, being
famous for his Religion to God, and his Love to his Country; but he had no
Right to the Crown save only by Election, having an Elder Brother, called
Ermenred, who was alive at the beginning of his Reign, and left two Sons behind
him.

Coleman also with his Companions then departed to his own Nation; the same
Year there was a great Plague over all the Isle of Britain, in which perished
Tuda the Bishop, and was buried at Wagele (which Bid calls Pegnaleth:) also
Ceadda and Wilverth were now Consecrated Bishops; and the same Year too the
Archbishop Deus Dedit dyed, after whom the Sea remained void for Four Years.

But of the occasion of this departure of Coleman, Bid has given us a long
and particular account, ( viz.) That a Synod being called at Strean-shall (now
Whitby in Yorkshire) by the procurement of Hilda the Abbess of that place; tho
by the Authority of King Oswi, Id. Cap. 25.
(who was there present,) concerning the old Difference about the observation
of Easter; Wilfred the Abbot, and Romanus a Priest, were very earnest for the
observation of it, according to the Order of the Church of Rome; and Coleman
Bishop of Lindisfarne was as zealous on the other side; but after many
Arguments pro and con, (which you may find at large in Bid,) the Synod at last
determining in favor of the Romish Easter, it so far displeased Coleman, that
he was resolved to quit his Bishopric, and depart into Scotland, to the Isle
of Hye, (from whence he cam^,) rather than to comply with it; from whence he
also departed into Ireland, (here called Scotland) where he built a Monastery
in that Country, and lived all the rest of his days, and in which only English
Men were admitted, at the time when Bid wrote his History.

But after the departure of Coleman, one Tuda, who had been ordained Bishop
among the Southern Scots, was made Bishop of Lindisfarne, but he enjoyed that
Bishopric but a very little while. Lately publish^d at Oxford, by the Learned
Dr. Ga^e.


But after the Death of Bishop Tuda, (according to the Life of Bishop Wilfrid
King Oswi held a great Council with the Wise Men of his Nation, whom they
should choose in the vacant See, Anno Dom. DCLXIV.
as most fit for that holy Function, when they all with one Consent nominated
and chose Abbot Wilfrid as the fittest and worthiest Person to succeed him but
being to be Consecrated, he refused it from any Bishop at home, because he
looked upon them all as Uncanonical, being all ordained by Scottish Bishops, who
differed from the Roman Church about this Point of keeping Easter; so that he
would needs go over into France for Ordination; where staying too long, the
King put Ceadda (who had lately come out of Ireland) into his Place; which
Wilfred upon his return much resenting, retired to his Monastery at Ripon, and
there resided; as also sometimes with Wulfher, King of Mercia, or else with
Ecghert King of Kent, till he was restored to his See.

Bid tells us, that the abovementioned Eclipse was followed by a sudden
Pestilence the same Year, which first depopulating the Southern Parts of
Britain, then proceeded to the Northern, wherein Bishop Tuda deceased; it also
invaded Ireland, and there took off many Religious, as well as Secular Persons.

The same Year also (according to Florence) Ercombert King of Kent dying, left
that Kingdom to Egbert his Son: Also Ethelwald King of the East Angles dying
this Year, Aldulf succeeded him.

Lib. 4. c. 30.
About this time (according to Bid) Siger and Sebba, succeeding Swidhelm in the
Kingdom of the East Saxons, being unsteady in the Faith, and supposing the late
great Pestilence to have fell upon them for renouncing their old Superstition,
relapsed again to Idolatry, and rebuilt the Idol-Temples, hoping by that means
to be defended from the present Mortality; but as soon as Wulfher, King of the
Mercians, (to whom this Kingdom was then subject) heard of it, he sent Bishop
Jaruman to them, who, together with their Fellow Laborers, by their sound
Doctrine, and gentle Dealing, soon reclaimed them from their Apostasy.

Anno Dom. DCLXV.
This Mortality is also partly confirmed by Mat. Westminster, who the next Year
relates so great a Mortality to have raged in England, that many Men going in
Troops to the Seaside, cast themselves in headlong, preferring a speedy Death
before the Torments of a long and painful Sickness; tho this seems to be no
other than the great Pestilence which raged the Year before, unless we suppose
it to have lasted for 2 Years successively.

The same Year also, according to the Account of an ancient British Chronicle,
(lately in the Possession of Mr. Robert Vaughan,) Cadwallader, last King of the
Britains, having been forced by a great Famine and Mortality to quit his Native
Country, and to sojourn with Alan King of Armorica; finding no hopes of ever
recovering his Kingdom, from thence went to Rome, where, professing himself a
Monk, he died about 8 Years after. Now, tho the British History of Caradoc
(Translated by Humphrey Lloyd, and Published by Dr. Powel,) places
Cadwallader's going to Rome Anno 680, which, Mr. Vaughan in the Manuscript I
have by me, (and which is already cited in the former Book) proves, can neither
agree with the Account of the said old Chronicle, nor yet with the Time of the
great Mortality abovementioned; for Caradoc and Geoffery of Monmouth do both
place Cadwallader's going to Rome in the Year of the great Pestilence, which
(as Bede) and Mat. Westminster testify) fell out in the Year 664, or 665, and
therefore that learned Antiquary very well observes, That as for their
Calculation, who prolong Cadwallader's Life to the Year 688, or 689, and place
his going to Rome in Pope Sergius's time, he thinks they had no better Warrant
for it, Anno Dom. DCLXV.
than their mistaking Ceadwalla, King of the West Saxons, (who then indeed went
to Rome, and there died) for this Cadwallader, who lived near 20 Years before,
whereby they have confounded this History, and brought it into a great deal of
uncertainty; whereas that ancient Appendix annexed to the Manuscript, Nennius,
in the Cottonian Library, (whose Author lived above 300 Years before either
Geoffery, or Caradoc,) does clearly show, that this Monastery abovementioned,
and consequently Cadwallader's going to Rome, happened in the Reign of Oswi
King of Northumberland; who, according to the Saxon Annals, began to Reign Anno
642, and died Anno 670; and therefore no other Mortality ought to be assigned
for Cadwallader's going to Rome, than this in King Oswi's Reign, Anno 665, for
the Words of the said old Author are these: Oswi, the Son of Ethelfred, reigned
28 Years, and 6 Months; and whilst he reigned, there happened a great Mortality
of Men, Catwalater (so he spells it) then reigning over the Britains, after his
Father, and therein perished. Now the Case is clear, if these Words in the
Latin, Et in ea periit, have relation to Cadwallader, (as most likely they
have,) considering Oswi lived 5 Years after the Year 665, wherein this
Mortality raged; then Cadwallader never went to Rome at all, but died of this
Plague; but of this, I dare not positively determine, since the greater part of
the Welsh Chronicles are so positive in Cadwallader's dying at Rome. But to
return to our Annals.

This Year Oswi King of Northumberland, and Ecgbrith King of Kent; Anno Dom.
DCLXVI.
with the Consent of the whole English Church, (as Bede relates,) sent Wigheard
the Presbyter to Rome, to be there made Archbishop of Canterbury, but he died
almost as soon as he arrived: Lib. 4. c. 1.
So that Theodorus being the next Year consecrated Archbishop, was sent into
Britain. Anno Dom. DCLXVII.
Of which Transaction, Bid gives us this particular Account.

About this time also, (as Bede relates, Lib. 3. c. 29.
) Wina Bishop of Winchester being driven from his See by King Kenwalch, went
and bought the Sea of London of King Wulfher. This is the first Example of
Simony in the English Church.

The Sea of Canterbury had been now vacant for above 3 Years, for the Pope was
resolved himself to Ordain an Archbishop; and at last, at the Recommendation
of one Adrian a Greek Monk, (who might have been Archbishop himself, but
refused it,) the Pope chose this Theodorus, then a Monk, and a Native of
Tharsus in Cilicia; who, being an excellent Scholar, brought the knowledge of
the Greek Tongue, as also Arithmetic, Music, and Astronomy, in use among the
English Saxons.

This Archbishop, immediately upon his coming into England, made a thorough
Visitation of his Province, Lib. 4. c. 2.
and (as Bede tells us) surveyed all Things, and ordained Bishops in fit
Places; and those Things which he found less perfect than they should be, he by
their Assistance corrected; among which, when he found fault with Bishop
Ceadda, as not having been rightly Consecrated; he humbly and modestly replied,
If you believe that I have not rightly undertook the Episcopal Charge, I
willingly quit it, since as I never thought my self worthy, so I never
consented to accept it, but in obedience to the Commands of my Superiors. But
the Archbishop seeing his Humility, answered, That he would not have him lay
aside his Episcopacy; and so he again renewed his Ordination according to the
Catholic Rites.

Anno Dom. DCLXVII.
From whence it appears, that this Archbishop then thought the Ordination of
the English and Scottish Bishops, who differed from the Church of Rome, as to
the time of keeping Easter, to be Uncanonical; and for this reason Bid here
also tells us, That Bishop Wilfrid was sent into France to be Ordained: But as
for this Bishop Ceadda, Florence of Worcester informs us, That he was now also
deprived of his Bishopric, (and Wilfrid restored to it,) as having been unduly
Elected thereunto; which, tho Bid does not tell us in express Words, yet he
confirms it in the very next Chapter, where he tells us, That Jaruman, Bishop
of the Mercians, being now dead, King Wulfher did not ask Archbishop Theodorus
to Ordain a new One, but only desired of King Oswi, that Bishop Ceadda, the
Brother of Cedda, should be sent to him to take that Charge, (who lived
privately at his Monastery of Lestinghen, where he was then Abbot,) Wilfrid
then not only Governing the Diocese of York, and all the Northumbers, but also
Picts as far as King Oswi's Dominions extended. But to return again to the
Saxon Annals.

Anno Dom. DCLXIX.
This Year King Ecgbert gave to Basse the Priest Reculf, where he built a
Monastery; This was afterward called Reculver [in Kent].

Oswi, King of Northumberland, died xv Kal. Martij, [and was buried at
Streanshale Monastery, Anno Dom. DCLXX.
] and Ecverth (or Egfrid) his Son reigned after him; also Lothaire, Nephew of
Bishop Agelbert, took upon him the Episcopal Charge over the West Saxons, and
held it 7 Years; Archbishop Theodorus Consecrated him. He whom these Annals
call Lothair, was the same with Leutherius Bishop of Winchester.

Lib. 4. c. 5.
Bid tells us further of King Oswi, That being worn out with a long Infirmity,
he was so much in love with the Roman Rites, that if he had recovered of the
Sickness of which he died, he had resolved to go to Rome, and end his Days at
the Holy Places; having engaged Bishop Wilfrid to be the Guide and Companion of
his Journey, promising him no small Rewards for his Pains.

Anno Dom. DCLXXI.
'This Year was a great slaughter of Birds. H. Huntington renders it a great
Fight of Birds, which seems to have been some remarkable Combat of Crows or
Jackdaws in the Air, of which we have several wonderful Relations in our
Histories. Mat. Westminster relates, that the strange Birds seemed to fly
before those of this Country, but that many Thousands were killed.

Anno Dom. DCLXXII.
This next Year Cenwalch King of the West Saxons died, and Sexburga his Wife
held the Kingdom after him for one Year. Of whom William of Malmesbury gives
this Account; That this King; dying, left the Kingdom to Sexburga his Wife; nor
did she want Spirit or Courage to discharge all the Functions of a King, for
she straitways began to raise new Forces, as also to keep the Old to their
Duty; to govern her Subjects with moderation, and to keep her Enemies in awe;
and, in short, to do such great Things, that there was no Difference, but the
Sex, between Her and a King: But as she aimed at more than Feminine
Undertakings, so she left this Life when she had scarce Reigned a Year about.

But Mat. Westminster says, she was expelled the Kingdom by the Nobles, who
despised Female Government: But what Authority he had for this, I know not, for
I do not find it in any other Author; whereas if what William of Malmesbury
says of her be true, it was not likely they should Rebel against so good a
Governess, who seems to have been the perfect Pattern of an Excellent Queen.

After the Death of King Cenwalch, Anno Dom. DCLXXII.
and (as I suppose) Queen Sexburga likewise, Bid relates, That the Great Men
or Petty Princes of that Kingdom, divided it among them, and so held it for 10
Years; in which time Eleutherius, Lib. 4. c. 12.
Bishop of the West Saxons (i. e. of Winchester) dying, Heddi was Consecrated
by Archbishop Theodorus in his stead; in whose time those Petty Princes being
all subdued, Ceadwalla took the Kingdom; but this does not agree with the Saxon
Annals.

About this time (tho Bid does not set down the Year) King Egfrid of
Northumberland waging War with Wulfher, King of Mercia, won from him all the
Country of Lindsey.

About this time also died Ceadda, Bishop of Litchfield, (according to Ran.
Higden's Polychron;) but Bid does not tell us the time of his Death, Lib. 4.
c. 3.
tho he mentions it, and there gives a large Account of the great Humility and
Piety of that good Bishop, and of the Pious End he made: He is called by us at
this day St. Chad.

This Year Egber^, King of Kent, deceased, Anno Dom. DCLXXIII.
(according to Bede's Epitome,) who (as says Math. Westminster) gave part of
the Isle of Thanet to build a Monastery, to explate the Murder of his Cousins,
whom he had caused to be slain, as you have already heard.

The same Year was a Synod of all the Bishops and great Men of England held at
Heartford, (now Hartford, Lib. 4. c. 5.
) which Synod (as Bede tells us) was called by Archbishop Theodorus; where
Wilfred Bishop of York, with all the rest of the Bishops of England, were
either in Person, or by their Deputies, (as Florence relates,) and in which
diverse Decrees were made for the Reformation of the Church; the first and
chiefest of which was, That Easter should be kept on the first Lord's Day after
the Fourteenth Moon of the First Month (i. e. (...)); which tho it had been
before appointed by the Synod at Streanshale abovementioned, yet that being
not looked upon as a General Council of the whole Kingdom, it was now again
renewed; the rest of them concerning the Jurisdictions of the Bishops, and the
Privileges and Exemptions of Monasteries, I pass over, and refer you to Sir H.
Spelman's First Volume of Councils for farther satisfaction: But I cannot omit,
that it was here first Ordained, That tho Synods ought to be held twice a Year,
yet since diverse Causes might hinder it, therefore it seemed good to the whole
Council, that a Synod should be assembled once a Year at a place called
Cloveshoe.

This Year also the Saxon Annals relate, That Etheldrethe, (...)
late Wife to Egfrid King of Northumberland, founded the Monastery of Ely, (in
which she her self became the first Abbess. Id. c. 19.
) She (as Bede tells us) had been twice married, but would never let either of
her Husbands enjoy her; and at last (with much ado) obtained Leave of this King
to quit his Palace, and retire into a Nunnery; which perverting of the Ends of
Marriage, was counted a great piece of Sanctity in those Times. But the
Monastery abovementioned being burnt and destroyed by the Danes, Anno 870, was
afterward re-edified by King Edgar, as shall be in due time more particularly
related.

Also Egbright, King of Kent, deceased; and Lothair, his Brother, succeeded
him.

This Year also, according to Bid, Bosa Bishop of Dunmoc being deprived by
reason of his Infirmities; two Bishops, ( viz.) Acca and Bedwin, were placed in
that Diocese, one of whom had his See at Dunmoc (now Dunwich) in Suffolk, and
the other at Helmham in Norfolk.

Anno Dom. DCLXXIV.
'This Year Aescwin began to Reign over the West Saxons.] Here also follows his
Pedigree needless to be repeated; for William of Malmesbury remarks no more of
him, than that he was supposed to be the next of the Royal Line, as being the
great Nephew of Cynegils, by his Brother Cuthgils.

The same Year (as Bede tells us in Published by Sir Ja. Ware 1664, with other
Pieces of Bid, and Archbishop Egbert; it is also in Manuscript in the
Cottonian Library.
his Lives of the Abbots of Wiremuth and Girwy) Abbot Benedict, (I suppose from
his Episcopal Actions Surnamed Biscop,) having before come over with
Archbishop Theodorus, was by him made Abbot of the Monastery of St. Peter in
Canterbury; which he 2 Years after resigning, and Adrian, that great Scholar,
succeeding him, he went again to Rome, and then returning into Britain, brought
along with him many Books of Divine Knowledge; and then applying himself to
Egfrid, King of Northumberland, he obtained of him as much Land as served 70
Families, lying near the Mouth of the River Wir, (in the Bishopric of Durham,)
where he began a Monastery in Honor of St. Peter; but before it was finished,
he went into France, and from thence brought Masons, who built the Church of
Stone after the Roman fashion: and the Work being near finished, he sent into
the same Country for Artificers, who understood the making of Glass, which till
then had been unknown in Britain; wherewith he glazed the Windows of the Church
and Monastery he had there built, and thereby taught the English Nation the Art
of Glass-making; which (says my Author) has proved so useful in making of
Lamps for Churches, and also other Vessels so necessary for diverse Uses: And
because this Island, nor yet France it self, could then afford all the
Ornaments requisite for the Altar, he took care to fetch them from Rome,
whither he went for that purpose; from whence again returning, he brought a
great many choice Books of all sorts, together with diverse Relics of Saints,
and curious Pictures, with which he adorned the Church he had built; and he
likewise received a Bull from Pope Agatho, whereby the Monastery also, by the
Consent and License of King Egfrid, was freed from all Secular Servitude.

But some time after, ( Simeon of Durham says 8 Years,) King Egfrid (being very
well satisfied with what Benedict had done) bestowed as much more Land upon him
as then maintained 40 Families, for the building of another Monastery at a
Place called Girwy, (now Tarro^,) near the Mouth of the River Tine, which was
built in Honor of St. Paul; when also, by reason of his frequent Absence and
Employment in other Affairs, he appointed one Easterwine his Kinsman, Abbot of
that of St. Peter; and Ceolfrid, a Monk of the same Monastery, over that of S.
Paul; in which Charges they continued several Years under his Inspection; till
at last, after the decease of Easterwine, and another Abbot called Sigfrid,
Ceolfrid abovementioned was made Abbot of both Monasteries, which he Governed
many Years; until He resigning that Charge, went to end his Days at Rome, but
died by the way in France. These Transactions, tho happening in the space of
about 40 Years, I have here put together, that you may have at once the History
of these two ancient and famous Monasteries, in the latter of which Bid
himself (the Author of this Account) lived, and died a Monk, as shall be
related hereafter.

About this time also, (tho Bid does not set down the Year,) Archbishop
Theodore deposed Winfrid, Bishop of the Mercians, for some Canonical
Disobedience, and ordained Sexwulf, Abbot of Medeshamsted, in his Room. But to
return to the Annals.

This Year Wulfher the Son of Penda, and Aescwin Son of Genwulf, Anno Dom.
DCLXXV.
fought at Bedanheafde; and also King Wulfher deceased the same Year.] Where
that Place was, is uncertain, (tho some suppose it to be Bedwin in Wiltshire,
lying near Berkshire.) H. Huntington describes this Battle to have been very
sharp; but that the Mercian King, inheriting his Father's, and his
Grandfather's Courage, was somewhat superior; yet that both Armies were
terribly shattered, and many Thousands slain on both Sides; on which our Author
makes this just Reflection, That from hence it is worth while to observe, how
Vile the Actions of Men, and how Vain those Wars are, which Princes call
Glorious Undertakings; for when these Kings had brought so great a Destruction
upon their own Nations, both of them survived not long after: For (according to
Florence's Chronicle) King Wulfher deceased this Year, having destroyed the
Worship of Idols throughout his Kingdom, and caused the Gospel to be preached
in all Places of his Dominions, and Ethelred his Brother succeeded him in the
Kingdom; whom William of Malmesbury describes to have been more famous for
Devotion, than Fighting, unless when he showed his Courage in a notable
Expedition against Kent; or else when he met and repelled Egfrid, King of
Northumberland, and forced him to return home, recovering from him all Lindsey,
which Wulfher had taken away before, tho with the loss of his Brother Edwin, in
that Expedition; after which, he spent all the rest of his Life in Peace.

About this time also, according to Math. Westminster, (forbid has not set
down the Years,) Erkenwald, younger Son of Anna King of the East Angles, was by
Archbishop Theodore ordained Bishop of London, being a Man of great Worth and
Piety.

This Year also (according to Florence) King Wulfher was first baptized, but
the Saxon Annals mention no such thing; and therefore I wonder from whence he
had it, for it is quite contrary to what Bid relates, concerning his being
Baptized long before; or else, How could he be Godfather to Edelwalch, King of
the West Saxons, who was Baptized near 20 Years before? But I suppose Florence
had it from some old Monkish Legend, if not from the Roman Martyrology it self,
in which is related, that incredible Story of King Wulfher's murdering of his
two Sons, Ulfwald and Rufin, with his own Hands, because they had been
instructed in the Christian Faith by Ceadda, Bishop of Litchfield. And Mr.
Stow, in his Chronicle, having found the same Story in an old Ledger-Book of
that Church, has thought fit to insert it into his History; placing the Year
of their Suffering in Anno 668, when all our Historians do at that time relate
him to have been a Christian. But this Book adds further, That the Queen,
Mother to these Princes, caused them to be buried under a great heap of Stones,
and thereby gave Name to the Town of Stone in Staffordshire. I thought good to
take notice of this Romance, because a greater Author, viz. Mr. Camden himself,
has also thought fit to put it into his In Staffordshire.
Britannia, from the Authority of a Manuscript Book once belonging to the Abbey
of Peterburgh.

But it is time to look back upon Ecclesiastical Affairs; for now (according to
William of Malmesbury) one Adhelm a Monk began to build the Abbey of Malmesbury,
having before obtained a License for so doing, together with a Grant of certain
Lands, called Madulfsburgh, from Lutherius Bishop of Winchester; the Place
being so called from one Maildulf a Scotch Monk, and Philosopher, (under whom
Aldhelm had formerly studied) who died at this Place, Anno Dom. DCLXXV.
where Maildulf had also begun a small Monastery; but the few Monks that were
there had no Means to subsist but by Alms, until such time as this Aldhelm
built it anew, and got it Endowed by the Charity of Ethelred, Vid. Monast.
Angl. p 97, 98.
King of the Mercians; Ceadwalla, and Ina, Kings of the West Saxons, with other
Noble Benefactors: So that it soon became one of the greatest and richest
Monasteries in England, being at first called Madunesburg, and afterward
Malmesbury.

About the same time also, according to the old Book of the Abbey of Abingdon in
the Cottonian Library, the Abbey of Abingdon was founded by one Hean, Nephew to
Cissa, a Petty Prince under Kentwin, King of the West Saxons, in Wiltshire and
Berkshire; the Place at first was called Sheovesham, and the Foundation was for
no more than an Abbot, and 12 Monks, but was afterward much increased by the
Charity of succeeding Kings; being rebuilt by Abbot Ordgar in the Reign of King
Edgar, having been burnt and destroyed by the Danes in the time of King Alfred.

Lib. 4. c. 6.
This Year also (according to Bid) Archbishop Theodore consecrated Erkenwald
Bishop of London, who was in great Reputation for his Sanctity, having, before
he came to be Bishop, founded two Monasteries, the one for Ethelburg his
Sister, at Berking; the other for himself, at Chertesey in Surrey.

Anno Dom. DCLXXVI.
This Year Escwin, Bishop of the East Saxons, departed this Life, and Hedda
took the Bishopric of that Province, and Centwin succeeded in the Kingdom of
the West Saxons; which Centwin was Son to Cynegils, and he the Son of Ceolwulf:
Also Ethelred, King of the Mercians, wasted Kent. Of which Expedition, H.
Huntington further relates, That this King made War against Lothair, King of
Kent; but he fearing that Valor, so Hereditary to the Mercian Family, kept out
of sight, and durst not meet him; whereupon the King of Mercia destroyed the
City of Rochester, and passing through the Kingdom of Kent, carried away a
great deal of Spoil.

Lib. 4. c. 12.
Bid adds further, That he destroyed both Churches and Monasteries, without
any regard to Religion, and so spoiled the Church and Palace of Rochester, that
Putta, the Bishop of that See, was forced to retire to Sexwulf Bishop of the
Mercians; and from him receiving the Possession of a certain Church, Anno Dom.
DCLXXVII.
there ended his Days in Peace. This Putta is by Florence of Worcester, and
William of Malmesbury, made the first Bishop of Hereford; which Church, it
seems, Sexwulf parted with to him, tho Bid does not expressly mention it. Also
Eadhed was now ordained Bishop in the Province of Lindisse, which King Egfrid
had lately conquered from Wulfher King of the Mercians. But when Ethelred
(Successor to Wulfher) recovered that Province, this Bishop retiring from
Lindisse, governed the Church of Ripon.

The same Year also Osric, a petty Prince of this Country, built a Nunnery at
Bath, which was afterward turned to a House of Secular Canons; but King Edgar
turned them out, and placed Benedictines in their Places.

Anno Dom. DCLXXVIII.
This Year being the Eighth of the Reign of Egfrid, King of Northumberland,
(according to Bid, and the Saxon Annals,) there appeared a Comet which
continued 3 Months, and arising toward Morning, carried with it a large Tail
like a Pillar; in which Year also (as Ibid.
Bid relates) there arose a great Contention between King Egfrid, and Bishop
Wilfrid, who was expelled his Bishopric, and two others substituted in his
Room over the Northumbrian Nation, (to wit,) Bosa, Anno Dom. DCLXXVIII.
who Governed the Province of Deira; and Fatta, that of Bernicia; the former
having his Episcopal See at the City of York, and the other at Hagulstad, being
both of them preferred from being Monks. Stephen Heddi, the Author of Vid.
Vitam Sancti Wilfredi, c. 24.
St. Wilfrid's Life abovementioned, as also De Pontif. l. 3.
Will. of Malmesbury, relate the Quarrel between King Egfrid and the Bishop to
have proceeded from the Envy and Ill Will of Erminburge his Queen, she making
the King jealous of his Secular Glory, and Riches, and the great Retinue that
followed him; whereupon the King resolved to be rid of him; so that presenting
Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury with great Gifts, they persuaded him to come
into that Province; and, together with three Bishops he brought with him, who
were not of the Northern Diocese, they not only condemned, but deprived Bishop
Wilfrid, being absent; whereupon the Bishop went to the King, and the
Archbishop, and asked them, What was the Reason, that without any Crime
alleged, they had robbed him of his Estate that was given him by former Kings,
for God's sake? But (if this Author may be credited) they gave him a very
trifling Answer, saying, That they found no Fault in him; yet would not alter
what had been Decreed against him: Whereupon the Bishop, by the Consent of the
rest of his Fellow-Bishops of his Province, appealed to Rome. But certainly
these Bishops could not at that time be many, for there were then no more in
this Province than Lindisfarne, and Whitern in the Picts Country:

Toward Rome he went the next Year; but in his way thither, landing in
Frizeland, he stayed there all that Winter, Anno Dom. DCLXXIX.
converting the People of that Province: And then proceeding in his Journey to
Rome the Spring following, where arriving, he applied himself to the Pope, and
presented him with a Petition; which being read before Pope John, and the Synod
at Rome, he was by the said Pope, and all the Bishops there present, (being 150
in Number) Decreed to be restored to his Bishopric; but he could never prevail
so far as to get this Council's Decree to be received as long as King Egfrid
lived.

The same Year Bishop Wilfrid returning into England, was received by
Beorthwald, Nephew of Ethelred King of the Mercians, Vit. Wil^redi, c. 39.
who then governed part of that Kingdom under his Uncle; who hearing of it, his
Wife being the Sister of King Egfrid, commanded Beorthwald immediately to
dismiss him; from whence, he went to Centwin King of the West Saxons, where
staying but a little while, he was also driven from thence, because the Queen
was Sister of Queen Erminburge. Thus Stephanus Heddy, in his Life of Bishop
Wilfrid, relates; but it is to be doubted with too much Partiality on his side.

Bid he gives us a more particular Account of the rest of his Actions, Lib. 4.
c. 13.
that tho he were thus expelled his Bishopric, yet that he could not be
restrained from Preaching the Gospel; for retiring to the Kingdom of the South
Saxons, which lies between that of Kent, and that of the West Saxons, where
Edilwalch, then King, (and who had not been long before Baptized at the
persuasion of King Wulfher, as has been already said,) gave him Commission to
Convert and Baptize, not only the Principal Officers and Knights of that
Province, but diverse Presbyters, (there named, who came along with him,) did
then, or not long after, Christen the rest of the common People; and Ebba the
Queen was also baptized in the Province of the Wectii, but what Queen this was,
Bid does not tell us. So that before this, Anno Dom. DCLXXIX.
it seems, tho the King was a Christian, yet the whole Province of the South
Saxons were as yet unconverted to the Christian Faith, of which the Author of
the Life of Bishop Wilfrid gives this Reason; Cap. 40.
that this Province, by reason of the multitude of the Rocks, and thickness of
the Woods, was hitherto almost inaccessible to strangers: But Ibid cap. 13.
Bid further tells us, That then there lived a certain Irish or Scotch Monk,
named Dicul, who had a little Monastery in a place called Bosanham encompassed
with Woods and the Sea, where he with five or six Brethren served God in great
Poverty and Humility; yet would not any of the People imitate their Lives, or
hear their Preaching; but when Bishop Wilfrid preached the Gospel to them, he
did not only free them from Eternal Torments, but also from present
destruction, for it had not rained (as my Author says) for Three Years before
in that Country; whence multitudes of the poorer sort of People daily perished
by Famine; so that many becoming desperate, Forty or Fifty Men in a Company,
being almost starved, would all take hands together, and at once leap down a
Rock into the Sea: But on the first day of their public Baptism, soft and
plentiful showers descending, restored plenty to the Summer following; so this
People casting away their Idolatry, became not only enriched with Spiritual,
but Temporal Blessings; for when the Bishop came into this Province, and saw so
dismal a Famine, he taught them how to get their livings by fishing; for though
the Sea and Rivers abounded plentifully with Fish, yet had not they the Wit to
make Nets to take any but Eels; whereupon the Bishop taught them, by joining
many of those small Nets together, to make them serve to catch Seafish, of
which they took so great a multitude, that they maintained themselves with
them, till other Provisions could be had.

Bid ibid.
At this time also King Edelwalch gave Bishop Wilfrid a certain Island, called
Seolesen, that is (in the old English Saxon) the Island of Seals, (or Sea
Calves) where Wilfrid founded a small Monastery, consisting chiefly of those
Brethren he brought with him, and which his Successors hold to this day, (
viz. in Bede's time;) for this place (after called Selsey:) was made the seat
of the Bishop of that Province, until it was long after removed to Chichester;
here Bishop Wilfrid lived, and exercised his Episcopal Functions, till the
death of King Egfrid.

The same Year, (according to the Saxon Annals) Escwin was slain near Trent, in
which place also King Egfrid and Ethelfred fought the same Year, and now also
St. Etheldrith deceased, and Coludesburgh, was burnt.

Bid, lib. 4. cap. 21.
H. Huntington more at large relates this Fight between the Kings of
Northumberland and Mercia; and Bid also tells us, This Young Prince (mentioned
in the Annals) being the King of Northumberland's Brother, and then about
Eighteen Years of Age was slain, and extremely lamented in both Kingdoms; For
King Ethelred had Married Ostrithe his Sister, but when Archbishop Theodore
saw the causes of their Intestine Quarrels daily to increase, he by his
intercession and persuasions made Peace between the two Kings, on this
condition; that King Ethelred should pay King Egfrid a pecuniary Mulct for his
Brother, who was slain.

This Queen Etheldrith here mentioned in the Annals, was Daughter to Anna,
Bid, lib. 4. cap. 19.
King of the East Saxons, and Wife of King Egfrid, who yet remained a Virgin;
for tho she had been twice Married, yet would she never let either of her
Husbands lie with her; but she dyed at last Abbess of the Monastery of Eli,
which she her self built, and of whom Bid makes a large Elegy both in Prose
and Verse; Anno Dom. DCLXXIX.
and that after she had been there buried Sixteen Years, her body being taken
up as whole as at first, she was canonized, and called St. Audrey of Ely; but
this Coludesburgh here mentioned in the Annals, was a great Monastery of Monks
and Nuns together, afterward called Coldingham, in the Marches of Scotland;
(which as Bede tells us) was a very magnificent building for that Age, Ibid.
Lib. 4. cap. 25.
but by the just judgment of God for the loose living of the Monks and Nuns,
was burnt; tho it happened not by any Miracle, but by mere carelessness of the
Servants.

About this time also, according to an ancient Manuscript Copy of Florence of
Worcester's Chronicle in the Bodleian Library, the Province of the Mercians was
by the Common Council or consent of Ethelred (King of that Kingdom) and of
Theodore Archbishop of Canterbu^y divided into Five Diocesses; Bosel being
ordained Bishop of the Wicii who had his seat Worcester, whilst Cuthwian was
ordained to the Diocese of Litchfield, Saxulf was pleased to continue Bishop
over middle England, having his See at Leicester, and Ethelwine was set over the
Province of Lindisse. having his See at Cidnacester; but as for the Sea of
Hereford, that had been founded about Three Years before by Bishop Putta, by
the means and consent of Bishop Saxulf, as has been now observed. But to
return to our Annals.

This Year, Theodore the Archbishop summoned a Synod at Heathfield, (now
Hatfield in Hartfordshire) that he might correct diverse errors concerning the
Christian Faith; but Id cap. 5.
Bid gives us a fuller account of it, Anno Dom. DCLXXX.
and tells us, it was summoned to condemn the Heresy of Eutyches, who then
maintained but one will and Person in Christ, and which then troubled the Latin
as well as Greek Church; and therefore the Archbishop being resolved to
prevent it, held this Synod, Vi. Sir H. Spelman 1. Vol. p. 168.
in which the Five first General Councils, were not only received, and
confirmed, but also the latter held at Rome under Pope Martyn I. in the Reign
of the Emperor Constantine.

Bid also tells us, That there was present at this Council, John the
Praecentor, or chief Chanter of the Church of St. Peter's in Rome, Id. Cap. 18.
whom Pope Agatho had sent hither, not only to instruct the English
Monasteries, how to Sing after the Roman Fashion, but also to give him an
account of the Faith of the English Church, which he did at his Return to Rome,
much to its advantage.

And the same Year, according to Bid and the Saxon Annals, Hilda the Holy
Abbess deceased at Streanshale, (now Whitby in Yorkshire,) which she her self
had Founded; she was Grand Niece to King Edwin, and having been converted by
Paulinus, had been almost ever since her Conversion a professed Nun, first in
the Monastery of Cale in France, and was afterward Abbess of diverse Nunneries
in England, being esteemed a Lady of great Sanctity and Knowledge. At this
Monastery of Strean-shale, (which was then for Men as well as Women) lived
Caedmon the English Saxon Poet, who is supposed by Bid to have been once
Divinely inspired in his sleep to make Verses in his own Tongue upon the
Creation of the World, and ever after kept that faculty upon other Divine
Subjects; there are diverse of his Paraphrases in Saxon Verse still extant, upon
several Stories in Genesis and Exodus, but very hard to be understood by reason
of the Obsoleteness of the Saxon Dialect. They have been Printed at Oxford, by
the Learned Junius.

Anno Dom. DCLXXX.
About this time also (according to Florence) the Kingdom of the Mercians became
divided into five Diocesses; and Tulfride a learned Monk, of the Abbess Hilda's
Monastery, was elected first Bishop of Worcester, but dyed before his
Ordination.

Cited in Monasticon Anglicanum, p. 120.
But the ancient Chronicle of the Church of Worcester, now in the Cottonian
Library relates, the Church of Worcester to have been first founded by
Athe^red; King of the Mercians, and Theodore Bishop of Canterbury; one Bosel
being made the first Bishop of that See, and sat therein Eleven Years.

There was then also founded a College of secular Canons, which so continued
as the Chapter of this Church till Anno Dom. 991, when Bishop Oswald turned
them out, and put in Benedictine Monks in their Rooms.

About the same time also, one Oswald Nephew to King Ethelred, founded a
College for Secular Canons at Pershore, in Worcestershire, which continued till
King Edgar and Bishop Oswald, Anno 984. brought in Benedictine Monks in their
Places.

I may also add, under this Year, that pretended Bull of Pope Agatho's
Privileges, together with the Charter of this K. Ethelred, which is reci^^d in
the Peterb^rgh Copy of the Saxon Annals, under Anno. 675, and is there related
to have been about the same time confirmed in the Council at Heathfield
abovementioned; whereby were gr^nted to the Monastery of M^desha^is^e ad
diverse great Imm^nities; which Bull does not only confirm and those Privileges
formerly granted by Pope Vitalian, but there is also further added this, that
the Abbot should be the Pope's Legate over the whole Isle (of Britain); and that
whatsoever Abbot was elected by the Monks, should be immediately consecrated by
the Archbishop of C^nterbury; with diverse other Things too tedious here to
relate: Which (...), being recited in the Council abovementioned, was by them
est^blished and confirmed; which being done, the King is said to have made a
Speech, reciting all the Lands he had given to the said Monastery, and then,
having subscribed the Charter, the Queen, Adrian the Pope's Legate, and all the
Bishops and Abbots, (whose Names are there mentioned) did so likewise, under
dr^^dful Curses upon those that should violate the Privileges abovementioned.

But notwithstanding the so exact Recital, and supposed Confirmation of this
Charter in the Council abovementioned, we have very great Reason to suspect
this Bull, as also the Charter it self, to have been forged long after by the
Monks of Peterburgh; for, in the first place, the Privileges granted to this
Abbey do not only exceed any that had been granted by the Pope to any Monastery
in England, but also were such, as we do not find it ever enjoyed; as
particularly, that of their Abbot's being the Pope's ordinary Legate all over
this Island, which had been such a Diminution of the Rights of the Archbishop
of Canterbury, as he would nover have so easily pa^s'd over: And besides all
which, the Names of the Bishops, who are put to this Charter, do not at all
agree with the Circumstances of Time; for, first, it is certain, that Wilfred
is here styled Archbishop of York, which Title he never took upon him, being
then no more but a Bishop under the Jurisdiction of Archbishop Theodore; and by
whom he, at this Time, stood deprived, and was not present at this Council, nor
did return this Year from Rome, (as this Copy of the Annals makes him to have
done,) but was indeed returned from thence near three Years before; being at
this Time converting the South Saxons, (^s has been already related:) Neither
was Putta, Bishop of Rochester, or Waldhere, Anno Dom. DCLXXX.
Bishop of London, at the time when this Council was held, though their Names
are also put to this Charter; for the former had been dead eleven Years before,
and one Quiehelme was then Bishop of that See, as appears by the Catalogue of
the Bishops in Sir H. Spelman's Fas^^, at the end of the Volume of English
Writers after Bid; nor was the latter then Bishop of London, but Erkenwald,
who was elected to that See above fifteen Years before, and continued in it
'till after the Reign of King Ina, who began not to reign 'till Anno 688; so
that upon the whole matter, I take this Charter to be a notorious piece of
Forgery.

This Year Trumbrith was consecrated Bishop of Hagulstad, and Trumwin Bishop of
the Picts: This was the Bishopric of Wyterne, Anno Dom. DCLXXXI.
called in Latin Candida Casa: which at that time (as Bede testifies) belonged
to the Kingdom of Northumberland; and also Centwin, (King of the West Saxons,)
put the Britains to flight as far as the Sea; H. Huntington says, That he also
wasted all their Country with Fire and Sword; but the Welsh Chronicle of
Caradoc (translated by H. Lloyd) relates, That this Year Kentwin, King of the
West Saxons gathered a great Company of his Nation together, and came against
the Britains, who seemed ready to receive the Battle; but yet, when both Armies
appeared in sight of each other, they were not all desirous to fight, for they
fell to a friendly composition and agreement; ( viz.) That Ivor should take
Ethelburga to Wife, who was Cousin to K^ntwin, and quietly enjoy all that he
had got during the Reign of Ivor; but of this our English Histories are silent.

This Year the Nunnery of St. Peter, in Gloucester, was founded by Osri^, Anno
Dom. DCLXXXII.
then a petty Prince or Governor under Ethelred, King of the Mercians, but was
afterward King of the Northumbers. This Monastery, tho it had the honor of
having Three Queens successively, Abbesses of it, was destroyed by the Danes,
but afterward was re-edified for Benedictine Monks by Aldred Bishop of
Worcester, Anno 1058.

This Year also, (according to Bid) Egfrid, King of Northumberland, Anno Dom.
DCLXXXIV.
sent a great Army into Ireland, under one Bert (or Bryt) his General, who
miserably wasted that innocent Nation, which had been always friendly to the
English; Lib. 4. c. 26.
(which Character perhaps might have been due to them in Bede's time;) and did
not so much as spare the Churches or Monasteries; but the Islanders as far as
they were able, repel'd Force with Force, and invoked the Divine assistance to
revenge their quarrel which happened the next Year, as the same Author
relates. For,

This Year, not long before the Death of King Egfrid, Anno Dom. DCLXXXV.
that Holy Man Cuthbert, was by the same King ordered to be ordained Bishop of
Lindisfarne, tho he was at first chosen to be Bishop of Hagulstaed instead of
Trumbert, who had been before deposed from that Bishopric; yet because
Cuthbert liked the Church of Lindisfarne better, in which he had so long
conversed, Bid, lib. 4. cap. 27, 28.
Eatta was made to return to the Sea of Hagulstad, to which he was at first
ordained, whilst Cuthbert took the Bishopric of Lindisfarne.

But I shall now give you from Bid a farther account of the Life of this good
Bishop; he had been first bred in the Monastery of Mailross, and was afterward
made Abbot of the Monastery of Lindisfarne; retiring from whence, he had for a
long time lived the Life of an Anchorite in the Isle of Farne, not far distant,
but when there was a great Synod assembled, King Egfrid being present at a
place called Twiford, near the River Alne, where Archbishop Theodore
presiding, Cuthbert was, by the general consent of them all, Anno Dom. DCLXXXV.
chosen Bishop; who when he could not by any Messages or Letters be drawn from
his Cell; at length the King himself, with Bishop Trumwin, and other Noble and
Religious Persons, sailed thither, where they at last, after many entreaties,
prevailed upon him, to go with them to the Synod; and when he came there, tho
he very much opposed it, yet he was forced to accept the Episcopal Charge, and
so was consecrated Bishop the Easter following; and after his Consecration, in
imitation of the blessed Appostles, he adorned his calling by his good Works;
for he constantly taught the People committed to his Charge, and incited them to
the love of Heaven, by his constant Prayers and Exho^tations; and, which is the
chief part of a Teacher, whatsoever he Taught, he himself first practiced; so
having lived in this manner about Two Years, being then sensible that the time
of his Death (or rather of his future Life) drew near, he again retired to the
same Island, and Hermitage from whence he came.

The same Year also King Egfrid rashly lead out his Army to destroy the
Province of the Picts, Id. cap. 26.
(tho his Friends, and principally Bishop Cuthbert, did all they could to
hinder it), and having now entered the Country, he was brought (before he was
aware) by the feigned flight of his Enemies, between the streights of certain
inaccessible Mountains, where he, with the greatest part of his Forces he had
brought with him, were all cut off, in the Fortieth Year of his Age, and the
Fifteenth of his Reign. And as the Year aforegoing, he refused to hear Bishop
Cuthbert, who diswaded him from invading Ireland, which did him no harm; so
Bid observes it was a just Judgment upon him for that Sin, that he would not
hear those who would then have prevented his Ruin.

From this time, the Grandeur and Valor of this Kingdom of the Northumbers
began to decline; for the Picts now recovered their Country, which the English
had taken away; and the Scots that were in Britain, with some part of the
Britains themselves, regained their Liberty, which they did enjoy for the space
of Forty Six Years after, when Bid wrote his History: But Alfred Brother to
this King succeeding him, quickly recovered his Kingdom, tho reduced into
narrower bounds: He was also a Prince very well read in the Holy Scriptures.

The same Year, (as the Saxon Annals relate) Kentwin, King of the West Saxons
dying, Ceadwalla began to Reign over that Kingdom, (whose Pedigree is there
inserted, Ibid.
which I shall refer to another place:) and the same Year also died Lothair
King of Kent; (as Bede relates) of the Wounds he had received in a Fight
against the South Saxons; in which Edric, his Brother Egbert's Son, Commanded
against him, and reigned in his stead.

This Year (also according to the Annals) John was consecrated Bishop of
Hugulstad, and remained so till Bishop Wilfrith's return; but afterward Bishop
Bos^ dying, John became Bishop of York, but from thence, many Years after,
retired to his Monastry in Derawnde, (now called Beverlie in Yorkshire:) This
Year it rained Blood in Britain; and also Milk and Butter were now turned into
somewhat like Blood. You are here to take notice, that this Bishop John above
mentioned, is the famous St. John of Beverlie; of whom Bid in the next Book
tells so many Miracles.

But our Annals do here require some farther Illustration; for this Ceadwalla
here mentioned, was the Grandson of Ceawlin, by his Brother Cutha; who being a
Youth of great hopes, was driven into Banishment by his Predecessor, Anno Dom.
DCLXXXV.
and (as Stephen Cap. 41.
Heddi in Bishop Wilfrid's Life relates) lay concealed among the Woods and
Deserts of Chyltern, and Ondred, and there remained for a long time; till
raising an Army, (tho Bid does not say from whence,) he slew Aldelwald, King
of the South Saxons, and seized upon his Province; Bid lib. 4. cap. 5.
but was soon driven out by two of that King's Captains, viz. Bertune and
Autune who for some time kept that Kingdom to themselves: the former of whom
was afterward slain by the same Ceadwalla, when he became King of the
West Saxons; but the other who reigned after him, again set it free from that
servitude for many Years; from whence it happened, that all that time they had
no Bishop of their own; for when Wilfrid returned home, they became subject to
the Bishop of the West Saxons, (that is, of Dorchester) which return (as the
Author of Wilfrid's Life relates) happened this Year, being the Second of King
Alfred's Reign, who then invited him home, and restored him to his Bishopric,
as also to his Monastery at Rypun, together with all his other Revenues,
according to the Decree of Pope Agatho, and the Council at Rome above
mentioned; all which he enjoyed till his second Expulsion, as you will hear in
due time.

After Ceadwalla had obtained the Kingdom, he subdued the Isle of Wight, which
was as yet infected with Idolatry; Anno Dom. DCLXXXVI.
and therefore this King resolved to destroy all the Inhabitants, and to Plant
the Island with his own Subjects; obliging himself by a Vow, Id. cap. 16.
(although he himself (as it is reported) was not yet baptized,) that he would
give the Fourth part of his Conquests to God; which he made good, by offering
it to Bishop Wilfrid, who was then come thither by chance out of his own
Country. The Island consisted of about Two Thousand Families, and the King
bestowed upon this Bishop, as much Land there as then maintained Three Hundred
Families, the Care of all which the Bishop committed to one of his Clerks,
named Bernwin, his Sisters Son, who was to Baptize all those that would be
saved. Bid also adds, That amongst the first Fruits of Believers in that
Island, there were two Royal Youths, Brothers, who were the Sons of Arwald,
late King thereof; who having hid themselves for fear of King Ceadwalla, were
at last discovered, and by him ordered to be slain, which when the Abbot of
Reodford heard, (as having his Monastery not far from thence) he went to the
King, who then lay private in those Parts to be cured of the Wounds he had
received in taking of the Island, and desired of him, if the Youths must needs
dye, that they might first received Baptism, which the King granted; whereupon
the Abbot immediately instructed, and then Baptized them; so when the
Executitioner came to put them to Death, they cheerfully underwent it, because
they hoped thereby to obtain an Eternal Kingdom. Thus the Isle of Wight did,
(tho last of all) receive the Christian Faith, and that upon very harsh terms;
as if God would make them suffer for their so long refusal of the Gospel.

The same Year also, Ceadwalla and Mollo ( or Mull) his Brother wasted Kent.
And, W. Malmesbury adds, That the occasion of this War, was to be revenged of
King Edric, who had killed Lothair his Predecessor, and that falling upon that
Province, now grown Esseminate with long Peace, he committed a great deal of
Spoil throughout the Country; but at last meeting with the Kentish Men, was
repulsed with loss.

Anno Dom. DCLXXXVI.
This Year also, according to Stephen H^ddis's Life of Bishop Wilfrid, he was
re-called home by King Alfred, and restored to his Sees of York, and Hagulstad,
the Bishop that then enjoyed them being turned out.

The same Year also Cuthbert, that Pious Bishop of Lindisfarne, having resigned
his Bishopric, Id. ibid cap. 30.
and retired again to Farne-Island, there deceased, but his Body was translated
to Lindisfarne; which being taken up Eleven Years after, was found as entire,
as when it was first buried.

This Year Mollo (or Mull) the Brother of King Ceadwalla, but now mentioned,
Anno Dom. DCLXXXVII.
was burnt in Kent, and Twelve others with him; but Ceadwalla afterward wasted
Kent the same Year, which action Will. of Malmesbury and H. Huntington relate
more at large; That Ceadwalla in the second Year of his Reign, sent his Brother
Mollo (at his own request) to Ravage and P^under the Province of Kent, out of a
Desire of Spoil, and Ambition of Glory; so marching into Kent, (then divided
into diverse Factions) and finding none there to resist him, he laid all the
Country waste; but when he despised his Enemies, and thought he might do what
he pleased with them; going about to plunder a certain House, and having no
more th^n Twelve Men in his Company, being there encompassed on the sudden with
far greater Forces, and not daring to sally out upon them, they set the House
on Fire about his Ears; where He with Twelve Knights were burnt: And thus this
brave Army consisting of the Flower of the West Saxon Youth came to nothing.

But Will. Thorn, in his Chronicle of the Abbots of St. Augustine, Cant.
relates the Death of this Prince, with more Circumstances ( v^z.) That he
invading and spoiling Kent, and coming before the City of Canterbury, and being
there stoutly resisted by the Citizens, till almost all his Men were killed,
was at last constrained to flee to a certain House, where the Men of Canterbury
burnt him to Death, as has been already related; but it seems his Body not
being reduced to Ashes, was taken up and buried in the Church of the Abbey of
St. Augustine, with the Kings of Kent; this I thought fit to add as not being
found elsewhere.

But when Ceadwalla heard this news, being extremely enraged at it, he again
entered Kent, and there satiating himself with Spoil and Slaughter, when he had
left nothing worth carrying away, returned home Victorious.

This Year, King Ceadwalla after he had Reigned 2 Years (perhaps having some
remorse for his former Cruelties, Anno Dom. DCLXXXVIII.
) went to Rome, and there received Baptism from Pope Sergius, who gave him the
Name of Peter; where he not long after dyed, and was buried in the Church of
St. Peter; to whom Ina succeeded in the Kingdom of the West Saxons, and Reigned
Thirty Seven Years: He also built the Monastery at Glastingabyrig, (now
Glastenbury) and also went to Rome, and there remained until his Death.

Bid (who has given us a long Epitaph on Ceadwalla, both in Verse and Prose,
B^^e, lib. c. 7.
) places this Prince's Baptism by the Pope, in Anno 689, which might very well
be, for he resigned his Kingdom the Year above mentioned, and it was ended by
that time he could be baptized, and so the Saxon Annalist might well place both
that and his Baptism under one and the same Year: The British Historians
confounded this Ceadwalla with their King Ceadwallo, who slew King Edwin; but
he lived above Twenty Years before this time, as has been already observed.

But Dr. Powel, Anno Dom. DCLXXXVIII.
and Mr. Vaughan in their Learned Notes upon Caradoc's Welsh Chronicle, do
suppose (with great probability) that this Cadwallo, was Edwal, surnamed Ywrch,
Prince of Wales, who about this time began to Reign, being the Son of
Cadwallader; Vid. Guidow in Catalogo Pontific sub sergio.
and may also very well agree with what Guidonius writes of one Ethwal Prince
of Wales; who about this time went to Rome and there dyed; for in proper Names
it is an easy matter for a Capital C to creep in, since it was commonly used
in old hands, at the beginning of a Paragraph: and might by an Ignorant Copier
be added to the Name it self, and so of Edwal make Cadwal, and from thence
Cadwallader.

But the Year after Ceadwalla dyed at Rome, (according to Bid, Anno Dom. DCXC.
as well as our Annals) Theodorus Archbishop of Canterbury also deceased,
being Eighty Eight Years of Age, having sat Archbishop Twenty Two Years, and
was buried in the Church of St. Peter in Canterbury; Lib. 5. cap. 8.
Bid tells us, That the English Church never attained to that height of
perfection under any Archbishops Government, as it did under his; he being the
first Archbishop, who Exercised his Metropolitan Jurisdiction over all the
Bishops, as well beyond, as on this side of Humber.

Berthwald, who now succeeded Theodore in the Archbishopric, had been Abbot
of a certain Monastery, called Raculf (now Reculver in Kent) near the Isle of
Thanet; and was a Man well read in the Scriptures, and skilled in Ecclesiastical
Discipline; but yet he ought not to be compared to his Predecessors: he was
Elected this Year, but it seems his Consecration was deferred till near Three
Years after, when the Saxon Chronicle likewise recites it.

This Year also (according to Florence) Ina a Prince of the Royal Blood took
the Kingdom of the West Saxons, being the Son of Kenred, the Son of Ceolwald:
Yet it seems he had no right by Succession; for Will. of Malmesbury tells us
expressly, That it was more in respect to his own Natural Virtue, than to the
Right of a successive descent, that he was now made King; and indeed, How could
it be otherwise, his Father Kenred being then alive?

This Year also, Abbot Benedict (abovementioned) dyed, after a long Sickness,
of whom Bid in his Life (already cited) gives us a large Account, that having
been at first a Servant to King Oswin, and receiving from him a competent
Estate for his Quality, he quited a Military Life for a Heavenly one, and
leaving his Country, went to Rome, in the Company of Alfred, Son to that King;
and upon his return thence the second time, professed himself a Monk in the
Isle of Lyren; where staying Two Years, he accompanied Wyghard to Rome, who
went thither to be ordained Archbishop, but soon after dying there, he again
returned home with Archbishop Theodore, and after some time built the
Monasteries of Wyremouth and Girwy, as you have already heard; and now after a
long Sickness, made a Holy End in the Monastery of St. Peter at Wyremouth,
where he was also buried.

About this time Wythred, the Son of Egbert, King of Kent, being Established in
his Kingdom, Anno Dom. DCXCI.
did by his Piety and Industry free it from Foreign Invasions; tho one
Swebheard, (or Webheard) held part of it together with him for some time.

This Year also according to Florence, for the Years are not exactly set down
by Bid, or Stephen Heddi; Bishop Wilfrid was the second time Expelled from his
Bishopric by Alfred, King of Northumberland; Cap. 44.
which, (as this Author in his Life relates) happened because that King had
not restored to the Church of St. Peter at Rypun diverse of its Possessions;
Anno Dom. DCXCI.
The next was because the Monastery of Hagulstad had been erected into a
Bishopric without his consent, and contrary to the privilege which Pope
Agatho had bestowed upon it; And lastly, because that King would have compelled
him to obey certain Decrees of Archbishop Theodore, which had been made in
Bishop Wilfrid's absence, and during the first quarrel that had risen between
them; which he refusing to observe, thereupon retired to his old Friend
Ethelred, King of the Mercians, who received him with great honor.

But King Alfred, as likewise Archbishop Bertwald, and all the Bishops of
Britain, being assembled in a Synod, at a place called Onestrefield or
Hosterfield, They sent Messengers to Bishop Wilfrid, desiring him to appear
before them; but when he came to the Synod, he could by no means agree with
them, because they did not perform what they had promised by their Messengers;
so that great disputes arising chiefly from those Bishops of the new Sees, who
together with certain Abbots had been also set on by King Alfred, and for the
sake of their own private Interests, did not desire the Peace of the Church;
they also objected many false things against him which could no ways be proved;
and at last decreed that the Bishop should be censured according to the Decrees
of the late Archbishop Theodore; whereupon Bishop Wilfrid asked them, with
what Face they could prefer the Decrees of Theodore before the Apostolical
Canons, which had been enjoined them from Pope Agatho, and Pope Sergius? but
when no due or decent manner of speaking was observed, and that they urged him
to subscribe a Resignation of his Bishopric, and Monasteries in
Northumberland, and Mercia, into the hands of the Archbishop, he utterly
refused it, and only offered to submit to the Judgment of the Archbishop, as
far as it was agreeable with the Canons of the Holy Fathers; but at last they
offered him, that if he would resign his Bishopric, he might still retain his
Abbey of Ripon, and live there in quiet, provided he did not go out of the
bounds of the Monastery, nor exercise any Episcopal Jurisdiction; upon which,
he in a long Speech set forth his former Merits, in converting the Northumbrian
Nation to the due observation of Easter; Then asked them for what offense they
went now about to degrade him? To which the King and the Archbishop replied,
That he was culpable in this, and was therefore to be condemned, because he had
preferred the Judgment of the Men at Rome before theirs; and the King then
offered the Archbishop to make him submit by force to their Judgment, but this
was opposed by most of the Bishops, because he had come thither under their
safe conduct; Then the Bishop retired again to King Ethelred, setting forth the
hard usage which he had received at the Synod, whereupon the King promised him
never to alter any thing in the Monasteries, which he had bestowed upon him,
until he had sent to Rome for the Pope's Judgment of these Matters, and how he
might act safely therein; but in the mean time the Archbishop and the Synod
did not only deprive, but also Excomunicate Bishop Wilfrid, and also all those
who were in communion with him; so that none might so much as eat with them,
and whatsoever they touched, was looked upon as defiled.

Wherefore Bishop Wilfrid was again forced to go to Rome, there to make his
appeal before the Pope, to whom he presented a long Petition. setting forth
that the Troubles which he had met with in Britain, Anno Dom. DCXCI.
had proceeded from those, who having seized upon his Bishopric, and
Monasteries, had refused to observe the Decrees of his Holiness's
Predecessors; whereupon the Pope at that time holding a Council at Rome, did
there hear the whole difference between him and Archbishop Bertwald, who had
now sent his Deputies thither, together with the accusations against him; so in
short, upon a solemn hearing of the whole matter on both sides, and after above
Seventy Congregations, in about Four Months time, (in all which the Bishops
Innocence did more and more appear,) he was at last absolved by the Pope, and
the whole Council; the particulars of which are too long to relate, only that
thereupon the Pope wrote Letters to Ethelred, King of the Mercians, and Alfred,
King of Northumberland, reciting Bishop Wilfrid's former appeal to Pope Agatho,
and the Decree that had been made in his Favor; as also what had been now done
at Rome, and how well the Bishop had acquitted himself of whatsoever had been
laid to his Charge; and therefore did not only order them to receive him, but
also admonished Archbishop Bertwald to call another Synod, together with
Bishop Wilfrid, and there to Summon the Bishops, Bosa and John, to hear what
they would say in their own behalf; and if they could make any agreement, with
the liking of Bishop Wilfrid, it would be very grateful to him; but if
otherwise, they were to exhibit the Reasons of their dissent before the Pope,
there to be determined in a more ample Council; and whoever should refuse this,
should be subject to be Excomunicated, and deposed from his Bishopric.

The Bishop in his Return home with these Letters, fell so sick by the way,
that he was like to dye at Melune in France, where ('it is said) he had a Vision
of an Angel appearing to him, which promised him restitution to his See within
Four Years; so he at last arrived again in Britain, where applying himself to
Archbishop Bertwald, He being frighted with the Pope's Letters, which had been
before sent him by Messengers, received Bishop Wilfrid very kindly, and being
then reconciled to him, promised to mitigate that harsh Judgment, given against
him in the former Synod.

Then the Bishop delivered his Letters to Ethelred, (who, having at that time
resigned his Kingdom, was become a Monk), and so used his Interest with King
Cenered, whom he had appointed King in his stead, that he promised to obey the
Pope's Decrees; not long after which the Bishop likewise sent an Abbot with a
Priest to King Alfred, desiring his leave to return home, and to deliver him
the Pope's Letters, and the Decrees which had been made on his behalf; which
Messengers tho the King civily received, yet he plainly told them, That he
would do them any other Favor, but that it was in vain to trouble him any
further in this matter, because whatever the Kings his Predecessors, together
with his Councillors, as also the late Archbishop Theodore had already
judged, and what he himself, together with the present Archbishop, and all the
Bishops of the British Nation had lately Decreed, That he was resolved never to
alter for any Letters sent (as they said) from the Apostolic See; so the
Messengers returning without any success, the Bishop continued where he was for
some Years: but the King it seems repented at last of this harsh Resolution,
and would have altered it, as you will hereafter find.

I have been the more exact in this transaction of Bishop Wilfrid's, because it
has never been as yet published in English before, and it also gives us a great
light into the Affairs of the Church at this time; and lets us know that the
Kings of Northumberland did not then think themselves bound to observe the
Pope's Decrees, tho made upon Appeals to Rome, if they were contrary to a
General Synod, or Council of the whole Nation. Anno Dom. DCXCIII.


About this time (tho it be not mentioned in Bid, nor in the Saxon Chronicle)
Ina, King of the West Saxons, summoned a great Council or Synod of all the
Bishops, with the Great and Wise Men of his Kingdom; which, because it is the
first Authentic great Council, whose Laws are come to us entire, I shall set
down the Title of it as it is recited in the First Volume of Sir H. Spelman's
British Councils; it begins thus; Ina by the Grace of God, King of the
West Saxons, by the Council and Advice of Cenred, my Father, and Hedde and
Erkenwald my Bishops; with all my Ealdermen, and sage Ancients of my People, as
also in an Assembly of the Servants of God, have Religiously endeavored, both
for the health of our Soul, and the common preservation of our Kingdom, that
right Laws and true Judgments be Founded, and ^stablished, throughout our whole
Dominions, and that it shall not be Lawful for the time to come, for any
Ealderman, or other Subject whatever, to transgress these our Constitutions.

I have also given you an Extract of the chief of those Laws, as far as they
relate to any thing remarkable, either in Church or State; referring you for
the rest to the Laws themselves.

1. If a Servant do any Work on a Sunday, by Command of his Master, he shall be
free, and the Master shall be amerced Thirty Shillings; but if he went about
the Work without his Master's privity, he shall be beaten, or redeem the
penalty; but a Freeman, if he work on that Day, without the Command of his
Master, shall loose his Freedom, or pay 60 Sihillings; if he be a Priest, his
penalty shall be double.

2. The portion or dues of the Church shall be brought in by the Feast of St.
Martyn, he that pays them not by that time, shall be amerced Forty Shillings,
and besides pay twelve times their value.

3. If any guilty of a capital Crime shall take refuge in a Church, he shall
save his Life, and yet make recompense according to Justice and Equity; if one
deserving Stripes run to a Church, the Stripes shall be forgiven him.

4. If any one Fight within the King's House, or Palace, he shall forfeit all
his Goods, and it shall be at the pleasure of the King, whether he shall have
his Life or not; he that Fights in a Church, shall pay 120 s. in the House of
an Alderman, or other sage Nobleman, 60 s. whosoever shall Fight in a
Villager's House paying Scot, shall be punished 30 s. and shall give the
Villager 6 s. and if any one Fight in the open Field, he shall pay 120 s.

5. He that on his own private account shall revenge an injury done to him,
before he has demanded public Justice, shall restore what he took away, and
besides forfeit 30 Shillings.

6. If a Robber be taken, he shall lose his Life, Anno Dom. DCLXXX.
or redeem it according to the estimation of his Head; we call Robbers to the
Number of Seven or Eight Men; from that number to Thirty Five, a band; all
above, an Army.

7. If a Country Boor, having been often accused of Theft, if he be at last
taken, he shall have his Hand or Foot cut off.

8. If any one Kill another's Godfather, or God-Son, the satisfaction shall be
according to his Quality and Circumstances; let the compensation due to the
Relations, and that due to the Lord, for the loss of his Man, be both alike:
and let the one increase, according to the Circumstances of the Person, just as
the other does; but if he were the King's Godson, let him make satisfaction to
the King, as well as the Relations; but if his Life was taken away by a
Relation, then let the Money due to the Godfather be diminished, as it uses to
be, when Money is paid to the Master for the Death of his Servant: If a
Bishop's Son be killed, let the penalty be half so much.

From which Laws we may observe that our Saxon Ancestors were strict observers
of the Lord's day, and would not permit any servile Work to be done thereon:
Secondly, that the superstition of Sanctuaries was very ancient in England, as
well as elsewhere: Thirdly, That Theft, Murder, and all sorts of Crimes, were
then redeemable by pecuniary Mulcts; either to the King, or to the Friends of
the party slain, or wronged, or else by loss of Limbs; but there is one Law
behind that is very remarkable.

That if any English Man, who has lost his Freedom, do afterward Steal, he
shall be hanged on the Gallows; and no Recompense made to his Lord; if any one
Kill such a Man, he shall make no recompense on that account to his Friends,
unless they redeem him within a Twelve Month. Where it appears that no English
Freeman could then be hanged for any fault but Treason, (tho that is not
expressed in these Laws): but as for the last clause in these Laws, That if the
Son of a Bishop be killed, the penalty should be half, whereby some would
prove, that Bishops were then Married, it is a mistake; for by those words are
only meant a Bishop's Spiritual Son, or Godson, and not his Natural, or
Conjugal Son.

This Year the Kentishmen made a League with King Ina and gave him Thirty
Thousand Pounds to obtain his Friendship, Anno Dom. DCXCIV.
because they had before burnt Moll his Brother. Also Withred began to Reign
over the Kingdom of Kent, and held it Thirty Three Years. William of Malmesbury
makes him to have been Elected King by the General Consent of his Subjects, and
that he did not deceive their expectation in governing them well.

The Saxon Chronicle here also proceeds, and gives us his Pedigree, which being
not to our purpose, I omit; only, you may take notice, that he was the Son of
one Ecbert, and not of the last King that Reigned.

As soon as ever he was made King, he commanded a Great Council to be summoned,
at a place called Becanceld ( which though it be somewhere in Kent, yet no body
certainly knows where it lay, unless it were Beckanham, which lies near Surry;)
at which Council Withred Himself was present, as also the Archbishop of
Canterbury and the Bishop of Rochester, and with them all the Abbots and
Abbesses, together with many Wise and Prudent Men, who were there assembled,
Anno Dom. DCLXXXV.
that they might all take Council about the repairing of the Churches in Kent;
then the King began to speak thus, I will, That all Churches and Monasteries,
which have been given and endowed for God's Glory, in the Days of the Faithful
Kings my Predecessors, shall remain so to God's Honor for ever; Therefore, I
Withred being an Earthly King, yet moved by the Heavenly one, have learnt from
our Ancestors, that no Layman ought to have right to meddle with any Church,
or any of those things, that belong to it; Wherefore we do firmly Decree, and
appoint, and in the Name of the Omnipotent God, and all his Saints, do straightly
forbid all the Kings our Successors, with all Ealdermen, (i. e. Governors or
Judges) and other Laymen, to exercise any Lordship or Dominion over those
Churches, and their poss^ssions, which either I, or my Pred^cessours, have
given for the Honor of Christ, and our Lady St. Mary, and all the Saints: but
when it shall happen that a Bishop or any Abbot, or Abbess shall depart this
Life, let it be told the Archbishop, that by his command one may be chosen,
who is most worthy; Moreover let the Archbishop make good trial of his Life,
who shall be elected to so Holy a Function, neither let any one be Elected, or
Consecrated, without the consent of the Archbishop; for as it is the King's
duty to appo^nt Ealdermen, Sheriffs, and Judges, so it is the Archbishop's to
Govern the Church of God, and to take care of it; as also to appoint and elect
Bish^ps, Abbots, and Abbesses, Presbyters, and Deacons, as also to Consecrate,
Co^firm and Instruct them by his good Precepts, and Example; least any of God's
Flock should wonder out of the way, and perish.

This passage being found in the Cottonian Copy of the Saxon Annals, I thought
good to insert, as a Monument of the ancient power of the Archbishop of
Canterbury, as Governor of the Church of England, though then under the power
of the Pope in Ecclesiastical Matters. These are the chief heads of this famous
Council; not do the other Copies in Sir H. Spelman's Collection, differ much
from this in the Saxon Annals; only there follows the Subscriptions of King
Wythred, and Werburge his Queen, (who Subscribed for her self, and the Prince
her Son,) then follow those of the Bishops and Abbots, and after them of Five
Abbesses of that Kingdom; which shows them to have been present at this
Council; but whether as consenters, or voters, or else as bare witnesses, I
shall not determine; but it is observable that their Names are written not only
before all the Presbyters? but also before Botred, a Bishop, though of what
Diocese is not specified: But to return to Civil affairs.

About this time also, as Bede relates, (though no Historian has given us the
Year) Sebbi, King of the East Saxons, being fitter for a Bishop than a King,
and being at last taken with a great bodily Infirmity, preferred a private Life
before a Crown, and took upon him the Habit of a Monk, with the Benediction of
Waldhere, Lib. 4. cap. 11.
then Bishop, and Successor to Erkenwald in the Sea of London; so this pious
King, after he had bestowed a great Sum of Money in Charity, soon departed this
Life, leaving his Sons Sighard and Senfrid to succeed him.

This Year the Southumbers ( that is the Mercians) killed Ostrythe the Wife of
Ethelred their late King, Anno Dom. DCXCVII.
and the Sister of King Egfrid. H. Huntington calls it a vile Wickedness, but
would not, or could not give us the reason why they did so; nor what punishment
was inflicted upon them for it.

This Year likewise was held the Council of Berghamsted in Kent, Bertwald
Archbishop of Canterbury, Gibmund Bishop of Rochester, and all the
Ecclesiastical Order of that Kingdom, together with all the Lay or Military Men
being there assembled, by the Common, and Unanimous Assent of All, Anno Dom.
DCLXXIV.
they decreed these Laws should be added to the Laws and Customs of the Kentish
Men: the Constitutions of this Council are called in the Saxon Title, the
Judgments or Doomes of King Wightred; But tho they relate chiefly to
Ecclesiastical Matters, yet I shall here insert some of the chief of them.

The First Law is, That the Church shall be free, and enjoy her own Judgments,
Rents, and Pensions; and that Prayer be made for the King, and his Commands
obeyed, not of necessity or Compulsion, but out of good will.

Secondly, If any Military Man (called there a Gesithcund-man, in the Saxon
Original,) shall, after this Council is ended, despising the King's Law, and
the Judicial Sentence of the Bishop's Excomunication, be taken in Adultery, let
him pay to his Lord an 100 Shillings.

By which Law it appears, there was at this time Knights Service in England,
and also, that slighting of Excomunication had no further Temporal Penalty,
than a pecuniary Mulct.

And that it was to the Lord of whom he held his Land, That he was to pay it,
appears by the next Law, by which it is appointed, that if the Adulterer were a
Country Man, or Villager, (called there Ceorlesman) he shall pay Fifty
Shillings (to his Lord,) yea tho he do Penance for that Sin.

Thirdly, If on Saturday in the Evening, after the Sun is set; or on Sunday
Evening after the same time; a Servant shall, at the Command of his Master, do
any work, let his Master redeem the offense with paying Eighty Shillings.

Fourthly, If a Layman kill a Theif, let him lie without any Wiregild, that is,
without making any satisfaction to the Friends of the party slain.

This Year also the Picts slew Bert the Ealderman, H. Huntington ascribes this
to the Curse of the Irish Nation, whose Churches he had in the late Invasion
destroyed; for as King Egfrid Invading the Country of the Picts was there cut
off; so entering their Country to revenge the Death of his Master, he was
likewise slain.

Mat. Westminster calls this Ealderman, Brithric, Earl of the Northumbers, but
from what Authority I know not.

I shall conclude this Century with a very remarkable Transaction out of Bid,
that happened about the latter end of it. Egbert, an English Priest, living in
Ireland, being hindered by a Storm that forced him back from Preaching the
Gospel (as he intended) in Germany, he persuaded one Wilbrode his Country man
to do it; who having obtained the Pope's License to Preach to the Heathen
Nations, he performed it first by preaching the Gospel in old Frizeland, (which
then included not only those Provinces, called East and West Frizeland to this
day, but also Holland and Zealand, and diverse others of the Belgic Provinces;)
where he converted all those Nations to the Christian Faith, and was
afterward, at the desire of Pipin, (father to King Charles,) ordained by the
Pope, Archbishop of the Frisons, Anno Dom. 596: and upon his return to Rome;
Pipin, being then Major of the Palace, (or General of France,) gave him for his
Episcopal See that famous Castle, which is called in the Old Language of that
Nation, Anno Dom. DCXCIX.
Wiltaburg, but in the Gallic Tongue, Trajectum, at this day Utrecht.

But not long after, two Priests, each of them named Henwald, and for
distinction Surnamed from the color of their Hair, Id. c. 12.
the Black and the White, being by his Example piously affected to the Souls of
their Countrymen, the Old Saxons, at their coming into Old Saxony to convert
them, met with much worse Entertainment; for being in the House of a Farmer,
who had promised to convey them (as they desired) to the Governor of that
Country, and being discovered by their daily Ceremonies to be Christian
Priests, and the cause of their coming also known, they were by him and his
Heathen Neighbors cruelly butchered, and their Bodies flung into the Rhine;
but the Governor coming to the knowledge of it, being enraged at such Violence
offered to two Strangers, sent Armed Men, and slew all those wicked
Inhabitants, and burnt their Village.

Anno Dom. DCC.
About this time Sir H. Spelman, in his first Volume of Councils, records a
Charter of Privilege granted by King Wythred in a General Council or Synod of
Kent; whereby, with the Consent of the Chief Men of his Kingdom, he freed all
the Churches thereof from all Public Payments or Tributes whatsoever; provided
they yielded the King and his Successors the same Honor and Obedience, as
they had done his Predecessors, under whom hitherto they had enjoyed all
Justice and Liberty. This was done in the Eighth Year of his Reign, at a Place
called Cylling; which seems to be no more than a Confirmation of what had been
done 6 Years before in the Council of Becanceld. But to return to our Annals.

Anno Dom. DCCII.
'This Year Cenred began to Reign over the Southumbers, (i. e. the Mercians,) as
has been already said.

Hedda, the Bishop, departed this Life; he held the Bishopric of Winchester 27
Years. Anno Dom. DCCIII.


This Hedda is he, of whom Bid gives the Character of an Excellent Bishop, and
one who Adorned the Episcopal See, converting more by his Example, than
Preaching.

Anno Dom. DCCIV.
Ethelred, the Son of Penda, King of the Mercians, became a Monk, (at Bardeney
Abbey,) having reigned 29 (or rather 30) Years, and Cenred succeeded him, (who
was his Cousin-German.)

William of Malmesbury further adds, That from a Monk he came to be Abbot of
that Monastery, wherein he died; and that of Osgilde, the Sister of Egfrid King
of Northumberland, he begat a Son, called Ceolred; yet for all this, Ethelred
passing him by, he appointed Cenred, the Son of his Brother Wulfher, for his
Successor; who reigned with great Love to his Country, and a singular Probity
of Manners, till, in the Fifth Year of his Reign, (...). c. 20.
he went to Rome, and, (as Bede tells us) taking upon him the Habit of a Monk,
during the Papacy of Pope Constantine, there ended his Days in Prayers,
Fasting, and Alms.

Anno Dom. DCCV.
Ealfert, or Alfred, King of the Northumbers, deceased on the 19o Kal. Jan. at
Driffeild, (in the 12th Year of his Reign,) Osred, his Son, succeeding in that
Kingdom.

But Stephen Heddi, in his Life of Bishop Wilfrid, (and who lived at that
time,) has given us a more accurate Account of the Death of this King, and of
his Successors, viz. That King Alfred lying now sick upon his Deathbed,
repented of what he had done toward Bishop Wilfrid, and promised, That if ever
he recovered of that Sickness, Anno Dom. DCCV.
he would restore the Bishop, and in all Things observe the Decree of the
Apostolic See; but if he died, he enjoined, who ever should succeed him, to be
reconciled with that Bishop for the good of both their Souls; but this King
dying, one Eardwulf succeeded him, tho but for a small time; and the Bishop
going to him, and carrying that King's Son along with him, he sent Messengers
before, supposing him to be his Friend; but the King being persuaded by his
Counselors, and also prompted by his own natural Wickedness, sent the Bishop
word, (binding it with an Oath.) That unless he departed his Kingdom within the
space of six Days, whosoever he found of his Company should be put to Death;
Not long after which harsh Message, a Plot being laid against him, he was
driven out of the Kingdom, which he had scarce enjoyed two Months, and so the
Royal Youth Osred, Son of the late King Alfred, succeeded in the Kingdom, and
became Bishop Wilfrid's adopted Son.

In the first Year of which King, the Author abovementioned has given us the
following Account, concerning the Restitution of the said Bishop, viz. That
Berthwald, Archbishop of Canterbury, came about this time from the South,
together with all the Bishops, Abbots, and Chief Men of the whole Kingdom, by
the Precept of the Apostolical See, to hold a Synod at a Place lying on the
East Side of the River Nid, in Northumberland; where the King, with his Bishops
and Chief Men being met, the Archbishop made a Speech to them, setting forth
the Letters from the Pope, which Bishop Wilfrid had brought directed to
himself, and which he desired might be read; the Purport whereof was to the
same effect, as you have already heard: Then Aelfleda the Abbess, Daughter to
the late King, as also Berechtfrid, the second Man in the Kingdom, set forth
the Will of the late King, and therefore that it was fit to obey it, as well as
the Commands of the Apostolical See; whereupon the King, with his Great Men and
all the Bishops, upon mature Deliberation, resolved to be reconciled to Bishop
Wilfrid, and that his two Monasteries of Rypon and Hagulstad, together with all
their Revenues, should be restored to him; and so a firm Reconciliation being
made, all the Bishops departed in Peace.

But yet for all this, by what Richard Prior of Hagulstad has left us of this
matter, it appears, Vid. December Script. col. 296.
that Wilfrid did not carry the Cause so clearly as this Author would make it;
for he only was restored to the Bishopric of Hagulstad, and Bishop John
abovenamed was from thence translated to York, which Bishop Wilfrid had held
before; Cap. 11, 12.
only Bishop John parted with Hagulstad for Peace-sake. I have been the more
exact in this Transaction, because it has never been done by any body in our
Language before.

Also it is to this Year we are to refer the great Council, Lib. 5. c. 19
which Bid tells us was held in the Kingdom of the West Saxons; in which,
after the Death of Bishop Hedda, the Bishopric of that Province became divided
into two; one whereof was conferred on Daniel, who held it at the time when
Bid wrote his History; and the other was bestowed upon Aldhelm
abovementioned, then Abbot of Malmesbury, who was now made Bishop of
Shireburn, and when he was only an Abbot, did, at the Command of a Synod of the
whole Nation, write an excellent Book against that Error of the Britains, in
not keeping Easter at the due time; whereby he converted many of those Britains
which were then subject to the West Saxons, to the Catholic Observation
thereof: Of whose other Works likewise, Anno Dom. DCCV.
Bid gives us there a Catalogue; being a Person (says he) admirable in all
Civil, as well as Ecclesiastical and Divine Learning; and, as William of
Malmesbury further informs us, was the first of the English Saxons who wrote
Latin Verses with a Roman Genius.

There is here in the Saxon Annals a Gap for the space of 3 Years, in which I
think we may (according to H. Huntington's Account) place what Bid relates in
the Chapter and Book last cited, viz. That Daniel and Aldhelm yet holding their
Sees, it was ordained by a Synodal Decree, That the Province of the South
Saxons, which had hitherto belonged to the Diocese of Winchester, should now be
an Episcopal See, and have a Bishop of its own; and so Ceadbert, who was then
Abbot of the Monastery of Selsey, was consecrated first Bishop of that Place;
who dying, Ceolla succeeded in that Bishopric; but he likewise dying some
Years before Bid wrote his History, that Bishopric then ceased.

Anno Dom. DCCIX.
This Year the Saxon Annals began with the Death of Bishop Aldhelm, (whom it
calls Bishop of Westwude, for so Shireburne was then called,) after whom one
Forther took the Bishopric, and this year Ceolred succeeded in the Kingdom of
the Mercians; for now Kenred (King of the West Saxons) went to Rome, and Offa,
with him and Kenred, remained there to his Live's end; and the same year Bishop
Wilferth (or Wilfred) deceased at Undale; his Body was brought to Rypon in
Yorkshire. This is the Bishop whom King Egferth long since forced to go to Rome.

There being diverse Things put very close together under this Year, they will
need some Explanation. This Offa, here mentioned, was (as Lib. 5. c. 20
Bid and William of Malmesbury relate) the Son of Sigher, King of the East
Saxons; who, being a young Man of a sweet Behavior, as well as handsome Face,
in the Flower of his Youth, and highly beloved by his People, and having not
long before succeeded to the Kingdom, (after Sighard and Senfrid
abovementioned,) he courted Keneswith, the Daughter of King Penda, whom he
desired to marry; but it seems, not long after their Marriage, she
over-perswaded him to embrace a Monastic Life, so that he now went to Rome for
that End. And Bid tells us expressly, that both these Kings left their Wives,
Relations, and Countries, for Christ's sake. But to this Offa succeeded Selred,
the Son of Sigebert the Good, in the Kingdom of the East Saxons. H. Huntington
proposes King Offa as a Pattern to all other Princes to follow, and makes a
long Exhortation to them to that purpose; as if a King could not do GOD better
Service, nor more Good to Mankind by well-governing his People, than by
renouncing the World, and hiding his Head in a Cell: But such was the Fashion,
or rather Humor, of that Age; and the Affairs, as well as Consciences of
Princes, being then altogether Governed by Monks, it is no wonder if they
extolled their own Profession, as the only One wherein Salvation could
certainly be obtained.

But since I have already given you from Bid and Stephen Heddi a large Account
of Bishop Wilfred's Life and Actions abovementioned, I shall not need to add
any more to it. He was certainly a Man who had tried all the Vicissitudes of an
adverse, as well as a prosperous Fortune, having been no less than three times
deprived of his Bishopric; the first time unjustly, but whether we may say the
same of both the other, seems doubtful; for let his Friends say what they will,
it is evident, he was at first deprived for opposing a very good Design, viz.
That of dividing the Northumbrian Kingdom into more Diocesses, Anno Dom. DCCIX.
and he having the rich Monastery of Hagulstad under his Charge, would not
permit it to be made a Bishopric, tho the Diocese was more than he could well
manage; and this seems to have been the true Original of that great Quarrel
between him and the two Kings Egfr^d and Alfred, as you have already heard; so
it should seem, the Wrong pretended to have been done him was none at all, or
else such holy Men as St. Cuthbert, St. John of Beverlie, and Eatta, are
described to be, would never have accepted of the Bishoprics of York and
Hagulstad during the time of his Deprivation; and it is very strange, that two
Archbishops successively, with the greater part of the Bishops of England,
should have agreed to his Deprivation, if there had not been great Cause for
it; nor would so holy and knowing a Woman as the Abbess Hilda, have been so
much against him, had not there been some substantial Reason to justify it;
but he had the Pope on his side, who always encouraged Appeals to Rome, and
then it was no wonder if he prevailed; but he was certainly a Prelate of a high
Spirit, and great Parts, and who building a great many Monasteries by the
Benevolence of the Kings and Princes of that Time; and himself, (tho a Bishop,)
being Abbot of two of them at once; it was no wonder if he grew very rich,
which, together with his high way of Living, (being the first Bishop of that
Age who used Silver Vessels,) it procured him the Envy of those Princes; but he
was a grand Patron of the Monks, and therefore it is not to be wondered at if
they cried him up for a Saint, of whom the Writer of his Life, (which he
Dedicates to Acca his Successor,) relates too many Miracles to be believed,
(raising the Dead, cuting the Lame, being very ordinary Feats,) but the Monks
being the only Writers of that Age, we must be contented with what Accounts
they will give us, tho thus much must be acknowledged in his Commendation, That
he converted great Multitudes to the Christian Faith, and caused the Four
Gospels to be written in Letters of Gold.

But having given you this Account of Bishop Wilfred's Life, it is fit I say
somewhat further of his Death, concerning which, Cap. 62, 63.
the Author abovementioned tells us, That having lived 4 Years in Peace after
his last Restitution, he at last went to visit the Monasteries which he had
founded in the South Parts of England, where he was received by his Abbots
(whom he had put in) with great Joy; till coming to a Monastery which he had
founded at Oundale in Northamptonshire, being there seized with the same
Sickness which had often attacked him before, (tho what it was, this Author
does not tell us,) he there died, having before made his Will, and given a
great deal, both in ready Money and Jewels, to the Monasteries he had founded:
His Body was carried with great Pomp and Attendance of many Abbots and Monks to
his Abbey of Rypon, and there buried.

This Year Acca (the principal Chaplain of Bishop Wilfred) succeeded him in his
Bishopric of Hagulstad; (To this Bishop, Anno Dom. DCCX.
Florence of Worcester gives the Character of a skilful Singer, and Learned in
the Scriptures:) Also this Year Beorthfrith the Ealderman fought against the
Picts between Haefe and Caere, (supposed to be Carehouse and Hatfeild in
Northumberland,) and also King Ina, and Nun his Kinsman, fought with Gerent
King of the Britains; and the same Year Hygbald was slain.

Mat. Westminster places this Action in Anno 708, and makes this Hygbald to
have been killed in the beginning of the Fight by the Welsh King above
mentioned; Anno Dom. DCCXII.
and He being there put to flight, left great spoils behind him to the English;
who (as Florence adds,) obtained the Victory.

This British Prince here mentioned, is supposed to have been King of Cornwall;
for we can find no such name in the Catalogue of the Princes of North, or
South Wales.

About this time, according to Bid, Naitan King of the Picts being convinced
by the frequent reading of diverse Ecclesiastical Writers, Lib. 5. c. 22.
renounced his Error, concerning the Celebration of Easter; and that he might
likewise reclaim his Subjects with greater Authority, he desired the assistance
of the English Nation, and therefore sent Messengers to Ceolfrid, Abbot of the
Monastery of Wyremouth, desiring some Exhortatory Letters from him, whereby he
might confute those who presumed not to keep Easter at the due time; as also
concerning the true manner of shaving of Priest's Crowns; he likewise desired
some Architects, that might build a Church for him after the Roman fashion,
which he promised to Dedicate in honor of St. Peter.

To which Pious requests Ceolfrid assenting, did not only send him the
Architect he desired, but also writ him a long Epistle upon those two Questions
in which he desired to be satisfied, which you may see at large in Bid; where,
besides many notable Arguments for keeping Easter on the first Sunday after the
first Full Moon that follows the Vernal Equinox, and besides some others, there
is this doughty Reason against the Scotch way of shaving Crowns, that it was
the Tonsure of Simon Magus; and then what good Christian could not but abhor it
as much as Magic it self!

"This Year Guthlac dyed, as also Pipin King of France; this Guthlac here
mentioned, was at first a Monk at Repandun Abbey, but afterward professing
himself an Anchorite, he retired into the Fens, and built himself a Cell, at
Croyland: of him the Monkish Writers of those times relate incredible Miracles,
of his Temptations, Sufferings by, and Victories over, Evil Spirits, which then
haunted that place, at which some Years after the Abbey of Croyland was founded.

The same Year also Egwin, Bishop of Worcester, founded the Abbey of Evesham
upon this occasion; the Virgin Mary (as the Monks relate) had appeared about
this place to one Eoves a Shepherd, and not long after to the Bishop himself,
having a Book in her hand, bringing two Female Attendants with her, (though who
they were it seems she did not declare;) whereupon the Bishop there founded
this Monastery, testifying this Vision in the Charter of the Foundation, which
you may see at large in Monast. Anglic. as also in Sir H. Spelman's first
Volume of Councils; but as for the Story related by the Magdeburg Centuriators,
that the Virgin Mary did then Command her Image to be set up, and worshipped in
that Church, there being no color for it in the pretended Charter of the
Bishop himself, that must be certainly forged; for as Sir H. Spelman has very
well observed, Archbishop Brightwald is said to have writ this Charter by the
command of the Pope; whereas this Archbishop was never at Rome, nor was the
Council in which it is said to have been confirmed, held, till after Bishop
Egwin's Return home into England; and as for the Kings, Kenred, and Offa, who
are made to witness and confirm it, they had both of them resigned their
Crowns, and gone to Rome Five Years before the date of this Charter, which is
Anno Dom. 714; therefore I shall pass it by as a mere Fable, since it is
certain that the worship of Images was not then, Anno Dom. DCCXII.
not long after introduced into the English-Saxon Church.

But before I dismiss this Subject concerning the foundation of the Abbey of
Evesham, I cannot forbear taking notice of another Charter pretended to be made
Anno Dom. 709; by King Kenred, and King Offa above mentioned, wherein they
grant those Lands, in which the Virgin Mary was supposed to appear to Bishop
Egwin, for the building of a Monastery according to the Rule of St. Benedict;
in which Charter, tho the Lands are particularly named and set out, yet it is
as justly suspicious as the other, to have been forged by the Monks of that
Abbey in after times; as Sir H. Spelman very well observes, Page 210.
who has Printed both these Charters in his first Volume of Councils; the
former of which is dated at Rome, Five Years before the other of Bishop
Egwin's, and is supposed to be subscribed by the Pope, this Bishop himself, and
the two Kings; who there style themselves, the former by the Title of King of
Mercia, and the latter by that of King of the East Angles; whereas it is
apparent both from our Annals and Historians, that they had both then resigned
their Kingdoms to their Successors, before they went to Rome; and, which is
worse, Offa was not King of the East Angles, but of the East Saxons, as Bede
expressly relates; nor can the fault be laid upon the Transcribers, since the
Error is in the Original Charter it self; neither do we read of any King of the
East Angles all that time, till King Offa, upon the Murder of King Ethelbert,
seized that Kingdom; but enough, if not too much, of these Monkish Forgeries:
we shall now return to our Annals.

King Ina and Ceolred fought at Wodensburh in Wiltshire a great and bloody
Battle; and now also Dagobert King of the French deceased. Anno Dom. DCCXV.


This Year was founded at Theoewkesbury in Gloucestershire, Anno Dom. DCCXVI.
a noble Monastery, for Bendictine Monks, by Odo and Dodo, Ealdermen of Mercia.

The same Year Osred King of Northumberland was killed near the Southern
borders; Vi. Monast. A^gl. P. 15^.
Mat. Westminster relates it was in a Fight near the Sea, but names not the
Enemy with whom he fought. This Osred held the Kingdom Eleven Years, then
Cenred took it, and held it Two Years, and after him Osric, who held it Eleven
Years. The same Year also Ceolred, King of the Mercians Dyed, and lies Buried
in Licetfield (now Lichfield): Then Ethelbald succeeded him in the Kingdom of
Mercia, and held it Forty One Years.

Of this King Osred above mentioned, Will. of Malmesbury gives a very bad
Character, that he stained his Reign by Debauching the Chastity of the
Professed Nuns, and that he was at last Slain by the Treachery of his
Relations, who also brought the same fate upon themselves.

But this King Ethelbald above mentioned, was the Son of Alwer, and he of
Eoppa, (whose pedigree is already set down.) Also this Year Egbert, that
venerable person, converted the Monks of Hii to the right Faith, so that they
afterward observed Easter Orthodoxly, as also the Ecclesiastical Tonsure, the
relation of which, Bid has given us at large; being in short, that Egbert the
Priest (above mentioned) coming out of Ireland on purpose to convert those
Monks, they were so moved by his Pious Exhortations, that leaving the
Traditions of their Forefathers, they afterward observed the Catholic (i. e.
Roman) Rites; Egbert, after he had lived with these Monks in this Island for
Thirteen Years, dyed there.

Anno Dom. DCCXVII.
This Year Ingild the Brother of King Ina deceased, whose Sisters were
Werburgh, and Cuthburgh; the latter of whom Built the Monastery of Winburne:
She was once Married to Eadbert, King of Northumberland, but whilst he lived,
they were made to renounce each other's Bed.

In this Year also (as Ingulphus in his History of the Monastery of Croyland
relates) that Abbey was founded by Ethelbald, King of the Mercians, in honor of
St. Guthlac, the Anchorite, then lately deceased, it was for Benedictines: You
may see this King's Charter in the aforesaid Author, whereby he granted to
this Monastery, the whole Isle of Croyland, then containing Four Leagues in
length, and Three in breadth, with all the Marshes adjoining, there
particularly mentioned.

About this time, according to the Welsh Chronicle, Roderic (or Rodri) the Son
of Edwal Ywrich, Anno Dom. DCCXX.
began to Reign over the Britains in Wales.

This Year Daniel Bishop (of Winchester) went to Rome; and the same Year Ina
slew Cinewoulf Athcling, Anno Dom. DCCXXI.
(that is, Prince of the Blood Royal;) and the same Year St. John, Bishop of
Hagulstad, deceased, who was Bishop Thirty Three Years and Eight Months, whose
Body was buried at Beverlie.

This was he, who being first Bishop of Hagulstad, and then of York, was after
his Death Canonised by the Name of St. John of Beverlie; to whose shrine many
Pilgrimages were made, and of whom the Monkish Legends relate many incredible
Miracles, nor is Bid himself wanting in his Stories of this Bishop, which
notwithstanding, I think, are better omitted: But Bid under this Year gives us
this account of him, that when he was not able, by reason of his Age, to
perform his Episcopal Functions, having ordained Wilfred his Presbyter, Bishop
of York in his room, he retired to his Monastery in the Forest of Deira, where
he finished his Life in a Heavenly Conversation.

Anno Dom. DCCXXII.
This Year Queen Ethelburg destroyed the Castle of Taunton (now Taunton-Dean in
Somersetshire) which Ina had before built, and Eadbert was forced to fly into
Surry, to the South Saxons, where Ina also fought with them. H. Huntington
tells us, That the reason why Queen Ethelburgh destroyed this Castle, was,
because Eadbert, a Rebellious Prince of the Blood Royal, had taken it; and made
it the seat of this Rebellious War.

It being now (according to Bid) the Seventh Year of the Reign of Osric King
of Northumberland, Anno Dom. DCCXXV.
King Wythred dyed, who was Son of Egbert King of Kent, after having reigned
Thirty Four Years and an half; He left Three Sons, Ethelbert, Eadbert, and
Aldric his Heirs: Will. Malmesbury gives him this Character, that he was gentle
at home, invincible in War, and who strictly observed the Christian Religion;
but according to our Annals, Eadbert his Son succeeded alone to him in the
Kingdom: This Year also (according to our Annals) Ina fought again with the
South Saxons, and there slew Eadbert Aetheling, whom he had before banished.

H. Huntington farther informs us, That King Ina pursued Eadbert into Southsex;
and a nameless Author adds, That he then slew Aldwin, King of the
South Saxons, (who took his part) and Conquered that Country.

Also the same Year, King Ina new built the Ancient Monastery of Glastenbury,
endowing it with diverse Lands, and also granted it an Exemption from all
Episcopal Jurisdiction, with diverse other privileges, as you may find in his
Charter, confirmed by a great Council of the whole West Saxon Kingdom; the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and Baldred, King of Kent, with diverse other Bishops
and Great Men being present, and subscribing to it in the presence of all the
Lay People.

This Charter is in the Manuscript, in the Library of Trinity Coll. in
Cambridge; and is also Printed by Sir H. Spelman in his First Volume of British
Councils: It was also sent to Rome, and there confirmed by the Pope, as the
Book of Glastenbury relates.

About this time (as Ranulph of Chichester in Polychronichon relates) that Ina,
King of the West Saxons, first confered upon St. Peter (that is the Bishop of
Rome) a Penny from every House in his Kingdom, which was called by the
English-Saxons-Romescot; and in Latin Donarius Sancti Petri, i. e. Peterpence,)
which is also allowed by Polydore Virgil in his History (who was once the
Pope's Collector of this Tax in England;) but since I do not find this
confirmed by any Ancient Author or Council, I suspend ^y my belief of it;
since I do not look upon the bare Testimony of the Collector of Polychronicon,
as of sufficient Authority for a m^tter of this Moment; but if it were ever
granted by this King, it is likewise as certain, that it could not be done
without the consent of the Mycel-Synod, or great Council of the Kingdom, though
that be not now to be found.

This Year, according to Bid, and the Saxon Annals, deceased Tobias, Bishop of
Rochester; a most learned Man, Anno Dom. DCCXXVII.
for he was bred under the discipline of Archbishop Theodorus and Abbot
Adrian, and was so well skilled in the Greek and Latin, that they were as
perfect and familiar to him as his Mother Tongue; Lib. 5. c. 24.
he was buried at Rochester in St. Paul's Porch adjoining to the Church of St.
Andrew, after whom Aldwulf was made Bishop of that See, Archbishop Bertwald
consecrating him.

King Ina went to Rome, and there dyed; Anno Dom. DCCXXVIII.
and Ethelheard his Kinsman succeeded him in the Kingdom of the West Saxons,
and held it Fourteen Years.

William of Malmesbury, and H. Huntington do both give King Ina great
Commendations, proposing him as an Example not only of Magnanimity and Justice,
by the good Laws he made, but also of Piety and Devotion; in that he was
persuaded to quit all Worldly Vanities for a Monastic Life, and that by the
frequent Exhortations of the Queen his Wife; who, when she saw nothing would
prevail upon him, took this course; which, (tho none of the cleanliest,) I will
here give you: Once when the King had made a great Entertainment at one of his
Country-houses, as soon as the Company was gone, the Queen ordered the Steward
to defile all the Rooms with Cow Dung and other filth, and also put a Sow and
Pigs into the Bed, where they had lain the Night before; but when the King and
Queen had gone some part of their Journey, she persuaded him to return back
again to the same place, otherwise he would run a great hazard; which being
done, when the King saw the place, which was yesterday fit to entertain a
Prince, now thus spoiled, being much troubled at it, he went to the Queen, and
complained to her of it; at which she laughing replied; My Lord and Husband,
See what is become of all that Feasting and Magnificence we saw Yesterday, Are
they not all gone and past, like Water that runs into the Sea? so of all those
Vanities there remains nothing, but this Dung and Filth, that only serves to
represent the Corruption of the Soul by such Excesses; think then Sir, how soon
that Flesh will rot that is now pampered, Anno Dom. DCCXXVIII.
by Luxury; and the greater and more powerful we are, the greater will our
Torments be hereafter. She needed to say no more, for she had now brought over
her Husband to her Sentiments, which she had for some Years before constantly
instilled, tho hitherto in vain; thus after so many warlike Triumphs, being at
the highest pitch of Humane Felicity, he went to Rome, where he showed not the
least Pride in his Conversation, but without exposing himself to public view;
being there shorn a Monk, grew old in that mean Habit; nor was his Wife, who
had been the Author of this Resolution, wanting in following the same Example,
accompanying him thither her self, comforting him, and confirming him in that
Course he had undertaken by her own Example; so not living far from each other
in Mutual Love, they at last departed this Life, not without doing diverse
Miracles, if our Author may be credited.

But before we dismiss the History of this ^ing, it is fit we should take
notice of a notorious falsehood inserted by some Ignorant trifling Monk, among
the Laws of King Vid. Lambert's Arch. cap. 17.
Edward the Confessor, concerning this King Ina's Marrying Guala, the Daughter
of Cadwallader, King of the Britains; from which Daughter we are there told,
that Country was called Wallia, which in Ancienter times had the name of
Cambria, and that all the English who lived at that time, took their Wives from
the British Stock, as they did also from the English; and that this was done by
the Advice of a Common Council of the Kingdom, and that in this manner they
were made one Nation, and one People, by God's mercy; throughout the whole
Kingdom of Britain; which has given occasion to some fabulous Historians to
make this Ina King of Wales, as well as England, though without any ground.
Since none of the Ancient British, or English Chronicles, do ever mention any
such thing: For during the Reign of this Ina, Ivour the Son of Alan, Duke of
Britain, is Recorded by the Welsh Chronicles to have Reigned in Wales; but the
likeness of these two Names, I suppose gave the first occasion to this Fable.

The same Year that Ina went to Rome, the Saxon Annals relate, That King
Ethelhard (his Successor) fought with Oswald, Aetheling, which Oswald was the
Son of Aethelbald; and he the Son of Cynebald, Grandson to King Ceawlin; who as
H. Huntington, and Will. of Malmesbury tell us, Being a Young Prince of the
Blood Royal and raising a Rebellion against him in the beginning of his Reign,
endeavored to obtain the Kingdom for himself; but being worsted was forced to
Flee.

Anno Dom^ DCCXXIX.
This Year appeared a Comet, and that Holy Man Ecgbert dyed at Hye.

This Ecgbert, was the person above mentioned, who brought over the Monks of
that Monastery, to keep Easter after the Roman manner.

Anno Dom. DCCXXX.
"This Year Oswald Aetheling, dyed, (as it is supposed in Banishment.)

This Year Osric King of Northumberland was slain, and Ceolwulf succeeded him,
and held it Eight Years; who was the Son of Cutha, and he the Son of Cuthwin:
Anno Dom. DCCXXXI.
where follows his Pedigree as far as Eoppa.

This Year ( Bid also tells us,) Bertwald the Archbishop Deceased; being worn
out with Age, and Infirmities, having held that See Thirty Seven Years and Six
Months; in whose room Tatwin was made Archbishop, who had been a Priest in the
Monastery of Berodune, Anno Dom. DCCXXXI.
in the Kingdom of the Mercians: he was consecrated at Canterbury by Daniel,
Bishop of Winchester. Inguald Bishop of London, Aldwin, Bishop of Leichfield,
and Aldulf Bishop of Rochester; he was a Man famous for Religion and Prudence,
and very well skilled in the Scriptures: he sat Archbishop till Bede's Death,
and lived but Three Years after; here also follow in Bid, the Names of the
rest of the Bishops, that were his Contemporaries, which is unnecessary here to
be inserted.

But as for the state of Civil Affairs, when Bid finished his History, he
gives us this brief Account, viz. That Ceolwulf (who was then King of
Northumberland,) had been in the beginning of his Reign perplexed with great
Troubles, the end of which Bid could not then foresee; the Nation of the Picts
at this time kept their league, with the English Nation, and rejoiced to be
partakers of the Catholic Peace and Truth with the Universal Church: This he
speaks because Natan King of the Picts, had been but a little before brought
over to embrace the Romish observation of Easter, and to their manner of
shaving Priest's Crowns.

Also the Scots, who Inhabit Britain, being kept in within their own limits,
did practice no Treachery against the English Nation; as, to the Britains, tho
the greatest part, from a natural hatred to the English Nation, did oppose the
Catholic observation of Easter, yet the Divine Power, as well as Human Force,
being against them, they could not obtain their desires; for though they were
partly at their own disposal, yet were they in great measure subject to the
English; in this Peaceable and quiet time, the most part of the Northumbrian
Nation, as well Nobles as Private Persons, chose rather to make themselves and
their Children Monks, than to Educate them in a Military Life; which (says he)
What end it will have, the next Age will show.

And so indeed it did, not long after Bede's Death, for when the best Men thus
retired into Monasteries, none but the worser, or meaner sort being left, they
soon fell into horrid Rebellions and Civil Wars; one King driving out, and
Murdering another, leaving the People an easy Prey to the Danes, who in the
next Generation Invaded them: This (as Bede relates) was the Present State of
Britain, in his Time, about 285 Years after the Arrival of the English Saxons.

We being now bereft of the assistance of so good an Author, must for the
future wholly rely upon the Saxon Annals, together with the other Monkish
Writers; tho indeed for near the space of above Thirty Years last past, Bid
growing more intent upon Ecclesiastical than Civil Affairs, (being all most
wholly taken up with the reciteing of Visions and Miracles,) and mentioning
other things only by the bye, has given us so slender an account of those
times, that if we had not found some assistance from the Saxon Annals, (as well
as from other Writers,) the History of that Age, though very short and obscure,
would yet have been much more imperfect without them.

But to proceed now with our Saxon Annals.

This Year K. Ethelbald took Sumerton; and Acca was driven from his Bishopric
of Hagulstad, (I suppose by the then King of Northumberland, though no Author
expressly mentions it.) Will. of Malmesbury tells us, that this Ethelbald was
that great and powerful King of the Mercians to whom Boniface, Anno Dom.
DCCXXXIII.
Bishop of Mentz, (being then the Pope's Legate,) writ a sharp Letter, setting
forth, and reproving, the then reigning Vices of this Nation, and particularly
of that King himself; who, relying on the vain Confidence of his Justice and
Alms, was not ashamed (no more than the Noblemen of his Kingdom, by his
Example,) to commit Uncleanness even with Consecrated Nuns, which wicked
Actions the Bishop foretells would be the ruin of himself and Kingdom, as it
proved in the end.

But King Ethelbald, after he had thus taken Somerton, with an Army too
powerful to be resisted by the K. of the West Saxons, became to great, that (as
H. Huntington observes,) he made all the rest of the Provinces of England,
together with their Kings, subject to him, as far as the River Humber: This
Somerton was anciently a great Town and Castle of the West Saxon Kings, and
gave Name to that County, which we now call Somersetshire, though at present it
be but an ordinary Country Village. Also this Year the Sun was so much
eclipsed, that (as the Epitome of Bid and Ethelward relate,) on 13o Kal. Sept.
its whole Orb seemed as it were covered with a black Shield.

Anno Dom. DCCXXXIV.
This Year also the Moon appeared as it were stained with Blood, and Simeon of
Durham says it lasted one whole hour, and then a Blackness following, it
returned to its natural Color. Also Tatwin the Archbishop deceased; and
Egbryht was made Bishop of York: Now Bid also died.

But the Author of his Life (in Manuscript in the Cottonian Library) refers it
to the Year following; and the Chronicle of Mailros, with greater Truth, to the
Year 736; for he was (as his Life above cited relates,) born Anno 677, and
deceased in the 59th Year of his Age.

But since Bid our Historian deceased about this time; and that it is to him
we are beholding for the greatest part of the History of this present Period,
it is fit we give you a short account of his Life; He was born in the Province
of Northumberland, not far from the Monastery of Gyrwie (the place is now
called Yarrow,) near the Mouth of the River Were, where he was bred up from
seven Years of Age, and in which, being professed, he lived a Monk all the rest
of his Life, spending his time in the Study of the Scriptures, saying his
Prayers, or Writing Comments upon the Old and New Testaments, as also his
Ecclesiastical History, (so often cited by us,) besides diverse other Books,
containing the Lives of Saints, and other Matters, of Humane, as well as Divine
Learning; whose Titles you may find at the end of his said History: 'Till at
last, being wasted by a long Asthma, he there made an Heavenly End, as may be
seen in his Life abovementioned: So that Simeon of Durham very well observes,
that though he lay, as it were, hid in the utmost Corner of the World, yet,
after his Death, he became known in all Parts by his Learned Writings;
therefore he has, for his great Piety, as well as Learning, justly obtained
the Title of Venerable Bede: After whose decease, (as Will. of Malmesbury
rightly observes,) all knowledge of Actions passed was almost lost even to his
own Times, since none proved an Emulator of his Studies, nor a Follower of his
Learning; so that to a slothful Generation, one more slothful still succeeding,
the Love of Learning for a long time grew cold in this whole Island.

Anno Dom. DCCXXXV.
'This Year Bishop Egbriht received the Pall from Rome; but you must here
observe, that by the Pope's thus sending a Pall to the Bishop of York, he now
became an Archbishop, and consequently Metropolitan of all the Northumbrian
Provinces, that See having been, Anno Dom. DCCXXXV.
ever since the Time of Paulinus's Flight out of Northumberland into Kent, and
carrying the Archiepiscopal Pall along with him, no more than an ordinary
Bishopric, subject to the Archbishop of Canterbury, from whose Power it was
from this time exempted, and came now to have Supreme Jurisdiction over all the
Bishops in Deira and Bernicia, as far as the Pictish Kingdom.

'The Archbishop Nothelm received his Pall from Rome:] This was the new
Archbishop of Canterbury, who succeeded Tatwine. Anno Dom. DCCXXXVI.


You may take notice, that it was in those Times usual for the Pope to send a
Pall to every new Archbishop upon his Consecration, to show his Dependence upon
the Sea of Rome, and for which every Archbishop paid a great Sum of Money to
the Pope's Treasury.

This Nothelm, when he was a Presbyter of the Church of London, was he, to whom
Bid, in the Epistle before his History, owns himself beholding for diverse
ancient Monuments relating to the English Church, as also Epistles out of the
Pope's Repository.

This Year Forthere Bishop of Scireburn, Anno Dom. DCCXXXVII.
with Frithogithe Queen of the West Saxons, went to Rome.

Where (as H. Huntington tells us,) they both took upon them the Monastic
Habit; which, in those days, very many of the English Nation, of all Degrees
and Qualities; as well high as low, were wont to do. For now also (as our
Annals relate,) Ceolwulf, King of Northumberland, surrendered his Kingdom to
Eadbert his Cousin, who reigned Thirty one Years: (This Ceolwulf was he to whom
Bid dedicated his History; who, after his professing himself a Monk in the
Monastery of Lindisfarne, (as R. Hoveden relates) brought the Monks of that
place from the strict discipline of drinking only Milk or Water, to drink Wine,
and Ale, and they might very well afford it, for he brought along with him good
provisions to live easily, as great Treasures and Revenues in Land (recited at
large by Simeon of Durham) all which he bestowed on that Monastery; no wonder
then if such great Commendations be given by Monkish Writers to Kings becoming
Monks.

The same Year also, (as Simeon of Durham, and Mat. of Westminster relates)
Alwin Bishop of Lichfield dying, there were two Bishops ordained in that
Diocese, viz. Wicca at Lichfield, and Tocca, the first Bishop of Leycester,
which Town from this time continued a Bishop's See, for diverse Ages: Also this
Year (according to the Saxon Annals) the Bishops Ethelwald, and Acca deceased,
and Cynwulf was consecrated Bishop; and the same Year Ethelbald King of the
Mercians wasted the Contry of Northumberland. (And as H. Huntington adds,)
carried away as much Spoil as he had a mind to from thence: Also (as Simeon of
Durham relates) Swebriht King of the East Saxons died this Year.

Eadbriht (or Egbert) the Son of Eatta, Anno Dom. DC^XXX^X.
who was the Son of Leodwald began to Reign in the Kingdom of the Northumbers,
and held it One and Twenty Years; Egbert Archbishop of York was his Brother,
who were both buried in the City of York, in the same Church Porch.

But it there is an oversight in these Annals, for this Eadbriht above
mentioned, must be the same with Eadbriht, under the former Year.

This Year also, (according to Simeon of Durham) Swebright King of the
East Saxons died.

Anno Dom. DCCXXXIX.
Ceolwulf, late King of Northumberland, died this Year (according to Mat.
Westminster) in the Monastery of Lindisfarne: Also (as Simeon of Durham
relates) Nothelm, Archbishop of Canterbury, deceased; but the Saxon Annals
defer his Death two Years longer.

Anno Dom. DCCXL.
This Year Acca, Bishop of Hagulstad, deceased, who, as the same Author relates,
was had in great Reverence, not only during his Life, but also after his
Decease, for his great Sanctity and supposed Miracles.

Anno Dom. DCCXLI.
King Ethelred deceased, and Cuthred his Cousin succeeded in the Kingdom of the
West Saxons, and held it 16 Years.] This King made sharp War against Ethelbald
King of the Mercians, and that with various Success, (as H. Huntington tells
us,) sometimes making Peace, and then again renewing the War.

This Year also Nothelm the Archbishop of Canterbury deceased, and Cuthbriht
was Consecrated in his stead, as was also Dun Bishop of Rochester, (after the
Death of Eadulph.) 'This Year also the City of York was burnt, together with
the Monastery, (as Simeon has it.)

Anno Dom. DCCXLII.
Now was held the great Synod at Cloveshoe, where were present Ethelbald King of
the Mercians, and Cuthbert the Archbishop, with many other wise Men.

Where this Cloveshoe was, is now very uncertain, since the Name is wholly
lost; some suppose it to have been Cliffe in Kent, near Gravesend; but it is
not likely that Ethelbald, being now the chief King of England, would permit
this Council to have been held out of his own Dominions; so that Vid. Nominum,
and Locorum explan. ad fin. Chron. Saxon. nuper Edit. per Edm. Gibson.
others suppose it to have been Abingdon in Berkshire, which was anciently
called Secvesham, where (as the old Book of that Abbey tells us) was anciently
a Royal Seat of the Kings, and where there used to be great Assemblies of the
People concerning the arduous Affairs of the Mercian Kingdom.

But tho we are more certain of the Decrees of this Council, than of the Place,
where it was held; yet since it was a mere Ecclesiastical Synod, and no great
Council of that Kingdom, and that its Decrees were chiefly made in Confirmation
of the Charter of King Withred concerning free Elections to Monasteries in
Kent, according to the Directions of the Archbishop of Canterbury, I shall
refer you to the Canons themselves, as they are to be found in the December
Scriptores, and Col. 2209. Vol. 1. p. 230.
Sir H. Spelman's British Councils; and shall only take notice of this one,
that now Bishops were first ordered to visit their Diocesses once a Year.

Anno Dom. DCCXLIII.
This Year Ethelbald King of the Mercians, and Cuthred King of the West Saxons,
fought against the Britains.] H. Huntington tell us, That these two Kings now
joining their Forces brought two great Armies into the Field against the
Welsh-men, who not being able to defend themselves, were forced to fly,
leaving great Spoils behind them; so both the Kings returned home Victorious.

Anno Dom. DCCXLIV.
According to Florence of Worcester. Wilfred, the second Bishop of York of that
Name, died, after he had fate 30 Years. Also this Year, according to the Annals,

Daniel resigned the Bishopric of Winchester, being worn out by Age, and
Hunferth succeeded him; and they say, the Stars seemed to fall from Heaven. But
Simeon of Durham calls them, (with more probability,) such Lightnings as those
of that Age had never before seen.

About this time also, (according to Simeon,) there happened a great Fight
between the Picts and the Britains, I suppose he means those of Camberland, for
no other Britains lay near the Picts.

This year Bishop Daniel (abovementioned) deceased, Anno Dom. DCCXLV.
after he had been 43 years Bishop.

'This year Selred (King of the East Saxons) was slain;] But by whom, or which
way, is not here said. Anno Dom. DCCXLVI.
This Selred was Surnamed The Good, and reigned 38 years.

Switheard, King of the East Angles, dying, Elfwold succeeded him, Anno Dom.
DCCXLVII.
as the Chronicle of Mailros relates.

This Year also was held the second Council at Cloveshoe, under Cuthbert
Archbishop of Canterbury, there being present, (beside the Bishops, Abbots,
and many Ecclesiastics,) Ethelbald, King of the Mercians, with his chief Men
and Ealdermen: In which, besides many Decrees concerning the Unity of the
Church, and for promoting Peace, (which you may see at large in Sir H.
Spelman's First Volume of Councils; P. 245,
) and after, the reading of Pope Zachary's Letters to the People of England to
live more continently, These (among other) Decrees were likewise passed, viz.
1. That the Reading of the Holy Scriptures be more constantly used in
Monasteries. 2. That Priests receive no Reward for baptizing Children, or for
other Sacraments. 3. That they learn the Creed, and the Lord's Prayer in
English; and are likewise to understand and interpret into their own Tongue the
Words of Consecration in the Celebration of Mass, and also of Baptism, etc.

This year Cynric Aetheling (that is, Anno Dom. DCCXLVIII.
Prince of the Blood Royal of the West Saxons) was slain; and Eadbriht, King of
Kent, died, after six Years Reign; and Ethelbryht, the Son of King Withred,
succeeded him.] This Cynric was he, whom H. Huntington relates to be Son of
Cuthred, King of the West Saxons; who, tho young in Years, was a great Warrior
for his time, yet perished in a sudden Sedition of his own Soldiers, but where
he does not say.

Simeon, affirms, That Elfwald, King of the East Angles, now dying, Anno Dom.
DCCXLIX.
Hunbeanna and Albert divided that Kingdom between them; but what relation they
had to the late King, he does not tell us.

This year Cuthred, King of the West Saxons, Anno Dom. DCCL.
in the 12th Year of his Reign, fought against Ethelune, that courageous
Ealderman.] H. Huntington calls him a bold Earl, who moved Sedition against his
Lord; and tho he were inferior in the number of his Soldiers, yet maintained
the Fight a great while by his sole Courage and Conduct; but while he was ready
to get the Victory, a Wound he then unfortunately received, so disabled him,
and disheartened his Men, that the King's (being the stronger, as well as the
juster) Side, did thereby prevail.

Also the same Year (according to Simeon of Durham, and the Chronicle of
Mailros,) Eadbert King of Northumberland led Kynwulf Bishop of Lindisfarne,
Prisoner to the City of Beban, who it seems had some ways rebelled against him,
for he then also caused the Cathedral Church of Lindisfarne to be besieged.

The same Year (as Bede's Continuator relates) Eadbert, King of Northumberland,
made War upon the Picts, and subdued all the Country of Kyle, with other
Territories, joining them to his own Dominions.

Anno Dom. DCCLIII.
This Year (according to the Saxon Annals) King Cuthred fought against the
Britains:] (But of this, the Welsh Chronicles are silent, as well as other
Authors.) The same Year also, (being the 12th Year of his Reign,) King Cuthred
fought against Aethelbald, King of the Mercians, at Beorgford (now Burford) in
Oxfordshire, and there put him to flight.

But H. Huntington gives us this Battle more at large, That King Cuthred being
not any longer able to bear the Insolences and Impositions of that proud King
Ethelbald, took Arms, and met him with an Army in the Field, preferring his
Liberty before his Life, being encouraged by Earl Ethelune abovementioned, who
it seems was now cured, and reconciled to the King, relying upon whose Courage
and Council, he resolved to undertake this War; but Ethelbald, as a King of
Kings, had brought along with him, besides his own Mercians, the Kentish Men,
with the East Angles and Saxons, which made all together a very great Army, and
being both drawn up on the Spot, they approached each other, whilst Earl
Athelune marching before the West Saxons, carried the Royal Standard, (being a
Golden Dragon,) and in the beginning of the Battle challenging him to a single
Combat, there slew the Standard Bearer of the Enemy; upon which a great Shout
being given, Cuthred's Soldiers were very much encouraged; then both Armies
engaging, there followed a great and bloody Fight, of which our Author gives us
a long and pompous Relation. Pride and Ambition (says he) inciting the
Mercians, and fear of Servitude provoking the West Saxons, to fight it to the
last; but wherever Earl Ethelune charged the Enemies, he with the force of his
invincible Battle-Axe destroyed all before him; but at last K. Ethelbald and
the Earl meeting, they fought together with great Obstinacy and Resolution;
till GOD, who resists the Proud, so discouraged this King, that he turned his
Back, and fled, whilst his Men still fought on; yet at last they were all
routed; nor from that time, to the day of his Death, did GOD give him any more
Success.

Anno Dom. DCCLIV.
Cuthred, King of the West Saxons, departed this Life; and (according to
Simeon) Sigebert, his Cousin, succeeded him: Also Cyneheard succeeded in the
Bishopric of Winchester after Hunferth, and the same year the City of
Canterbury was burnt.

Anno Dom. DCCLV.
This Year was very remarkable, for now (as our Annals inform us) Cynwulf, with
the Wife and Noble Men of the West Saxons, deprived King Sigebert of the whole
Kingdom for his Cruelty and Injustice, (except Hampshire,) which he kept for
some time, until he slew one Cumbran an Ealderman, (who had continued longest
with him;) so that at last Sigebert was driven into Andred's Wood, where he
remained till such time as a certain Hogheard ran him through with a Lance at
Pruutes-Flood, and thereby revenged the Death of Cumbran the Ealderman. This
King Cynwulf often overcame the Britains in Fight, but after he had governed
the Kingdom about 30 Years, he was slain by Cyneheard Aetheling, brother to
Sigebert; as shall be shown hereafter.

H. Huntington is very particular in the Reasons, and manner of King Sigebert's
Deposition. and tells us, That being puffed up with the good Succ^ss of his
Predecessors, he grew intolerable to his Subjects; for he had oppressed them
by all manner of ways, and wrested the Laws for his own Advantage, insomuch
that this Cumbran; one of his noblest Earls, at the Desire of the People,
represented their Grievances to this cruel King, who, because he persuaded him,
that he should govern them more gently, and thereby become more beloved both by
God and Man, Anno Dom. DCCLV.
he presently commanded him to be slain, and so daily increased in his Tyranny,
till in the beginning of his Second Year, the Great Men and People of the whole
Kingdom being gathered together, by the Provident Deliberation, and Unanimous
Consent of them All he was expelled the Kingdom; and Cinewulf, a notable young
Man of the Blood Royal, was Elected King in his room.

This is the first Example we have in our English History, of the Solemn
Deposition of a King, by the Authority of the Great Council of the Kingdom,
concerning whom our Author bids us remark the manifold Justice and Providence
of God, how sometimes it does not only recompense Kings according to their
Merits in the World to come, but also in this; for oftentimes setting up Wicked
Kings for the Deserved Punishment of their Subjects, he lets some of them
Tyrannize a great while, that so a wicked People might be punished, and the
King becoming more wicked, may be tormented for ever; as may be seen in
Aethelbald, King of Mercia abovementioned, whilst God cuts others short by a
speedy Destruction, lest his People, being oppressed by too great Tyranny,
should not be able to subsist under it, so that the immoderate Wickedness of a
Prince does often accelerate his Punishment.

The same Year, (according to Caradoc's Chronicle published by Dr. Powel,)
Conan Tindaethwy, Son of Rodri Molwynoc, began his Reign over the Britains in
Wales.

This Year also, (according to the Saxon Annals,) Aethelbald, King of the
Mercians, was slain at Seccandune (now Secington) in Warwickshire, after he had
reigned 41 Years; and then Beornred usurped the Kingdom, and held it but a
little while, and that with great Trouble; for the same year King Offa expelled
Beornred, and taking Possession of the Throne, held it 39 Years; but his Son
Egberth no more than 140 Days. This Offa was the Son of Thincerth, and he the
Son of Eanwulf: The rest of his Pedigree, as far as Woden, I omit.

Abbot Bromton's Chronicle farther adds, concerning the Death of King
Ethelbald, That he was slain in a Fight at the Place abovementioned, yet was
it not by the Enemy, but by the Treachery of this Beornred.

Ingulph, in his History of Croyland, tells us, That King Ethelbald having
founded the Abbey of Ripendune (now Repton) in Derbyshire, (being the most
famous of that Age,) was there buried; and also of this Beornred, (whom he
calls a Tyrant,) that he did not long enjoy his Usurpation, for it seems he was
not of the Blood Royal of the Mercian Kings; but when he was Expelled, Offa
succeeded him by the General Consent of the Nobles of Mercia; but Mat.
Westminster (who puts the Succession of King Offa two Years later) is more
particular in this Transaction, and relates, That this Beornred governing very
Tyrannically, the whole Nation of the Mercians rose up against him; so that
both the Nobility and Commons joining together, under the Conduct of Offa, a
valiant young Man, Nephew to the late King Aethelbald, they expelled Beornred
the Kingdom; and then Offa, by the General Consent of the Clergy and Laity of
that Kingdom, was crowned King. This was that King Offa, who afterward became
a Terror to all the Kings of England.

Eadbert, King of Northumberland, and Unust, King of the Picts, Anno Dom,
DCCLVI.
brought an Army against the City Alkuith, which the Britains delivered upon
Conditions. This is from the Authority of Simeon of Durham, and lets us see,
that this City (now in Scotland) was then in the Hands of the Northern Britains.

Anno Dom. DCCLVII.
This year Eadbert, King of the Northumbers, was shorn a Monk, and Ofwulf, his
Son, succeeded him, yet Reigned but one Year, being slain by the Treachery of
his own Servants on the 9th of the Kal. August following, tho without any just
Cause, as I can find.

Concerning this Eadbert, Simeon of Durham, in his History of that Church,
tells us, That after he had reigned 21 Years, and ruled his Kingdom with great
Wisdom and Courage, so that all his Adversaries being either overcome by force,
or else submitting themselves to him; the English, Pictish, and Scottish Kings,
not only maintained Peace and Friendship with him, but rejoiced to do him
Honor; so that the Fame of his Grandeur spreading as far as France, King Pipin
not only made a League with him, but sent him great Presents; and the Kings,
his Neighbors, when he was about to resign the Crown, had him in that Esteem,
that they offered him part of their own Dominions, on Condition, that he would
not lay down his Charge; but he refused it, and resigned his Kingdom to Usulf,
his Son.

Also about this time, (according to the British Chronicles,) there was a great
Battle fought at Hereford, between the Britains and the Saxons, where Dyfnwal
ap Theodore was slain: But they do not tell us who obtained the Victory.

Anno Dom. DCCLVIII.
This Year Cathbert, Arch Bishop of Canterbury, deceased, having fate
Archbishop 18 Years. Also (according to Florence) about this time Swithred
reigned over the East, and Osmund over the South Saxons; as also Beorne was
King over the East Angles.

Anno Dom. DCCLIX.
This Year- Bregowin was consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury at the Feast of
St. Michael; and Ethelwold, Surnamed Moll, began to reign over the Northumbers,
and at last resigned the Crown.

Anno Dom. DCCLX.
'Ethelbryght, King of Kent, deceased; he was the Son of King Wythred. Of this
King, William of Malmesbury records nothing remarkable, but that the City of
Canterbury was burnt in his Reign.

Ceolwulf also, late King of Northumberland, departed this Life the same Year,
dying a Monk in the Isle of Lindisfarne.] But Simeon of Durham prolongs his
Life 4 Years longer.

Anno Dom. DCCLXI.
This Year was a very sharp Winter; and Ethelwald Moll, King of Northumberland,
slew Duke Oswin at Edwinsclife on the Eighth of the Ides of August.

But tho who this Duke was, our Annals do not tell us; yet Simeon of Durham,
and Roger of Hoveden relate, he was one of those Great Northumbrian Lords, that
rebelled against the King; who gained the Victory over him, and those Rebels
that took his part.

Anno Dom. DCCLXII.
'This Year deceased Bergowine, the Archbishop abovementioned. But if he sat
4 Years, (as these Annals affirm,) he could not have died till the Year
following; in which also,

Anno Dom. DCCLXIII.
Janbryht (who is also called Lambert) was now consecrated Archbishop of
Canterbury about 40 Days after Christmas. Also Frithwald, Bishop of Witherne,
died on the Nones of May; he had been Consecrated in York on the 18th Kalends
of September, in the Reign of Ceolwulf, and sat Bishop 29 Years; and then
Piyhtwin (or Pechtwin) was Consecrated Bishop of Witerne at Aelfet, on the 16th
Kal. of August.

'Janbryht, the Archbishop, Anno Dom. DCCLXIV.
received his Pall] This was (as Florence of Worcester informs us) from Pope
Paul I.

'This Year also, (as Simeon of Durham relates,) there was much Mischief done
by Fire, at London, Winchester, and other Places.

'Alhred, King of Northumberland, began to reign, Anno Dom. DCCLXV.
and reigned Eight Years; ( Ethelwold Moll having now by Death quitted that
Kingdom)

The manner of which is given us more perfectly by William of Malmesbury, and
Roger Hoveden, (viz.) That Ethelwold lost the Kingdom of Northumberland at
Winchan-hea 1o Kal. November, being murdered by the Treachery of this Albred,
who succeeded him, and was also of the Race of Ida, being his Great Nephew.

The same Year also, (according to De Gestis Pontif. l. i.
William of Malmesbury,) Offa, King of the Mercians, envying the Greatness of
the Archbishops of Canterbury, did, by most noble Presents made to the Pope,
obtain a Pall for the Sea of Lichfield, that is, That it should be for the
future an Archbishopric, and that all the Bishops of the Provinces of the
Kingdom of Mercia, and the East Angles, should be subject to it; and this he
not only gained, notwithstanding the Opposition and Remonstrances of
Archbishop Jambert to the contrary, but also bereaved the Archbishopric of
Canterbury of all its Lands, which lay within the Mercian Territories; which
Injustice continued during the whole Reign of King Offa, till Kenulph his
Successor, by the Intercession of Eanbald then Archbishop of York, restored
the Sea of Canterbury to its ancient Rights.

This Year deceased Egbert Archbishop of York, Anno Dom. DCCLXVI.
(13o Kal. Sept.) who sat Bishop 36 Years.] This is he who was Base Brother to
the King of the same Name, and regained the Pall to his See, after it had been
without it ever since the time of Paulinus: He also built a Noble Library at
York, which was then counted one of the best in Europe; for William of
Malmesbury relates, that Alcuin (the greatest Scholar of his time) once told
the Emperor Charles, That if he would give him such Books of exquisite
Learning, as he had in his own Country by the Pious Industry of his Master
Archbishop Eghert, then he would instruct and send him back some young Men,
who should carry over the choicest Flowers of the English Learning into France.

(According to Simeon of Durham) Albert was now ordained Archbishop of York.
Anno Dom. DCCLXVII.


'Eadbert, the Son of Eatta, deceased on 14o Kal. September.] This Eadbert had
been formerly King of Northumberland, Anno Dom. DCCLXVIII.
and (according to Simeon of Durham) died 10 Years after his taking the Habit
of a Monk, and was buried at York.

Also this Year, (as the Welsh Chronicles acquaint us,) by the means of
Flbodius, that Learned and Pious Bishop of North Wales, it was decreed in a
General Synod of the British Nation, That Easter should be kept after the
Custom of Rome; so that all Differences between that Church and the British now
ceased.

'Charles, King of the Franks, began his Reign;] for Pepin, Anno Dom. DCCLXIX.
his Father, died this Year, (as R. Hoveden informs us:) Also the fair City of
Cataract in Yorkshire was burnt by B^ornred the Mercian Tyrant; and He also
perished by Fire the same Year.

Anno Dom. DCCLXXI.
This Year (according to Simeon of Durham, and R. Hoveden,) Offa, King of the
Mercians, subdued the Nation of the Hestings by force of Arms; but who these
People were, or where they inhabited, no Author informs us. Mr. Lambert, in his
Glossary at the end of the December Scriptores, will have them to be Danes; but I
see no reason for it here, since the Danes were not then settled in England.

Anno Dom. DCCLXXII.
'This Year died Milred the Bishop.] Florence says, he was Bishop of the Wiccii,
(that is, of the Diocese of Worcester,) and was in great Reputation for his
Sanctity.

Anno Dom. DCCLXXIII.
This Year Albert, Archbishop of York, received his Pall from Pope Adrian, as
Simeon informs us.

Anno Dom. DCCLXXIV.
This Year the Northumbrians expelled their King Albred from York about Easter,
and chose Ethelred, the Son of Moll, (once King,) for their Lord: He reigned 4
Years.

Of which Transaction, Roger Hoveden gives us this particular Relation; That
King Alhred being deposed by the Common Council, and Consent of his own
Subjects, and forsaken of all his Great Men, was forced to retire first to the
City of Bebban, (afterward called Banbarough-Castle,) from whence he betook
himself to Cynoth, King of the Picts, with but very few Followers.

The same Year also appeared a Red Cross in the Heavens after Sunset, and the
Mercians and Kentish-men fought at Ottanford (now Otford) in Kent.] But neither
the Saxon Annals, nor any other, vouchsafe to tell us what was the Quarrel, nor
who were the Commanders on either side, nor yet what was the Success. Also
strange Serpents were seen in the Province of the South Saxons.] Mat.
Westminster places this Prodigy two Years after, and says, They seemed to creep
out of the Earth.

Anno Dom. DCCLXXV.
This Year Cynwulf, King of the West Saxons, and Offa, King of the Mercians,
fought at Binsington) (now Bensington) in Oxfordshire, but Offa took the Town:]
So it seems Cynwulf had the worst of it. Here follows in the Peterburgh Copy
another Relation concerning that Abbey, which is thus* That

In the Reign of King Offa there was a certain Abbot of Medeshamstead, called
Beonna, who, with the Consent of the Monks of his Monastery, leased out to
Cuthbriht the Ealderman, X Bonde-land (that is, the Ground of ten Bondmen, or
Villains,) at Swinesheafde, with the Meadows and Pastures, and all other Things
thereunto belonging; upon this Condition, That Cuthbriht should pay the Abbot
Fifty Pounds, and one Night's Entertainment every Year, or else Thirty
Shillings in Money; and that after his Death the Lands should again revert to
the Monastery: To which Grant, King Offa, King Egferth, Arch Bishop Higebert,
the Bishop Ceolwulf, the Bishop Inwona, with Beon the Abbot, and many other
Bishops, Abbots, and Great Men, were Witnesses. I have inserted this Passage,
tho it does not relate to the Civil History of these Times, because it is the
First Example of a Lease of this kind, and seems to have been done in a great
Council of the Kingdom, where these Kings were present, which was then
necessary for such a Grant.

Also in the time of this King Offa, (as the Peterburgh Copies relate,) there
was a certain Ealderman, called Brordan, who desired of the King, That for his
sake he would free a certain Monastery of his, called Wocingas, because he
intended to give it to St. Peter, and to the Church of Medeshamsted, one Pusa
being then Abbot of it: Anno Dom. DCCLXXV.
This Pusa succeeded Beonna, and the King loved him very well; wherefore he
freed the Church of Wocingas by the King's consent with that of the Bishop,
Earls, and all other Men's consents; so that no body should from thenceforth
have any duty or Tribute besides, St. Peter and the Abbot; this was done in the
King's Town, called Freoricburne.

Pehtwin, Anno Dom. DCCLXXVI.
Bishop of Witerne (called in Latin Candida Casa) deceased XIII. Kal. October. he
was Bishop Fourteen Years, and had been bred under Aldhelm, that Pious Bishop
of Winchester; and the same Year Ethelbert was consecrated Bishop of that See
at York, XVII. Kal. Junii.

This Year (according to the Welsh Chronicle) the South-Welshmen destroyed
great part of Mercia with Fire and Sword: As also

The Summer following, all the Welshmen, Anno Dom. DCCLXXVII.
both of North and South Wales, gathered themselves together, and, Invading the
Kingdom of Mercia, made great spoil, by burning, and plundering the Country;
whereupon King Offa was forced to make Peace with the other Saxon Kings, and to
bend his whole Forces against the Welsh Men, who not being able to encounter so
great a strength as he then brought against them; were forced to quit all the
plain Country, between the Rivers of Severne and Wye, and retired into the
Mountains; whereupon Offa perceiving this, seized upon all the Country, and
planted Saxons in their places; and annexing it to his own Kingdom, caused that
famous Ditch, or Trench, to be made from Sea to Sea, betwixt his Kingdom and
Wales, whereby he might the better defend his Country from the Incursions of
the Welsh hereafter: This Ditch is seen at this day in diverse places, and is
called Welsh, Clawdh Offa, (i.e.) Offa's Ditch.

This Year Aethebald and Hearbert, killed Three chief Gerifs or Governors,
Ealdwulf the Son of Bosa at Cyningeselife, (i. e.) Kings Cliffe; Anno Dom.
DCCLXXVIII.
and Cynwulf and Ecga at Helathyrn, XI. Kal. Aprilis; then Alfwold took the
Kingdom, ( Aethelred being Expelled the Land,) and Reigned Ten Years.

But H. Huntington, and Simeon of Durham, gives us a more exact account of this
Matter; that Aethelred, King of Northumberland, having caused Three of his
Nobles, Aldwulf, Kinwulf, and Ecga, to be treacherously slain by two of the
same rank; The Year following his Subjects Rebelling against him, they first
slew Aldwulf, General of the King's Army, in Flight at the place above
mentioned, as they also did the two other Commanders in the same manner; so
that King Aethelred's Captains being all slain, and his hopes as well as his
Forces defeated, he was forced to flee into another Country, and so Elfwald the
Son of Oswulf succeeded him, tho not without Civil Broils: He was a Just and
Pious Prince; yet could not escape the hard Fate of his Predecessors, as you
will see in due time

The same Year, (as the Laudean Copy relates,) King Charles entered Spain, and
destroyed the Cities of Pampelona, and Caesar Augusta, (now called Saragosa,)
and having joined his Army, subdued the Saracens, and received Hostages from
them; and then returned by Narbon and Gascony into France.

This Year the chief Gerifs or Governors of Northumberland, burnt Beorne the
Ealderman in Seletune; 19 Kal. Januarij. Anno Dom. DCCLXXX.


Roger Hoveden, calls these Gerifs, Osbald, and Aethelheard, and H. Huntington
says, They burnt this Ealderman, or Chief Justice of the Kingdom, Anno Dom.
DCCLXXX.
because he was more Rigid and Severe, than in Reason he ought to have been.

The same Year the Ancient Saxons and Franks fought against each other,] in
which Battle, Charles King of the Franks gained the Victory, having wasted the
Saxon Territories with Fire and Sword, and laid them to his own Dominions; as
not only our own, but the French Historians relate.

Also, Bishop Aethelheard dyed at York, and Eanbald was consecrated to the same
See; and Cynebald the Bishop resigned his See at Lindisfarne, and Alchmuna
Bishop of Hagulstead deceased, 7 th Id. Sept. and Higbert was consecrated in
his stead, the 6 th of the Nones of October. as likewise Higbald was consecrated
at Soccabrig to be Bishop of Lindisfarne. Also King Allwold sent to Rome, to
demand the Pall for Eanbald, Archbishop of York.

This Year Werburh, the Wife of King Ceolred (late King of the Mercians, Anno
Dom. DCCLXXXII.
) deceased, (at her Nunnery of Chester, where she was Abbess, and where the
Church is dedicated to her Memory:) also Cenwulf Bishop of Lindisfarne died;
there was likewise now a Synod at Aclea. But under what King this Council was
held, or whereabouts the place is, or what Decrees were there made, our
Histories are altogether silent in, but Sir H. Spelman, in his Page 305.
first Volume of Councils, supposes it to have been at a place of that Name, in
the Bishopric of Durham, where there are two places so called, the one Alca,
and the other Scole Aclea.

This Year, Cyneheard slew Cynewulf, King of the West Saxons, but Cyneheard
himself was there slain, Anno Dom. DCCLXXXIV.
and Eighty Four Men with him: but these Annals in the beginning of this King's
Reign, under Anno Dom. DCCLV. have given us a full account of this King's
unfortunate end, which I rather choose to insert in its proper place, and was
thus; That he endeavoring to Expel Cyneheard (Brother to the late King
Sigebert out of the Kingdom;) in the mean time when he knew that the King with
a small Company was gone to Merinton, (now called Merton in Surrey,) to visit a
certain Woman, he there besieged him, and beset the Chamber where he was,
before the King's Attendants could know any thing of it; which, as soon as the
King perceived, he got out of Doors, and Manfully defended himself; but all of
them assaulting the King at once, they in the end slew him, (tho as Florence
relates, he first sorely wounded Cynheard;) but when the King's Thanes, who
were then in the same House, heard the noise, they all ran thither as fast as
they could get themselves ready; but Cyneheard Aetheling promised them great
Rewards, and Pardon, if they would take his part, which none of them would
agree to, but presently all fought against him, till they were all kill^d,
except one British Hostage, who was grievously wounded; but the next morning
the King's Thanes that remained at home, coming to know that he was killed, (
viz.) Osric, the Ealderman, and Wiverth his Thane, and all those whom he had
left behind him, they all came thither on Horseback, and when they found
Cyneheard Aetheling in the Town, where the King lay dead, and having the doors
fast locked upon them, as they approached and endeavored to break in; Cynheard
promised to grant them all their Liberties, and all their Lands and Goods, with
great Riches and Honors, if they would deliver up the Kingdom to him
peaceably; telling them moreover, That he had some of their Kinsmen with him,
who would never desert him; but they answered, Anno Dom. DCCLXXXIV.
That none of their Relations were dearer to them than their own Lord, and they
would never obey his Murderers; and they then farther told their Kinsmen, That
if they would leave their Leader, they should all be safe, from whom they also
received this Answer, That the like had been already promised to those who were
of the King's Party; and said, That as they then refused their promise, so
themselves should now refuse the like from them, then they fought at the Gates
until they were broken open, and the Conspirators forced to retire within them,
but there Cyneard Aetheling was Slain, and all those that were with him, except
one, who was the Ealderman's Godson, to whom, being grievously wounded, he
granted his Life. This King Cynwulf Reigned One and Thirty Years, and his Body
lies buried at Wintencester, but that of the Aetheling at Axanmister, (now
Axminster in Devon-shire,) being both of them descended from Cerdic, the first
King of that Kingdom.

This same Year also, Brihtic began his Reign over the West Saxons, whose Body
lies buried at Werham, and he was also descended from Cerdic in a right Line.
In those times King Aealmond Reigned in Kent, he was the Father of King Egbert,
and Egbert was the Father of Athulf, (or Athelwulf.)

But the Author of these Annals is here mistaken, for tho one Aealmond was
Father of King Egbert, yet was there never any of that Name King of Kent.

Bothwin, Abbot of Ripun, deceased this Year, Anno Dom. DCCLXXXV
and the same Year was held that troublesome Synod at Cealchythe, where
Archbishop Janbryht lost part of his Province to the Sea of Litchfield; also
Higebryht was this Year chosen Arch Bishop of Litchfield, by King Offa, and
Egbert his Son, was anointed King with him; and in those times there were
Legates sent from Pope Adrian to renew the Faith, which had been sent us by
Augustine.

Note, the Pope had before granted the Pall to Litchfield, and thereby made it
an Archbishopric, but it was not till the following Year confirmed in a
general Synod of the Kingdom.

This Year that great Synod, or Council of Calcuith (above mentioned) was held
by Gregory, Bishop of Ostia, and Theophilact, Bishop of Tudertum, Anno Dom.
DCCXXXVI.
(then the Pope's Legates in England;) at which were also present Offa, King of
the Mercians, and Cinwulf, King of the West Saxons; Vid. Spelman's Counc^l.
vol. 1.
where not only the Nicene Creed was again received, and confirmed, as also the
Seven first General Councils; but many Canons were made concerning Matters of
Religion, and Ecclesiastical Discipline; of all which I shall here recite some
that I think proper.

The second of these Decrees is, That Baptism be performed at the times
appointed by the former Canons of the Church, and no other; and that all Men in
general learn the Creed and the Lord's Prayer; that Godfathers shall be
answerable for those Children for whom they stand, till they come to Years
capable of learning the Creed and the Lords Prayer.

The Twelfth Canon is, That in the Election or Ordination of Kings, no Man
should permit the Assent or Vote of Evil Men to prevail; but Kings shall be
Lawfully Elected by the Clergy and Elders of the People, not begot of Adultery
or Incest; because, as in our times, an Adulterer according to the Canons
cannot arrive to the Priesthood, so neither can he be the Lord's Anointed, and
the Heir of his Country, and King of the whole Kingdom, Anno Dom. DCCXXXVI.
who is not begot of Lawful Matrimony. The rest of it is for rendering Honor
and Obedience to Kings, without speaking Evil of them, and the chief Texts out
of St. Peter and St. Paul, are cited to that purpose. It is also there forbid,
That any Man should conspire the Death of the King, because he is the Lord's
Anointed; and if any shall be guilty of that wickedness; if he be a Bishop or
one in Priest's Orders, he shall be deprived, as Judas was cast out from his
Apostleship: There is also here likewise cited out of Scripture several
examples of those that have been punished either for conspiring the Death of
Kinsg, or having actually killed them.

The Sixteenth Canon is, That Bastards, and those begotten of Nuns, shall not
inherit, which is the first Decree we find of this kind.

The Seventeenth Canon is, That Tithes shall be paid according to the
Scriptures, viz. Thou shall bring the Tenth part of all thy increase, when thou
bring thy first fruits into the House of the Lord thy God; there is likewise
cited the Text in Malachi Chap. 3. concerning the paying of Tithes, and
therefore, says the Canon, we exhort all Men, that they pay Tithes of
whatsoever they possess; because it is God's special Commandment, that every
Man live, and give Alms of the other 9 parts.

Whence you may observe, that as this is the first Decree of any Council in
England, concerning payment of Tithes, so also is it hereby declared that they
are due by Divine Right.

The Nineteenth Decree is, against Men's observing any Pagan Rites, and
particularly of making marks and scars in any part of their Bodies for any
false God. There are also other Decrees which seem very trivial, as against
cutting off Horses Ears, or Tails, and slitting their Noses; as also against
eating Horseflesh, which it seems was then much in fashion amongst the Common
sort of People; as also against casting of Lots for the deciding of Civil
Controversies.

It also here appears by the Address of the Pope's Legates, made to him at the
end of this Council, that there were two distinct Sessions of it; the first was
held before King Aelfwald, and Arch Bishop Eanbald, and all the Bishops
belonging to the Northumbrian Kingdom; as also all the Senators, Ealdermen, and
People of that Country, who when these Decrees were proposed to them, did all
of them with great devotion promise to observe them, and subscribed them with
the Sign of the Cross. Then follow the subscriptions of the King, the
Archbishop of York, and the rest of the Bishops of that Province; after them
follow also the Subscriptions of the Presbyters and Deacons of Churches,
Judges, Chief and Noble Men, some of whom do there subscribe for all the rest.

Where this Council was held for the Kingdom of Northumberland is uncertain;
but the second Session of it was held at Calcuith, now supposed to be in the
Kingdom of Mercia, which, as also in the conclusion of this Council, it is thus
recited; King Offa with all the Senators of his Kingdom, with Janbryht,
Archbishop of Canterbury, and the other Bishops of that Province, the same
Decrees being read before the Council, as well in Latin as in Saxon, so that
all might understand them, they all agreed with one accord to observe them;
then follow the Subscriptions of King Offa, and the Archbishop of Canterbury,
with diverse of the Nobles there present, who subscribed in the name of all the
rest.

But Will. of Malmesbury in his First Book, de Pontif, Anno Dom. DCCXXXVI
has given us a further account of the Acts of this Council, than what are
expressed in the Canons themselves; viz. That in this Council, Archbishop
Janbryht was forced to resign part of his Province to the Bishop of Litchfield,
who thereby became an Archbishop; so that there remained no more Bishops under
the Jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Canterbury, but those of London,
Winchester, Rochester, and Shireburne: But tho it had been obtained by King
Offa from the Pope by great importunity, and false suggestions, that
Archbishop Janbryht should be thus deprived of his Primacy; yet was it not
counted of any force till it was confirmed in a great Council, and that the
Archbishop of Canterbury himself had consented to it.

The same Author further adds, That also in this Council, Offa the most potent
King of the Mercians, did then cause his Eldest Son Egfred, a Comely and
Valiant Young Man, and endued with all good Qualities, to be solemnly Crowned
King; who obeying his Father in all things, Reigned together with him so long
as he lived.

But it is very observable, that neither Alrich, then King of Kent, nor any of
his Deputies, did appear at this Council; for which I can give no other Reason,
than that this King did not approve of the Removal of the chief Archiepiscopal
See from Canterbury in his own Dominions, to Litchfield in another Prince's
Territories.

But as Will. of Malmesbury observes, This Violence done to the Sea of
Canterbury* tho it lasted all the Reign of King Offa, and also during the
Lifetime of Archbishop Janbryht, De Pontif. l. 1.
who spared neither cost nor pains to get his See restored to its Ancient
Dignity; yet was it all to no purpose, till such time as Kenwulf, King of the
Mercians, restored the Archbishopric of Canterbury to its former Rights,
Litchfield becoming again an ordinary Bishopric, subject to the Sea of
Canterbury to this day, having continued an Archbishopric only during the
times of two Archbishops, viz. for the space of about Eleven Years. But it is
time to return to Civil Affairs.

The same Year (as H. Huntington relates) the Sign of the Cross appeared of it
self upon Men's Clothes, which (if true) is wonderful to future Ages.

King Brithric now married Eadburghe, the Daughter of King Offa, which was done
(as Will. of Malmesbury relates) to strengthen his Interest with his
Neighboring Princes; also about those times (as Ethelwerd, Anno Dom.
DCCLXXXVII.
and the Saxon Annals inform us,) arrived in the West Country three Ships of
Danes, or Norwegians, from Herethaland, (that is, the Country of Pirates;)
these landing, the King's Geref or Officer coming thither on Horseback
endeavored to carry them to the King's Town (of Dorchester,) because he knew
not from whence they came; but he was there slain with those that attended on
him; after which great Multitudes of People flocking in, the Danes were at last
forced to Flee to their Ships, and leave their prey behind them; these were the
first Danish Ships that ever infested the English Nation.

Where Note, That the same People who are first called Normans in the Saxon
Annals, are there also named Danes in other places; which shows, that the Danes
and Normans were then looked upon to be one and the same People.

Anno Dom. DCCLXXXVII.
This Year there was a general Synod assembled at Pyncanhale, or Finkenhale,
(now Finkley in the Bishopric of Durham, then part of the Kingdom of
Northumberland) where Eanbald Archbishop of York, presided: whose Decrees you
may see in Sir H. Spelman's 1 Vol. of Councils; but its constitutions being
wholly about Ecclesiastical Discipline, and the right observation of Easter, it
is beside my purpose to take any further notice of them.

This Year also, (according to the Annals) Albert the Abbot deceased; and King
Charles passed through Almany, to the very Borders of Bavaria, (as the Latin
Text of the Laudean Copy relates.)

Anno Dom. DCCLXXXIX.
Alfwold, King of Northumberland, was slain by one Sicga on the IX. Kal. October.

This King is said by Simeon of Durham, and Roger Hoveden, to have been a very
Just and Worthy Prince, and that he was Slain by the Treachery of this Sicga,
who was one of his chief Noblemen, and being Murdered at Cilceaster, (near the
Pict's Wall,) there was frequently seen a Light from Heaven over the Place,
where he was Slain: He was buried in the Cathedral Church of Hagulstad, with
great Solemnity, and there was afterward a Church built in the Place where he
was killed: and Osred, the Son of Alchr^d, Reigned after him, who was the
Nephew of King Alfwold: There was also at this time another Synod held at Aclea.

The same Year likewise (according to Mat. Westminster,) Offa, King of the
Mercians, fought against Kenwulf, King of the West Saxons, at the Siege of
Bensington Castle: But Kenwulf being worsted was forced to flee, and so Offa
took the Castle.

Now Janbryht the Archbishop deceased, and Ethelheard the Abbot was elected
Archbishop. Anno Dom. DCCXC.
Also Osred, King of the Northumbers, was betrayed, and driven out of his
Kingdom; and Ethelred, the Son of Ethelwald (Surnamed Mull,) reigned after him,
or rather was again restored to the Kingdom, having reigned there before, as
has been already shown.

But Simeon of Durham adds farther, that this Osred, the late King of this
Kingdom, having been also shaven a Monk against his Will, escaped again out of
the Monastery, into the Isle of Man. But the next Year,

As Simeon relates, Oelf and Oelfwin, Sons of Alfwold, formerly King of
Northumberland, Anno Dom. DCCXCI.
were drawn by fair Promises from the Principal Church of York, and afterward,
at the Command of King Ethelred, cruelly put to Death at Wonwalderem^re, a
Village by the great Pool in Lancashire, (now called Winanderemere.)

Also about this time, (according to the same Author,) one Eardulf, an Earl,
being taken and brought to Ripun, was there Sentenced by the said King to be
put to Death, without the Gate of the Monastery; whose Body, when the Monks had
carried to the Church, with solemn Dirges, and placed under a Pavilion, was
about Midnight found alive. But this Relation is very imperfect, for it neither
tells us how he escaped Death; nor how he was conveyed away, though we find him
five Years after this made King of Northumberland.

This Year (as Simeon of Durham and Mat. Westminster relate,) Charles King of
France sent certain Synodal Decrees into England; in which alas* (for with
great Grief, our Author speaks it) were found many inconvenient things, and
altogether contrary to the true Faith: For it had been decreed in a Council at
Constantinople, by more than Three Hundred Bishops, that Images ought to be
adored, Anno Dom. CCXCI.
which the Church of God does (say they) wholly abominate.

Then Albinus, (that is our Alcuin,) wrote an Epistle, wherein he proved it by
the Authority of the Holy Scriptures to be utterly Unlawful; and this he
offered, together with the Book it self, to the King of France, on the behalf
of all our Bishops and Great Men; Vid. Sir. H. Spe^man 's Council, 1. vol. p.
307.
and this Letter of Alcuinus is thought to have wrought such an effect on the
Synod of Francfort, assembled about two Years after, that the Worship of Images
was therein solemnly condemned.

From which it is evident, that Image Worship, as now practiced in the Greek
and Roman Churches, was not then received in England.

And this Year also, according to the same Author, Osred, late King of
Nortbumberland, being deceived by the Oaths of some great Men, returned
privately from the Isle of Man; when, his Soldiers deserting him, and being
taken Prisoner by King Ethelred, he was by his Command put to Death, at a Place
called Aynsburg; but his Body was buried at the famous Monastery at the mouth
of Tine; and the same Year King Ethelred betrothed Elfrede the Daughter of King
Offa.

In whom also there was found as little Faith as Mercy; for this Year, Anno
Dom. DCCXCII.
according to our Annals, Will. of Malmesbury, and Mat. Westminster; Ethelbert,
the Son of Ethelred, King of the East Angles, notwithstanding the disswasions
of his Mother, going to the Court of King Offa, in order to Woo his Daughter,
was there slain, by the wicked instigations of Queen Quendrith; so that out of
an Ambition to seize his Kingdom, Offa was persuaded to make him away; but by
what means it is not agreed: The Annals relate him to have been beheaded.

But the same Annals, and Florence of Worcester agree, That his Body was buried
(in the Monastery) at Tinmouth. But the Chronicle ascribed to Abbot Bromton, as
also Mat. Westminster, have given us long and Legendary Accounts of the Death
of this Prince; and the latter of these, as well as other Monks, who were
favorers of this King Offa, would have this Murder to be committed without
this King's knowledge; and Mat. Westminster has a long Story about it, but not
all probable, especially since the King was so well pleased with the Fact when
it was done, that he presently seized the Kingdom of this poor Murdered
Prince, and added it to his own Dominions.

This Year, (as Mat. Paris, and his Namesake of Westminster relate, Anno Dom.
DCCXCIII.
) King Offa was warned by an Angel to remove the Relics of St. Alban into a
more noble Shrine; and so either for this cause, or else (which is more likely)
to expiate the several Murders he had committed, began to build a new Church
and Monastery in honor of St. Alban, and thither removing his Bones, into a
Silver shrine all gilt and adorned with precious Stones, he placed them in the
new Church that he had built without the Town: where (as the Monks pretended)
they wrought great Miracles.

This King having made a journey on purpose to Rome, obtained of Pope Adrian to
have him Canonized: King Offa also conferred upon this Monastery very great
Privileges, and vast Possessions, all which he confirmed by his Charter, which
you may find in the first Volume of P. 17^.
Monast. Anglic. as that also, Anno. Dom. 1154. One Nicholas having been first
a Servant in this Abbey, and afterward was Bishop of Alba, Elected Pope by the
name of Adrian IV: he by his Bull ordained, that, as St. Alban was the first
Martyr of England, Anno Dom. DCCXCIII.
so this Abbot should be the first in Dignity of all the Abbots in England; and
Pope Honorius did by a Bull in the Year 1118, not only ratify all the
Privileges made and confirmed by former Popes, but also granted to the Abbot
and his Successors Episcopal Rights, together with the Habit; and that he and
his Monks should be exempt from all Jurisdiction to the Bishop of Lincoln, with
other Exemptions too long here to be set down.

Also this Year there appeared strange Prodigies in the Country of
Northumberland, which mightily terrified the People of that Province; ( viz.)
immoderate Lightnings; there were also seen Meteors like fiery Dragons, flying
in the Air; after which signs followed a cruel Famine; and a little after, the
same Year ( 6o Idus Jan.) certain Heathens (i.e. Danes) miserably destroyed the
Church of God in Lindisfarne, committing great Spoils and Murders. Simeon of
Durham says, These Danes not only pillaged that Monastery, but killing diverse
of the Friars, carried away the rest Captive, sparing neither Priests nor
Laymen. This Year also Sicga died; he who killed the good King Alfwold, who now
(as Roger Hoveden relates) slew himself.

And the same Year, (according to Florence of Worcester,) Ethelard was ordained
Archbishop of York; and (as Simeon of Durham relates) the same Year died
Alric, Third Son to Withred, King of Kent, after a long Reign of Thirty Four
Years; in whom ended the Race of Hengist: Thenceforth, (as Will. of Malmesbury
observes,) whomsoever Wealth or Faction advanced, took on him the Title of King
of that Province.

Anno Dom. DCCXCIV.
This Year both Pope Adrian, and Offa, King of the Mercians, departed this
Life; the Latter after he had Reigned Forty Years.

Yet notwithstanding the Printed Copies of the Saxon Annals, have placed the
King's Death under this Year: Yet the rest of the Copies do not agree with this
Account; for the Laudean Manuscript Copy, in the Bodlean Library places this
King's Death in Anno. Dom. 896; and that with greater Truth; for first Pope
Adrian abovementioned died not till Two Years after the time here specified.
And, it appears farther in a Letter written by the Emperor Charles the Great,
to this King Offa; and which is recited at large by William of Malmesbury, in
his Life of this King, that Pope Adrian was dead some time before the date of
that Letter: viz. Anno. Dom. 796; Tho it is certain, King Offa did not survive
long after.

I thought to give the Reader notice of this, because it puts the Death of this
King, and the Succession of all his Successors, just Two Years later than the
common Printed Accounts: But whenever this King here died, he is said by
William of Malmesbury to have been buried in a Chapel at Bedford, near the
River Ouse; whose frequent Inundations had in his time, carried away both the
Chapel, and the Tomb into the River: So that it could not be seen, unless
sometimes by those who washed themselves in that River.

This Prince is also described by the same Author, to have had so great a
Mixture of Virtues and Vices, that he does not know well what Character to give
him: The Reason that so confounded him, was, That tho he was a Cruel and
Perfidious Prince, yet he Built the Monastery of St. Albans (as you have
heard,) but for all that he cannot give him many good words, because he took
away abundance of good Farms from his Abbey. This seems to have been the first
of our English Saxon Kings, who maintained any great correspondence with
Foreign Princes; for tho he had first great Enmity with Charles the Great,
which proceeded so far, Anno Dom. DCCXCIV.
as to the interdicting of all Commerce, yet at last it was changed into as
much Amity; so that a firm League was made between them, as appears by a Letter
of the said Charles to Offa, extant in William of Malmesbury, in which also is
mentioned, that he sent him many Noble Presents. Also he granted (says Henry
Huntington) a perpetual Tribute to the Pope out of every House in his Kingdom,
and this, perhaps, for his consenting to translate the Primacy from Canterbury
to Litchfield in his own Dominions. He also drew a Trench of a wondrous length
between Mercia and the British or Welsh Territories, thereby to hinder the
Incursions of the Welsh-men, called to this day in the Welsh Tongue Claudh
Offa, (i.e.) Offa's Dike.

But from the Grant of the abovementioned Pension, some Men of different
Persuasions have drawn as different Consequences. Pol. Virgil, and diverse of
the Romish Writers, have from thence concluded, That King Offa, by this Act,
made his Kingdom Tributary to the Pope; whereas indeed it was no such Thing,
for it had been also granted by King Ina long before, (as has been already
observed,) for the Kingdom of the West Saxons; whose Example King Offa seemed
now to follow, and indeed was no more than a Voluntary Annual Alms, or
Benevolence, as it is expressly called in our Saxon Annals, as shall be shown
further hereafter.

This is also urged by some high Promoters of the Royal Prerogative, to prove
this King's unlimited Power in Ecclesiastical, as well as Civil Matters; since
He (as they suppose) could, without the Consent of the Great Council of the
Kingdom, charge all the Houses in his Dominions to pay, each of them, one Penny
to the Pope: But this, if it be closely looked into, will prove a Mistake; for
tho it be true, that upon King Offa's going to Rome, he is said to have granted
this Alms, called Rome's Scot, or Peter Pence, to the Pope, yet Anno 794,
immediately upon his Return, you will find in Sir H. Spelman's Councils, he
called a Great Council at Verulam, (now St. Alban's,) where this Tribute might
be confirmed by the Consent of the Estates of his Kingdom: Nor is the Silence
of our Histories, or of the Acts of this Council it self, any material Argument
to the contrary, since that Law might be lost, or omitted, by which it was
confirmed, as well as several other Councils of that Age; there being no more
mention made of this King's Confirmation of the Lands given to this Monastery
in the great Council at Verulam, P. 314.
than what is cited in Sir H. Spelman's Councils out of a Manuscript History of
St. Alban's, all the Acts of that Council being now lost. But to return to our
Annals.

The same Year Ethelred, (who had been twice King of Northumberland,) was slain
by his own People 13o Kal. Maii, and that deservedly, (as R. Hoveden relates,)
as having been the Death of King Osred, his Predecessor. After Ethelred, one
Osbald, a Nobleman, was made King; but held the Throne but a small time, being
deserted by his Subjects, and at last forced to flee the Kingdom, going by Sea
from Lindisfarne, and then taking Refuge with the King of the Picts, there died
an Abbot. Who was most in fault, in all these frequent Rebellions, and Changes
of Kings among the Northumbers, is hard to decide; since all the Annals, as
well as Historians, are very short in their Relations of these Transactions;
but it is certain, that the People, as well as Princes, must have suffered much
by such frequent Revolutions. Anno Dom. DCCXCIV.
And it is also very well observed by H. Huntington, that these frequent
Rebellions, and Expulsion of their Kings, proceeded in great part from the
proud and turbulent Temper of the Northumbrian Angles.

The same Year, (according to our Annals,) Bishop Ceolwulf, and Bishop Eadbald,
departed from the Northumbers, and Egferth (Son to Offa) began his Reign over
the Mercians, and within a few Months after deceased, having scarce reigned
half a Year. It is also further to be noted, That this Prince, being of great
Hopes and Worth, had been crowned King 9 Years before, in his Father's
Lifetime, and after his Death restored to the Church whatever he had violently
seized on; but before he died, he left the Crown to Kenwulf, the next of the
Royal Line.

But the Monks do ascribe the short Reign of this good Prince, to his Father's
Sins; but of these Things, it belongs not to us to determine.

Also this Year Eadbert, or Ethelbert (Surnamed Praen,) began to Reign in Kent,
and also Ethelred the Ealderman deceased.

This Man had been a famous Commander in his time, but was then a Monk in the
City of York; and now also, (according to the Annals,) the Heathen Danes
destroyed Northumberland, and robbed the Monastery built by Egbert, which is at
the Mouth of the River Weri; but there one of the Danish Captains was slain,
and diverse of their Ships destroyed by a Tempest, and many of their Men
drowned; but some of them reaching the Shore, were presently slain at the Mouth
of the same River.

But Simeon of Durham imputes this to a Judgment inflicted on them by St.
Cuthbert, for thus spoiling his Monastery.

Anno Dom. DCCXCV.
The Moon was Eclipsed, 5o Kal. Aprilis, from the Cock crowing, till the
Morning. Eardwulf also began to reign over Northumberland 1o Idus Maii, and was
afterward Consecrated, and placed on the Throne 7o Kal. Junii, at York, by
Eanbald the Archbishop, and by the Bishops Ethelbert, Higbald, and Badewulf.

This Eardwulf, as Florence of Worcester informs us, was he, who 5 Years before
had so strangely escaped Death at Ripun, after he had been carried out to be
buried; but the Chronicle of Mailross does here give great Light of the Saxon
Annals; for it tells us, that now the Northumbers murdered their King
Ethelred, the Son of Moll; Simeon places it a Year after, but says, The Murder
was committed on the 14th of the Kalends of May, at a Place called Cobene; but
they both agree, that immediately after his Death, one Osbald, a Nobleman of
that Country, was made King, but reigned only 27 Days; and that then being
forsaken by the Chief Men of his Kingdom, he was driven into the Isle of
Lindisfarne with a few Followers, from whence he fled by Sea to the King of the
Picts, where he became a Monk: And this Eardwulf reigned of his stead.

William of Malmesbury further adds, that Alcuin, writing to King Offa, tells
him, That King Charles, so soon as he heard of this Murder of King Ethelred
abovementioned, and of the Perfidiousness of the Northumbrian Nation, not only
stopped the Gifts he was then sending, but falling into a Passion against them,
called them a perverse and perfidious Nation, and worse than Pagans; so that if
Alcuin had not interceded for them, he would have done them all the Mischief he
could.

About this time also the Welsh Chronicles relate, Anno Dom DCCXCV.
there was a great Battle fought at Ruthlan, between the Saxons and the
Britains; where Caradoc ap Gwin, King of North Wales was slain.

But as Dr. Powel observed, in his Notes upon Caradoc's Chronicle, in those
Times there was no settled Government in Wales; therefore such as were Chief
Lords of any Country there, are, in this History called Kings.

This Year died Eanbald, Archbishop of York, Anno Dom. DCCXCVI.
the 4th of the Ides of August, whose Body was there buried; also the same Year
Bishop Ceolwulf died, and another Eanbald was Consecrated in his stead. This
Year likewise Cenwulf, King of the Mercians, destroyed Kent to the Borders of
Mercia, and took Eadbert, (or Ethelbert, Surnamed Praen,) and carried him
Prisoner into Mercia, and there caused his Eyes to be put out, and his Hands to
be cut off. Also Ethelheard, Archbishop of Canterbury, called a Synod; which,
by the Command of Pope Leo, established and confirmed all those things relating
to God's Church, which had been before constituted in the Reign of King
Withgar; and then the Archbishop said thus. I Ethelheard, Archbishop of
Canterbury, with the Unanimous Consent of the whole Synod, and of the whole
Body of all the Monasteries, to whom Exemption has been granted of Old Times
by Believers; in the Name of GOD, and by his fearful Judgments, (and, as I have
received Command from Pope Leo,) do Decree, That for the future none shall
presume to Elect themselves Cov^rnours amongst Laymen over GOD's Heritage, but
as it is contained in the Charter, (or Bulls,) which the Pope has granted, or
Holy Men, (to wit,) our Kings and Ancestors have ordained, concerning the Holy
Monasteries, so let them remain inviolate, without any gainsaying; and if
there be any one who shall refuse to obey this Command from GOD, the Pope, and
Us, but shall despise it, and count it as nothing; let him know, that he shall
give an Account of it before the Tribunal of GOD. And I Aethelheard the
Archbishop, with Twelve Bishops, and Three and Twenty Abbots, do hereby
establish and confirm this Decree with the Sign of the Cross.

This Council, tho the Annals do not expressly mention it under that Title, is
that great Council of Becanceld, placed in Sir H. Spelman's Collection, under
Anno 798, being held under Cenwulf, King of the Mercians; Aethelheard,
Archbishop of Canterbury, with 17 Bishops more, who all subscribed to this
Decree, tho the Annals mention no more than 12 Bishops, to have been there.

This Year the Romans took Pope Leo, and cut out his Tongue, Anno Dom. DCCXCVII.
and put cut his Eyes, and deposed him; but presently after (if it may be
believed,) he could both see, and speak, by the help of GOD, as well as he
could before; and was also restored to the Papacy (by the Emperor Charles.)
Also Eanbald, the Archbishop of York, received the Pall, and Ethelbert Bishop
of Hagulstad deceased 3o Kal. Nov.

This Year was a bloody Battle in the Province of Northumberland, Anno Dom.
DCCXCVIII.
in Lent-time, at Wealaege, now called Whalie) in Lancashire, where was slain
Alric, the Son of Heardbert, and many others with him.

The occasion of which Civil War, Simeon of Durham has thus given us ^iz, That
besides Alric, there were diverse others in Northumberland, who had formerly
conspired against King Ethelred, and now raising a Rebellion against Eardwulf,
under Wad^ their Captain, after much slaughter on both sides at Billangahoth,
near Whalie in Lancashire; the Conspirators being at last put to flight, King
Eardwulf returned home Victorious. Anno Dom. DCCXCVIII.
The same Year London (according to the same Author,) with a great multitude of
its Inhabitants, by a sudden Fire was Consumed.

And now (according both to Simeon of Durham, and Roger Hoveden,) was held the
Second Council of Pinchinhale in the Kingdom of Northumberland, under Eanbald
Archbishop of York, and diverse other Principal and Ecclesiastical Men, where
many things were ordained for the Profit of GOD's Church, and of the
Northumbrian Nation; as concerning the keeping Easter, and other Matters not
particularly mentioned.

Tom. 1. p. 187.
The same Year also (according to Monasticon Anglicanum,) Kenwulf, King of the
Mercians, founded a stately Abbey at Winchelcomb in Glocestershire for 300
Benedictine Monks, and when it was Dedicated in the Presence of Wilfrid
Archbishop of Canterbury, and 13 other Bishops, he then set free before the
High Altar, Eadbert, King of Kent, who was then his Prisoner of War.

But having before most cruelly put out his Eyes, and cut off his Hands, and
disposed of his Kingdom to another, I doubt that Liberty proved but a small
Satisfaction to his poor injured Prince. But such was the Superstitious Zeal of
that Age, the Foundation of a Monastery was counted a sufficient Atonement to
GOD, for whatsoever Cruelties or Injustice Princes has then committed.

Anno Dom. DCCXCIX.
This Year Eth^lheard the Arclt-bishop, and Cynebriht, Bishop of the West
Saxons, went to Rome, the latter to take the Habit of a Monk,) and Bishop
Alfwin deceased at Southburg, (now Sutbury,) in Suffolk, and was buried at
Domuc (now Dunwich,) in the same County, (being then the Seat of that
Bishopric;) and Tidfrith was chosen in his Room. Also this Year, the Body of
St. Wihtburh was found at Durham, entire and incorrupt, after she had been dead
55 Years.

And the same Year (according to Roger Hoveden,) Os^ald, who had been before
King of Northumberland died an Abbot, and was buried in York Minster; and
Alred, the Ealderman, who slew King Aethelred, was also killed by one Thormond,
in Revenge of the Death of his Lord.

Also the Moon was Eclipsed in the second Hour of the Night, 17o Kal. Feb. Anno
Dom. DCCC.
Also this Year Beorthric, (or Brihtrick,) King of the West Saxons, deceased:
As also Worre an Ealderman: Then also Ecgbriht began to Reign over the West
Saxons; and the same Day, (or Year, as Florence of Worcester has it,)
Aethelmond, Ealderman of Wiccon, (that is Worcestershire,) passed the River
Severne at Cynesmeresford, (suppose to be Kemsford in Glocestershire,) and
there met him Weoxton the Ealdormen, with the Wiltshire Men who gained the
Victory.

I cannot find in any Author the occasion of this Quarrel; only, that it was
fought between these Earls, one of the West Saxons, and the other of the
Mercians; but such Bickerings we often meet with in these Writers, and so
related, M.
are of no more use to Human Life, than to Chronicle the Skirmishes of Crows or
Jack daws flocking together, and Fighting in Air.

The same Year is very remarkable, because (as our Annals relate,) Charles the
Great was first made Emperor, and saluted Augustus by the Romans; he then
condemned those to Death who had before outraged Pope Leo; but by the Pope's
Intercession they were pardoned as to Life, and only banished; but Pope Leo
himself anointed him Emperor. Also this Year, according to the Dr. Power 's
History.
Welsh Chronicles, Published by Arthen ap Sitsilt, King of Cardigan; and Run,
King of Divet; and Cadel, Anno Dom. DCCC.
King of Pow^s, all three died.

Now also (according to Florence, and Simeon,) Alchmaid, Son to Ethelred, late
King of Northumberland, being taken by the Guards of K. Eardulf, was by his
Command slain; but without telling us any Reason why.

Also about this time, according to Sir H. Spelman's First Volume of Councils,
was held the Third Council of Cloveshoe, under Kenwulf, King of the Mercians,
and Athelherd, or Ethelhard, Archbishop of Canterbury, with all the Bishops,
Ealderman, Abbots, and other Dignified Persons of that Province; in which few
Things were transacted concerning the Faith, only the Lands of a certain
Monastery, called Cotham, which had been given by Ethelbald, King of the
Mercians, to the Monastery of St. Saviours's in Canterbury, and had been upon
the Embezeling the Deeds, unjustly taken away by King Kenwulph, but he now
repenting of it, desired they should be restored; whereupon Cynedrith, his
Daughter, then Abbess of that Monastery, gave the said Archbishop other Lands
in Kent there mentioned, in exchange for the same.

But since I am come to the Conclusion of this Period, I cannot omit giving you
a fuller Account of the Character, and Death of Brithric King of the West
Saxons, and of the Succession of Egbert, who afterward became the Chief or
Supreme King of this Kingdom, and to whom all those Kings that remained were
forced to become Tributary.

As for King Britric, he is noted by Will. of Malmesbury to have been more
desirous of Peace, than War; and to that end, courted the Friendship of Foreign
Princes, to have been easy to his Subjects in such Things as did not weaken
his Government; yet being jealous of Prince Egbert, who afterward succeeded
him, he forced him to flee to King Offa for Refuge; but upon the coming of
certain Ambassadors to Treat of a Marriage between King Brithric, and the
Daughter of King Offa, he retired into France, till that King was made away by
the means of his Wife Aeadburga, the Daughter of King Offa; who having prepared
a Cup of poisoned Wine for one of his Favorites whom she hated, the King,
coming in by chance, tasted of it, and so pined away. After whose Death, Asser,
in his Annals, relates, That when this Queen could live no longer among the
English, (being so hated by them for her violent and wicked Actions,) she went
into France, where she was kindly Entertained by Charles the Great, and there
making that Emperor many great Presents, for which he bidding her choose whom
she would have for a Husband, himself, or his Son, she foolishly chose his Son;
whereupon the Emperor laughing, said If thou had chosen me, thou should
have had my Son, but now thou shall have neither: (A just Return for her
desiring to marry one so much younger than her self.) So the Emperor put her
into a Monastery, where she lived for some Years as an Abbess; but being
Expelled thence for her Incontinency, she wandered about with only one Servant,
and begged her Bread in Pavia in Italy, till she died.

But as for Egbert above mentioned, when he had been for about three Years
banished into France, where (as William of Malmesbury tells us) he polished the
Roughness of his own Country Manners, the French Nation being at that time the
most Civilized of any of those Gothic and German Nations, who had some Ages
before (as has been already related) settled themselves in this side of
Europe: But upon the Death of King Brihtric, Anno Dom. DCCC.
without any Issue, (as the same Author relates,) he was recalled by the
Nobility of the West Saxon Kingdom; and being there ordained King, reigned with
great Glory and Honor, exceeding all the English Saxon Kings that went before
him, as shall be declared in the ensuing Book.

But before I conclude this, I cannot forbear mentioning a Learned Englishman,
who flourished about this time, called Alcuinus, or Albinus; who, going into
France, was in great Favor with Charles the Great, whom he taught the Liberal
Arts, and by his means erected the University of Paris, where he read Logic,
Rhetoric, and Astronomy; being the most Learned Man of all the Englishmen (if
not of all others) in his Time. He died Abbot of St. Martins at Tours, which
that King bestowed upon him. He wrote elegantly in Verse, as well as Prose,
considering the Age he lived in; as appears by his Poem De Pontificibus and
Sanctis Ecclesiae Eboracencis, lately Published by the Reverend and Learned Dr.
Gale, in his last Volume of English Historians.

So having arrived to the end of this Period, I shall in the next Book show,
how King Egbert obtained not only the Crown of the West Saxon Kingdom, but also
the Supreme Dominion of the English Nation.

The End of the Fourth Book.
A Continuation of the Succession of the English-Saxon Kings contai^ed in the
former Book; from the Saxon Annals, Florence of (...) and Simeon of Durham.
Note, That the last King of each Column in the former Table, is again repeated
in this, that the (...) the better see how the Series is continued.
This Account differs sometimes from the Annals some few Years, wherein they
are certainly mistak^n. The Chronology of the Kings of Wales is according to
the Account of Mr Robert Vaughan, and (...) Ma^uscript Welsh Ch^onicle at the
end of Domesday-Book.

Anno Dom. Kings of Kent. Anno Dom. Kings of the South Saxons. Anno Dom. Kings
of the West Saxons. Anno Dom. Kings of the East Saxons. A^no D^m. Kings of
Northumberland Anno Dom. Kings of the East Angles. Anno Dom. Kings of Mercia.
Anno Dom. (...) 560 Ethelbert reigned 56 years. 597 Ceolwulf reigned 14 years.
566 Sebert 47 years. Ethelfrid reigned 24 years over both Kingdoms. 599
Eorpwald, or Earpenwald. Ceorl. 658 (...) 616 Eadbald, or Ethelbald, his Son,
24 years. 617 Sexred, Seward, and Sigebert, being brothers, 6 years. ^17 Edwin,
Son of Aella, reigned likewise over both 17 years; but he being slain, they
became again divided; for then in 636 Sigebert the Great. 611 Cynegils, and 638
Egric, his Cousin. 627 Penda, a Prince of the Royal Blood, reigned 30 years.
640 Ercombert, his Son, 24 years. In the Succession of this Kingdom we find a
great Chasm, until 613 Cwichelm, his Son, who lived not long; but Cynegils
reigned 31 years. 643 Anna, Nephew to Redwald. 660 (...) 664 Egbriht, his Son,
9 years. 623 Sigebert the little, their Cousin, 25 years. Deira, Bernicia, 654
Ethelthere, his Brother. 634 (...) 673 Lothair, his Brother, 12 years. ^34
Osric, Son to Alfrid, reigned one year. 634 Eanfred, Son to Ethelfrid, late
King, reigned one year. 656 Aethelwald, his Cousin. 655 Peada, his Son, one
year, after whom 685 Eadric, a Stranger to the Royal Line. 680 Ethelwalch, or
Athelwald, who being slain in Battle by Ceadwalla, he for some time added that
Kingdom to his own, till he was driven out by Bertune and Autune, two
Commanders of the late King Ethelwalch's. These divided the Kingdom between
them; after whom followed diverse Kings, who being obscure, we know not their
Names, until one 643 Kenewalch, his Son. 648 Sigebert the Good. 664 Aldwulf,
Son to Ethelhere. 656 Oswie, King of Northumberland held that Kingdom three
years; but he being expelled, 665 (...) 672 Sexburge, his Queen. 661 Swithelme,
his Brother, 2 years. Then these being both slain in the same year, 683
Aelfwold, his Brother. 686 Wittred and Waebberd; these also usurped (not being
of the Blood Royal), and reigned at once. ^34 Oswald, Brother to Eanfrid,
reigned over both Kingdoms 9 years; who being also slain, 690 Beorne, one of
another Family. 668 (...) 674 Aeskwine, Cousin to the late King, reigned 2
years. 663 Sigher and Sebba, Cousins; the former reigned a small time; the
latter, 30 years. Note, That under An. 749. Sim. of Durham, and the Chronicle
of Mailross, make Hunbean and Albert to have succeeded Aelfwold, and divided
the Kingdom between them. But since Mat. Westminster. calls them Beorna and
Athelbert, I take this Hunbean to be the same with Beorne above-m^ntioned, and
Athelbert to be the same with ^42 Oswie, Brother to Oswald, reigned in Bernicia
9 years. 644 Oswin, Son to Osric, reigned in Deira, until after 7 years reign,
being slain by, 659 Wulfher, Son to Penda, was made King. 694 Wightred, who
restored the Royal Line, and dying, left three Sons, that all reigned one after
another, viz. 676 Centwine, Son to Cynegils reigned 9 years. 675 Ethelred, his
Brother, 39 Brother, 39 years. 685 Ceadwalla three years and an half. 693
Sigehard and Swenfred 7 years. 651 Oswie (last mentioned) he then united both
these Kingdoms into one; and so they afterward continued: He reigned 28 years.
704 Kenred, Cousin, 5 years. 727 Ethelbert, who reigned 22 years. 688 Ina, his
Cousin, reigned 39 years. 700 Offa reigned 9 years. 670 Egfrid, or Egfert, Son
to Oswie, reigned 15 years. 709 Ceolred, Son of Ethelred, 9 years. 749 Eadbert,
11 years. 760 Alric; in whom the Royal Line being extinct, several strangers
were advanced to the Throne; viz. 728 Aethelheard, his Kinsman, reigned 14
years and an half. 709 Selred, his Cousin reigned 37 years and an half. 685
Alfred, his Brother, 20 years. 700 (...) 705 Osred, Son to Alfred, 11 years.
719 Ethelbald the Proud, his Cousin, tho far remote, 36 years. 716 Kenred, Son
of Cuthelm, 2 years. 720 (...) 746 Swithred. 718 Osric, Brother to Kenred, 11
years. 741 Cuthred, his Cousin. After whose death (as Florence tells us) few
Kings reigned over the East Saxons; for the same year in which the South Saxons
and Kentish-men submitted themselves to King Egbert, the East Saxons did so
lik^wise. 729 Ceolwulf, Cousin to Kenred, 8 years. 764 Heahbert and Sigared;
these reigned at once, and divided the Kingdom between them. 725 Aldwin, who
being slain by Ina King of the West Saxons, he by conquering this Kingdom,
added it to his own. 737 Eadbert, 21 years. 749 Ethelred Son to Aethelwald; who
after the death of Beorne reigned alone; tho the time when is uncertain. 755
Beornred, an Usurper, half a year. 752 (...) 754 Sigebert, his Cousin, 13
years. 758 Osulph, his Son, 1 year. 759 Ethelwald, surnamed Moll, 6 years. 756
Offa, Nephew to Ethelbald, 40 years. 755 Cynewulf reigned, 29 years. 765
Alhred, Great Grandson to Ida, 16 years. 755 (...) 778 Egfert, another Usurper.
774 Ethelred, or Ethelbert, Son to Moll, 4 years. 786 Eadbert or Ethelbert,
surnamed Praen, taken Prisoner by Kenwulf King of the Mercians, who bestowed
this Kingdom upon 784 Brihtric, his Cousin, 18 years. 778 Alfwold, 11 years.
Aethelbert, Son to Ethelred, murdered by K. Offa, who seized his Kingdom;
after whom were many Kings of small note for 61 years, until 796 Egfert, his
Son, about half a year. 802 Egbert, his Cousin (though far remote:) 789 Osred,
his Nephew, Son to Alred, 1 year. 793 790 Ethelred, or Ethelbert, again
restored, 4 years. 796 Kenwulf, one of the Blood Royal, tho far remote, 24
years. 795 Osbald 27 days, and then deposed. 795 Eardulf 10 years. 794 Cuthred,
as his Tributary. Edmund, surnamed the Martyr.

THE General History OF BRITAIN, NOW CALLED ENGLAND: As well Ecclesiastical; as
Civil. BOOK V. From the beginning of the Reign of King EGBERT, to that of King
EDGAR; Being the space of One Hundred Fifty Six Years and an Half.
THE English Saxons having after their Conquest of so great (...) part of
Britain, and the expulsion of the Natives into Wales and Cornwall, erected
Seven (and if we reckon Deira and Bernicia as distinct, Eight) different
Kingdoms in this part of our Island; that naturally followed, which always
attends a Warlike People, cantoned out into many small independent
principalities, viz. constant disputes about the borders of their respective
Territories, or else a strife for the Mastery who should be Chief, and
Domineere most over the rest: from whence (besides diverse other accidental
occasions of Quarrels) sprang Civil Wars, incident to neighboring Nations, no
ways divided but by Rivers or other less certain boundaries, which never ceased
until what had been begun by King Egbert's Predecessors, was finished by
himself, and his Successors, who at length united all those Kingdoms into one,
to the lasting quiet and happiness of the English Nation; which to set forth
shall be the subject of this present Period. For though there had been before
Egbert many chief or Principal Kings (several of whom Bid, as also the Saxon
Annals have mentioned) who by the sole power of their Arms succeeded each other
in that Title, yet did it never so properly belong to any one as to King
Egbert, (with whose Reign we shall begin this Book;) since he was not satisfied
as others had been before him, with the bare acknowledgments and submissions of
the other remaining Kings; but having subdued most of them, he laid their
Kingdoms to his own, leaving only those of the Mercians, Northumbrians and
East-Angl^s to be held by their respective Princes as Tributaries to his Crown;
in which state they continued, till the Invasion and Conquest of the Danes
wholly swallowed up all those Principalities, and that after their expulsion by
King Alfred, and his Son Edward the Elder, these Kingdoms became again united
to the rest of their Dominions under the General name of England.

But since the Invasion of the Danes, also happened in the beginning of this
Period, it is fit we say something of it, both as to its Causes, and Instruments
by which it was performed; in the doing of which I shall make use of H.
Huntington's words, in the Prologue to his Fifth Book, wherein he tells us,
That the Invasion of the Danes was much the fiercest, and most c^uel that ever
was felt in this Island; for the Romans* although they subdued Britain to their
Empire, yet used their Victory with moderation, and made those they conquered
partakers of the Roman Laws and Civility; and as for the Invasion of the Picts
and Scots which followed the decay of the Roman Empire in Britain, though it
fell severely upon the Northern Parts, yet was it not of any long continuance,
or of any general extent, being soon stopped by the more predominant Power and
Valor of the English-Saxons; who (as you have already heard) conquering this
Kingdom by degrees, though they drove out the ancient Inhabitants who refused
to submit to them; yet we do not find, but that they spared the lives of all
those that became their Vassals, and having Conquered the Country, they not
only repaired the ancient Towns and Cities, but likewise built many new ones,
and governed the Kingdom by their own Laws and Constitutions. Lastly, the
Normans, who succeeded the Danes in subduing this Nation, yet granted not only
Life and Liberty to the vanquished, but also permited them the use of their
ancient Laws and Customs; whereas the Danes wasted and spoiled this whole
Island, for a long time together by frequent Incursions, exempting no places
Sacred or Profane from Spoil or Ruin; so that sparing neither Age nor Sex,
they seemed for a long time not so much to design the Conquest, as Destruction
of the English Nation;] till at last King Knute obtaining the Crown of England,
after the Death of King Edmund (Sir-named Ir^nside,) by restoring i^^ ancient
Laws and Liberties, made some amends for the continual spoils and depredations
of himself and his Predecessors.

If therefore you do but consider the frequent Invasions of that Barbarous
People, how they often landed in several places at once, thereby not only
dividing the Forces of the English-Saxons, but also so distracting their
Commanders, that they could not tell which way to March against them; you may
hence observe (that next to the Providence, and Mercy of God,) nothing but the
extraordinary Valor and Conduct of those Kings, whose Great and Noble Actions
we shall here relate, could have preserved this Nation from being totally
subdued long before; nor could they ever bring it under their Power, till they
met with a Prince, who fell very short of his Ancestors, as well in Prudence
and Valor, as (in the chiefest thing of all) the love of his Subjects.

But as for the causes, Anno. Dom. DCCCII.
which provoked the wrath of God to bring this dreadful Judgment upon the
English Nation, the same Author gives us this probable Account, viz. That in
the Primitive Church of England, Religion shined with so great a Luster, that
diverse Kings and Queens, together with many of the great Men and Bishops
undertook Monastic Vows, (as you have already heard;) but in process of time
all Virtue and Piety so far declined, that the English Saxons suffered no
Nation to exceed them in deceit, and all manner of wickedness; which chiefly
appears in the precedent, as well as following History of the Northumbrian
Kings, in which you will find, that all Orders and Degrees of Men were guilty
of so great Treachery and Rebellion, that nothing was a greater disgrace than
Piety and Innocence, which was looked upon as a just occasion to be made away;
wherefore it was no wonder, if God thought fit to send upon them whole swarms
of cruel Nations, which destroyed all before them, (to wit) the Danes or
Norwegians, together with the Swedes and Vandals.

These from the latter end of the Reign of King Egbert, to the beginning of the
Reign of William the First, being above Two Hundred and Thirty Years, never
gave this Island any long respite from their Invasions. So that it seems it was
not the Nation of the Danes alone, (properly so called,) who were the cause of
this Destruction, but a mixture of diverse of these Northern Nations, who
joining together, proposed at first to themselves no other design but Plunder
and Spoil: But of this we shall speak more in due time; and shall now proceed
in our History, where we left off in our last Book.

Egbert, the only surviving Prince of the Blood Royal of the West Saxon Kings,
as great Nephew to Ina, by his Brother Inegilds, Anno. Dom. DCCCII.
being arrived in England, was now ordained King, as Ethelwerd expressly terms
his Election.

But since Asser in his Annals, places this King's coming to the Crown under
Anno 802. as does Simeon of Durham, and also, Roger Howden, from an Ancient
piece of Saxon Chronology, inserted at the beginning of the first Book of his
first part; and this account being also proved by that great Master in
Chronology, the now Lord Bishop of Litchfield, to be truer then that of the
Saxon Annals, or Ethelwerd, by diverse Proofs, too long to be here Inserted. I
have made bold to put this King's coming to the Crown, two Years backwarder
then it is in the last Book, tho I confess the former Account in the Saxon
Annals, would have made a more exact Epoch.

Also about this time, as appears from the ancient Register of St. Leonard's
Abbey in York; cited in 1 Vol. P. 367.
Monast. Anglican, viz. 'That Anno Dom. 800, Egbert King of all Britain, in a
Parliament at Winchester, by the consent of his People, changed the Name of
this Kingdom, and commanded it to be called England.

Now, tho by the word Parliament here used, it is certain that this Register
was writ long after the Conquest; yet it might be transcribed from some more
ancient Monument, since Will. of Malmesbury tells us of this King, (though
without setting down the time,) that by the greatness of his Mind, he reduced
all the Varieties of the English Saxon Kingdoms to one uniform Empire, or
Dominion, which he called England; though others perhaps more truly refer it
toward the latter end of his Reign, as you will find when we come to it.

This Year Eardulf, King of the Northumbers led his Army against Kenwulf, King
of Mercia, for harboring his Enemies, who also gathering together a great
Army, they approached to each other; when by the Advice of the Bishops and
Noblemen of England, as also by the Intercession of the chief King of the
English, (by whom is meant King Egbert; who then passed under that Title.) They
agreed upon a lasting Peace, which was also confirmed by Oath, on both sides.
This we find in Simeon of Durham's History of that Church, and in no other
Author.

About this time also, St. Alburhe, Sister to King Egbert, founded a
Benedictine Nunnery at Wilton, Vid. Monast. Angl. Tom. 1 p. 191.
which was long after rebuilt by King Alfred, and augmented by King Edgar, for
Twenty Six Nuns, and an Abbess.

The same Year, the Moon was Eclipsed on the 13 Kal. Jan. and ' Beormod, was
Consecrated Bishop of Rochester.

Anno. Dom. DCCCIII.
About this time, in Obedience to a Letter from Pope Leo III. (who at the desire
of Kenwulf King of the Mercians, had Two Years since restored the Sea of
Canterbury to its ancient Primacy,) was held the Third Synod at Cloveshoe, by
^rch bishop Ethelward, and 12 Bishops of his Province, whereby the Sea of
Canterbury was not only restored to all its ancient Rights and Privileges; but
it was also forbid for all times to come, upon Pain of Damnation, (if not
repented of,) for any Man to violate the Rights of that ancient See, and
thereby to destroy the Unity of Christ's Holy Church; then follow the
Subscriptions of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and of 12 other Bishops of his
Province, together with those of many Abbots and Presbyters, who never
Subscribed before, but without the Subcriptions of the King, or any of the Lay
Nobility: Which plainly shows it to have been a mere Ecclesiastical Synod, and
no great Council of the Kingdom, as you may see at large in Sir H. Spelman's 1
Vol of Councils, the Decree of which Synod also shows, that the Church of
England did not then conceive the Authority of the People alone, sufficient to
disanul what had been solemnly Decreed in a great Council of the Kingdom, as
was the Removal of the Primacy from Canterbury to Litchfield. The next Year,

Anno. Dom. DCCCIII.
According to our Annals, Ethelheard, Archbishop of Canterbury, deceased, and
Wulfred was consecrated Archbishop in his stead, and Forther the Abbot dyed.
The same Year also,

Deceased Higbald Bishop of Lindisfarne, 8o Kal Julii. and Eegbert was
Consecrated to that See, 3o Ides. Junii.

Anno. Dom. DCCCIV.
'This Year, Wulfred the Arch bishop received his Pall.

Anno. Dom. DCCCV.
Cuthred King of Kent deceased, as did also Ceolburh the Abbess, and Heabyrnt
the Ealdorman.

This Cuthred here mentioned, was (as Will. of Malmesbury informs us) he whom
Kenulph King of the Mercians has made King of Kent, instead of Ethelbert,
called Pren.

Anno. Dom. DCC^VI.
This Year the Moon was Eclipsed on the Kal. of September, and Eardwulf, King
of the Northumbers, was driven from his Kingdom; and Eanbryth Bishop of
Hagulstad Deceased. Also this Year (2o Non Junii.) the sign of the Cross was
seen in the Moon upon Wednesday in the *Morning; and the same Year, on the
Third Kal. September. a wonderful Circle was seen round the Sun.

This Eardwulf abovementioned is related by Simeon of Durham to have been the
Son of Eardulf, the first of that Name, King of Northumberland, Anno. Dom.
DCCCV.
and after Ten Years Reign, to have been driven out by one Aelfwold, who
Reigned Two Years in his stead.

During these Confusions in the Northumbrian Kingdom, Archbishop Usher with
great probability supposes (in his Antiquitat. Britan. Eccles.) that the Picts
and Scots Conquered the Countries of Galloway and Lothian, as also those
Countries called the Lowlands of Scotland, as far as the Friths of Dunbritain
and Edinburgh. And that this City was also in the possession of the English
Saxons, about an Hundred Years after this, I shall show in due order of time;
and that our Kings did long after maintain their claim to Lothian shall be
further shown, when I come to it: But that all the Lowlands of Scotland, as far
as the English Saxon Tongue was spoken, were anciently part of the Bernician
Kingdom, the English Language, as well as the Names of places, which are all
English Saxon (and neither Scottish nor Pictish) do sufficiently make out.

The Sun was Eclipsed on the 7th Kal. of August, Anno Dom. DCCCVII.
about the Fifth Hour of the Day.

This Year (as Sigebert in his Chronicle relates) King Eardulph
(abovementioned) being expelled his Kingdom, Anno. Dom. DCCCVIII.
and coming for Refuge to the Emperor Charles the Great, was by his Assistance
restored thereunto; but since neither the Saxon Annals, nor Florence, nor yet
any of our English Historians do mention it, I much doubt the Truth of this
Relation; tho it must be also acknowledged, that it is inserted in the ancient
French Annals of that time, and recited that this King's Restitution was
procured by the Intercession of the Pope's and Emperor's Legates, who were
sent into England for that purpose.

This Year (according to Mat. Westminster) Egbert, King of the West Saxons,
marching in an Hostile manner into Cornwall, absolutely subdued it, and added it
to his own Kingdom, many being there slain on both sides.

The same Year also (according to Caradoc's Chronicle) Run, King of Dyvet, and
Cadhel, King of Powis, deceased.

Charles the Emperor made Peace with Nicephorus Emperor of Constantinople.
Anno Dom. DCCCIX.


This Year also (according to the same Caradoc) Elbods, Archbishop of North
Wales, (i. e. of St. Asaph,) deceased, before whose Death was a great Eclipse
of the Sun: But as the Reverend Lord Bishop of Bangor, in his Catalogue of the
Welsh Kings, which he has been pleased to communicate to me, well observes,
That Eclipse falling out Anno 810, the Bishops Death must do so likewise, and
therefore in this the Chronicles must needs be mistaken.

Also (according to Mat. Westminster) Aelfwold, King of Northumberland, dying,
Earnred succeeded him, and held it for 32 Years; which is also confirmed by
Simeon of Durham, Hist. Dun. Eccles. col. 13.
tho this can by no means agree with the Chronicle of Mailross, which says,
That Eardulf being expelled his Kingdom, it continued without any King for many
Years; but William of Malmesbury makes this Anarchy to have begun from the
murder of King Ethered, Anno 794, (as has been already observed in the last
Book,) and that this Confusion lasted for about 33 Years, during which time
that Province became a Scorn to its Neighbors: But it seems they still had
Kings, tho very obscure, and but of small Account.

Anno Dom. DCCCX.
But of greater certainty is that which Mat. Westminster relates under this
Year, viz. That King Egbert subdued the Northern Welsh-men, and made them
Tributary to him.

But it is wholly incredible what Buchanan, in his Scottish History, relates in
the Year following, to wit, That Achaius, King of Scots, having reigned 32
Years, and had formerly aided (but in what Year of his Reign he tells us not)
Hungus, King of the Picts, with 10000 Scots against one Athelstan, then wasting
the Pictish Borders; and that Hungus, by the Aid of those Scots, and the Help
of St. Andrew their Patron, in a Vision by Night, and the Appearance of a Cross
by Day, routed the astonished English, and slew this Athelstan in Fight. But
who this Athelstan was, I believe no Man knows; Buchanan supposes him to have
been some Danish Commander, on whom King Alured, or Alfred, had bestowed
Northumberland: Yet of this, I find no Footsteps in our ancient Writers; and
if any such Thing were done in the time of Alfred, it must be above 60 Years
after, for King Alfred began not to Reign till Anno 871. And John Fordun, in
his Scottish History, is also as much mistaken, making this Athelstan to be the
Son of King Ethelwulf, who then governed the Northern Provinces under his
Father, which also fails almost as much in point of time; this Prince Athelstan
here mentioned being (as appears by the Saxon Annals) alive, and engaged in a
Sea Fight against the Danes above 40 Years after, as you will find in its due
place set down. This Athelstan therefore, and this great Overthrow, seems
rather to have been a mere Fancy of some idle Monk.

Anno Dom. DCCCXI.
And this Year, (according to Mat. Westminster,) as King Egbert had the Year
before subdued the Welsh-men, so (it seems upon some fresh Rebellion of theirs)
he again entered their Borders, and laid them waste from North to South with
Fire and Sword, and then returned home Victorious.

But notwithstanding the Wars the Welsh had from abroad, it seems they had also
time enough for Civil Wars at home; for now (according to Caradoc's Chronicle)
Conan, Prince of Wales, and his Brother Howel, could not agree, insomuch that
they tried the Matter by Battle, where Howel had the Victory; to which Dr.
Powel has here added this Observation.

That this Howel, the Brother of Conan, King or Prince of North Wales, did
claim the Isle of Mon, or Anglesey, for part of his Father's Inheritance, which
Conan refusing to give him, thereupon they fell at Variance, and consequently
made War the one against the other.

And here (says he) I think fit to say somewhat of the old Custom and Tenure of
Wales, from whence this Mischief grew, that is, the Division of the Father's
Inheritance amongst all the Sons commonly called Gauel kind. Gauel is a British
Term, signifying a Hold, because every one of the Sons did hold some portion of
his Father's Lands, as his lawful Son and Successor. This was the Cause, not
only of the Overthrow of all the ancient Nobility of Wales, (for by that means
the Inheritance being continually divided and subdivided amongst the Children,
and Children's Children, it was at length brought to nothing,) but also of much
Bloodshed, unnatural Strife, and Contention amongst Brethren; as we have here
an Example, and many others in this History. This kind of Partition is very
good to plant and settle a Nation in a large Country, not inhabited, but in a
populous Country already furnished with Inhabitants; it is the utter Decay of
great Families, and (as I said before) the cause of constant Strife and Debate
But some Years after, Howel gave his Brother Conan another Defeat, and slew a
great many of his People.

Whereupon Conan levied an Army in the Year 817, and chased his Brother Howel
out of the Isle of Anglesey, compelling him to flee into that of Man; and a
little after died Conan, chief King of the Britains, or Welsh-men, leaving
behind him a Daughter named Esylht, who was married to a Nobleman, called
M^rvyn Vrych, the Son of Gwyriad, who was afterward King in her Right.

This Year also, as the Manuscript Annals of the Abbey of Winchelcomb relate,
the Charter of this Monastery was granted by King Kenulph, as appears by a Copy
there inserted; which shows, Bib. Cotton. Tib. E. 4.
what Orders of Men were summoned by that King to be present at the Council, in
which this Charter was confirmed, viz. Merciorum optimates, Episcopos,
Principes, Comites, Procuratores meosque (i. e. Regis) Propinquos; which Terms
having already been explained in the Introduction to this Book, I need no^ ^ere
repeat. There were also present Cuthred King of Kent, his (...) King of the
East Saxons, with all others, who should be present at those Synodal Councils:
Then follow the Subscriptions of K. Kenulph, as also of both the said Kings,
and of Wilfred Archbishop of Canterbury, with the rest of the Bishops and
Ealdermen there styled Duces.

This Year, according to our Annals, the Emperor Charles the Great departed
this Life, (when he had Reigned Forty Five Years;) also Wilfred the Archbishop
of Canterbury, Anno Dom. DCCCXII.
and Wigbright the Bishop of the West Saxons went to Rome:] But here our Annals
are mistaken, for this Emperor dyed not till the Year 814. Mat. Westminster
also adds, that these Bishops abovementioned went to Rome about the Affairs of
the English Church.

Archbishop Wilfred having received the Benediction of Pope Leo, returned
again to his Bishopric, and the same Year King Egbert wasted the Western Welsh
from the South to the West. Anno Dom. DCCCXIII.
] This seems but to have been the same Invasion mentioned by Mat. Westminster
under An. 811.

This Year Leo, that worthy and Holy Pope, deceased; and Stephanus succeeded in
the Popedom; but Florence of Worcester more rightly places the Death of this
Pope Two Years later.

Pope Stephanus deceased, Anno Dom. DCCCXIV.
and Pascalis was consecrated Pope in his stead* and the same Year the School
or College of the English Nation (...) Rome was burnt.

But Mat. Westminster does more rightly place the Death of Pope Stephanus the
Year following. Anno Dom. DCCCXVI.


At this time was held the Synod at Calcuith, under Wilfred Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Kenulph King of the Mercians, who was there present; but the
Decrees being wholly Ecclesiastical, I pass them by, and refer the curious to
Sir H. Spelman's 1. Volume of Councils: only shall here take notice of this one
passage, that now Bishops, Abbots, and Abbesses were first forbid by the
Seventh Canon of this Synod, to alien their Lands committed to their trust, in
Fee, or for longer time then one Life; and that with the consent of the House.

Cenwulf King of the Mercians deceased, Anno Dom. DCCCXIX.
and Ceolwulf began to Reign in his stead, also Eadbyrht the Ealderman dyed.

But the Saxon Annals do here omit, that which is very remarkable that not
Ceolwulf, but Kenelm, Son to King Kenwulf being a Child of Seven Years Old,
Anno Dom. DCCCXIX.
succeeded his Father under the tutelage of his Sister Quendride, who being
tempted by a wicked Ambition of Reigning, was by her made away, and thereby he
obtained the Name of a Martyr: The manner of which (tho it is certainly but a
Legend) I shall, to divert the Reader, relate out of Will. of Malmesbury, and
Mat. Westminster.

This young Prince was committed by his Sister to an Attendant, on purpose to
be made away; who carrying him into a Wood under pretense of Hunting; cut off
his Head, and threw his Body into a Thicket of Bushes; his Sister presently
seizing the Kingdom, straightly forbad all inquiry to be made after her lost
Brother: But sure it was Miraculous, That a thing done so privately in England,
should be first known at Rome: but so it came to pass by Divine Revelation; for
upon the Altar of St. Peter, a White Dove let fall a certain Paper, which
discovered both the Death of King Kenelm, and also the place of his Burial;
which being Written in Golden Letters was thus:

In Clent Cow-batch, Kenelme King Bearne, lies under a Thorn, heaved bereaved.

Which being in Saxon, may be thus Translated into English Rhyme.

In Clent-cow-pasture under a Thorn,
Of Head bereft, lies Kenelme King Born.
But it seems the Characters were so hard to be read, that all the Roman Clerks
there present, attempted in vain at the Pope's Command to read this writing;
but an English Man by chance standing by, (whom, to make the Miracle the
greater, Mat. Westminster (reading Angelus instead of Anglus) calls an Angel,
Will. Malmesbury, lib. 2.
and Translating this writing into Latin, caused the Pope by an Epistle sent by
him on purpose to give notice to the English Kings of their Martyred
Countryman; whose Body being thus Miraculously discovered, was in a great
Assembly of Clerks and Nobles, taken out of the hole where it was laid, and
carried to Winchelcombe, in Gloucester-shire; and there buried in the Church of
that Abbey, which his Father had founded; which after some time brought no
small profit to that Monastery, by frequent Pilgrimages made to the Tomb of
this little Saint.

But now my hand is in, pray take all the rest of the Story.

When the Body of this Young Prince was brought home, the Murdress his Sister,
being vexed with the Singing of those Clerks and Laics that attended the
Corpse, and looking out of her Chamber Window in pure Spite, repeated the Psalm
backward which they then Sung, thereby to disturb the Harmony of the Chorus;
but (as the same Author adds,) whilst she was thus singing, both her Eyes
fell out of her Head upon the Psalter she held in her Hands, and the Psalter it
self set in Silver, and besmeared with the Blood of her Eyes, (being then to be
seen) gave a pregnant Testimony of her Crime, as well as punishment; yet it
seems Will. of Malmesbury knew nothing of this Legend of the finding the Body,
but only says, it was discovered by Miraculous Rays of a vast Light, which
shining all Night over the place where it lay, was the occasion of its being
found out; but no matter for the manner, both of them being alike credible.
This is enough, (if not too much) of this Boy, King and Martyr: And this is
certain, that his unnatural Sister did not enjoy the Fruits of her wicked
Ambition long; Anno Dom. DCCCXX.
for Ceolwulf Brother to King Kenwulf, succeeded in the Kingdom; tho he
likewise Reigned but little more than one Year:

For the next Year he was deprived of his Kingdom (as Ingulphus relates) by one
Bernulph, an Ambitious Man, of great Riches and Power, Anno Dom. DCCCXXI.
tho no way related to the Blood Royal.

'This Year Two Ealdermen were slain, Burkelm, and Muca, Anno Dom. DCCCXXII.
(but who these were our Annals do not acquaint us:) There was also this Year
held a Synod at Cloveshoe under King Beornwulf, and Archbishop Wilfred; whose
Constitutions relating wholly to Ecclesiastical Affairs, you may find in Sir H.
Spelman's 1. Vol. The only Civil Business, was that of the Abbess Cendrythe's
being forced to make satisfaction to Archbishop Wilfred, by rendering 100
Manses or Farms, for the wrongs which King Cenwulf her Father had done to the
Church of Canterbury.

This Cendrythe is the same with Quendrithe; or Quendrida (as she was called by
our Latin Authors,) who made away her Brother K. Kenelme, (as you have already
heard;) and who, to Expiate for the Death of her Brother, (since she could not
be a Queen) had professed her self a Nun, and was now an Abbess.

There was a Fight between the Britains and Devonshire Men at Gafulford, now
Camelford, in Cornwall; and Florence of Worcester tells us, Anno Dom. DCCCXXIII.
That the Britains were slain by those of Devonshire.

The same Year also, (according to our Annals,) Ecbriht King of the
West Saxons, and Beornwulf, King of the Mercians, fought at Ellendune,
(supposed to be Wilton near Salisbury;) where Ecbriht obtained the Victory, a
great slaughter being there made; after which King Ecbright sent Aethelwulf his
Son, and Ealstan his Bishop, and Wulfheard his Ealderman, with a great Army
into Kent, where they forced King Baldred to Fly over Thames into the Northern
parts; then the Kentishmen, and those of Surry, together with the South Saxons,
and East Saxons, submitted themselves to King Egbert; which last Nation had
been unjustly wrested from his Family, and had (as Florence relates) for the
space of several Years been subject to Kings that were strangers; the same Year
also the King of the East Angles, together with the whole Nation beseeched King
Ecbriht to grant them Peace, and be their Protector, for fear of the Mercians.]
And the same Year the East Angles slew Beornwulf King of the Mercians, because
(as Mat. Westminster relates) he challenged their Kingdom as his own, ever
since the time that King Offa took it, but now the Mercians tried to recover it
by Force.

The same Year was also held another Synodal Council at Cloveshoe, for the
Kingdom of Mercia, under K. Beornwulf and Wilfred Archbishop of Canterbury,
with all the Bishops and Chief Men of that Kingdom, wherein some disputes about
Lands between Heabert, Bishop of Worcester, and a certain Monastery called
Westburgh, were determined.

This Year Ludican King of the Mercians and five of his Ealdermen were slain;
and Wiglaf began to Reign in his stead. Anno Dom. DCCCXXV.
] Ingulf and Will. of Malmesbury tell us, That this Ludican was Kinsman to the
last mentioned King Beornwulf, and leading an Army against the East Angles to
revenge his Death, was there overcome and Slain, and that both these Tyrants
were justly removed, who had not only made Kings without any Right, but had
also by their imprudence been the occasion of the destruction of the Military
Forces of that Kingdom, which had till then proved Victorious; and that
thereupon one Withlaf being before Ealderman of M^rcia, was by the consent of
all the People created King; whose Son Wimond had Married Alfleda the Daughter
of Ceolwulf, the late King. This King Withlaf Reigned thirteen Years, Anno Dom.
DCCCXXVII
as Tributary to King Egbert, as shall be further related anon.

The Moon was Eclipsed on Christmas day at Night, and the same Year King
Egbryht subdued the Kingdom of Mercia, and all the Country that lay South of
Humber: He was the Eighth King; who Ruled over all Britain; but the First, who
had so great a Command, was Aella King of the South Saxons; the Second was
Cea^lin, King of the West Saxons; the Third was Aethelbryght King of Kent; the
Fourth was Redwald King of the East Angles; the Fifth was Edwin King of
Northumberland; the Sixth was Oswald, who succeeded him; the Seventh was Oswi
the Brother of Oswald; and the Eight was Egbryght, King of the West Saxons; who
not long after led an Army against the Northumbers, as far as Door; which place
is supposed to have been in Yorkshire beyond the River H^mber; but the
Northum^ers offering him Peace, and due Subjection, they parted Friends.

From which passage in the Saxon Annals it is apparent, that this Supreme
Dominion of one English King over all the rest was no new thing, Bid having
taken notice of it long before; yet did they not therefore take upon them the
Title of Monarchs, any more than Egbert, who now succeeded them in that Power,
tho most of our Historians, who have written the Saxon History in English, have
(but without any just reason) given them that Title, which could not properly
belong to Kings, who had diverse others under them, with the like Regal
Jurisdiction within their own Territories; not but that King Egbert was in a
more peculiar manner the Supreme King of England, because by his Absolute
Conquest of the Kingdoms of Kent, and of the South and East Saxons, he was the
greatest King who had hitherto Reigned in England; all the rest of the Kings
that remained, Reigning by his permission, and paying him Tribute; a power
which never had been exercised by any other King before him.

But to return to our History; it seems that King Egbert was so highly
displeased with the Mercians for setting up a King without his consent, that
Ingulf and Florence of Worcester tell us, That as soon as ever Withlaf was made
King, before he could raise an Army, he was expelled his Kingdom, which Egbert
added to his own; but Withlaf being searched for by Egbert's Commanders through
all Mercia, he was by the industry of Seward Abbot of Croyland, concealed in
the Cell of the Holy Virgin Etheldrith, Daughter of King Offa, and once the
Spouse of Ethelbert, King of the East Angles; where King Withlaf found a safe
retreat for the space of Four Months; until such time as by the Mediation of
said Abbot Seward, he was reconciled to King Egbert; and upon promise of the
payment of an Yearly Tribute, permitted to return to his Kingdom in Peace;
which is by him acknowledged in that Charter of his, that Ingulf has given us
of his Confirmation of the Lands and privileges of the Abbey of Croyland. It
was made in the Great Council of the whole Kingdom in the presence of his
Lords, Egbert King of West-Saxony, and his Son Ethelwulf, and before the
Bishops and great Men of all England, Assembled at the City of London, to take
Counsel against the Dani^h Pirates, then infesting the English Coasts: And in
the Year 833, as you shall see when we come to that Year.

This Restoration of King Withlaf to his Kingdom is also mentioned in the Saxon
Annals of the next Year, where it is said

Anno Dom. DCCCXXVIII.
That Withlaf again obtained the Kingdom of the Mercians, and Bishop Ethelwald
deceased; also the same Year King Egbryht led an Army against the Northern
Britains, and reduced them absolutely to his Obedience: Anno Dom. DCCCXXVIII.
For it seems they had again rebelled.

Now likewise, as Mat. Westminster relates, King Egbert vanquished Swithred,
King of the East Saxons, and drove him out of his Kingdom; upon whose
expulsion, the West Saxon Kings ever after possessed that Kingdom.

Now (according to the same Author) King Egbert having subdued all the South
Parts of England, Anno Dom. DCCCXXIX.
led a great Army into the Kingdom of Northumberland, and having grievously
wasted that Province, made King Eandred his Tributary; which is also confirmed
by Will. of Malmesbury, who relates that the Northumbers, who stood out the
last, fearing least this King's anger might break out upon them; now giving
Hostages, submitted themselves to his Dominion, but they continued still under
Kings of their own, as you will further find.

To this Year I think we may also refer that great Transaction, which the
Annals of the Cathedral Church of Winchester (printed in 1. Vol. P. 32.
Monast. Angl. from an ancient Manuscript in the Domit. A. 13.
Cottonian Library) place under the Year following, viz. That King Egbert
having thus subdued all the Kingdoms abovementioned, and forced them to submit
to his Dominions, called a great Council at Winchester, whereto were summoned
all the Great Men of the whole Kingdom; and there by the General Consent of the
Clerus and Populus, (i. e. the Clergy and Laity,) King Egbert was crowned King
of Britain: And at the same time he Enacted, That it should be for ever after
called England; and that those who before were called Jutes; or Saxons, should
now be called English ^en. And this I could not omit, because tho William of
Malmesbury, and other Historians, agree of the Matter of Fact; yet I think this
the truest and most particular Account of the Time, and manner when it was
performed.

Also this Year Wilfred, the Archbishop of Canterbury, deceased; and Feologild
the Abbot was Elected Archbishop, (7 Kal. Maij.) and was Consecrated (5. Id.
Junij. being Sunday,) and dyed the 3. Kal. Sept. after.

But here is certainly a mistake in this Copy of the Annals, for it was not
Feologild, but Ceolnoth, who was then chosen Archbishop; for in the next Year
it is thus corrected, viz. Anno Dom. DCCCXXX.


This Year Ceolnoth was Elected, and Consecrated Archbishop, and Feologild the
Abbot deceased.

'And the Year following Ceolnoth the Arch-BP received his Pall from Rome. Anno
Dom. DCCCXXXI.


This Year certain Heathens or Pagans wasted Sceapige (now the Isle of Sheppey
in Kent. Anno Dom. DCCCXXXII
]

But since this is the first time, that these Heathens are mentioned in the
Saxon Annals, it is fit we should tell you a little more exactly who they were,
and from whence they came; for they were indeed no other than that Nation which
was before in our Saxon Annals, called Northmanna, and sometimes Deanscan (i.
e. Danes;) the Etymology of which Name, since I find writers are so divided
about, I will not take upon me to determine; not that all these People came out
of that Country, which is at this day called Denmark, for it is impossible,
that so narrow a Region (tho you should likewise include whatsoever that
Kingdom did then, or does now enjoy upon the Continent of Swedeland and
Jutland) could ever send out such vast Shoales of People, as for near Two
Thousand Years before the Norman Conquest overran and destroyed France, the
Low Countries, and also this Island; but you may, from what has been already
said, observe, that H. Huntington, in the Prologue to his Book above cited,
does besides the Danes, Anno Dom. DCCCXXXII.
add also the Norwegians, together with the Goths, Swedes and Vandals, to have
been those Nations which for so many Years wasted England; and that he did not
deliver this without Book, but had sufficient Authority for what he wrote, I
shall further make out from the Testimony of those Writers, who lived in that
very Age, when these Nations first infested those parts of Europe: For
Eginhart, who was Son-in-Law and Chancellor, to Charles the Great, thus writes
in his History of that Prince, which I shall here faithfully Translate.

In like manner the Danes and Sweones, with those whom we call Normans, do
possess the Northern Shore of Scandinavia, together with all the Islands
adjoining to it, whilst the Sclavi with diverse other Nations inhabit the
Southern Coasts; but the Norwegans, or rather Northern Men, (for so they are
called by the Swedes, because they lie more Northerly than the greater part of
that Nation,) and indeed all those that inhabit Scanzia, are (by those People
of Europe, that lie more remote,) with very good reason called in the German
Tongue ( i.e.) Northland Men.

Next to Eginhart, Adam of Bremen, (who lived about Two Hundred Years after)
does not only insert these very words of the aforesaid Author* but also adds
this further, that the Danes and Swedes with the other Nations, beyond the
River Danabius, are by the French Historians all called Normans; so likewise
Albertus, Abbot of Stade, who wrote about the Year 1250, says likewise, that
the Danes and other Nations, who lived beyond Denmark, are all called Normans;
from which Authorities the learned Grotius in his Prolegomena to his Gothic
History, lays it down as an undeniable Truth, that whatever we find among any
writers of that Age concerning the Normans, does rightly belong to the Swedes,
who were then one of the greatest and most powerful of those Northern Nations,
that were all then called by one general Name of Normans.

But as for their Religion, I need say no more of it, since I have already told
you in the beginning of the Third Book, that all those Nations had the same
common Deities, ( viz.) Woden, and Thor, etc. whose Names I have there already
set down, to which last Deities, as Ubbo Emmius relates, they before any great
exepedition, sacrificed a Captive, by knocking out his Brains, and smearing
their Faces in his Blood, immediately marched against their Enemies; but that
they were extremely given to Witchcraft and Enchantments, all their own
Authors relate, which would be too tedious here to repeat, since you will mere
with some Instances of it in the following History. But to return again to our
Annals.

Anno Dom. DCCCXXXIII.
This Year is very remarkable, for King Egbert encountered Thirty Five Ships of
Danish Pirates at Carrum (now called Charmouth in Dorsetshire,) where there was
a great slaughter, but the Danes kept the Field,] whereby we may guess that
they had the advantage; yet it seems before this time, (even in this very Year)
the Danes had been vanquished, and put to flight at Dunmouth, (now called
Tinmouth, from whence (having now spoiled the Isle of Sheppey) they Sailed to
Charmouth abovementioned.

This shows us (as Will. of Malmesbury well observes) the Instability of all
Worldly grandeur; for now King Egbert being arrived at the height of Empire,
met with this unlooked for Enemy, who harrassed him and his Posterity for
diverse Generations: And tho in this Sea Fight last mentioned, he had the better
for the greater part of the Day, yet toward Night he lost the Victory, tho by
the help of it he retreated, and so saved the disgrace of an entire defeat;
this was the only time that Fortune ceased to favor King Egbert's Undertakings.

This Year also (according to our Annals,) Herefrith Bishop of Winchester, and
Wigen (or Sighelm) Bishop of Scirborne, and also Two Ealdormen, Dudda and
Osmund deceased.

The same Year was held that General Council of the whole Kingdom at London, at
the Feast of St. Augustine the English Apostle, Anno Dom. DCCCXXXIII.
Egbert King of West Saxony, and Withlaf King of the Mercians, with both the
Archbishops, and all the other Bishops and Chief Men of England being present;
at which, (besides a Consultation how to restrain the Invasion of the Danes,)
the Privileges, Vid. Sir H^ Spelma^ 's Council, 1. vol.
and Concess^ons of the said King Withlaf to the Monastery of Croyland, were
also confirmed by the said Council; and were subscribed to by King Withlaf, and
both the Archbishops, and most of (...) Bishops of England.

The next Year a great Fleet of Danes landed amongst the Western Welsh, (i. e.
Cornishmen, Anno Dom. DCCCXXXV.
) who being joined with them in a League against King Egbert; offered him
Battle, which he accepting of, straight ways marched against them with his
whole Army, and at Hengestdune, (now Hengston in Cornwall,) put both the
Britains and Danes to flight; and as Mat. Westminster adds, freed his Kingdom
at this time from the Invasion of those barbarous Enemies.

King Egbryht departed this Life, having Reigned Thirty Seven Years, and Seven
Months;] but the Annals must needs be mistaken, Anno Dom. DCCCXXXVI.
either in the time of his Reign, or else in the Year of his Death; for if he
began to Reign Anno Dom. 800, and Reigned Thirty Seven Years and an half; it is
evident he must have dyed Anno Dom. 838; the Printed Copy of Will. of
Malmesbury places his Death, Anno Dom. 837, and another reading in the Margin,
in 838; but Florence of Worcester places it according to the Annals in 836.

This King as the same Author relates, governed his Subjects with great
Clemency, and was as terrible to his Enemies, and for Nine Years Reigned
Supreme King over all Britain: Before his Death he is said (by Will. of
Malmesbury) to have told his Son Ethelwulf, whom he left his Successor, That
he might be happy if he did not permit the Kingdom, which he had now laid
together with great Industry, to be spoiled by sloathfulness, to which this
Nation had been too much addicted.

There is little mention of this King's Children, except Ethelwulf, only it is
said by John of Tinmouth, that he had also a Daughter called Edgithe, who being
first bred up under an Irish Abbess, called Modwina, was made Abbess of the
Nunnery at Polesworth; but this, since we have no better Authority than modern
hands for it, I cannot be certain of; but as for the Wife of King Egbert who
was (according to the late West Saxon Law,) never called Queen, her Name was
Redburge, and she is mentioned, by John Beaver to have procured that Law from
her Husband, that no Welshman should without leave pass over Offa's Ditch upon
pain of Death.

But the same Year that King Egbert dyed, Vid. Sir H. Spelman's Council, 1. vol.
was held a Common Council of the whole Kingdom at Kingston upon Thames, where
were present Egbert, King of the West Saxons, and Ethelwulf his Son, with
Ceolnoth Archbishop of Canterbury, and other Bishops and Chief Men of England,
where among other things the manner of Mallings in Sussex having been bestowed
by Baldred, King of Kent, on Christ Church Cant. and being afterward taken
away from it, because the great Men of that Kingdom would not ratify the
Donation, it was now by the consent of the King and all his Chief, and Wise Men
again confirmed.

King ETHELWULF, with his Son King ATHELSTAN.
Anno Dom. ^^^^XXXVI.
No sooner was King Egbert's Body buried at Winchester, but King Ethelwulf
succeeded to the Throne, and though none of our Historians mention any former
Election or Coronation of this King, yet it is certain he came to the Crown by
Virtue of his Father's Testament; Henry Huntington and Roger Hoveden telling us
expressly, That he left his Two Sons Ethelwulf and Athelstan his Heirs, which
though it be in part a mistake, (since this Athelstan was not Son, but Brother
to King Ethelwulf) yet that concerning the King's bequeathing the Crown is very
probable, it being according to the Custom of that time, but that this alone
would not have been sufficient shall be shown in another place.

This Prince (as Thomas Rudborn in his History of the Church of Winchester
relates) had been during the Life of his Elder Brother (whose Name we know not)
educated in the Monastery of Winchester, under the Tuition of Helmestan Bishop,
and Swithune, Praepositus, or Dean of that Church, and had there taken the
Order of a Subdeacon, with an intent (as is supposed) to have professed himself
a Monk, not that he was ever made Bishop of that Church, tho it is so related
by H. Huntington and other Writers.

But King Egbert having no other Son living, he was dispensed with to Marry;
and returning very early to a Secular Life, helped his Father in his Wars;
after whose Death he was advanced to the Throne, yet he always retained a great
deal of the Monk, loved his ease, and had very little Ambition; and therefore
not caring to trouble himself with the Governing of many Provinces, he rested
contented with his Paternal Kingdom of West Saxony, and made over the Kingdoms
of Kent, and of the South and East Saxons (being his Father's Conquests) to
Athelstan, his Son (as the Saxon Annals and Will. of Malmesbury expressly call
him,) and which is more, Ethelwerd in his Chronicle gives us the Names of Five
Sons of King Ethelwu^f, of which (says he) Athelstan who Reigned together with
his Father was the Eldest, that Alfred the Fifth Son Reigned after them all;
yet most of the other Historians going directly contrary to those Authorities,
will needs have him to be his Brother, I suppose to save this Pious Prince's
Reputation; but Mat. Westminster says, That he was his base Son, which is most
probable, since he had not any Legitimate Son then old enough to Govern a
Kingdom as this Athelstan at that time was, and whom we shall often find
mentioned in this History; tho when, or how he dyed, all our Writers are silent.

Anno Dom. DCCCXXXVII
This Year, according to the Saxon Annals, Wulfheard the Ealdorman fought at
Hamtun, (i. e. Southampton,) with a Fleet of Thirty Three Danish Pirates, and
there making a great slaughter of them obtained the Victory.

The same Year this Wulfheard deceased: Also Aethelm, another Ealdorman, fought
with the Danish Army at Port, (now called Portland,) where he being assisted by
the Dorset-shire Men, soon put them to flight; but how this can consist with
what follows I know not, viz. That the Danes notwithstanding kept the Field
where the Battle was Fought, and slew the Chief Commander being an Ealdorman;
unless it relate to the Year following; when

H^rebryht the Ealdorman was killed by the Danes, and many others with him in
Merscwarum, (that is Mercia;) also the same Year in Lindisse, Anno Dom.
DCCCXXX^^^
as also among the East Angles, and in Kent many were Slain by their Forces;
for there (according to Mat. Westminster) the above said Earl or Ealdormen was
slain; the Danes obtaining the Victory, destroying all places with Fire and
Sword: And (the same Year according to Florence of Worcester) Wiglaf King of
Mercia dying, Bertulf succeeded him.

There was this Year a great slaughter made by the Danes, Anno Dom. DCCCXXXIX.
about London, Cantwic (i. e. Canterbury, and Hrofcester,) that is Rochester.

So that now it seems the Danes had entered farther into the Land, making havoc
of all where ever they came.

This Year King Ethelwulf fought at Carrum, Anno Dom. DCCCXL.
(i. e. Charmouth) against 35 Danish Ships, who kept the Field where the Battle
was fought.

So that according to H. Huntington, they here obtained the Victory; for though
the number of their Ships were but small, yet they were very large and full of
Men.

'This Year also the Emperor Lewis (the Pious) dyed.

Nor can I here omit what the Scottish Historians place under the former Year,
but ours under this, viz. The total Conquest of the Picts by Kened the first
King of Scotland, after many fierce Battles; in the last of which Drusken, King
of the Picts, being Slain, that Kingdom was totally destroyed, and as H.
Huntington long since observed, not only their Laws, but also their very
Language, (except what remains in the Names of places) is now totally lost, and
that Nation being long since incorporated with that of the Ancient Scots and
Saxons, shows us that even whole Kingdoms and Nations have both their
Originals, and fatal periods, as well as particular Persons.

But tho the Scottish Historians do justly date the Empire of their Kings over
all Scotland, from this Total Conquest of the Picts by King Kened; according to
that old Verse:

Primus in Albania fertur regnasse Kenedus; Yet when those Historians will by
this Conquest extend the limits of this King and his Successour's Dominions, so
far beyond Edinburgh, Southward, making him to have Reigned from the River
Tyne, (and so would take in all the County of Northumberland, lying between
Tine and Tweed,) to the utmost Orcades, this is by no means to be admitted;
since as the Lord Primate Usher learnedly observes, That Country had long after
not only English, but Danish Kings, Britan. Eccles. Antiquitat. P. 374.
as shall in the pursuit of this History be clearly made out; and after those
were extinct, we may read in Turgot's Chronicle of the Bishops of Durham, the
Earls, appointed by the Kings of England, under them Governed that Country; For
as Roger Hoveden, in the Year 953, expressly relates after Eric, to whom the
Northumbers had sworn Allegiance, that Province was committed by K. Edred to
Earl Oswald, who afterward in the Reign of King Edgar, had one Olsac assigned
him as a partner in that Government, the former Commanding all that lay on the
North side of Tyne, and the latter all Yorkshire; there also follow all the
Successors of these Earls, as low as the Time of Edward the Confessor, under
whom Tosti Governed it; who loosing his Earldom by reason of his Tyranny, it
was by King Edward committed to Earl Morchar, but he being taken up with great
Employments, committed the Government of that part of it beyond Tyne to one
Oswulf, who afterward by the Gift of K. William, enjoyed the Government of the
whole Country: But that Laden and the other Low-Land Countries of Scotland, as
far as Edinburgh, were long after in the possession of the English, shall be
shown when we come to the Reign of King Edgar.

About this Time Eanred King of Northumberland dying, Ethelred his Son
succeeded him, Anno Dom. DCCCXLI.
as Simeon of Durham and Mat. of Westminster relate, tho the latter places this
the Year before.

But to give some account of the Affairs of Wales, from Caradoc's Chronicle.

About this time was fought the Battle of Ketell, betwixt Burthred King of
Mercia, Anno Dom. DCCCXLIII.
and the Britains; wherein (as some do write) Mervyn Vrych, King of the
Britains was Slain, leaving behind him a Son afterward called Rodri Mawr, that
is to say, Redoric the Great; yet according to Nennius, this King Mervyn was
alive Anno Dom. 854, which was the Twenty Fourth Year of this Kings Reign, and
in which that Author in his Preface says, He wrote his History; but I believe,
there is either an error in Nennius's Account, or else in the Transcribers;
since all the Welsh Chronicles agree, that about this time Mervyn dyed, and
Rodri succeeded him.

This Prince, Commonly called Rodoric the Great, began his Reign over Wales
this Year; it was he who divided all Wales into three Territories of Aberfraw,
Dineuawr, and Mathraval, he had great Wars with Burhred, King of Mercia, who by
the aid of King Ethelulph entered North Wales with a great Power, and destroyed
Anglesey, and fought with the Welshmen of Northwales diverse times, and slew
Meyric, a great Prince among them.

This Year, (according to Mat. Westminster) Aethelred King of Northumberland
was driven from his Kingdom, Anno Dom. DCCCXLIV.
(I suppose by a Rebellion, the usual method in that unquiet Country,) and one
Redwald succeeded him, who, as soon as ever he was made King, fought a Battle
with the Danes, at a place called Aluethelie, where the King and Earl Alfred
were slain, with the greatest part of their Army, and that then K. Ethelred was
again restored to the Throne; but this Author does not tell us by what means,
nor is the Year expressed; and tho this Action is found in no other Author,
yet is it likely enough to be true, Cap. 5.
for Simeon of Durham in his History of that Church; tho he does not mention
this Kings Expulsion and Restitution to the Throne, yet he there expressly
mentions King Ethelred to have about this time succeeded his Father Eandred.

This Year, according to our Annals, Eanwulf the Ealdorman, with the
Somersetshire) Men, Anno Dom. DCCCXLV.
Men, and Ealstan the Bishop and Osric the Ealdorman, with the Dorset-shire
Men, fought with the Danish Army at the mouth of Pedidan (called by Hoveden,
Pendred's Mouth, and was indeed the River Parret in Somersetshire;) where they
made a great slaughter of them, and obtained the Victory over the Danes; after
which the Kingdom enjoyed Peace for diverse Years.

But the Northumbers still continued their old custom of driving out, or
killing their Kings, Anno Dom. DCCCXLVIII.
for about 3 Years after, as Florence of Worcester, and Simeon of Durham
relate, Ethelred King of the Northumbers being Slain, Osbert Reigned in his
stead Eighteen Years; and the same Year there was an Eclipse of the Sun, about
the Sixth Hour of the Day, on the Kal. of October; this is that King Osbert,
who was afterward killed by the Danes.

According to Florence, and Mat. Westminster a Son called Aelfred, Anno Dom.
DCCCXLIX.
was now Born to King Ethelwulf at Wanating (now Wantige in Berk-shire,) his
Mother was Osberge the Daughter of Aslat, or Oslac, chief Butler to King
Aethelwulf, who was related to Stuff and Whitgar, first Princes of the Isle of
Wight; she was a Woman as remarkable for her Piety, as her Birth, and deserved
to be the Mother of him, who was afterward to prove so great a Prince.

The same Year also (from the same Authors) Berthferth the Son of Bertwulf,
King of Mercia, wickedly slew his Cousin Wulstan, who was Nephew to both the
late Kings of Mercia; but his Body was buried at the Famous Monastery of
Rependun (now Repton in Darby-shire,) in the Tomb of Wiglaf his Grandfather,
and, if we may believe our Historians, a Pillar of Light reaching up to Heaven,
stood over the place for Thirty Days, which procured him the Title of a Saint.

This Year the Pagan Danes returned hither, and Ceorl the Ealdorman, together
with the Forces of Devonshire, Anno Dom. DCCCLI.
fought with their Army at Wicganbeorch (supposed to be Wenbury in
Devon-shire;) and there obtained the Victory: And the same Year also King
Aethelstan, and Duke Ealcher, fought with them a Sea Fight, and routed a great
Fleet of them near Sandwic, (now Sandwich, in Kent) took 9 Ships and put the
rest to Flight; now also the Danes Wintered in the Isle of Thanet, (or as Asser
in his Annals relates in the Isle of Sheppy;) and the same Year came 300 of
their Ships into the Mouth of Thames, and the Danes landing took Canterbury and
London; and routed Beorthwulf King of the Mercians, with his whole Army, who
had come out to Fight with them; after which the Danes marched Southward beyond
Thames into Surry, and there K. Aethelwulf, and his Son Aethelbald, with the
Forces of the West Saxons, fought against them at Aclea, (now called Oakley in
Surry,) where they made a greater slaughter of the Pagan Army, than had been
heard of at any time before; so that the greatest part of them were destroyed.

The same Year also (according to sir H. Spelman's 1. Vol. of Councils) was
held the Council of Kingsbury under Berthwulf, King of the Mercians, Ceolnoth,
Archbishop of Canterbury with the other Bishops and Wise Men of the Province
being present, wherein, besides the public business of the Kingdom, several
grievances of the Monks were redressed, and the Charter of that King to the
Abbey of Croyland is confirmed under the Rule of St. Benedict, and is supposed
by Sir H. Spelman in his Councils to be a great Council of that Kingdom;
because it bears date in the Week of Easter, when they were Assembled about the
public Affairs of the Kingdom, at which time as also at Whitsontide and
Christmas, the great Men of the Kingdom were wont of course to attend at the
King's Court, to consult, and ordain, what should be necessary for the common
Good, when also the King used to appear in State with his Crown upon his head;
which custom of holding great Councils, was also continued after the Norman
Conquest, to the middle of the Reign of Henry the Second, as Sir H. Spelman
learnedly observes in his Notes at the end of this Council.

This Year (according to the Peterburgh Copy of the Saxon Annals) Ceolred Abbot
of Medeshamstead, Anno Dom: DCCCLII.
and his Monks leased out to one Wulfred the Land of Sempigaham (perhaps
Sempingham in Lincolnshire,) on Condition, That after his Death it should
again revert to the Monastery, he paying in the mean time a Yearly Rent of so
many Loads of Wood, Coals and Turf, Anno Dom. DCCCLII.
and so many Barrels of Beer and Ale, and other Provisions, with Thirty
Shillings in Money, as is there specified; at which Agreement Burherd King of
the Mercians, who had (now succeeded Beorthwulf) was present, together with
Ceolred the Archbishop, with diverse other Bishops, Abbots and Ealdormen.

I have inserted this, to let you see the form of Leasing out the Abbey Lands
in those Days, and which it seems required the Solemnity of the Common Council
of that Kingdom to confirm it.

The same Year also, (according to Florence) Berthulph King of the Mercians
deceased, and Burhed succeeded him,

Who this next Year together with his Wites, (that is the Wise Men of his Great
Council, Anno Dom. DCCCLIII.
) desired King Aethelwulf that he would assist them to subdue the Northern
Welshmen, which he performed, and marching with his Army through Mercia, made
the Men of Florence, and Math. Westminster, call them the Midland Welsh, or
Britains: and if their Copies of the Annals are true, the Men of Powisland are
here meant.
North Wales Subject to King Burhed; but of this, the Welsh Chronicles are
silent.

This Year also, King Aethelwulf sent his Son Aelfred to Pope Leo to Rome, who
there anointed him King, and adopted him for his Episcopal Son. It is much
disputed among some of our Modern Historians, of what the Pope anointed Alfred
King, whether of any present, or else future Dominions; But since, an ancient
Manuscript in the Cottonian Library (containing an History of the Kings of
England) says expressly, That he was anointed In Successorem Paterni Regni, and
that we do not read of any Territories King Alfred enjoyed till after the Death
of his Brethren; it is most reasonable to understand it in the plain Literal
Sense, as it is here set down, not only in these Annals, but in Asser's Account
of this King's Life and Actions, that the Pope anointed him King as a
Prophetical Presage of his future Royal Dignity.

And the same Year Ealcher with the Kentish-men, and Huda with the Surrey-men,
fought with the Danish Army in the Isle of Thanet, and at first had the better
of them, but there were many killed and drowned on both sides, and both the
Ealdormen or Chief Commanders perished.

Also Burhed King of the Mercians now married the Daughter of King Ethelwulf.
Asser relates the Marriage to have been kept with great Solemnity at a Town of
the King's, called Cippenham (now Chipnam) in Wiltshire.

Anno Dom. DCCCLIV.
This Year the Danes wintered in Scepige, (or Sheppie;) and the same year King
Aethelwulf discharged the Tenth part of his Land throughout his whole Kingdom
of all Tribute or Taxes for the Honor of God and his own Salvation.

This being the famous and solemn Grant of King Aethelwulf concerning Tithes,
requires a more particular Relation, and therefore I shall here give you the
Words of the said Grant at large. -- I Aethelwulf, King of the West Saxons,
with the Council (or Consent) of my Bishops and Chief Men, etc. have consented,
That a certain Hereditary Part of the Lands heretofore possessed by all Orders
and Degrees of Persons, whether Men or Women, Servants of GOD, ( i. e. Monks or
Nuns,) or mere Laics, shall give their Tenth Mansion, and where it is least,
the Tenth Part of all their Goods, free and discharged of all Secular
Servitude, and particularly of all Royal Tributes or Taxations, as well the
greater as the less, which they call Wittereden, (which signifies a certain
Fine or Forfeiture;) and that they be free from all other Things, as
Expedition, building of a Bridge, Anno Dom. DCCCLIV.
or fortifying of a Castle, etc. And that they may the more diligently pour out
their Prayers to GOD for us without ceasing, we do in some part discharge their
other Service. These Things were done in Winchester, in the Church of St.
Peter, in the Year of our LORD's Incarnation 855, the Third Indiction, on the
Nones of November, before the great Altar, in Honor of the Glorious Virgin
Mary, the Mother of GOD, St. Michael the Archangel, and St. Peter Prince of
the Apostles, as also of our blessed Father Pope Gregory, all the Archbishops
and Bishops of England being present, and subscribing to it; as also Beorhed
King of Mercia, together with the Abbots, Abbesses, Earls, and other chief Men
of the whole Kingdom, with an infinite multitude of other Believers, who all of
them have witnessed, and consented to the Royal Grant, but the Dignitaries have
thereunto subscribed their Names.

But, as Ingulph relates, King Aethelwulf, for the greater firmness thereof,
offered this Charter at the Altar of St. Peter at Rome; but that the Bishops
received it in the Faith of God, and transmitted it to be published throughout
all the Churches in their several Diocesses.

Tho this Grant of Tithes is mentioned by the Annals, as to be made before the
King's going to Rome, yet it appears by the Date, as also from Asser and
Ingulph, not to have been done till after his Return from thence; which makes
Sir H. Spelman conjecture, (and not without good Grounds,) that this Grant was
twice made; once before his going to Rome, it being there confirmed by the
Pope, and was also regranted by a Great Council of the Kingdom after his
Return, as appears by the Charter here recited.

I have been the more exact in reciting this Law concerning Tithes, both
because it gives us the form of passing an Act in the great Council of the
Kingdom at that time, and who were the Parties to it, as also because this was
the first general Law that was ever made in a Mycel Synod of the whole Kingdom
for the payment of Tithes, tho I do not deny but there had been before some
particular Laws of King Ina and King Offa to the same effect; yet those could
only oblige the West Saxon and Mercian Kingdoms.

The next Year also (according to Florence and Asser's Chronicle) K. Aethelwulf
went to Rome, carrying Aelfred, Anno Dom. DCCCLV.
his youngest and best beloved Son along with him, but to what intent, having
been so lately there before, we know not, any more than what the King did
there, unless to repair the English School or College for Youth, that had been
lately burnt; but it is certain, he stayed abroad near a Year, and in his
Return home, Charles, (Surnamed The Bald,) King of the Franks, gave him his
Daughter to Wife, who was called Leotheta, (in French Judith,) and so, together
with her, he returned into England.

But as Asser relates, there was in the mean time an infamous Conspiracy framed
in the Western Parts of England, for Prince Aethelbald, the King's eldest Son,
and Ealchstan Bishop of Scirborne, and Aeanwulf Earl of Somerset, had plotted
together, that King Aethelwulf, at his Return Home, should never be received
into his Kingdom; most Men laid this to the Charge of this Bishop and Earl
only, tho many do chiefly attribute it to the Perverseness of this young
Prince, who was also very obstinate in other Wickedness. So the King his Father
returning from Rome, Anno Dom. DCCCLV.
Prince Ethelbald, together with his Counselors, contrived this great Villainy,
viz. to expel the King from his own Kingdom, tho God would not permit it to
take effect, neither did all the Noblemen of England consent to it; yet lest so
great a Mischief should happen, that the Father and Son making War on each
other, the whole Nation should be engaged in mutual Slaughter, by the wonderful
Clemency of the King, and with the Consent of all his Nobility, the Kingdom,
which was before united, became now divided between the Father and the Son, the
Eastern Countries being allotted to the former, and the Western to the latter;
but where the Father ought indeed by Right to have Reigned, there Ruled this
Rebellious and Undutiful Son* for the Western part of the England was always
accounted before the Eastern. King Ethelwulf therefore coming back from Rom^,
the whole Nation (as it ought) highly rejoiced at his return, and would, if he
had pleased, have expelled his wicked Son Aethelbald, with all his Adherents,
out of the Kingdom; but the King would by no means suffer it, using great
Clemency and Prudence, lest the Kingdom might thereby be endangered.

All this Disturbance seems to have been raised by his Son and his Faction,
because of his marrying this new Wife, whom notwithstanding having now brought
over with him, he placed by him on the Royal Throne as long as he lived,
without any Dispute or Opposition from his Nobles; tho (says this Author) the
Nation of the West Saxons did not permit the Queen to sit by the King, or to be
called Queen; which Custom our Ancestors relate to have proceeded from a
certain wicked Queen, called Eadburga, the Wife of King Bryhtric, whose Story,
Asser in his Annals, as also in his De Gestis Alfredi, has given us at large,
where speaking of the Occasion of this severe Law, he tells us, it proceeded
from the wicked Carriage of that Queen, (already mentioned at the end of the
former Book,) who abusing her Husband's Affections by untrue Accusations, took
away many Men's Lives; and being hated by the English after that King's
Decease, they made that Law now mentioned.

William of Malmesbury and Mat. Westminster do assure us, That King Ethelwulf
lived but two Years after his return from Rome, during which time he thought
not only of the World to come, but also what should happen in this after his
Decease; and therefore, lest his Sons should quarrel among themselves after his
Death, he commanded his Testament to be written, ( Asser calls it an
Hereditary, or Commendatory Epistle,) in which he ordained, his Kingdom should
be divided between the two eldest Sons, as also his own proper Inheritance
between all his Sons and Daughters, and near Kinsmen; but for his Money, he
ordered it to be divided between his Sons and his Nobles, and what was left, to
be employed for the good of his Soul; to which end he ordained, That his
Successors throughout all his own Hereditary Lands, should maintain out of
From w^ence came the Corrodies, that still remain in div^rs places.
every Ten Families one Poor Person, (either Native or Stranger,) with Meat,
Drink, and Apparel; always provided, that the Land did not then lie waste, but
was cultivated by Men and Cattle: It is also to be noted, That this Grant was
wholly different from that of Tithes, tho Bromton's Chronicle has confounded
them together, and made them all one; he also ordered to be sent every Year to
Rome 300 Mancuses, which William of Malmesbury renders Marks, tho what the Sum
was is uncertain: but it was to be equally distributed between the Churches of
St. Peter and St. Paul, to provide Lights on Easter Eve; and of this 300 Marks,
Anno Dom. DCCCLV.
the Pope was to have 100 to himself. These Grants are supposed by Sir Henry
Spelman to have been made in a general Council of the whole Kingdom, but after
this time we find no more of them for many Years, by reason of the frequent
Invasions of the Danes. But not long after King Ethelwulf died, and was buried
at Winchester, having reigned 20 Years and 5 Months; for the Saxon Annals,
which allow him but 18 Years and an half, are certainly mistaken.

This Year also, (according to Florence of Worcester,) Humbert the Bishop
anointed that Glorious Martyr, Edmund King of the East Angles, being then but
15 Years old, at a Town called Buram, being then the Royal Seat.

But having no Account of King Edmund's Pedigree, or of the Place of his Birth
from any of our English Historians, you must be content with what Johannes
Anglicus of Tinmouth has told us, or in his Legend of Saints, (called
Sanctilogium,) of this King and Martyr, viz. That he was the Son of one
Alemond, a Nobleman of the Blood Royal of the East Angles, who having fled for
fear of King Offa into Old Saxony, out of which his Family first came, had
there by his Wife called Cywara a Son, whom he named Edmund, the pretended
Miracles of whose Birth I purposely omit. This Prince having been instructed in
all Christian and Moral Duties, lived in Germany to the 14th Year of his Age,
and upon his return into England was so acceptable to the East Angles, that he
was by them Elected King, and, till his Death, continued in the quiet
Possession of that Kingdom, without any opposition of King Ethelwulf, or any of
his Sons, then Kings of the West Saxons, to whose Dominions that Kingdom of the
East Angles had lately been made subject; and hence it may be reasonably
inferred, that it was by King Ethelwulf's Consent, that Edmund being returned
out of Germany, took Possession of that Kingdom.

Being thus made King, and, by reason of his tender Age, not esteeming himself
capable of managing the Affairs of the Nation, he willingly submitted them and
himself to the Direction of the said Bishop of the East Angles, by whom he was
Crowned, and by whose Council and Direction he behaved himself as became a
Prince, endued with all Kingly Virtues; so that during his Reign, his principal
Care was to repair the Ruins which the Mercian Arms and Tyranny had brought
upon the Churches of the East Angles, reduced by War to extreme Poverty, and
consequently to a Neglect of Piety and Ecclesiastical Discipline. And thus he
Reigned 14 Years in Peace, with the Affection of all his Subjects, till GOD was
pleased, by sending the Pagan Danes as a Scourge to his Country, to render this
Prince a high Example of Christian Fortitude and Constancy.

King ETHELBALD, and King ETHELRED.
After the Death of Ethelwulf King of the West Saxons, Anno Dom. DCCCLVII.
his two eldest Sons divided their Father's Kingdom according to his Will:
Ethelbald, his eldest Son, succeeded him in West Saxony, whilst his younger
Brother Ethelred Reigned in Kent, as also over the East and South Saxons. And
now (according to our Annals) the Pope hearing of the Death of King Ethelwulf,
anointed Alfred to be King, and also delivered him to a Bishop to be Confirmed:
Anno Dom. DCCCLVII.
If this was so, the King his Father must have left him behind at Rome; for
Asser says expressly, That he went thither with him; but over what Kingdom the
Pope should Anoint him. I know not, unless foretold by way of Prophecy, he
would be King after his Brothers.

But as for King Ethelbald, abovementioned, both Ingulph and Will. of
Malmesbury give him a very bad Character, That he married Judeth, his Father's
Widow, and was also besides both Lazy, and Perfidious; but Edit. in 1. Vol.
Angl. Sacr.
Thomas Redborne, in his larger History of Winchester, says, That by the
Admonition of Swithin, Bishop of that Church, he repented of his Incest, and
put away Judeth his Mother-in-Law, and observed all Things that the Bishop
enjoined him. This Author farther relates from one Gerard, of Cornwal's History
of the West Saxon Kings, not now extant that I know of, That he died in a few
Years after, without doing or suffering any thing that deserves to be
mentioned; for we do not find that the Danes troubled this Kingdom all his
Reign, concerning the Length of which there is very different Relations amongst
our Historians; the Saxon Annals, and William of Malmesbury, making him to have
reigned 5 Years, whereas Asser and Ingulph allow him but Two and an half, which
seems to be the truer Account, for if King Ethelwulf returned from Rome in the
Year 855, and lived above Two Years after, it is plain King Ethelbald could not
Reign above Two Years and an half; for the Saxon Annals tell us, that in the
next Year but one, viz.

Anno Dom. DCCCLX.
King Ethelbald deceased, and that his Body was buried at Scireborne.

King ETHELBERT alone.
The^ Aethelbryght, his Brother took the Kingdom, and held it in great Concord
and Quiet.

I suppose our Author means, from Domestic Commotions; for he immediately
tells us, That in this King's time there came an Army (of Danes) from the Sea,
and took Winchester; with whom (in their return to their Ships) Osric and
Aethelwulf the Ealdormen, with the Hampshire and Berkshire-men, fought, and put
the Danes to flight, and kept the Field of Battle, but the Annals do not tell
us in what Year of his Reign this Invasion happened.

Anno Dom. DCCCLXI.
'This Year deceased St. Swithune Bishop of Winchester.

Now concerning this holy Bishop, as also Alstan Bishop of Shirbone, De Pontif.
la.
William of Malmesbury gives us this Character, which omitting all the Bedroll
of Miracles that follow, I shall here set down.

King Aethelwulf bearing a great Reverence to St. Swithune, whom he calls his
Teacher and Master, desisted not till he had honored him with the Government
of the said Bishopric, so that he was Consecrated with the Unanimous Consent
and Joy of all the whole Clergy of that Diocese, by Ceal^oth Arch Bishop of
Canterbury; hereby Bishop Swithune's Authority increasing, his Councels, for
the Good of the Kingdom, proved of greater weight; so that by his Admonitions,
both the Church and State received great Benefit: And indeed he was a rich
Treasure of all Virtues; but those in which he took most Delight, were Humility
and Clemency; and in the discharge of his Episcopal Function, he omitted
nothing belonging to a True Pastor.

By his Assistance principally, Anno Dom* DCCCLXV.
together with that of the Prudent and Courageous Prelate Alstan, Bishop of
Shirborne, King Aethelwulf was enabled to support the Calamities his Kingdom
suffered by the frequent Irruptions of the Danes, for these two were his
principal Councillors in all Affairs. Bishop Swithune, who contemned Worldly
Things, informed his Lord in all Matters which concerned his Soul, whilst
Alstan judging that Temporal Advantages were not to be neglected, encouraged
him to oppose the Danes, and provided Money for his Exchequer, and also ordered
his Armies; so that tho this King was of a slow, unactive Nature, yet by the
Admonitions of these two worthy Councillors, he Governed his Kingdom prudently
and happily: Many noble Designs for the good of the Church and State being well
begun, were prosperously executed in his Reign.

This Year the Danish Army landed in Thanet, and wintering there, made a League
with the Kentish-men, who promised them Money, provided they would keep the
Peace; under pretense of which, and of the Money promised, the Danes stole out
of their Camp, and wasted all the East part of Kent.] For, as Asser well
observes, they knew they could get more by Plunder, than by Peace.

Now, according to the same Annals, King Aethelbryht died, Anno Dom. DCCCLXVI.
to the great Grief of his Subjects, having governed the Kingdom 5 Years with a
general Satisfaction, and was buried at Scyreburne, near to his Brother. This
Prince is supposed to have had a Son called Ethelwald, whom you will find in
this History to have raised a Rebellion against King Edward the elder many
Years after.

King ETHELRED.
Then (according to the Annals) Aethelred, Brother to the late King, began his
Reign; and the same Year a great Army of Danes landed in England, and took up
their Winter Quarters among the East Angles, and there turned Horsemen, and
that Nation was forced to make Peace with them.

Then the Pagan Army sailed from the East Angles, Anno Dom. DCCCLXVII
and went up the River Humber to the City of York, where was at that time great
Discord between the People of that Nation.] I shall here give you Asser's
Account of this Transaction, being to the same effect (tho more particular than
that) in the Annals themselves. For (says he) the Northumbers had now expelled
Osbright, their lawful King, and had set up a Tyrant or Usurper, one Aella, who
was not descended of the Royal Line; but now when the Pagans invaded them by
the Intercession of the great Men, and for the Common Safety, the two Kings
joined their Forces, and so marched to York; at whose coming the Danes
presently fled, and endeavored to defend themselves within the City; which the
Christians perceiving, resolved to follow them to the very Walls, and breaking
in, and entering the Town with them; (for it seems, that City had not in those
Times such strong Walls, as they had when Asser wrote his History;) therefore
when the Christians had made a Breach in the Wall as they designed, and that a
great part of them had entered the City, the Pagans being compelled by Necessity
and Despair, broke out upon them, and killed, routed, and put to flight the
whole Army, as well within as without the Town; so that both the Kings were
slain, together with many Noblemen, and a vast number of Common Soldiers; and
a great many were taken Prisoners, Anno Dom. DCCCLXVII.
and those that remained alive were forced to make Peace with the Danes, who
(according to the Chronicle of Mailross,) made one Egbert King over the
Northumbers that were left, tho under the Danish Dominion; but it seems, it was
over those that lay on the North side of the River Time, as Simeon of Darham,
in his History of that Church, relates.

The same Year also died Aethstan the Bishop, after he had held his See of
Scireborne 50 Years, whose Body was buried in that Town.

But since the Chronicle that goes under the Name of Abbot Vid. X. Script. Col.
802.
Bromton undertakes to give some probable Account how the Danes came to invade
the Kingdom of Northumberland, tho it looks somewhat like a Romance, yet I
shall here give it you, since it is found in no other Author that I know of,
being thus. Osbriht, King of Northumberland, going one day a hunting, as he
returned home went privately to the House of one of his Noblemen, called Bruern
Brocard, to refresh himself; Bruern knowing nothing of the King's coming, was
gone to the Sea side, according to his Custom, to secure the Shore against
Pirates; but his Wife, a Woman of great Beauty, entertained the King at Dinner
very splendidly. The King have dined, took her by the Hand and led her to her
Chamber, telling her, He must speak with her in private; and there removing all
out of the way; but such as were privy to his Secrets, he by Force and Violence
lay with her. Having thus had his Will, he speedily returned to York, whilst
she so lamented, and wept, that her Face was extremely altered; which caused
her Husband at his return to ask the cause of so sudden a Change, and such an
unusual Sadness: Whereupon she told him the whole Matter, how the King had
forced her; which having heard, he comforted her, bidding her not to afflict
her self, since she was not able to resist a Man so potent; assuring her,
because she had told him the Truth, he would not love her less than he had done
before; and if GOD gave him leave, he would Revenge both himself, and her, upon
him that had committed the Crime. Then did Bruern, being a Man both Noble and
Powerful, call his Kindred together, to whom he revealed the Affront put upon
him, and his Intention speedily to Revenge it; To which they all consenting,
and approving his Purpose, he with them took Horse and rode to York. The King,
upon sight of him, called him to him very civilly, but he having all his
Relations at his Back, defied him, renouncing his Allegiance, giving up his
Land, and whatsoever else he held of him. This said, without any more Words he
withdrew, making no stay at all at Court.

So his Friends consenting, he went straitways over to Denmark, where he made a
great Complaint to the King of the Affront offered to him and his Wife by K.
Osbriht, desiring his speedy Relief and Supplies to put him into a Capacity to
revenge himself. At this News, Godrin and his Danes conceived very great Joy,
having now some Reason to induce them to invade the English, and revenge the
Injury offered to Bruern, who was descended of his Blood; whereupon he speedily
prepared a great Army, over which he made Captains, two Brothers, called
Inguar, and Hubba, most valiant Soldiers; and to them he gave a Navy,
furnished with all Necessaries, to transport an innumerable Company of Men.
These Adventurers landing in the Northern Parts, and taking their way through
Holderness, destroyed all the Towns, with their Inhabitants; and coming to
York, provoked Osbriht to come out and fight them, where he and his
Brother-King were both slain, as you have already heard.

This Year the Danish Army marched into Mercia as far as Snotingaham, (now
Nottingham,) and there took up their Quarters; Anno. Dom. DCCCLXVIII.
but Burhred, King of the Mercians, with his Great or Wise Men, entreated
Aethelred, King of the West Saxons, and Aelfred his Brother, to help them to
fight against the Pagans; whereupon they likewise marched to the same place,
where finding the Danish Army strongly fortified, they only besieged
Nottingham.] But (as Asser and Ingulph relate) the Christians not being able to
take either the Town or Castle, there was very little fighting, so that the
Mercians were forced to make Peace with the Pagans; whereupon the Danes marched
back again into the Kingdom of Northumberland.

The same Year Asser (in his Life of K. Alfred) tells us, That the King married
the Daughter of Aethelred the Ealdorman of the Gaini, i. e. of the Country
about Gainesburrough in Yorkshire.

But the next Year, the Danish Army returned again to York, Anno. Dom. DCCCLXIX.
and there stayed Twelve Months; and now there was also a great Mortality both
of Men, and Beasts.

But we cannot here omit the Relation of Mat. Westminster under this Year,
concerning what the Danes did before they left the North of England, where he
says, they slew both Old and Young, not sparing the Lives or Chastities so much
as of the Nuns, where he gives us a strange Example of an Heroic (if not too
Great a) Love of Chastity; for Ebba, (afterward Sainted,) then Abbess of
Coldingham Nunnery in Yorkshire, being more afraid of the loss of her
Virginity, than her Life, calling her Nuns into the Chapter House, there made a
Speech to them, setting forth the Lust and Cruelty of the Danes, and also
exhorting them to follow her Example in avoiding it; which they all promising
to observe, she then took a Razour and cut off her own Nose and upper Lip, in
which she was immediately followed by all the Sisters; which being done, those
cruel Tyrants, Hinguar and Hubba, coming thither the next day, together with
their Forces, and seeing so horrible a Spectacle, they not only ran out of the
Monastery and left them, but also gave order to their Followers, that they
should set the House on fire, which they forthwith did; so it was burnt to
Ashes, together with the Abbess, and all her Nuns, who thought themselves happy
in thus suffering Martyrdom for the preservation of that which was dearer to
them than their Lives. Nor did they discharge their Fury upon this Nunnery
alone, but upon all the rest of the Monasteries of the Northumbrian Kingdom,
having not long before destroyed the Monasteries and Church of Linaisfarne,
with those of Girwy and Weremuth, besides the famous Nunneries of Streanshale
and Tinmuth; most of which were never rebuilt, and those that were, not till
several Ages after. But to proceed with our Annals. In the Peterborough Copy,
it follows thus:

Then the Danes quitting the North, Anno Dom. DCCCLXX.
and mounting themselves on Horseback, marched through Mercia into East
England, and took up their Winter Quarters at Theodford; the same Winter King
Eadmund fought with them, but the Danes gained the Victory, and slew that holy
King, and destroying all the Monasteries that lay in their way, they wholly
conquered that Kingdom. The Names of the Princes who slew him were Higwais and
U^ba, (whom other Writers call Hinguar and Hubba. Anno Dom. DC^CLXX.
) At the same time also they came to Medeshamstead, which Monastery they burnt
and destroyed, killing the Abbots and Monks, with all the Men they found there,
carrying away all the rich Spoil of that place.

But since the Saxon Annals are very short in this Relation, I shall give you
from Ingulph a more particular Account of what they did this Year in their
march into East England, who further adds; That Winter being ended, the Danes
took Shipping and went into Lindisse in Lincolnshire, and landing at
Humberstan, spoiled all that Country, at which time that famous and ancient
Monastery of Bardney was destroyed, the Monks and all others being slain in the
Church without Mercy; and when they had there stayed, wasting the Country for
the whole Summer: About Michaelmas they did the like to the Country of
Kesteven, in the same Province, where they committed the same Murders and
Desolations.

The same Year, in the Month of September, Count Algar drew together all the
Youth of Hoyland (now called Holland) in Lincolnshire, with two Knights his
Senescals* Wibert, and Leofric, who marched in the Head of them, together with
a brave Body of 200 Men belonging to Croyland Abbey, who being all stout
Fellows, were led by one Toly, then a Monk, but formerly a famous Soldier
among the Mercians; these taking with them about 300 stout and warlike Men more
from Deping, Lanioft, and Boston, to whom also joined Morchar, Lord of Branne,
with his strong and numerous Family, and being met by the Sheriff of Lincoln, a
valiant and ancient Soldier, with the Lincolnshire Forces, all which mustering
together in Kesteven on St. Maurice's Day, they joined Battle with the Pagans,
where GOD gave them the Victory, three Kings being slain, with a very great
multitude of Soldiers; the Christians pursued the Pagans to their very Camp,
where finding a stout Resistance, Night at last parted them, and the Earl drew
back his Army.

But it seems there returned that Night to the Danish Camp all the rest of the
Princes of that Nation, who dividing the Country among them, had marched out to
plunder; their names are Barbarous, and too long to be repeated, but their
chief Kings were Godrum and Basseg, and their Earls or Leaders, Hingar and
Hubba, with others, who then returned with great Forces, and a multitude of
Captives, and a great deal of Spoil; and their coming being known, the greatest
part of the Christians struck with terror fled away; whilst those that were
left, early in the Morning, after hearing Divine Service, and receiving the
Sacrament, being resolved to dye for Christ, and in Defense of their Country,
marched into the Field against their Enemies; but the Earl perceiving his
Forces to be too much weakened appointed Friar Toly with his Five Hundred Men
to Fight in the Right Wing, because they were the strongest; and Earl Morchar
with those who followed him, as also the Sheriff of Lincoln making other Five
Hundred in the Left Wing; whilst he with his Senescals kept the main Body, as
ready to help either Wing if there were occasion; but the Danes being now
enraged at the slaughter of their Men, having buried their Three Kings at a
place, which is thence called Trekingham; afterward 2 Kings and 8 Counts
marched out, whilst the rest guarded the Camp, and Captives; but the
Christians, because of their smaller Number, drawing themselves up in one Body,
made with their Shields a strong Testudo against the force of their Enemies
Arrows, and kept off the Horse with their Pikes; Anno Dom. DCCCLXX.
and thus being well ordered by their Commanders, they kept their Ground the
whole day: But tho they remained unbroken till night, and had still withstood
the force of their Enemies Arrows, but their Horses being then tired, began to
flag; the Pagans feigning a Flight, on purpose seemed to quit the Field, which
the Christians perceiving, although their Commanders forbad and opposed it, yet
nevertheless breaking their Ranks, were all dispersed through the Plain without
any Order or Command: but the Pagans returning like Lions upon a Flock of
Sheep, made a great Slaughter amongst them; whilst the stout Count Algar, and
Friar Toly, with some Soldiers, getting upon a rising Ground, and being drawn
up into a round Body, did for a long time endure the Pagans Insults; and when
the said Earl and other Captains saw the stoutest Men of their small Army
slain, they got upon the thickest heaps of the Christian dead Bodies, and there
being resolved to sell their Lives as dear as they could, they fell down dead,
having received many Wounds; only a few young Men of Sutton and Gedeney
flinging away their Arms, fled into a Neighboring Wood, and so escaping, came
the Night following to the Monastery of Croyland, and there related the
slaughter of the Christians, and the loss of their whole Company: which when
they had told at the Church door with great lamentations, the Abbot and Monks,
being extremely confounded at this ill news, resolved to keep only with them
the Elder Monks, and some few Children, to provoke compassion, and so sent away
all the Younger Men, together with the Relics, Jewels, and Charters of their
Monasteries, by Boat to the Wood of Ancarig, adjoining to their Island; where
they staid with one Foret an Anchorite Four days, being Thirty in number,
whereof Ten were Priests: But the Abbot having hid the rest of the Plate; with
the rich Table of the Altar, and put on his Sacred Vestments, and had with his
Brethren said Mass, and communicated; they had scarce finished all this when
the Pagans breaking into the Church, slew Abbot Theodore at the Altar, who
perished by the hands of their King Oketule, all the rest as well Old Men as
Children, being also slain, except one handsome Boy of about Ten Years Old, who
(being intended for a Monk) was saved by Count Sidroc the Younger, and
stripping him of his Habit, put on him a Danish Coat, ordering him to follow
him where ever he went, and so the Boy sticking close to him, his Life was
saved, and he alone escaping, gave a relation of what he had seen; but the
Danes, when they had broke open the Tombs of St. Guthleak, and the Princes
there buried, and finding no more Plunder, set the Church on Fire, and burnt
the dead bodies that were in it together.

So likewise of the destruction of the Monastery of Medeshamstead, this Author
has given us a larger account than what we find in this Copy of the Annals,
viz. That four days after the destruction of Croyland, the Danes marched
toward that Monastery, where finding the Gates locked, they began to make an
assault upon it; but receiving a Repulse, at the second assault, Tuba the
Brother of Count Hubba being knocked down with a Stone, was carried off for
Dead, whereat Hubba was so enraged, that breaking into the Monastery he slew
all the Monks that came in his way, whilst the rest of them destroyed the
others, till at last all perished, so that in short, the Monastery was wholly
destroyed, and the Church, together with a noble Library of Books, Anno Dom.
DCCCLXX.
and all its Charters were reduced to Ashes.

But the fourth day after this the Pagan Army having got together all the spoil
they could, marched toward Huntington; but in their way thither, as the two
Counts Sidrocs brought up the Rear of the Army, which had now passed the River
Nene, two Wagon loads of rich movables happened to be sunk in the Ford, as
also the Beasts that drew them, in getting out of which, whilst Sidroc and his
Men were busied, the Boy Turgar slipped away into the next Wood, and walking
all Night about break of Day he got to Croyland, where he found the Monks
returned again, and busy in quenching the Fire, as well as they could; to whom
he related all that had happened, and discovering where the body of the Abbot
and most of the Monks lay, they removed the rubbish, and buried them, and then
having chosen Godric, one of the Monks that escaped, for their Abbot, they were
resolved to go and do the like Pious Office for the late Prior and Monks of
Medeshamstead, where arriving, they buried the Bodies of above fourscore Monks
in one Grave in the Churchyard, placing over them a Pyramidal Stone of about a
Yard high, whereon were carved the Images of the Abbot and Monks about him,
which was then to be seen in Ingulph's time.

In the mean time the Britains spoiling the Country as far as Grant-bridge (now
Cambridge,) they then fell upon, and burnt the famous Nunnery of Ely, killing
all that were therein both Men and Women, and carrying away a great deal of
Riches, which had been brought thither from all parts for their better
security; from whence they passed over into the Country of the East Angles,
where they slew Earl Wulketule coming against them, and making a stout
resistance with his small Forces, from whence they marched against King Edmund
himself, of whose Life and Martyrdom, I shall out of Asser's Annals, give you a
particular account; and tho I will not pass my word for the truth of all his
Relation, being written after the manner of the Legends of those times, yet the
substance of it is no doubt true, and the rest may serve, if not to instruct,
yet at least to divert the Readers.

But before I proceed to the Story of the Martyrdom of this King, it may not be
amiss to relate the occasion, why the Danes invaded the Kingdom of the
East Angles, and put King Edmund so cruelly to Death, which story tho it be not
very probable; yet since it is found in Mat. Westminsters Flores Historiarum, I
will from thence repeat it in as few words as I can, being to this effect; That
in the Kingdom of Denmark there was one Lothbrook, who being descended from the
Royal Family, had by his Wife two Sons, Inguar and Hubba: Lothbrook going to
Sea by himself, in a Boat, with only a Hawke on his Fist, to seek for Game in a
Neighboring Island, being taken by a sudden and violent Storm, was tossed up
and down for several Days, till at last he was by the Wind and Tide driven upon
the Coast of that Country, we now call Northfolk: where being found alone with
his Hawk, he is presented to Edmund the King, and being kindly received for the
comeliness of his Person, continued in his Court, and told the King the Tale of
his strange Fortune, and often went out in the Field for his Recreation, with
Beorn the King's Huntsman, being extraordinarily dexterous both in Hunting and
Fowling; for this Reason, this Huntsman greatly envied him, and as they two
were hunting together alone, he secretly murdered him, Anno Dom. DCCCLXX.
and hid his Body in a Wood. Now Lothebroc kept a Greyhound, which was
exceedingly fond of him, and the Huntsman being gone away with the rest of the
Dogs, he stayed there alone by his Master's Body; next day, when the King asked
for Lothebroc, Beorn answered, That the day before he stayed in the Wood, and
since that he had not seen him. But behold, the Greyhound comes to Court, and
fawning upon the King, as well as others, as soon as he had filled his Belly,
again departed; till doing this often, he was followed to the place by some of
the King's Servants, who there found out the Body, and brought the Relation of
it to the King: The Matter being examined, and found out, the Huntsman is
sentenced to be put into the same Boat in which Lothebroc arrived, without any
Oars or Tackling; in which, after a few days, (surely the Boat knew its way,)
he was cast upon the Coast of Denmark, where being brought to Lothebroc's Sons,
and by them examined what was become of their Father, whose Boat they
sufficiently knew, he affirmed, That he was killed by Edmund, King of the East
Angles; Whereupon they prepare a Navy, and passing into England, landed first
in the Northern Parts, and, as was said before, they grievously harassed the
Country of the Northumbers, and having brought it under Subjection, Hinguar
quits his Company, and with a great Fleet sailed to East England, where King
Edmund Reigned.

But Saxo Grammaticus gives us quite another Account of the Death of these
Prince's Father, whom he calls Regner, viz. That he was taken Prisoner in
Ireland, and there killed in Prison by Snakes, where none, you must know, ever
were, a Story altogether as probable as the former; so I have here given you,
from several Authors, two different Accounts of the Reason of the Danes
invading England, and shall leave it to the Reader to believe one, or neither,
since as they cannot both be true, so neither of them seem very probable.

This King Edmund had now Reigned five Years with great Affection of his
Subjects, for, being a Prince of great Hopes, he was by the Unanimous Favor,
and Consent of the People of that Province, not only Elected, but rather forced
to Rule over them. He had a Majestic Mien that became a King, and in his
Countenance appeared a certain Air of Piety mixed with Meekness and Devotion.
It was indeed but a short time he Reigned, but in that time he did by his
Charity to the Poor, and his Care over Widows and Orphans, perform all the
Duties of a Pious Man, as well as of a Good King.

But to come to the Story it self: The Danes, having now spoiled the Country,
and routed the King's Army, as you have heard, came on a sudden upon a certain
City, and taking it by Surprise, they killed the Inhabitants, and ravished the
Women, sparing neither Age nor Sex; but when they had pretty well satiated
their Fury, Hinguar their Captain examined some of the ordinary People that
were left alive, where their King used to reside; but here our Author supposes
the King to have never yet resisted them, and therefore that they would first
seizeon him, to prevent him from raising any Forces against them; which is not
at all likely, especially since the Saxon Annals tell us expressly, that King
Edmund had already fought against him, and been put to flight: But this seems
more probable, that the King being then fled to one of his Houses in the
Country, called Heglesdune, was by the Danes discovered: Whereupon Hinguar sent
one of his Servants on a Message to him, the Substance of which was, Anno Dom.
DCCCLXX.
That Earl Hinguar, his Lord, commanded him to deliver up all his Treasures,
and that he should submit himself and his Kingdom to his Power, which if he
refused to do, he should then be deprived both of his Kingdom and Life. To
which the King answered, That he would never renounce the Vow he had made in
Baptism, and being made King by the General Consent of the whole People, he was
resolved never to do any thing to the Prejudice of the Commonweal of the
English Nation, nor ever to submit his Neck to any Yoke but that of Christ,
whose Example he now intended to imitate, and by his Grace would Suffer for his
Name: And so he bid the Messenger return, and tell this to his Master. It seems
the King had no sooner finished what he had to say, but as the Messenger was
going back with this Answer, Hinguar himself met him, to whom having told what
the King had said, he immediately commanded his Men to enter the Palace, and to
lay hold of none but the King, and He, being there soon found, was immediately
tied, and brought before the Captain, who commanded him first to be cruelly
beaten, and then bound to a Neighboring Tree, to be inhumanly whipped; all
which he manfully endured, still calling on the Name of Christ: Whereat his
Enemies being enraged, in a most barbarous manner shot his Body so full of
Arrows, that it seemed capable of receiving no more; yet none of the Wounds
killing him outright, Hinguar at last commanded one of his Soldiers to cut off
his Head; which our Author describes with a great deal of Monkish Eloquence:
This being done, and leaving his Body there, they carried away the Head along
with them, that so it might not be buried with it; but at last they flung it
into a Wood, (which John of Tinmouth, in his Historia Aurea, calls Heglesdun;)
but the People, after they were gotten out of their Hiding-places, began to
look for it, and having long searched up and down the Wood, they at length
heard the Head when they cried out to one another, Where are you? Answer (in
English,) Here, here: Nor ceased repeating those words, till they came where it
lay. As for this part of the Story, it sounds so like a Legend, that I shall
leave it to be swallowed by those who are apt to be taken with such Things. I
have no more to add, but that King Edmund Suffered on the 12th of the Kal. of
December, in the Year abovementioned: But enough in Conscience, if not too
much, of this King's Martyrdom, who had afterward a Church and Monastery
erected to his Memory, as you will find when you come to it; for it is certain,
the English Saxons attributed as great Sanctity to this, as to any of their
ancient Saints, and had as great a Belief of his Miracles, his Body being
preserved incorrupt (whether by Art or Miracle I shall not determine) for many
Ages after.

I have no more to Remark under this Year, but that now Ceolnoth the
Archbishop deceased, and Ethelred Bishop of Wiltun-scire was Elected
Archbishop of Canterbury in his stead.

Also that the Town of Dunmoc, being now destroyed by the Danes, Helmham in
Norfolk continued to be the sole Bishop's See for the Kingdom of the East
Angles, till it was long after removed to Norwich.

Anno Dom. DCCCLXXI.
This Year (as both Asser and the Saxon Annals relate) the Army of the Danes
leaving the East Angles, marched into the West Saxon Kingdom, and came to a
Town of the King's called Reading, lying on the South side of Thames, in that
County which was then called Bearrock^^^^^ (now Berkshire;) and the third Day
after their coming, diverse of their Commanders rid out with great part of their
Forces to Plunder, Anno Dom. DCCCLXXI.
whilst the rest remained behind to cast up a Trench between the two Rivers,
Thames and Kynton, on the right side of the Town, whom Earl Aethelwulf with his
Forces met at Englefeild in that County, where it was stoutly fought on both
sides; but after a long Battle, one of the Counts Sydrock being slain, and a
great part of his Army routed, the rest escaping by flight, the Christians got
the Victory, and kept the Field. And four Days after, King Aethered and Aelfred
his Brother joining their Forces together, marched to Reading, and when they
came to the Castle, they killed and destroyed all the Danes whom they found
without the Ga^es; but they within did not make a less obstinate Resistance,
for f^llying out, the Fight became very sharp on both sides, in so much that
the Christians were at last forced to turn their Backs, and the Pagans gained
the Victory, and there Earl Aethelwulf abovementioned was slain amongst the
rest; with which the Christians being much provoked, 4 days after they fought
with them again at a place called Aescesdune (now Aston) in Berkshire, when the
Pagans divided themselves into two equal Bodies, for they had then two Kings,
besides many Earls; so they allotted one part of the Army to the two Kings, and
the other to the Earls; which the Christians perceiving, they likewise did the
same with their Army: But Elfred came sooner into the Field with his Men, than
did the King his Brother; for (as Asser tells us) he had heard from those that
were there, that the King was then in his Tent hearing Mass, and positively
affi^ming, that he would not depart thence till it was finished, which he made
good; and this Piety of the King's was thought to prevail much with God, for
the Christians had resolved that King Ethered with his Forces should maintain
the Fight against the two Pagan Kings, whilst Aelfred his Brother, with his
Detachment, should oppose the Earls. And now both Armies being drawn up in
Battle Array, whilst the King stayed somewhat long as his Prayers, Prince
Aelfred, then his Brother's Lieutenant, was not strong enough alone to sustain
all the Pagan Forces, for tho he saw he must either Retreat, or else Engage the
Enemy before his Brother's coming up, which still the King delayed, yet the
Prince (trusting on the Divine Assistance, and) having put his Men in good
Order, presently marched against the Enemy, who had much the ^dvantage of him,
by reason of the higher Ground they had got. There was also in the same Field a
single Thorn Tree, (which Asser says he himself had seen,) about which the
Enemies Troops were all drawn up; but when they had both bloudily fought for a
long time, the Pagans being no longer able to withstand the Christians Arms, a
great part of their Troops was slain, and the rest saved themselves by flight,
leaving behind them dead upon the place one of their Kings called Bachseg, and
several other great Men, with many Thousands of common Soldiers, needless here
to be particularly mentioned; but this King here called Bachseg, the Danish
History na^es Ivar, the Son of Reynere; so the rest of their Army fled that
night to the Castle of Reading abovementioned whither the Christians following
killed them as long as daylight would permit.

But tho Asser, the Writer of King Alfred's Life and Actions, has for his
Honor attributed the whole Success of this Battle to that Prince; yet it is
more probable what the Manuscript, called Scala Chronica, (cited by Mr. Speed,)
relates, That when Prince Aelfred's Men, being now spent, were ready to
Retreat, Anno Dom. DCCCLXXI.
King Ethered came into the Battle from his Prayers; and so well seconded his
Brother with fresh Forces, that renewing the Fight, the Victory (the greatest
they had ever yet obtained) was chiefly owing to their Valor.

But Fifteen Days after this, King Aethered, with his Brother Aelfred, marched
again toward Basing to fight the Enemy, where another Battle happened, and the
Pagans, making there an obstinate Resistance, obtained the Victory, and kept
the Field; after which Fight; a fresh Army of Pagans coming from beyond Sea,
joined themselves to the former.

But here the Saxon Annals further add, That about two Months after this, King
Aethered, and Aelfred his Brother, fought again with the Pagans at Meretune
(now Merton) in Surrey, where the Army being divided into two Parts, at first
put the Enemy to the Rout, and had the better for a great part of the day; yet
at last, after a mighty slaughter, the Danes kept the Field, and there was
slain Bishop Heamund, with abundance of brave Men.

After this Battle, during the whole Summer following, the Danes remained in
quiet at Reading; but the same Year King Aethered, having now for five Years
stoutly and nobly Governed his Kingdom, tho with many Troubles, deceased, and
was buried in the Monastery of Winburne in Dorsetshire. But tho the Chronicle
that goes under the Name of Abbot Bromton, (from I know not what Authority,)
relates this King to have died of the Wounds which he had received in a Fight
against one Somerled, a Danish King, who had newly destroyed the Town of
Reading; and the Inscription on this King's Tomb at Winborne, (cited by Tit.
Dorsetshire.
Mr. Camden in his Britannia,) relates him to be slain by the Danes; yet since
neither Asser, Ingulph, the Saxon Annals, nor William of Malmesbury, mention
any such thing, and that the Inscription it self is but Modern, I rather
suppose him to have died a natural Death of the Plague, which then reigned.

This King is said, by the Annals of Ireland, to have had a Daughter named
Thyra, married to Gormun, King of the Danes, who on her begat Sweyn, the Father
of King Cnute. This Ethered had also several Sons, as Alfred, supposed to be
Grandfather to Ethelwerd, called Quaestor the Historian; as also Oswald, who
his Father mentions in his Charter to the Abbey of Abingdon.

King AELFRED, otherwise called ALFRED.
Immediately after King Ethered's Death, (as Asser relates,) Prince Alfred,
(who, during the Lives of his three Brothers, had been only their Deputy, or
Lieutenant,) now by the General Consent of the whole Kingdom, took the
Government upon him, which he might have had if he pleased during their
Lifetime, since he exceeded them all both in Wisdom and Courage; so that
indeed he Reigned almost whether he would or no. But before the first Month of
his Reign was at an end, he, trusting on the Divine Assistance, marched his
Army (tho but few in comparison of the Pagans) to Wilton, lying on the South
side of the River Willie, (from which both the Town and Country take their
Names,) where it was valiantly fought on both sides for great part of the day,
till the Pagans not being able any longer to endure the Force and Valor of the
English, began to turn their Backs, but then finding the Number of the Pursuers
to be small, they rallied, and obtaining the Victory, kept the Field.

Nor let this seem strange to any, Anno Dom. DCCCLXXI.
that will but consider how small the Number of the Christians were, in
comparison of the Pagans; for the English had in the space of one Year fought 8
or 9 Battles against them, besides innumerable Skirmishes which King Alfred, or
his Commanders, had with them, wherein tho they lost one King and nine Earls,
or Principal Commanders; yet receiving such frequent Recruits from beyond Sea,
whilst the Saxons every day grew weaker, it is no Wonder if they prevailed; yet
notwithstanding Asser, and the Saxon Annals, tell us, That this Year there was
a Peace made with the Danes, upon condition that they would depart the Kingdom;
which they for the present observed, but to little purpose.

For the next Year, (as the same Author tells us,) the Danes having landed
again, marched from Reading to London, Anno Dom. DCCCLXXII
and there took up their Winter Quarters; and the Mercians were forced to make
Peace with them.

Also this Year, (according to the Chronicle of Mailross, and Simeon of
Durham,) the Northumbers expelled Egbert their King, and Wulfher Archbishop of
York, who both (as Mat. Westminster relates) flying to Bertulph King of the
Mercians, were by him honorably received.

About the same time (according to Caradoc's Chronicle) also died Gwgan, King
or Prince of Cardigan, who, as some British Chronicles relate, was drowned by
misfortune; and at the same time the Danes destroyed the Town of Alcluid in
Scotland.

This Year the Danish Army leaving the Countries about London, Anno Dom.
DCCCLXXIII.
marched into the Kingdom of the Northumbers, and there Wintered in a place
called Tursige (now Torswick) in Lindsey, (which was then part of the
Northumbrian Kingdom;) so that the Neighboring Nations were again forced to
renew their League with them.

And now also (according to Simeon of Durham) Egbert, King of Northumberland,
dying, one Ricsige succeeded him, and Archbishop Wulfher was now restored to
his Bishopric.

The next Year the Pagan Army leaving Lindisse, marched into Mercia, Anno Dom.
DCCCLXXIV.
and wintered in a place called Hreoptun (now Repton) in Derbyshire, where they
forced Burhred, King of the Mercians, to desert his Kingdom, and pass the Seas
to go to Rome, where arriving, he lived not long, but there dying in the 22d
Year of his Reign, he was honorably buried at the English School or College in
the Church of St. Mary thereunto belonging. The Danes, after his Expulsion,
brought the whole Kingdom of Mercia under their Dominion, and then delivered it
to one Ceolwulf, an inconsiderable Fellow, and Servant of the late King, upon
this miserable Condition, That he should deliver it up to them again whenever
they required it; and for this he gave Hostages, swearing to obey them in all
Things.

Now the Danish Army leaving Hreoptun, became divided into two; Anno Dom.
DCCCLXXV.
and Halfden their Commander marched with one part of it into the Kingdom of
Northumberland, and there took up his Winter Quarters near the River Tine,
where they conquered the whole Country, and also spoiled the Country between
the Picts and the Straecled Welsh-men, (who then inhabited part of Galloway in
Scotland,) whilst another part of them, under the Command of Godrun, Oskytel,
and Amwynd, (three of their Kings,) marched to Grantbridge, and there Wintered:
And the same Summer King Aelfred fought at Sea against seven of their Ships,
and took one of them, the rest escaping.

Anno Dom. DCCCLXXVI.
This Year (as Asser and the Saxon Annals relate,) Rollo, the Dan^ or Norman,
wasted Neustria; (afterward called Normandy,) and, in some time after, made an
entire Conquest of it: Asser also says, that this Rollo having had a Dream of a
Swarm of Bees flying toward the South, he chose to leave England, and go over
into France; though, as other Authors affirm, it was because he was so warmly
received by King Alfred, that he did not like to stay here, but rather chose to
pass into another Country of easier Conquest, as Normandy indeed proved, for he
reigned there fifty Years.

The same Year (according to the Chronicle of Mailrosse, and Simeon of Durham,)
Ricsig, King of Northumberland, dying, another Egbert succeeded him; but we
have no account of his Actions, more than that he reigned beyond Tyne as a
Tributary to the Danes, who possessed all the rest of the Country, as you will
find by the Saxon Annals

The same Year, (accordingly) the Danes stealing away by Night from
Grantbridge, (where they had long encamped,) marched to Werham, (now Warham in
Dorsetshire,) being then a strong Castle of the West Saxons; this place they
took, and destroyed, together with the Nunnery there; then passing higher, as
into a secure Harbor, they drew up all their Ships, so that now King Alfred
was reduced to such great streights, that he was forced to make Peace with him;
and they gave the King for Pledges some of the Noblest Persons in their Army,
and took an Oath upon a sacred Bracelet they had, (which Oath they would never
take to any Nation before,) that they would presently depart the Kingdom; but
in the mean while, that part of the Army, which had Horses, stole away to
Exanceaster, (now Exeter,) whereupon the King put all their Hostages to Death.

The same Year in the Month of August, Healfden the Danish King divided the
Kingdom of the Northumbers among his People, who now settling there, ploughed
and sowed; from whence the Danes date their Reign over that Kingdom. But the
Year following,

Anno Dom. DCCCLXXVII
The Danes having left Werham, and come to Exeter, (as you have already heard,)
their Fleet in the mean time fetching a compass, sailing toward the West, (I
suppose to Exmouth) there arose so violent a Storm, as that 120 of their Ships
were cast away near Swandwic, (now Swanwick in Hampshire;) then King Aelfred
followed that part of the Army as far as Exeter, tho he could not overtake
them, till they had got into the Castle, which proved so strong, that no body
could come at them; but he streightning them there, they gave him what Hostages
he required, and took fresh Oaths, and for a small time observed the league
they had made; yet nevertheless in the Month of August following, the same
Danish Army marched into the Province of the Mercians, where, dividing part of
it between themselves, they left the rest to Ceolwulf above mentioned.

About this time also, according to Caradoc's Chronicle, the English, having
entered Wales the Year before, fought a Bloody Battle with the Welshmen, though
this Author neither tells who were the Commanders, nor who had the Victory;
and the Year following there was another Battle between them, wherein Rodorick,
Surnamed The Great, King or Prince of Wales, and Guyriad his Brother, or (as
some say,) his Son, were slain.

This Rodorick had, by his Wife Engharaud, the Daughter of Prince Meyric
several Sons, as Anarawd his Eldest, to whom he gave Aberffraw, with North
Wales: Cadelh the second, to whom he left Dynevowr, Anno Dom. DCCCLXXVII.
with South Wales; who also took by force Marthraval and Powysland, after the
Death of Mervyn the third Son; to whom their Father Rodorick had given the
same; To which Dr. Powel likewise adds, That this Rodorick is esteemed by all
Writers, to be sole King of all Wales; North Wales descending to him from his
Mother Esylcht the Daughter and sole Heir of Conan Tindaethwy; but South Wales
he had in Right of his Wife, the Daughter and Heir of Meyric ap Dyfnwal, King
of Cardigan; Powis he had by Nest, the Sister and Heir of Congen ap Cadhel,
King of Powis, his Father's Mother: These three Dominions he appointed under
their Meeres and Bounds, with a Princely House in each of them. These he had
named Ytair Talaeth, and left them unto three of his Sons, Anarawd, Cadhel, and
Mervyn, who were called Ytrit Twysoc Talaethioc, that is, the three Crowned
Princes, because each of them did wear upon his Bonnet, or Helmet, a Coronet of
Gold, being a broad Lace or Head-band indented upwards, set and wrought with
precious Stones; which, in the British or Welsh Speech, is called Talaeth; and
to which Mr. Vaughan, in his Additional Notes to Caradoc's History has added,
out of an ancient Welsh Manuscript, That this Rodorick is said to have
corrected some of the old British Laws, and to have appointed new ones: He also
ordained, that his Eldest Son should have the Crown, or Coronet of Aberffraw,
with the Fifteen Cantreds thereunto belonging. This Aberffraw is now a small
Village in the Isle of Anglesey; and was anciently the chief Seat of the
Princes of Guyneth, or North Wales: He left to his second the Crown or Coronet
of Dinevowr or Cardigan, with its fifteen Cantreds, extending from the Mouth of
the River Devi to the Mouth of Severne; and also that his Son should have the
Crown, or Coronet of Mathraval, with the Fifteen Cantreds of Powis, from the
mouth of the River Dee, to the bridge over Severne at Gloucester.

He ordained also, That his Eldest Son, and his successors should continue the
payment of the ancient tribute to the King of London, (i. e. King of England)
and that the other two, their Heirs and Successors, should acknowledge his
Sovereignty, and pay the like tribute to him and his Successors; and that upon
the Invasions of Strangers, they should all send him aid, and be also ready to
protect them, when there should be need.

Moreover he ordained, That when any difference should arise between the
Princes of Aberffraw, and Cardigan, the Three Princes should meet at Bwlchy
Pawl, and after hearing of Council on both sides, the Prince of Powis should be
Umpire between them.

And if the difference were between the Kings of Aberffraw, and Powis, that
they should likewise all Three meet at Dolhrianedd, (perchance Morvarhianed, on
the Bank of the River Dee) where the King of Cardigan was to end the
Controversy.

And if there should be any difference between the Kings of Powis, and
Cardigan, the meeting should be at Llyswen, upon the River Wy, and the King of
Aberffraw to decide it.

This, tho it seems to have been as wise a course as could be taken to maintain
amity in a divided Kingdom, yet did prove of no effect; for it seems the
Princes of these Countries did not long observe this Constitution of their
Ancestour King Rodoric, but perpetually weakened each other with Civil Wars; so
that the English taking advantage of their mutual divisions, by assisting the
weaker Prince against the stronger; they at last by degrees reduced them all
under the English Dominion, Anno Dom. DCCCLXXVIII
as shall be further shown in its proper place.

About this time Anarawd, the Eldest Son of Rodorick above mentioned, began his
Reign over North Wales.

This Year (according to Asser) the Danes stealing away privately after the
Feast of Epiphany to Cypenham, and having now got Horses, marched through all
the Country of the West Saxons, and there began to fix their Quarters; forcing
many of the Inhabitants beyond Sea, and subjecting the rest of their Dominion,
in so much that King Alfred was forced with a few of his Nobles, and with some
Soldiers and Vassals, to lurk among the Woody and Boggy parts of
Somersetshire, where he led a very uneasy Life, in great Trouble and
Scarcity, having no Provisions but what he could take away by frequent
incursions from the Enemies, or else those Christians who had submitted
themselves to their Dominion; and it is found in the Life of St. Neot, as he
lay hid with a certain Cow-herd, it happened one day, that as his Wife was
making of Cakes, the King sat by the Fire, fitting up his Bow and Arrows, and
other Weapons; but when the Woman saw the Cakes which lay before the fire begin
to burn, she presently ran and removed them, and chiding the King, (whom she
did not know,) said thus, Do thou, Fellow think much to turn these Cakes,
which thou can eat fast enough when they are baked? At which the King
laughing, took all in good part; but be the Story true or false, this much is
certain, that the King lay at this time so private, that neither his Friends
nor Enemies could tell where he was; in so much that all this while the Royal
Patrimony became a prey, as well to the revolting English, as to the Danes
themselves.

But the Monkish writers of these times, (according to their usual Custom of
interpreting all misfortunes to be God's Judgments) will needs have this to be
a judgment upon this King, because that in the beginning of his Reign, being
taken up with the desire of Learning, or else diverted by Hunting and other
Juvenile Pleasures; he had too much neglected the public affairs; and that
being admonished by St. Neot, and refusing to amend, the Holy Man foretold,
there would be a time, when he should be driven from his Kingdom, and from his
own House.

But be this as it will, whilst King Alfred was thus overpowered by the great
multitude of Danes that daily entered the Kingdom, he was forced to retreat; yet
even then, being followed by a small band of Stout and Loyal Soldiers, he
often set upon the Enemies by surprise, and with so good success, that he let
them see, though he was overcome by numbers, yet he was not vanquished, since
he remained formidable even in his flight; but to this Retreat, the then Woody
and Bogy parts of Somersetshire, between the Rivers The One and Parret chiefly
contributed, which were then almost an Island, and not to be entered without a
Boat, unless by one narrow way, (as Leland in his Itinerary has rightly
observed) but Will. of Malmesbury tells us, That it is to no purpose to relate
all the little Skirmishes and Adventures of this King, during his Retreat; only
one passage will not be unpleasant, whether it be true or false, it happened
one Day that whilst King Alfred lay pivate in a little Castle, or Fort, in the
Wood Athelney, it being Winter time, and the Waters frozen up, he sent out his
followers to seek for some Fish or Foul, whereby they might sustain Nature, so
that none were left at home, but himself and his Mother, (for it seems the
Queen his Wife was either dead, Anno Dom. DCCCLXXVIII.
or else lay concealed some where else;) but the King having to pass away the
time taken up a Book, and began to read, (as his custom was, when he had
nothing else to do) a certain poor Man knocked at the door, and begged an Alms;
whereupon the King calling to his Mother, desired her to see if there was any
thing for him to eat; but she told him, that there was no more than one Loaf
left, and this would not be enough for the whole Company when they returned
home; the King hearing this, said no more, but let God be blessed for all his
gifts, then praying his Mother, to bestow half of it upon this poor Christian,
further added, that he who had fed 5000 Men with Five Loaves and Two small
Fishes, could also, if he pleased, make half a Loaf suffice their necessities;
whereupon his Mother complying with his desire, and the poor Man having got
more than he looked for, went his way, but the King having read till he was
tired, happened to fall asleep, and dreamt that he saw St. Cuthbert (formerly
Bishop of Lindisfarne) coming to him, and telling him, that he was sent from
God to let him know, that he was now resolved to put an end to the long and
grievous punishments which the English had hitherto suffered for their Sins;
and that the Alms which he had just now bestowed, was so acceptable in his
sight, that he would restore him to his Kingdom, and said, as a sign of this,
his Servants, who were then gone out a Fishing, tho with very small hopes of
catching any thing, should return home so loaded, that he should look upon it
with wonder; but that which is more strange, his Mother fell also a sleep, and
dreamed the like Dream at the same time, as she told the King her Son when he
awaked her; but whilst they with great astonishment discoursed of this
Miracle, his followers returned home, bringing Fish enough with them to have
served a little Army, if there had been occasion.

But be this Story true or false, it is certain that not long after, the King
received news, that Hinguar and Hubba, returning out of Wales, (where having
made a great slaughter of the Britains, they had past the Winter) and being
lately landed in Devon-shire with Twenty three Ships, there met with some of
the King's party, by whom their Captain with, 1200 Soldiers were slain, near
the Castle of Kenwith, the manner of which was thus; Odun, Earl of Devon-shire,
with many others of the King's Subjects, upon the arrival of Hubba, had fled
hither for refuge; but when the Danes knew the Castle was but weakly fortified,
and they within were not provided of things necessary for a Siege; they then
resolved to sit down before it, supposing that the English would quickly
surrender for want of Provisions; which they being also sensible of, were
endeavoring to prevent, and resolving either to obtain the Victory or dye;
they sallyed out early one Morning upon the Enemy, who lay Encamped without any
good Guards, so falling upon them at unawares slew Hubba their Leader, with his
whole Army, except a few who were forced to flee to their Ships.

And this Hubba being here buried under a heap of Stones, gave name to the
place, being called Hubblestones to this day; Vid. C^m^ens. Britan Tit.
Devonshire.
but the English having stripped the dead bodies, they there found among the
spoils, that famous Banner, called Reafan, (that is the Raven) being the
Picture of a Raven embroidered by the Three Sisters of Hinguar, and Hubba, in
one forenoon on purpose for this Expedition, and which being Enchanted by their
Magic Arts, they put so great a confidence in it, that they believed if they
were to meet with good success, Anno Dom. D^C^IXXVIII.
this figure would clap its Wings, as if it were alive, but if otherwise, would
let them fall; but be this Story true or false, it seems they now lost their
Oracle before they had time to consult it, and the loss of it was certainly a
great discouragement to them.

King Aelfred being now much encouraged with the news of this good success of
the Devon-shire-men, began to consider how he might perform some worthy action
against the Enemy; therefore this Year, (as the Saxon Annals relate,) having
first fortified with his slender Forces a small Castle or Fort at
Aetheling-gaige (now called Athelney in Somersetshire) where he had resided
hitherto; he marched from thence the Seventh Week after, and with his Subjects
and Vassals there, to fight against the Pagans; and it is also about this time,
that we may place that memorable action of this King which is thus related by
Ingulph, and Will. of Malmesbury, which if true, shows not only his great
Courage, but Conduct too; for knowing the Enemy to exceed him in numbers, as
well as other advantages, and that if he should set upon them with open Force
he would be able to do them little, or no prejudice, nor could he hope for any
better success, unless he knew in what condition the Enemie's Army was, and not
having any one whose Sagacity or Fidelity he could well trust, he was resolved
to go himself to spy out the Enemie's Camp: so taking upon him the Habit of a
Country Minstrel (or Fiddler) he went with only one Companion into the Danish
Camp, where he became so acceptable, as well for his Singing, as Playing, that
at last he was introduced to the King's Tent, and when he had there, as well as
in the rest of the Danish Camp, learnt as much as he had a mind to know, he
again returned to his Castle at Athelne; where having called together all his
chief followers, he related to them the careless condition of the Enemies Camp,
and with what ease they might be destroyed: whereat they being extraordinarily
surprised, he then resolved to muster up what Forces he could.

So the Seventh Week after Easter, he marched to Ecgbyrth-stan (now supposed to
be Brixstan in Somersetshire,) lying on the East side of Selwood Forest, where
met him all the Wilt-shire, Somersetshire and Hamptshire Men; who were
mightily pleased to behold their King after so many hazards; but staying there
only one night, he marched away to Iglay, (where the place was is not very well
known,) and there encamped another night, in which (as Asser relates) St. Neot,
who had been formerly his Kinsman, and Friend, appeared to him in a Dream, and
bid him not be afraid of the great Army of the Pagans, because God would now
have mercy upon him and his People; and that what had happened to him, was for
his too great Arrogance in his Youth, and that God would Fight for him and his
People: The King you may be sure was much rejoiced at this Dream, and failed
not to encourage his Men with it; so the next Morning removing his Camp from
thence, he came in one Day more to Ethandune, (but where it is we cannot tell)
where the Danes lay encamped, and marching against them in very close order, he
fought their whole Army, and though they did for a long time stoutly resist the
frequent charges the King's Men made upon them, yet at last they gave ground,
and beginning to flee he obtained a notable Victory, making a great sl^ughter
of the Pagans, as they retreated to a certain Castle not far off, and at which
they lay encamped, where the King besieged them for Fourteen Days; till being
overcome by hunger, they were reduced to that necessity, as to desire Peace on
these Conditions, Anno Dom. DCCCLXXVIII.
That the King should receive from them what Hostages He should name, but He
not to return any to them; so they made such a Peace with him, as they had
never done with any King before; for they swore that they would depart his
Kingdom, and that Gythram (or Gutrum) their King should become a Christian, all
which was performed, for about Three Weeks after the said King with about
Thirty more of his Chief Noblemen came to the King, being then at Alrey (the
place is now unknown) only that it lay near Athelney abovementioned, where
King Alfred receiving him from the Font at his Baptism, became his Go^father,
and took him for his adopted Son: But he did not receive the Chrisme till Eight
Days after, at a Town of the Kings called Wedmore, where he staid with him for
the space of Twelve Days, who presented him, and all those that accompanied
him, not only with Money, but Houses and Lands, being now resolved to fix here.

So this next Year the Danes (according to their promise) removed from
Cippenham (i. e. Chippenham in Wiltshire) to Cirenceaster, Anno Dom. DCCCLXXIX.
and there staid one Year.

But now another Army of Pagans, arriving from beyond the Sea, sailed up the
River Thames, to whom (notwithstanding their former Oaths) the Army that was
here before also joined, and took up their Winter Quarters at Fullanham (now
Fulham, not far from London,) and the same Year (according to the Annals) the
Sun was Eclipsed for one whole hour; also now part of the Pagans who had
quartered at Cirencester, (as say the Annals and Asser) marched from thence
under the Conduct of King Gythrum, into the Kingdom of the East Angles; and
dividing the Country among them, began to inhabit it; which, having been in
their possession ever since the Death of King Edmund, King Alfred now yielded
up to their King Gythram; but those Danes who had before staid at Fulham, now
sailed into Frankland, and quartered at Ghent for one whole Year; from whence
you may observe, that what we now call Flanders was then accounted part of
France, or Frankland.

And to this time we may also refer, Vid. Lambe^d's Archani^m.
that League or Agreement made between King Alfred and King Guthram, which sets
out the Territories of each of these Princes.

The First Article is, That it is agreed that the Limits of K. Alfred's Land
are first upon the Thames, then proceed they to the River Lee, as far as his
Fountain; then straight to Beaford, and then along the River Ouse, as far as
Watling-street; which I suppose, is thus to be understood; that K. Alfred did
hereby grant him East-England and Essex; so that the bounds of these Kings
Dominions were first the Thames, then the River, Lee, as far as Harford,
whereabouts it arises: Then from Harford to Bedford, all along Watling-street,
and then from Bedford all along the Ouse to the Sea.

The Second Article appoints the value of a Man slain, whether English or Dane,
to be four Marks of pure Gold, and the Redemption of each Four hundred
Shillings.

But if the King's Servant or Thane was accused of Manslaughter; the Third
Article proceeds, That he then should be tried by Twelve other of the King's
Servants; Anno Dom. DCCCLXXIX.
or in ease he was not the King's Servant, but belonged to some inferior Lord,
he should be tried by eleven of his Equals, and by one of the King's Servants.
The same Order was taken in all Suits, which exceeded four Marks; but in case
he refused to undergo this Trial, his Fine was to be increased threefold.

The Fourth appoints Vouchers for the Sale of Men, Horses, or Oxen.

The Fifth and Last Ordains, That none from either Army should pass to the
other without Leave; and in case it be by way of Traffic, such shall find
Sureties for their good Behavior, that the Peace may not be broken.

This was the League it self, with some other Articles needless to be here
recited; the Preface to which declares, That it was made betwixt the two Kings,
Aelfred and Gythrum, (so the Saxon Original,) by Consent of all the Wise Men of
the English, and of all those that inhabited East England, and that not only in
behalf of themselves, but of their Posterity.

This sufficiently shows, that the Eastern Parts of England then belonged to
the Danes; yet Polydore Virgil calling this King by the Name of Gormon,
vehemently contends, that he had not that Country bestowed upon him. Krantzius
also denies, that this Gormon was converted to the Faith; yet confesses, that
about this time one Froto was converted: But whatever they write, this League
sufficiently evinceth the Distinction of their Territories, and the Testimoy of
Asser is uncontrollable as to his Baptism, who lived himself at this very time,
not to mention that the Saxon Annals also affirm the same thing.

After which follow the Ecclesiastical Laws, said in their Title to be made
between King Alfred and King Gythrum, as they are to be found in Abbot
Brompton's Chronicle.

The First of which is, That the Danes and English should Love and Serve the
true GOD alone, and Renounce Paganism.

And in the next place, That if any should Renounce his Christianity, and
Relapse to Paganism, then he should pay his Wear, Wite, and Lashlite,
according to what he had done.

The Third Law is, That if any in Holy Orders shall either Fight, Perjure
himself, or commit Fornication, let him likewise make Amends by the like
Penalties abovementioned; and likewise make Satisfaction to GOD according to
the Canons of the Church; and also give a Pledge or Security to do so no more.

Note, That the Wear, Wite, and Lashlite, abovementioned, were all of them
Fines, or Mulcts, which the Danes and English were to pay according to the
value of their Heads, as has been already shown; but as for the last of these
Words, Mr. Somner, in his Glossary; supposes it to be purely Danish, and
signified no more than the two former Words, Anno Dom. DCCCLXXVIII.
but was so called in relation to the Danes alone, who were to undergo it;
after which follow several Constitutions against the Offenses of Clergymen,
against committing Incest, and withholding of Tithes, and Romescot or
Peter Pence; in all which Offenses a Dane was to pay the like Wear, and Wite,
with an Englishman; as also against Buying, Selling, and Working on the Lord's
Day; in which Cases, if a Freeman wrought upon Holy Days, he was to lose his
Liberty, or pay his Wite, but if he were a Servant or Villain, he was to
satisfy it with his Skin, (i. e. by Whipping,) or pay his Head-Gild; but if a
Master compelled his Servant to work upon Holy Days, he was to pay his Lashlite
as the Danes, and his Wite as the English did, that is, according as he was a
Dane, or an Englishman; (which sufficiently justifies Mr. Somner's Sense of
that Word:) The rest of these Laws being against diverse other Offenses, as
against violating the Fasts of the Church, against making Ordeal, or taking an
Oath on Sundays or Fast-days. Not that this Ordeal, or Trial by a hot Iron, or
boiling Water, in case the Person was accused of a Crime, was to be used,
unless there was no direct Proof against him. The rest of the Laws are against
putting any Man to Death upon a Sunday; as also against Witches, Perjured
Persons, and Common Whores, all which Persons were to be banished the Country.

But the last Law saving one, is a sort of Cruel Mercy; for thereby if a Man
had lost any of his Members for any Crime, and survived the same four Nights,
it was afterward lawful with the License of the Bishop for any one to give him
Help and Assistance, which it seems before that time it was not lawful to do.

But the Reader may further from the Title of these Laws observe, the
Subjection or Dependence which King Gytrum then had upon K. Alfred at that
time; for King Gytrum and his Danes gave their Consent to them in a
Common Council of the Kingdom, in the same manner as the Kings of Mercia, and
of the East Angles, were wont to do in the General Council of the West Saxon
Kingdom, in acknowledgment of its Superiority over them, as may be proved by
diverse Examples; and if this King Gytrum could have made Laws by his own
Authority, he might have called a Council of his own to do so, which we do not
find he ever did, having received his Kingdom wholly from the Bounty of King
Alfred.

Also about the Year last mentioned, King Alfred new built the Town of
Shaftsbury, as appears by an old Inscription cited by Brit^n D^rs^tsh^r^.
Mr. Camden, out of an old Manuscript Copy of William of Malmesbury, then
belonging to the Lord Burghley; which Inscription was in that Author's time to
be seen in the Chapter House of that Nunnery, which was built at this place by
this King some Years after.

The Pagans entered further into France, Anno Dom. DCCCLXXXI.
where the French fought with them, and (as it is supposed) were routed, for
here the Danes found Horses enough to mount the greatest part of their Men.

This Year the Danes sailed up the Maese (now the Meuse) into Frankland, and
there stayed another Year. Anno Dom. D^^CLXXXII.
The same Year also King Aelfred sailing out with his Fleet, fought against
four Danish Pirat Ships, and took two of their Men, and the other two (the Men
being very much wounded and tired in the Fight) surrendered themselves.

Anno Dom. D^CCLXXXIII
The Danes sailed up the Skeld to Cundoth, (which was then a Monastery, and is
now supposed to be Conde upon the River Escaut) where they stayed a whole Year.
Now also Marinus, that Religious Pope, sent some of the Wood of our LORD's
Cross to Alfred, and in Return the King sent to Rome the Alms he had vowed by
the Hands of Sighelm and Ethelstan: Also he sent other Alms into India, to St.
Thomas, and St. Bartholomew, (who being there martyred, are accounted the
Indian Apostles.) And about that time the English Army lay encamped against the
Danes, who held London, where yet (thanks be to GOD) all Things succeeded
prosperously.

Also this Year, (according to the Chronicle of Mailross, and Simeon of
Durham,) King Alfred having slain the two Danish Captains, Ingwar and Halfdene,
caused the wasted Parts of Northumberland to be again Inhabited; then Edred the
Abbot, being so commanded by Cuthbert in a Vision, redeemed a certain Youth who
had been sold to a Widow at Withingham, and made him King of Northumberland by
the joint Consent both of the English and Danes, King Alfred himself confirming
the Election. This King Guthred, in Gratitude to St. Cuthbert, did also bestow
all the Land between the Rivers of Weol and Tyne, and says upon that Saint,
that is, upon the Bishop of Lindisfarne, who this Year removed the Bishop's See
from thence to a place then called Concacestre, now Chester; and thither they
also removed the Body of St. Cuthbert. But as for the Miracle of the Earth's
opening and swallowing up a whole Army of Scots, who came to fight with King
Cuthred, I leave it to the Monks to be believed by them, if they please. This
is certain, that thus making this poor Youth King, the Church got all that
Country now called the Bishopric of Durham. And who can tell but all this
Vision was a Contrivance of Abbot Edred's, for that very Design; yet if it were
so, it was but a Pious Fraud, which highly tended to the enriching of that
Church.

The same Year (according to Florence of Worcester) died Asser, Bishop of
Shirburne; who could not be the same with that Asser, who writ the Life and
Actions of King Alfred, since that Author writ to Anno 993, being the 45th Year
of King Alfred's Age, as appears by that Work. Arch Bishop Usher supposes this
Asser the Historian to have been he, who was afterward the Bishop of St.
David's and was the second of that Name who sat in that See; but without any
good Authority.

Anno Dom. DCCCLXXXIV
This Year the Danes sailed up the River Sun, (i. e. Some,) as far as Embenum
(now Amiens, in Picardy, where they remained one whole Year. And now also
deceased the worthy Bishop Athelwold.

Anno Dom. DCCCLXXXV.
The Danes being thus employed abroad, did nothing this Year in England; but the
next we find in Asser, that the Pagan Army divided it self into two Bodies, the
one whereof sailed to the East Parts of France, whilst the other making up the
Rivers of Thames and Medway, besieged the City of Rochester, and having built a
strong Fort before the Gates, from thence assaulted the City, yet could by no
means take it, because the Citizens valianty defended themselves, until such
times as King Aelfred came to their Assistance with a powerful Army; which when
the Pagans saw, quitting their Forts, and all the Horses which they had brought
with them out of France, together with a great many Prisoners, to the English,
they in great have fled away to their Ships, Anno Dom. DCCCLXXXV.
and being compelled by necessity passed again that Summer in France; King
Aelfred having now reinforced his Fleet, was resolved to fall upon the Danish
Pirates, who then sheltered among their Country Men of East England; upon which
he sent his Fleet that he had got ready in Kent, (being very well Manned) into
the mouth of the River Stoure, (not that in Kent, but another that runs by
Harwich, where they were met by Sixteen Danish Pirates, who lay there watching
for a Prey; and immediately setting upon them, after a sharp resistance the
King's Men boarding them, they were all taken, together with great Spoils, and
most of the Men killed.

But as the King's Fleet were returning home, they fell among another Fleet of
Danes, much stronger, with whom fighting again, the Danes obtained the Victory;
tho with what Loss to the English, the Annals do not say.

But the rest of the Danes of East England, were so much incensed at this
Victory; as also with the slaughter of their Country Men, that setting out a
greet Fleet very well Manned, they sailed to the mouth of Thames; where setting
upon diverse of the King's Ships, by surprise in the Night, when all the Men
were asleep, they had much the better of them; but what damage the King's Ships
received, and how many Men were lost, our Author does not tell us.

The same Year, somewhat before Christmas, Charles, King of the Western
Franks, was killed by a wild Boar, which he was then hunting; but his Brother
Lewis dyed the Year before: They were both Sons to that King Lewis, who
deceased the Year of the last Eclipse, and he was the Son of that Charles,
whose Daughter, Ethelwulf King of the West Saxons had married.

The same Year happened a great Sea Fight among the ancient Saxons of Germany,
but the Annals do not acquaint us with whom they fought, However, it is
supposed to have been with the Danes; and they further add, That they fought
twice this Year, where the Saxons being assisted by the Frisians, obtained the
Victory.

Here also Asser, as well as our Annals, proceed to give us a further account
of the French and German affairs, with a brief descent of their Kings, from
Charles the Great; as that this Year Charles King of the Allmans received all
the Kingdoms of the Western Franks, which lie between the Mediteranean Sea, and
that Bay, which was between the Ancient Saxons and the Gauls, by the voluntary
consent of all the People; the Kingdom of Armorica, (that is, of les^er
Britain,) only excepted: This Charles was the Son of Lewis, Brother of that
Charles last mentioned; and both the Kings were the Sons of Lewis, the Younger
Son of Charles the Great, who was the Son of King Pipin.

The same Year also the good Pope Marinus deceased, who freed the English
School at Rome, at the entreaty of King Aelfred, from all Tax and Tribute.

Also about the same time the Danes of East England broke the Peace, which they
had lately made with King Aelfred.

The Pagans who had before Invaded the East, quitting that, Anno Dom. DCCCLXXXV^
now marched toward the West parts of France; and passing up the River Seine,
took their Winter Quarters at Paris.

Anno Dom. DCCCLXXXVI
The same Year (according to Asser, as well as the Annals,) King Alfred, after
so many Cities being burnt, and such great destruction of People, not only took
the City of London from the Danes, who had it long in their Possession; but he
now repaired it, and made it habitable; and then committed it to the Custody of
his Son-in-Law, Ethered Earl of the Mercians; and now all the English, (viz.)
the Mercians and Kentishmen, as also the East and West Saxons, who had been
before dispersed, or made Prisoners with the Danes, being now returned home,
put themselves under King Alfred's Protection

But these Danish Storms being pretty well blown over, King Alfred began now to
make some use of the Learned Men he had sent for from abroad; for as Mr. Camden
shows us in his Oxfordshire.
Britannia, we have a large account of the University of Oxon. Under the Year
of our Lord, 886, viz. That in the Second Year of St. Grimbald's coming over
into England, the University of Oxford was founded; the first Regents there,
and Readers in Divinity were St. Neot, an Abbot, an Eminent Professor of
Theology, and St. Grimbald, and Eloquent and most Excellent Interpreter of the
Holy Scriptures; whilst Grammar and Rhetoric were Taught by Asser a Monk, a
Man of extraordinary Learning; Logic, Music and Arithmetic, were Read by
John a Monk of St. David's; Geometry, and Astronomy were professed by John
another Monk, and Colleague of St. Grimbald; one of a sharp Wit, and Immense
Knowledge.

These Lectures were often honored with the presence of the most Illustrious
and Invincible Monarch, King Aelfred, which is also asserted by Will. of
Malmesbury, who tells us a constant Tradition of his time, that King Alfred by
the Advice of Neot the Abbot, first founded public Schools of various Arts at
Oxford; which is further confirmed by an Ancient Manuscript Copy of Randolph
Higden's Polychron, in Bayliol College Library, which in the beginning treating
of all the Kings of England, when he comes to King Alfred, says thus, That he
first founded the University of Oxford. John Rouse in his Manuscript Treatise,
de Regibus Angliae, (Lib. 1.) seems also to have seen this passage in
Winchester Annals, and adds Three Halls to have been thus built, The one for
Grammar, near the East Gate; the Second near the North-Gate for Logicians; and
the Third in the High Street, for Divines.

But since this only proves that King Alfred first founded public Schools
here, and not that there was any such thing here before; I shall recite also
what follows, as it is quoted by the said Mr. Camden, out of an ancient Copy of
Asser de Gestis Alfredi, which, I could wish may clear this point: About this
time (says he) there arose a sharp and grievous dissension between Grimbald,
and those learned Men whom he brought hither with him, and the old Scholars
whom he found here at his coming; for these absolutely refused to comply with
the Statutes, Institutions and Forms of Reading perscribed by Grimbald; the
difference proceeded to no great height, for the space of Three Years, yet
there was always a private Grudge and Enmity between them, which soon after
broke out with the utmost violence imaginable; to appease these Tumults, the
most Invincible King Aelfred, being informed of the Faction, by a Message and
Complaint from Grimbald, came to Oxford to accommodate the matter, and
submitted to a great deal of Pains and Patience, to hear the Cause and
Complaint of both Parties: Anno Dom. DCCCLXXVII.
The Controversy depended upon this; The Old Scholars maintained, that before
the coming of Grimbald to Oxford, Learning did here flourish, tho the Students
were less in number, than they had formerly been, because very many of them had
been Expelled by the cruel Tyranny of the Pagans: They farther declared and
proved, by the undoubted Testimony of their ancient Annals, that good Orders
and constitutions for the Government of that place had been already made by Men
of great Piety, and Learning; such as Gildas, Melkin, Ninnias, Kentigern and
others; who had there prosecuted their Studies, to a good old Age: All things
being then managed in happy Peace and quiet; and that St. German coming to
Oxford and residing there half a Year, after he had gone through all England to
Preach down the Pelagian Heresy, did well approve of their Rules and Orders:
The King with incredible Humility and great attention heard both parties,
exhorting them with Pious and Importunate entreaties, to preserve Love and
Amity with one another; upon this he left them, in hopes that they both would
follow his Advice, and obey his Instructions: But Grimbald, resenting these
proceedings, retired imediately to the Monastery of Winchester, which King
Aelfred had lately founded: and soon after he got his Tomb to be removed
thither to him, in which he had designed his Bones should be put after his
Decease, and laid in a Vault under the Chancel of the Church of S. Peter's in
Oxford; which Church the said Grimbald had raised from the ground, of Stones
hewn and carved with great Art.

But since it must be confessed that this passage of the quarrel of St.
Grimbald, and the Old Scholars of Oxford, is not to be found in that ancient
Copy of Asser, which Archbishop Parker first published in Saxon Characters
(like those in which it is written, being still Extant in the Cottonian
Library) yet though it was published by Mr. Camden in that Edition of Asser,
which was printed at Frankford, in 1603. The Original of which the Lord Primate
Usher in his Ant. Brit. Eccles. expressly tells us, Mr. Camden never saw; from
whence Sir John Spelman in his Published at Oxford in Latin.
History of the Life of King Aelfred, has made a very hard inferences, as if
that clause was not to be found in any of the ancient Copies of that Author,
but had been foisted in either by the Publisher, or else by Mr. Camden himself;
tho this Author does not say so in express terms,

I shall therefore repeat in short what Mr. Ant. Wood has answered to this
Objection, in the Page IX.
Antiquities of the University of Oxford, from a Manuscript Testimonial, under
the hand of the learned Mr. Twyne; viz. That he himself, long after discoursing
with Mr. Camden on this Subject, and asking him expressly about this passage,
whose authority began to be then questioned, His Answer was, that he very well
knew that he had truly transcribed, that passage from an ancient Manuscript of
Asser, which he had then by him, and which as the said Mr. Wood in his Notes
tells us, then belonged to Sir Henry Savile of Bank, near Halifax in
Yorkshire.

But I shall not now take upon me to Answer the rest of the Objections which
the said Sir John Spelman does there produce against the validity of the above
cited passage; which supposes public Schools to have been at Oxford, before
King Alfreds time; for they are all reduceable to these two heads; First the
express words of the Annals, of the Abbey of Hyde abovementioned, as also that
of Polychronicon, That King Alfred was the first King who founded a University
there: Anno Dom. DCCCLXVIII.
all which may be answered, by allowing that to be true in respect of a
University, endowed with Privileges, and distinct Halls and Colleges built on
purpose; and yet there might very well have been before that time a public
School, or Studium, (as it was then called,) where the Liberal Arts were
taught; as for the other Objection of the improbability of the old Scholars
falling out with the new Professors, in the very first Year of the Institution
of the University, (that is, as soon as ever they came thither,) this may be
also answered, by supposing that those Annals were written many Years after the
Death of King Alfred, from a Common received Tradition, and so this transaction
might have been dated there, or Four Years later than it really happened; as
John Rouse in his Manuscript History of the Kings of England also places it.

I confess there is one Objection, which I wish I could Answer; and that is,
How Gildas and Nennius could study at Oxford, when the latter was not so much
as Born, till about the Conclusion of this, or Beginning of the following
Century, and much less the Former; when even by the best Accounts of those
Times, the Pagan Saxons were then Masters of that part of England.

Having said thus much concerning the Antiquity of that Famous University, to
which I owe my Education, I shall not trouble my self with enquiry into the
Reality of those supposed Ancient Schools, of Creeklad and Leacklade; (which
the Monkish writers suppose to have been anciently called Greeklade, and
Latinelade,) the latter of which Derivations, tho Mr. Camden justly explodes,
yet he seems to have more Veneration for the former, since in the place from
whence I have transcribed the above cited Quotations; he also tells us, That
the Muses were transported to Oxford from Creeklade; (now a small Town in
Wilt-shire.) All the Authority for which (that I know of, beside uncertain
Tradition) depends upon the Credit of a Manuscript, lately in the Liberary of
Trinity Hall in Cambridge, I^b. 4. cap. 2.
and is cited by Mr. Wheelock in his Notes upon Bid; where speaking of
Theodorus, Archbishop of Canterbury, he says, That he held or maintained
Schools in a Village near the Water, which is called Greekislake; but Mr.
Somner in his Learned ad sin. X. script.
Glossary, has given us a much more likely Derivation of this place, ( viz.)
from the Old Saxon Word Creek, signifying a River, or Torrent, running either
into some River, or else into the Sea; and Gelad, which signified an emptying,
for it was anciently written Crecca Gelade, and not Greeklade, as some would
now write it.

Anno Dom. DCCC^XXXVII.
This Year the Pagans passing under the Bridge of Paris, and from thence by the
Seine up the River Meterne, (now called Marne,) as far as Cazii, (now Choisy)
and which Florence says signified a Royal Village, where, and at Jona, (a place
we know not,) they staid Two Years; also the same Year Deceased Charles (the
Gross) King of the Franks, but Earnwulf his Brother's Son had expelled him out
of his Kingdom six Weeks before his Death; after which it was divided into five
Parts, over whom were set five Kings; but this partition was with Earnewulf's
good leave, for they all promised to Govern under him, because none of them was
Heir on the Fathers side, besides himself alone; therefore Earnwulf fixed the
Seat of his Kingdom in the Countries lying on the East side of the Rhine;
whilst Rod^lf took the middle, or inward part of the Kingdom; and Odo (or Otto)
the Western Part; and Beorngar, and Witha, (called in Latin Beringarius, and
Wido) held Lombardy, Anno Dom. DCCCLXXXVII.
and all the Countries on that side the Mountains; all which Kingdoms they held
with much Discord, Fighting two great Battles, and wasting those Countries,
till such time as each of them had expelled the other from his Kingdom; also
the same Year Ethelelm the Ealdorman carried the Alms of King Alfred, and the
West Saxons to Rome.

This was the Benevolence, called Peter Pence, which is here justly termed an
Alms, and not a Tribute, as Modern Popish Writers have termed it.

But to return to our own Domestic Affairs; Asser abovementioned, informs us,
that the Kingdom being now pretty well at quiet from the Danes, the King began
to mind his Civil Government, to repair his Cities and Castles, and also to
build others in the most necessary places, altering the whole face of the
Country into a much better form; and having walled several Towers and Castles,
he made them defensible against the Pagans: Nor was he less careful in the
Political Affairs of his Kingdom; for diverse of his own Subjects, having, under
the name of Danes, committed great Spoils and Rapines, these the King resolving
to punish, and restrain from these Excesses, he first of all divided all the
Provinces of England into Counties, and those again into Hundreds and Tythings;
so that every Legal Subject should dwell in some Hundred or Tything, whereby if
any were suspected of Robbery, and being thereof Condemned, or absolved by his
Hundred or Tything, they should either undergo due punishment, or else if
Innocent be acquitted.

But the Governors of Provinces, who were before called Vice Domini, and in
English Saxon Geriffs, he divided into two Offices, That is, into Judges, whom
we now call Justices, and into Sheriffs, who do yet retain that name; and by
the Kings care and industry in a short time, there was so great a Tranquillity
through out the whole Kingdom, that if a Traveller had happened to have lost a
Bag of Money in the Highway, he might have found it again untouched the next
day.

And Bromton's Chronicle relates, That tho there were Gold Bracelets hung up at
the parting of several Highways; yet Justice was so strictly executed, that no
Man durst presume to touch them.

But in the Distribution of his own Family, he followed the Example of King
Solomon; for dividing it into Three Companies, or Bands, he set a Chief over
each of them; so that every Captain with his Band, performed his Service in the
King's Palace for the space of one Month; and, then going with his Company to
his own Estate, he looked after his private Affairs for Two Months, and so did
each of them in their Order, which Rotation of Officers this King observed all
the rest of his Reign.

And to this Year also, Sir H. Spelman refers that Great Council wherein King
Alfred made those Laws that go under his Name; in which, after a Preface,
wherein he first recites and confirms the Ten Commandments, as also diverse
other Laws, which are set down in Exodus and Leviticus, he concludes to this
effect, That whatsoever he found worthy of Observation either in the time of K.
Ina, his Kinsman, or Offa, King of the Mercians, or of Ethelbert, the first
Christened King, he had gathered them all together, and committed those to
writing which he thought most deserving, omitting others which he judged less
convenient, in doing of which he had taken the Advice, and had the Consent of
his Wisemen, and having revised the Laws of those Princes, Anno Dom.
DCCCLXXXVII.
he transcribed such of them as he liked into his own; and by the Consent of
the said Wisemen he thereof made a Collection, and commanded them to be
observed by all Englishmen; under which name the Saxon and Jutes were then
included.

The first of his Laws requires (as most necessary to all his Subjects) that
each Man keep his Oath or Pledge, ( i. e. his promise to observe the Laws, and
keep the Peace) and if any should be compelled to Swear, or deposite a pledge
whereby he may be bound to betray his Lord, or unjustly to assist any Person,
he ought to break his promise, rather than perform it. But in case he has
engaged to perform any thing which might justly be done, and does it not, his
Arms and all his personal Estate shall be put into the hands of his Friends;
and he himself kept in the King's Prison for Forty Days, till he undergo that
Penance which the Bishop shall enjoin him; and also his Friends ( i. e.
Relations) require of him: but if he have not wherewith to sustain himself in
the mean while, if his Kindred are not able to provide him Victuals, the King's
Officer shall do it; but if he resist and be taken by force, he shall forfeit
both his Arms and his personal Estate; and if he be killed, nothing shall be
paid as the Value of his Head: and in case he escape before his time, viz. of
Forty Days be out, and be retaken, he shall be returned back again to Prison
for other Forty Days: If he escape, he shall have no benefit of the Laws, but
be Excommunicated from all Christ's Churches, and if any Man have been security
in his behalf, he shall make satisfaction for it according to Right, and do
Penance, till he make such satisfaction as his Priest shall appoint.

The Second bears the Title of the Immunity of the Church, and we shall speak
of it among the Ecclesiastical Constitutions.

The Third is, concerning the breach of the King's Surety-ship, by the payment
of a Mulct of Five Pounds of Mercian, (i.e. larger Money) but the Violation of
Surety-ship, (or the Peace) made to an Archbishop by a fine of Three Pounds:
and if any one break or forfeit the King's Pledge, (or Recognizance,) he shall
make amends according to Right, and the breach of the Surety-ship to a Bishop
or Ealdorman, by two Pounds.

The Fourth Law is, concerning the Death of the King, or any other Lord; If any
one, that, either by himself alone, or by any other person, shall attempt
against the King's Life, he shall lose his Life and Goods; but if he will purge
himself, let him do it according to the valuation of the King's Head; the same
is also ordained in all Judgments concerning other Men, whether Noble or
Ignoble: whosoever Conspires against his Lord, shall lose both his Life and
Estate; or else pay the Valuation of his Lord's Head.

From which Laws we may observe, That according to the custom of those Times,
there was a Rate set upon every Man's Life, even upon the King's himself, if he
were killed.

The Seventh Law is, against Fighters in the King's Palace; Anno Dom.
DCCCLXXXVII.
If any Man shall Fight, or shall draw a Weapon in his House, his Life shall
lie at the King's Mercy, whether he will Pardon him or not; but if the offender
flee, and be taken, he shall redeem his Life, with the price of his head, or be
fined according to his Offense.

Whereby it appears that the Offender might have redeemed this crime with Money
at the first, or else the last Clause had been vain.

The Ninth Law ordains, What mulct a Man shall pay, that Kills a Woman with
Child, which was to be according to the Value of her head; and he was also to
pay for the Child in her Womb, half as much as for a living one, according to
the quality of its Father.

The Tenth ordains, What fines or amends every Man shall pay to a Husband, for
committing Adultery with his Wife; which was to be increased according to the
Estate, or Quality, of him against whom the Offense was committed.

The rest of the Law, being about the quantity of the mulcts appointed for
several Thefts, I omit.

The Eleventh appoints, What mulct a Man shall pay, that wantonly handles the
Breasts of a Country Man's Wife, or offers her any Violence, as by flinging her
down, etc. though he does not lie with her.

This shows how careful the ancient English Saxons were of the Persons and
Chastity even of the meanest Subjects.

I shall skip over a great many of the other Laws, they only ordaining
penalties for several petty trespasses, and small Offenses, and shall pass

To the Twenty Sixth Law, Which appoints what mulcts shall be paid by those who
shall Kill in Troops or Companies, and also to whom these Mulcts were to be
paid. If the Slain and Innocent Party were an Ordinary Person, (that is, one
whose head was valued but at Two Hundred Shillings,) he that slew him must pay
the value of his head, and a Fine besides to his Kindred: Also every one that
was in the Company, must pay Thirty Shillings; which Penalty was still to be
increased, according to the Value of the Estate of the Party Slain; so that as
the Penalty for the Death of a Man valued at Twelve Hundred Shillings, every
one that was present shall pay 120 Shillings, and the Man slayer himself the
price of his Head, and a Fine besid^s: But in case the whole Company shall deny
that he gave the Mortal Wound, all of them are to be impeached together, and to
pay both the Value and the Fine besides.

Now concerning this Troop, or Company, which our Saxon Ancestors called
Hlothe, how many Men made up one of them, the Reader may please to take notice,
that by the Laws of King Ina they were to be above Thirty.

Anno Dom. D^CCLXXXVII.
The Twenty Seventh appoints, What share of the Mulct, or satisfaction a Man's
Kindred by the Mothers side shall receive, in case he have no kindred on his
Father's side; and what share those of his Guild, or Fraternity shall pay in
case he have committed. Manslaughter in a quarrel, ( viz.) The former shall
pay a Third part, and the latter one half of the price of the head of the party
slain.

But whether by those here mentioned of the same Guild, are meant such as were
fellow Contributors to the same Parish Feasts in honor of the Saints, as was
the Custom of those Times; or else (which is more likely) such as were bound
together in the same Decenary, or Tything, it being very obscure, I shall not
take upon me to determine.

The Twenty Eighth Laws was made against public defamers, or spreaders of
false news, (whereby is meant spreaders of false news against the Government,)
and Commands that such a one being Convicted, should suffer no less punishment,
than the cuting out of his Tongue, except he redeem it by payment of the value
of his Head, and even then he was afterward to be esteemed of no Credit.

The Thirtieth Ordains, That Merchants when they Land shall bring such as come
on Shore with them, before the King's Officers in Folcmote, and there declare
their number, that they may be ready to produce them to answer any thing that
shall be demanded of them in the said Folcmote; and if it happen that they
bring many strangers on shore, that they also certify this to the King's
Officer in that said Assembly; that so they may be forth coming.

Now considering the Times wherein King Alfred lived, when there was such
flocking of Strangers, being Enemies, into England; this Law was very justly
and seasonably made.

The Thirty First inflicts upon him that shall put a Ceorles's Man (that is an
ordinary Countryman) without any fault into Bonds, viz. A Mulct of Ten
Shillings; upon him that beats such a one, Twenty Shillings; if he hang him up
a-loft, Thirty Shillings; if he cut off his Hair to expose him like a Fool, Ten
Shillings; if he shave his Head like a Priest, (yet bind him not) Thirty
Shillings; and in case he only cut off his Beard, Twenty Shillings; but if he
bind him, and shave his Hair like a Priest, then Sixty Shillings.

Which Law was no doubt made to restrain the Tyranny and Insolence of the
English Nobility, who were wont before that Law too much to domineer over poor
Countrymen, (here called Ceorles-men;) and therefore it seems highly probable,
that the Commons of England had then Representatives in the Great Council, or
else it is not likely the Nobility would ever have lost that Power they then
Usurped over them: Wherefore I shall leave it to the Indifferent Reader to
Consider, whether the Common People of England were then such Slaves, as some
late Writers would fain make them; since not only satisfaction was to be made
for their Lives, but also for the least injury, or abuse, Anno Dom. DCCCLXXXVII.
that might be committed against their Persons.

The Thirty Fourth Law imposes upon him that shall strike or fight in open
Court, before the King's Ealdorman, both the value of his own head, and such a
Fine besides, as shall be thought fit; and also 120 Shillings to be paid to the
Ealdorman by him, that by thus drawing his Weapon shall make any disturbance in
the Folcmote, or County Court; if the Ealdorman were not present, but the fact
was done before his Substitute, or the King's Priest, then a Were or
Amerciament of Thirty Shillings.

Here by the King's Priest, is meant either the King's Chaplain or Bishop, I
will not determine whether; who as we formerly said in those times presided
also in the Folcmotes, and there dispatched all business relating to the Church.

The Thirty Fifth ordains, What satisfaction shall be made for breach of the
Peace in any other place; as for Example, he that fights in the home-stall of a
Countryman, shall pay the said Countryman Six Shillings; if he drew his
Sword, but struck not, half as much; which Penalty also was to be increased
according to the Estate or Quality of him upon whose ground the Assault was
made: So that if he fought in the House of one worth 600 Shillings, he was to
pay Three times as much; if of one worth 1200 Shillings, then the Amends was to
be twice as much as the former.

The Thirty Six Law of B^rhbrice, or breach of the Peace, in a Town, confirms
that part of King Ina's Law, concerning that matter, in imposing upon the
Offender, for the breach of the Peace in the King's Town or City, by setting
the Mulct of an Hundred and Twenty Shillings; but if it be done in the
Archbishop's Town, then Ninety Shillings; in that of a Bishop or Ealdorman,
Sixty Shillings; in the Town of a Man valued at 1200 Shillings Estate, Thirty
Shillings; but half as much if done in a Village of one worth but half that
Sum.

From whence we may observe, That in those times not only the King and the
Great Men, such as Bishops and Ealdormen, but also Gentlemen of ordinary
Estates, had Villages or Townships of their own; and they themselves received
the Mulcts or Penalties imposed for the breach of the Peace within their
Precincts; which privilege they lost, I suppose, after the coming of King
William. I.

The Thirty Seventh is, That Law concerning Bocland, by virtue whereof he that
holds Lands left him by his Ancestors, was forbid to alienate it from his
Kindred to others, in case it could be proved by Writing or Testimony, before
the King, or the Bishop, his Kindred being present, that the Man who first
granted them, forbid him all Alienation, and laid on him this Condition.

Anno Dom. DCCCLXXXVII.
From the making of this Law Mr. Seldom informs us, that we may here find an
Estate in Fee-Tail, much more ancient than the thirteenth Year of Edward the
First.

The 38th Law is concerning Quarrels, or deadly Feuds, which, since it gives a
strange License for Men to take Satisfaction on their Enemies, even without the
Presence of any Officer, I shall likewise set down:

First, It forbids any Man to attack his Enemy, if he find him in his own
House, except he first demand of him Satisfaction: But if he have force enough,
he may besiege the House for seven days, yet he shall not assault him, if he
will stay within; but if he then surrender himself, and his Arms, into the
Defendant's hands, he may keep him thirty Days, without hurt, but then shall
leave him so to his Kindred or Friends. In case he fly to a Church, the Honor
of the Church is to be preserved: But if the Demandant have not Strength enough
to besiege him in his House, he may desire the Assistance of the Ealderman,
which, if he cannot obtain, he must appeal to the King before he can assault
him. If any one by chance light upon his Adversary, not knowing that he keeps
himself at home, and he will deliver up his Arms to him, he shall keep him safe
thirty Days, and then deliver him to his Friends: But in case he will not
deliver up his Arms, then he may fight with him; but if he be willing to
deliver up himself, and his Arms, to his Enemy, and any other Man sets upon
him, such a Man shall pay the value of his Head, if he kills him; or give
Satisfaction for his Wounds if any be given him, according to the Fact; besides
which, he shall be fined, and lose all that may fall to him, by reason of
Kindred.

From whence you may observe, that the nature of that Rough and Martial Age,
did allow Men a greater Liberty of righting themselves against those that had
injured them, than was afterward thought fit to be allowed in more settled and
peaceable Times.

The last of King Alfred's Laws is concerning Wounds and Maims, which being
very long, I shall only give you an Abstract of it. It is, (in short,) to
appoint what Satisfaction in Money any Man shall pay for wounding or maiming
another, or for cutting off any Member or part of his Body, even to the Nail of
his little Finger: All which was ascertained according to the particular Sums
there set down; and I shall leave it to wiser Judgments to consider, whether it
would not be better if the Law were so at this day, since it would not only
prevent the too great Favor of Juries in some Cases, but also their
over-Severity in others, by often giving either very small, or else excessive
Damages, according as the Plaintiff or Defendant is more or less known to them,
or that they have a greater or less Kindness for them.

There was likewise made in the same Synod diverse Ecclesiastical Canons, some
of which, taken from amongst the Civil Ones, I shall here likewise set down.

The first is concerning the Immunities of the Churches, by which it is
ordained, That if a Man, guilty of any little Crime, fly to a Church, which
does not belong to the King, or the Family of a private Person, he shall have
three Nights to provide for himself, Anno Dom^ DCCCLXXXVIII.
unless in the mean time he can make his Peace: But if any Man, within that
Term, shall inflict upon him either Bonds or Blows, he shall pay the Price of
his Head, according to the Custom of the Country; and also to the Ministers or
Officers of the Church 120 Shillings, for violating the Peace thereof.

The next Law but one is likewise to the same effect, whereby is granted to
every Church, consecrated by the Bishop, the like Peace, and if any Offender
shall fly to it, none shall take him thence for seven Days; if any Man shall
presume to do so, he shall be culpable of breaking the King's and Church's
Peace: If the Officers shall have need of their Church in the mean time, he
shall be put into another House, which has no more Doors than the Church; only
the Elder, ( i.e. Presbyter) of that Church shall take Care he have no Meat
given him: But if he will surrender himself, and his Arms, to his Enemies, he
shall be kept thirty Nights, and then be delivered up to his Kinsmen. Also,
whosoever shall fly to a Church for any Crime, which he has not yet
confessed, if he shall there make Confession of it, in God's Name, half the
Penalty shall be remitted to him.

From whence you may observe the Antiquity and Design of Sanctuaries in
England, which were not then (as they were afterward,) abused, being at first
only intended for Places where Offenders might stay for a time, 'till they
could agree with their Adversaries or Prosecutors, as well as they could; since
almost all Crimes whatever were redeemable with pecuniary Mulcts in those days.

The 5th Law is, that if one shall steal any thing out of a Church, he must
restore the value, and also forfeit as belongs to an Angild; the meaning of
which you may see in the next Law.

The 6th Law is, That if any one shall steal on the Sunday, or on Christmas, or
Easter, or Ascension-days; the Forfeiture should be as belongs to an Angild,
(i. e.) the whole value of his Head; Also the Hand with which he stole was to
be cut off: But if he would redeem his Hand, it should be permitted him to
compound for it, according as it should appertain to his Were, (i. e.) the
Price of his Head.

Besides which Laws, Alfred, Abbot of Rieval, in his Geneal. Regum Angliae,
mentions another Law of this King's, whereby every Freeman of the Kingdom,
having two Hides of Land, was obliged to keep his Sons at School 'till they
were 15 Years of Age, that so they might become Men of Understanding, and live
happily; for (said the King in this Law,) a Man Freeborn, and unlettered, is
to be regarded no otherwise than a Beast, or a Man void of Understanding.

The 12th is concerning the Breach of the Peace by Priests: If a Priest kill
any one, he should be taken, and all his Estate confiscated; and also the
Bishop should degrade him, and put him out from the Church, unless his Lord
would obtain his Pardon by the Price of his Head. The rest, being concerning
the Penalties for the Violation of Nuns, I omit.

Anno Dom. DCC^LXXXVIII.
I have been the more particular in the reciting of these Laws of King Alfred,
as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, that the Reader may see the Penalties that
were inflicted upon Offenders in that Age; and how different they were from
ours. But to return to our Annals,

This Year Beocca the Ealderman carried the Alms of the West Saxons as well as
the King's, to Rome; Also Queen Aethelswith, who was the Sister of K. Aelfred,
and Widow of Burhed King of Menia, died in her Journey thither, whose Body was
buried at Pavia: And the same Year Aethered, Archbishop of Canterbury, and
Aethelwald the Ealderman, deceased in the same Month.

About this time also (according to Asser,) King Alfred built two Monasteries;
the one for Men at Ethelingaie, (now Athelney,) that is, The Isle of Nobles,
(where he had before lain so concealed;) and the other for Nuns at Shaftsbury,
where he made Algiva, his own Daughter, Abbess; endowing them both with great
Revenues.

Anno Dom. DCCCLXXXIX.
'This Year none went to Rome, unless two ordinary Messengers, whom the King
sent with Letters;] yet nevertheless Florence of Worcester affirms, the King
Commanded all the Bishops and Religious Men of England to Collect the Alms of
the Faithful, in order to sen^ them to Rome, and Jerusalem: And,

Anno Dom. DCCCXC.
The next Year, (according to the same Annals) Beornhelm, Abbot of the West
Saxons carried those Alms to Rome; and also Goarun, (or Gythrum) King of the
Normans, (i.e.) Danes, deceased, and being God-Son to King Aelfred, his
Christian Name was Ethelstan; this was he who possessed the Country of the
East Angles, after the Death of King Edmund.

Also the same Year the Danes left the River Seine, and came to Sand-Laudan,
which place lies between the Bretons and the French; but the Bretons fighting
with them, obtained the Victory, and drove them into a River, where many of
them were drowned.

This Year also the Annals relate, That Plegmond was Elected by God and all his
Holy Men to the Archbishopric of Canterbury, tho Florence of Worcester places
it, and that more rightly, under the Year before.

Anno Dom. DCCCXCI.
The Danes again Invaded the Eastern Franckland; and Arnulf the Emperor, being
assisted by the French, Saxons, and Bavarian Horse, fought with the Danish
Foot, and put them to flight.

Also Three Scots came now to King Alfred from Ireland in one Boat made of
Hides, having quitted their Country, because they would live the Life of
Pilgrims ( i. e. a Wandering Life) for God's sake, not being solicitous about
any place, wherefore they had brought only one Week's Provision with them, and
after about Seven Days being at Sea, landing in Cornwall, they were presently
brought to King Alfred; their Names were Dubslane, Macbeth, and Maelinmun; also
Swifneh, who was chief Preacher amongst the Irish Scots, deceased; The same
Year after Easter appeared a Comet.

This Year, after Eight Years Intermission, the Kingdom became again infested
worse than ever by a fresh Invasion of the Danes; Anno Dom. DCCCXCIII.
for their Army abovementioned, being driven by the Emperor Arnwulf out of
France, marched Westward to Bunnan, (now Boloign) where taking Shiping in Two
Hundred and Fifty Vessels, together with their Horses, they arrived in the
Mouth of the River Limene, which then lay from the Eastern Part of Kent, as far
as the East End of that great Wood, which is called Andred; Anno Dom. DCCCXCIII.
which Wood or Forest is in length from East to West at least an Hundred and
Twenty Miles, and in breadth Thirty; (containing all that which we call the
Weald of Kent to this Day; as also the Woodland part of Sussex, as far as
Hamptshire;) but up this Note, That the Mouth of this River than ran into the
Sea near Rumney in Kent, but is now turned.
River Limene they drew their Ships, as far as the said Wood or Forest, viz.
Four Miles from the furthest part where the Sea flows up, and there they made a
Fort in that Fen, which was raised by a few of their Ceorls, or Villains.

And not long after arrived Haestein the Dane, who, entering the Mouth of Thames
with Eighty Vessels, Built a Fort at Middletune in Kent, whilst another part
of the Army did the same at Apuldre or Apultre (now called Apledore in the same
County) where as Ethelward relates, They took and destroyed an Old Castle being
defended only by a few Country People; he also makes Haestein to have Fortified
Middleton after Apuldere, and his Army to have Wintered in both places.

'This Year also, Wulfhere Archbishop of the Northumbers decased. Anno Dom.
DCCCXCIV.
]

But to look a little upon the Affairs of Wales: The same Year Anarawd Prince
of North Wales, came with a great number of English Men (whom he had got to
join with him) and made War upon his Brother Cadelh, Prince of Southwales, and
spoiled the Countries of Cardigan, and Ystradgwy.

What the Danes did immediately after their Landing, our Annals mention not;
but we may with great probability hither refer that Action, (touched upon in
our Annals, which are very confused and obscure in the Relation of this War)
viz. That it is most likely the Kings Army besieged Haestein either at
Middleton, or Beamfleot; where not long after his Landing, he had built a
strong Fort on the opposite Shore, and being reduced by the King to great
Extremities, he was forced to surrender himself with his Wife, and his Two Sons
to the King's Mercy, upon Condition that they should be Christened; which being
done, (the King, and Aethered, Ealdorman of Mercia, being their Godfather;)
Haesten gave the King Hostages, and solemnly swore to depart the Kingdom; but
as soon he got loose, he broke all those Agreements, and retiring into
Beamfleot there fortified himself a fresh.

And the Spring after Aethelward assures us, That passing along the great
Forest of Andredeswood, they then wasted the adjacent Countries of Hamptshire,
and Berkshire; but the Saxon Annals affirm, that about a Year after the Danes
had raised that Fort, (I suppose of Middleton abovementioned), in the East
part of the Kingdom, K. Alfred the better to secure himself, caused the Danes
of Northumberland, and East England, to take an Oath to be true to him; and the
King also compelled the East Angles to give him Hostages: yet nevertheless they
broke this Peace; for when the Danes in Kent went out of their Ships in Troops
to Plunder, they also went with them, or else the Danes carried the Prey into
their Territories; wherefore King Alfred, gathering together his Army, and
marching forward, Encamped between Two Parties of these Danish Robbers, where
by reason of Woods, as also of Water on both sides, he had a very convenient
place for that purpose, insomuch that he could set upon either Party whenever
they marched into the Country to Plunder; but they Robbed in Troops, as well on
Horseback as on Foot, in all Parts where the King's Army was not; yet were
repulsed almost every Day, as well by the King's Forces, as by the Neighboring
Towns: For the King had now divided his Forces into two Bodies, Anno Dom.
DCCCXCIV.
so that one half of them remained always at home, whilst the other marched
out, except those whose business it was to defend the Towns; but the Danes
oftener sallied out of their Camp than the King's Men; For the (...) in one
Body sallied not out of their Camp, but twice; Once when they first Landed, and
another time when they were about to Decamp; and then having taken a great
Booty, they endeavored to carry it over the Thames, into Essex, toward their
Ships; But the King's Forces prevented them, and fought them near Fernham, and
put them to flight, and rescued the Prey; from whence they fled beyond the
Thames, and thence by the River Colne, into a certain Island (called by Mr.
Speed, Brecklesey;) where the King's Army besieged them, as long as their own
Provisions lasted, for they had only Victuals for a small time: Then the King
marched thither with the Forces of that Province, whilst the former returned
home; but the Danes in the mean time remained there, because they could not
carry away their King (being then wounded) along with them; but those Danes
that Inhabited Northumberland, and East England, got together an Hundred Ships
with which they sailed about the South Parts, whilst with Forty others they
did the like in the North; with the former they besieged a certain strong place
lying on the Northern Coast of Devonshire, and then fetching a Compass toward
the South, besieged Exancester (now Exceter;) which when the King heard, he
turned all his Forces toward that place; but the Danes, (as Florence relates)
affrighted at the News of his approach got again to their Ships, carrying their
Prey to Cisseancester, (now Chichester in Sussex,) where they were repulsed by
the Citizens, and great part of their Army killed; but in the mean time while
one Party of the King's Army remained behind, the other marched on to London,
and then proceeded Eastward with the Citizens of that place, and other
Auxiliaries that came from the West, as far as Beamfleot, (now South Bemfleet)
in Essex; whither Haestein was come with the Forces which had been before
quartered at Middleton; to which also were joined those that first arrived at
Apuldre in the Mouth of the River Limene; for Haesten had built a strong Fort
at Beamfleot, and was from thence marched out to Plunder, whilst great part of
his Army remained at home; but when the King's Forces came thither, they soon
put his Army to flight, and demolished the Fort, taking all that was within it,
together with their Goods, Wives and Children, carrying them to London; and as
for their Ships, part of them they broke to pieces, but carried the best of
them to Rochester and London, and burnt the rest; but the Wife of Haesten and
his Two Sons being brought to the King, he not long after sent them back to him
at his request, because one of the Boys had been the King's, and the other Earl
Aethered's Godson, (as has been already said).

H. Huntington places the Siege of Exester after the taking of Bemfleet;
whereas the Annals suppose it to be done about the same time; but be it as it
will, they all agree that whilst the King was detained in the West at that
Siege, both Armies of the Danes (viz. as well those which had been before
routed at Bemfleet, as those which were at the Isle of Brecklesey) met at
Sceobyrig (now South-Shoebury in Essex,) and there built a Castle, and then
marching along the Thames, a great many of the Danes of East England, and
Northumberland joined them; and so they marched from the Thames as far as the
River Severne; then Aethered, Aethelm, and Aethelnoth the Ealdormen, and the
King's Thanes who were left at home in the Garrisons, Anno Dom. DCCCXCIV.
drew all the Men together they could from every Town on the East Side of
Pedridan (now Parret in Somersetshire,) and on the West of Selwood (Forest) as
also from both sides of the Thames, even as far as North Wales, who when they
were all assembled, followed the Pagans to Butdigingtune, on the side of
Severne, (now called Budington in Shropshire,) and there besieged them on all
sides, in a certain Fort they had cast up; but when they had staid there for
diverse Weeks Encamped on both sides the River, (the King being then in
Devonshire with his Fleet) the Pagans pressed with Hunger, Eat their Horses,
and many of them perished with Famine; yet at last they broke out upon those
who lay on the East side of the River; where (as Aethelwerd tells us) was a
very sharp Dispute, tho the Christians got the Victory, and kept the Field; but
there Ordhelm the King's Thane was killed, as also many others of the same
Rank; but that part of the Danish Army which remained alive, escaped by flight.
And when they were got into their Garrisons and Ships in East Saxe, just before
Winter, they Mustered a great Army from among the East Angles and Northumbers;
and committing their Wives, Ships and Goods to the keeping of the East Angles,
marched Day and Night, till they took up their Quarters at a certain City in
Werheal, called Legacester, (now Chester;) but the Kings Forces could not
overtake them before they had got into the Castle, which nevertheless they
besieged for about Two Days, and took away all the Cattle that were in those
Parts, and killed all the Men they could find without the place; and partly
burnt the Corn, and partly devoured it with their Horses: This was done about a
Twelve Month after the Danes arrival here.

Not long after this the Pagans went from Werheal into North Wales, but they
could not stay there long because the Cattle and Corn were all drove away and
destroyed; Anno Dom. DCCCXCV.
so they were forced to march thorough the Country of the Northumbers and East
Angles with such speed, that the King's Forces could not overtake them till
they came into the East part of East Seaxe, to a certain Island seated near the
Sea, called Meresige (now Mercey) in Essex.

Also the same Year the Danes, who were encamped in Meresige, drew their Ships
up the Thames, and thence up the River Ligan, (now called Lee) which divides
Middlesex from Essex; and there according to Florence they began to raise a
Fort; this happened in the second Year after their arrival.

The Pagans having raised the Fortification near Ligan abovementioned, about
20 Miles from London; Anno Dom. DCCCXCVI.
this Summer a great part of the Citizens and others marched thither, and
endeavored to take and destroy it, but they were there forced to fly for it,
and Four of the King's Thanes were killed on the spot.

This Autumn, when the King had pitched his Camp in those Parts about Harvest
time, to hinder the Danes from carrying away their Corn, it happened one day,
as the King rode by the River side, that he found a place where the River might
be so diverted, that the Danes should not be able to carry back their Ships;
and tho they had built two Castles, one of each side the River to defend them;
yet so soon as the Danes saw that (the stream being now diverted into several
Channels) they could not carry back their Ships, they quitted them, and marched
away on Foot, till they came to Quatbrige (now supposed to be Cambridge, Anno
Dom. DCCCXCVI.
not far from the River Severne) where they cast up a Fort; but the King's
Forces pursued them toward the West on Horseback, whilst the Citizens of
London seized and broke their Ships, and carried all that was worth any thing
to the City, but the Danes had left their Wives with the East Angles before
they departed from that place; so that that Winter they staid at Quatbridge,
being the Third Year since their last arrival.

But the next Year, according to our Annals, The Danes marched part of them
into East England, Anno Dom. DCCCXCVII.
and part into Northumberland, because wanting Money, they could only there
procure Ships, which having got they sailed from thence Southward to the River
Seine: Thus by God's Mercy this vast Army of Pagans did not wholly ruin the
English Nation, although it was very much weakened during these Three Years, as
well by the Murrain of Cattle, as also by a great Plague upon Men; by which
many of the King's noblest Thanes that were in the Kingdom dyed, of which
number were, Swithulf Bishop of Rochester, Beorthalf Ealdorman of the East
Saxons, Wulfred Ealdorman of Hamptshire, and Ethelheard Bishop of Dorchester,
with many others. But I have only noted the most remarkable.

The same Year, those Robbers residing in East-England, and Northumberland,
very much infested West Saxony, especially the Southern Coasts, by their stolen
Booties; chiefly with their Ships which they had got ready long before for that
purpose; then King Alfred (being it seems at last sensible how much damage the
want of a Fleet had done his Country) Commanded diverse Galleys to be made which
were almost twice as long as others, some whereof had sixty Rowers; they were
also swifter, higher, and less apt to roll than others formerly built, for
they were made neither according to the model of the Frisian Vessels, nor the
Danish, but after such a manner, as was thought might prove most useful: And
some time after in this Year, there arrived six Danish Ships at the Isle of
Wight, and Sailing along committed great spoil in Devonshire, and all up and
down that Coast. Then the King commanded that they should set Sail with the
Nine Gallyes newly built, and shut up the Enemies Ships from going out of the
Harbor where they were; upon which the Pirates sailed out with Three Ships
against them, the other three being left in the entrance of the Harbor upon
the dry ground, and the Seamen gone out of them; But the King's Fleet took two
of the Danish Ships that came out of the Harbor, and slew the Men, but the
Third escaped, though all, except Five, were killed: There came also other
Ships thither, which were somewhat more conveniently posted, Three of them
being placed in that part of the Sea, where the Danish Ships had before taken
up their station, but all the rest in another part, so that they could not
assist each other, for the Tide had gone back many Furlongs from the King's
Ships: And so the Danes going out of their Vessels set upon Three English Ships
which lay on the dry ground, and Fighting with them, there slew Lucomon the
King's Admiral, and Wulfherd, Aebba, and Aethelerd, being all Frizelanders,
(who it seems then served in the King's Fleet) so that of the Frisons and
English there were slain Sixty Two, of the Danes One Hundred and Twenty: But
the Tide returning, the Danish Ships got away before the English could have out
theirs at Sea, tho they were so shattered, that they could scarce reach the
Coast of Sussex, for two of them were ran on Shore, and the Men being brought
to the King at Winchester, he Commanded them all to be Hanged: But those who
were in the Third Ship, being very much wounded, with great difficulty reached
East-England.

The same Year there perished no less than Twenty of their Ships together with
the Seamen near the Southern Coast; and then also Wulfred Master of the King's
Horse Deceased, who was a British or Welsh Gerefe or Governor.

Aethelm Ealdorman of Wiltshire deceased Nine days before Midsummer, and the
same Year also Aealhstan Bishop of London dyed. Anno Dom. DCCCXCVIII.
]

This Year (according to the Welsh Chronicle) Igmond the Dane, with a great
number of Soldiers Landed in the Isle of Man, or Anglesey, where the Welshmen
gave him Battle at a place called Molerain, or Meilon, Anno Dom. DCCCC.
wherein we may suppose the Danes got the Victory, for their Chronicle says
nothing to the contrary, and besides Merwy Son to Rodri King of Powis was there
slain.

Also now King Alfred Deceased six days before the Feast of All Saints. He was
King over all the English Nation, (except what was under the power of the
Dan^s.)

But since we are come to the end of this King's Life, I shall here give you
Vid. the MSS. in Bib. B^dl^ian.
Florence of Worcester's Character of ^him: viz. Anno Dom. DCCCCI.
That Famous and Victorious Warrior, King Alfred, the Defender of Widows and
Orphans, the most skillful of all the Saxon Poets, who excelled in Prudence,
Justice, Fortitude and Temperance, being as Discreet and Diligent in hearing of
Causes, and giving Judgments, as he was devout in the Service of God; was also
most Liberal and affable to all Men; so that for these Virtues he was highly
beloved by his Subjects, now died of an Infirmity under which he had long
labored, whose Body lies buried in the new Monastery of Winchester, in a
stately Tomb of Porphyrie.

But I shall from De Gestis Alfredi.
Asser's History of this King's Life and Actions, give you a larger account of
him from his Infancy.

He was (as you have already heard) born Anno Dom. 849, and had been twice at
Rome, but after his last Return together with his Father, He tells us, He was
bred up at Court with the great Care and Affection, both of his Father and
Mother, who loved him above the rest of his Brothers, because he was not only
more Witty and Handsome, but also of a sweeter Disposition; and it had been
well if he could have improved his own excellent Parts by Humane Learning; for
to his great regret afterward, by the extreme fondness of his Parents, or by
the negligence of those who had the care of his Education, he remained till the
Twelfth Year of his Age, without so much as being taught his Letters; only
having an excellent Memory, he learned by heart several Saxon Poems, being
repeated to him by others; for he had a great, and natural Inclination to
Poetry, as our Author himself had often observed; and as an instance of the
quickness of his Parts, gives us this Account, That one Day when his Mother
showed him and the rest of his Brothers a certain fine Book in Saxon Verse,
with which they were very well pleased, he being taken with the beauty of the
Capital Letters, at the beginning of it, she promised to give it to him that
should soonest understand and get it by heart; which Alfred undertaking to do,
he carried it to his Master, and not only learned to Read it, but also got it
without Book, and so repeating it to his Mother, had the Book given him for his
pains: after this he also learned the Daily Office, Anno Dom. DCCCCI.
and then some Psalms and Prayers by heart, which being writ together in a
Book, he still carried in his Bosom for his daily use: But alas! England,
could not then supply him with any fit Tutors in the Liberal Arts, which he
often complained was one of the greatest hindrances in his Life, that at the
time when he had most leisure to learn, he had no Masters that could teach him;
and afterward when he grew more in Years, he was troubled with incessant Pains
both Night and Day, the causes of which were unknown to Physicians, but when he
came to be King, he was then taken up with the cares of the Government, and how
to resist the Invasions of the Danes, so that he had but little time for Study;
yet notwithstanding all these impediments from his very Childhood, to the day
of his Death, he never ceased to have an insatiable desire after knowledge;
insomuch that he did not only at leisure times learn himself, but also
communicated that learning to others, by translating into the English Saxon
Tongue Orosius's Roman, and Bede's Ecclesiastical Histories, the latter of
which Versions is Printed, but the former is still in Manuscript, in the
Library of Corpus Christi Coll. Oxon. as also in other places: he had likewise
begun to Translate the Psalms of David, but was prevented by Death, from making
an end of it.

But to how low an Ebb Learning was then reduced by the frequent Wars and
devastations of the Danes, King Alfred himself tells us in his Preface to St.
Gregorie's Pastoral, that learning was so decayed in the English Nation, that
very few Priests on this side of Humber could understand the Common Service of
the Church, and he knew none South of Thames, who could turn an ordinary piece
of Latin into English, though things were now somewhat better, yet that he
himself had turned this Book into English by the help of Archbishop Plegmond,
with Grimbald and John his Priests; and had sent one of them to every Bishops
See in the Kingdom, with an Aestel, (as the Saxon Word is, or Stilus, as in the
Latin Version) upon each Book of fifty Mancuses in value, charging them in
God's Name, neither to take away that Aestel from the Book, nor any of those
Books out of the Church, seeing it was uncertain how long there would continue
such Learned Bishops, as now (God be Thanked) were in all parts of this Kingdom.

But how this can consist with the supposed Relation out of Asser, concerning
the flourishing state of Learning at Oxford, before that King's Founding the
University, I do not understand.

But in the Twentieth Year of his Age, as soon as he was Married, that
Distemper took him which held him till about his Fortieth Year, the cause
whereof being unknown to his Physicians, it was supposed by some, that he was
bewitched, and it was so sharp that he feared the Leprosy or Blindness, or
else some worse Distemper, which often makes Men unuseful or despised; but by
Praying to God in a certain Church in Cornwall, (where St. Neot lay buried) and
near which the King came by chance to Hunt, he was relieved of that Pain, which
tho this Author does not tell us what it was, yet it seems to have been
somewhat proceeding from the stoppage of the Humors in the lower Parts, and
which our Author calls the Ficus, or Emerhoids.

I shall now in the next place show you, how this King spent his time, as well
in his private as public Affairs, as the same Author has related it; by which
the Reader will be better enabled to frame a true Character of this most Pious,
Learned, and Magnanimous Prince.

King Alfred (notwithstanding his frequent hindrances, Anno Dom. DCCCCI.
not only by the Danish Wars, but also his bodily Infirmities) was always
mindful of the Affairs of State, tho at spare times he used Hunting (for his
Recteation) and to oversee and direct his Artificers, Huntsmen and Faulkners;
He built also his Houses much more Magnificent than those of his Predecessors,
and at leisure times was wont to read English Saxon Books, and learn Verses in
the same Tongue by heart, so that he never failed when he was alone to employ
himself well. And for the better performance of his Duty, he vowed to bestow
half his time (as far as his occasions and Infirmities would permit) in God's
Service. And because it was impossible to know how the Hours of the Day and
Night past, when often by reason of the Clouds the Sun could not be seen, (no
Clocks being then invented) he began to think how he might distinguish the
Hours by Night as well as by Day; and at last, by his own ingenious
contrivance, he ordered Six Wax-Tapers to be made of equal length and bigness;
so that each Taper being divided into Inches, and every Inch marked out upon
the Taper; by this means those Six Tapers being set up one after another before
the Relics of the Saints, (which he still carried with him) gave a constant
and certain Light during the whole Twenty four Hours, both by Night and by Day.
But when sometimes by reason of the Wind, which came in at the Windows or Doors
of the Chapel, or thorough the Chinks of the Walls, or the Cloth of his Tents;
the Tapers were made to burn out sooner than they were used to do at other
times; he first found out the Invention of making Lanthorns of Cow's Horns cut
into thin Plates, whereby no Wind could wast the Tapers; so that by this
Invention none of them burnt out sooner than another.

Afterward he endeavored to perform his former Vow in dedicating half his
time to God, so that he was wont not only to hear Mass every day, but also to
repeat his Prayers, Psalms, and other Nocturnal Offices, having made a
Collection out of David's Psalms for his own private use; which being with
certain Prayers written in a small Book, he always carried about with him in
his Bosom; he likewise used to frequent the Church in the Night time, and there
alone to say his Prayers: He was also very liberal in his Alms to Strangers, as
well as his own People, treating all sorts of Men with great Gentleness and
Affability, he would often hear the Scriptures read by his own Servants, and
also Prayers read by Strangers, when he came to any place by chance: He loved
his Bishops and all the Clergy very well, as also his Earls, Noblemen, and
Servants; expressing his affection in Educating their Sons in his own Family,
and by causing them to be constantly instructed in Letters and good Manners,
with the same care, as if they had been his own Children: Yet for all this, the
King was not satisfied, but was sorry that God had not made him more capable of
true Wisdom, as well as Liberal Arts; admiring Solomon for nothing more, than
that despising Riches and Worldly Glory, and desiring of God Wisdom, he thereby
obtained not only those outward things, but this Request too over and above.

Thus our King imitated the Be, which rising early, gathers Honey from all
sorts of Flowers; So whatever was rare, that he had not in his own Kingdom, he
fetched from abroad: for about this time God favoring his Pious Desires, sent
him Werfriht, after Bishop of Worcester, one very well skilled in the Holy
Scriptures, who by this King's Command, Elegantly and exactly Translated the
Dialogues of Pope Gregory, Anno Dom. DCCCCI.
out of Latin, into the English Saxon Tongue; and after him Plegmond a Mercian,
who was afterward Archbishop of Canterbury, a Venerable Man, and endued with
all true Knowledge; to whom we may also add Aethelstan, and Werwulf, Priests,
and the King's Chaplains.

These learned Men abovementioned, King Aelfred had sent for out of Mercia,
whose Erudition, as it daily increased the King's Love to it, so his greedy
Thirst after it could never be satisfied; for Night and Day, as often as he had
leisure, he Commanded some or other to read to him, for he was never without
one of them near him, whereby he obtained a general Knowledge of almost all
sorts of Books; nor was he contented with those he found at home, but he sent
Messengers into France to procure new Masters; fetching from thence one
Grimbald a Priest and Monk, a worthy Man, and an excellent Chanter, and one
well skilled in all Secular, as well as Ecclesiastical Learning; as also John
another Priest and Monk, thoroughly versed in all manner of Litterature, by
whose assistance, as the King's Mind became much enlarged, so in Requital he
Honored and Enriched them.

And here I may likewise add, what some other Authors have written concerning
these two last Learned Persons, by whose assistance he first Founded the
University of Oxford, as has been already related; for John Rouse, in his
History of the Kings of England, has wrote of these two Monks, that Grimbald
was sent for from his Monastery in Flanders, then counted part of France, as
John was from his of St. Bertin, at St. Omers; this is that John commonly
called Scotus and Erigena, (tho from whence he borrowed this last Name, I shall
not determine, since the Learned differ so much about it) 'twas he Translated
Dionisius his Hierarchia out of Greek into Latin, which is now published by the
Learned Dr. Gale.

About the same time Asser also relates, that he was sent for by the King from
the Western, or furthest Parts of Britain, (that is, from St. David's in Wales)
and being kindly received by him, he earnestly entreated him to leave whatever
he had on the other side of Severne, and Dedicate himself wholly to his
Service; but he could not promise that for above six Months in the Year,
standing engaged the other six to reside at his own Monastery; for the Abbot
and Monks there hoped that by his Interest with the King, they might better
avoid those Troubles and Injuries From King Hemeid, who had often spoiled that
Monastery and Diocese; by the Expulsion of its Bishops, as he had done the
Archbishop Novis, our Author's Kinsman; for he also tells us, that both at this
time and long before, all the Countries on the South part of Britain did then
belong to King Aelfred's Dominions; Hemeid with all the Inhabitants of South
Wales, and Rodri with his six Sons having subjected themselves to his Empire;
Howel also the Son of Rice, King of Gleguising, Brochmail and Fermail Kings of
Guent being oppressed by the Tyranny of Eadred Earl of the Mercians, desired of
the King, that he would please to take the Dominion over them, and be their
Protector against their Enemies: Also Helised the Son of Teudyr King of
Brechonoc being kept under by the power of the said Sons of Rodri, sought the
Protection of the King, as did Anarawd the Son of Rodi, (together with his
Brethren) who all at last forsaking the friendship of the Northumbers, by which
they had received no advantage, but rather damage, came to the King desiring
his favor, and were honorably received by him.

Prince Anarawd being enriched with many great gifts, Anno Dom. DCCCCI.
submitted himself to the King's Dominion, together with all his Subjects,
promising to be obedient in all things to his Royal Pleasure; neither did they
desire the King's Friendship in vain, for those who loved to increase their
power obtained it, those who desired Money had it, those who only sought his
Friendship enjoyed it; but all of them did partake of his kindness and
protection, as far as the King was able to defend them.

Then our Author further adds, That after he had been with the King Eight
Months, he gave him a grant of Two Monasteries, called Ambresbyri in Wiltshire,
and Banuwelle, together with all that was there, adding these words; That he
had not now given these small things, but in order to bestow greater on him;
for some time after he gave him also Exancester (now Exeter) with all the Lands
that belonged to it in West Saxony, and Cornwall; besides other daily presents,
too long here to recite, which he says, he does not relate out of vain Glory,
but to set forth this King's Liberality. Note, That by Excester he means only
the Abbey.

Which also, as well as his Piety was very great; for the King had now ordered
two Monasteries to be built, the one at Aethelingey, the place of his Retreat
abovementioned, putting Monks therein of diverse Nations, because he could then
find no Gentlemen nor Freemen of his own Country, that would undertake a
Monastic Life; the other Monastery he built near the Eastgate of Shaftsbury,
for an Habitation for Nuns, over which he made his own Daughter, Aethelgova
Abbess, placing many Noble Virgins there, to serve God with her in a Monastic
Life.

All which being finished, he then considered how he might further add to what
he had already done; and therefore being stirred up by the Divine Grace, he
Commanded his Officers to divide all his Yearly Revenues into two equal parts,
the first of which he allotted to secular Affairs; distributing it to skillful
Artificers and Architects, who came to him from all parts far and near, whom he
discreetly rewarded giving every Man according to his Merit; And the other half
he dedicated to God, which he Commanded his Officers to divide likewise into
four parts, so that one part should be discreetly bestowed upon poor Men of all
Nations, that came to him; a second part was to be reserved for the two
Monasteries which he had founded; a third for that School which he had made up
of many considerable persons of his own Nation, as well as Foreigners. And
which is supposed to have been the University of Oxford.

And the fourth part was to be sent some Years to the Monasteries in West
Saxony and Mercia, and other Years to the Churches and Monks, serving God in
Britain, France, Cornwall and Northumberland, nay as far as into Ireland; to
each of them by turns according to his present Abilities. Nor did he only thus
dedicate one half of his Revenues, but also one half of the Labors of his Body
and Mind to God's Service, as has been already declared.

Nor was he less exact in all things else he undertook; for he was the Great
Patron of the Oppressed, whose Cause and Defense he almost alone supported,
having very little assistance from others; since almost all the Powerful and
Great Men of that Kingdom rather addicted themselves to Secular, then Divine
employments, and pursued every one his own private Interest, without any
consideration to the Common good: but the King in his Judgments studied the
advantage as well of the meaner sort as of the Noble or Great, Anno Dom. DCCCCI.
the latter of which, did often times in the public Assemblies of the
Ealdormen and Sheriffs pertinaciously quarrel among themselves, so that none of
them would scarce allow any thing that was adjudged by the said Magistrates in
their Courts, to be Right; and by reason of these obstinate dissentions, diverse
of them were compelled to appeal to the King, which also both sides often
desired to do; for they found that he diligently enquired into all the
Judiciary Sentences that were given throughout his Kingdom, and if he found any
injustice in them, he forthwith sent for the Judges, before whom such false
Judgments were given and either by himself, or else by some trusty
Commissioners had those Judges examined, to know the reason wherefore they had
given such unjust Sentences, and then enquired whether they had done this
through Ignorance, or else for Love, Hatred, or Fear, or else for lucres sake;
but if the Judges protested, (and it was also found upon Examination) that they
had passed such Sentence, because they were able to judge no better in the
Cause; then would the King with great moderation reprove their Ignorance and
Unskilfulness; telling them, He wondered much at their presumption in taking
upon them the Office of a Judge, without having first duly studied the Laws,
and therefore enjoined them either to lay down their Employments, or else
mmediately to apply themselves to study them with more care: Which when they
had heard, they took this reproof for sufficient punishment, and betook
themselves to study with all their might; so that most of all the Ealdormen,
who were illiterate from their Youth, rather desired to learn the Laws tho with
labor, then lay down their Employments; but if any one through Age, or great
incapacity could not profit in those studies, he made either his Son or some
near Kinsman read to him English Saxon Books, when ever he had time, repenting
that he had not employed his Youth in those Studies, and esteeming those Young
Men Fortunate, who could now be more happily instructed n all Liberal Arts.

So far Asser has given us a particular Account of this King's Life and
Conversation, both in public and private: But if Andrew Horn, in his Book
called, Chap. 2.
The Mirror of Justices (a great part of which is supposed to be collected
from diverse ancient Saxon Records that are now lost,) may be credited, this
King, condemned no less than Forty four inferior Judges, in Hundred and County
Courts, to be hanged, in one Year, for their false Judgments, either in
condemning or acquitting Men without the Verdict of the Jury; but the
particular Cases being many, and long, I refer you to the Author himself,
wherein you will see the Difference between the manner of Judicial Proceedings
in those Times, from what they were presently after the Norman Conquest.

But some of our Historians, as particularly Harding in his Chronicle, made
this King to have collected a Body of Laws, not only out of the Old and New
Testament, but also from the Greek, Roman, British, and Danish Laws; which, if
it were ever done, is not now extant.

Having thus finished the Life of King Alfred, I cannot but take Notice of his
last Will and Testament, (the only one we have left of all the English-Saxon
Kings,) wherein, at the very beginning, he styles himself, By the Divine Grace,
King of the West Saxons, with the Means and Assistance of Athelred the
Archbishop; Anno Dom. DCCCCI.
as also with the Assent and Consent of the Nobility of all West-Saxony, whom
he there summons as Witnesses of this his last Will; and to be Trustees and
Overseers of his Goods and Estate, for the good of his Soul, as well of the
Inheritance which GOD and the chief Men, together with the Ealdormen of the
People, had affectionately and bountifully bestowed upon him, as also of the
Inheritance which his Father Aethelwulf had bequeathed to him and his three
Brothers, viz. Aethelbald, Aethered and himself; so as that the Survivor of
them should enjoy the entire Dominion of the whole Kingdom: And then proceeds
to show the particular force of that Entail, according to his said Father's
Will, in these Words, as he gives it us, speaking in the first Person.

That if it should happen, That Aethelbald, the eldest Son of our Father,
should first decease, then Aethered, together with the Nobility of all
West-Saxony, should be Witnesses for us of our Share in the said Kingdom, on
the Day of his Coronation; whom we should with all our Might endeavor to
advance to the Throne, after the Death of Aethelbald our eldest Brother,
according to the Agreement he made with us, viz. That the said King Aethered
should permit us to enjoy our Distributions, as we had them before our said
Brother's Coronation; And also the Engagement he stood in to us concerning the
said Hereditary Distribution, was confirmed in like manner, to wit, that the
Lands and Territories, which K. Aethered, by our Assistance, and the Power of
our Men, should acquire to himself; as also the Dominions which should fall to
him by Hereditary Right, he should, in Brotherly Love, proportionably divide
with us. But yet, if it should so happen, that Aethered should succeed to the
Kingdom, he himself was to promise the same thing: But he refusing, (as this
Testament particularly takes notice,) to observe this Agreement, only promised,
That as for the Lands and Territories which he, by Alfred's and his People's
Assistance should acquire to his Dominions, as also the Inheritance to which he
was born, he would, after his decease, confer upon none else but my self: And
being thus pacified, I thereupon remitted all further Complaints against my
Brother.

Then he proceeds farther, That in case it should happen, that we all should
fall by the hands of our Danish Enemies, then it was especially provided, that
every one of us should so dispose of our Estates to our Sons, that each of them
should successively enjoy our Inheritance, and our Lands and Possessions in
like manner, as the Inheritance it self, with the Dominions, Lands and
Possessions, which had been before conferred upon us. And then he goes on to
recite what had been formerly done in a General Council of the West Saxon
Nobility at Swinbourne, wherein he had adjured them all to bear witness of the
manner and intent of the former Entail; the sum of which was, That since K.
Aethered his Elder Brother was deceased, there was then none left but himself,
who had any writing or Testimony concerning this Inheritance, nor any other
Heir besides himself; and that if any one should offer to claim the said
Inheritance, he should lose his Right, unless he forthwith produced witnesses
of it; but then he heard that all his Kinsmen were dead, and so the whole
Inheritance of King Aethelwulf his Father was devolved upon him, by a Charter
made thereof at his General Council at Langdene; which Charter he had then
likewise wife commanded to be read before the Witnesses of all West Saxony;
Anno Dom. DCCCCI.
and after it was read, he ordered all there present to declare, whether they
had heard or knew of any Man who could justly claim any Right to his
Inheritance, which had never come to his Knowledge before; because it was his
intent to disinherit none of his Kinsmen of any thing; and then all the Princes
and Ealdormen of his People did firmly and positively declare, that they never
heard of any who had a juster Title to it than himself, and then they gave him
full power to make his Will, and bequeath his Estate to his Kinsmen and Friends
in such manner as best pleased him.

Next King Alfred proceeds in the presence of the said Witnesses, to make his
last Will, and to confer upon his Eldest Son Edward diverse Lands and
Territories there particularly mentioned; lying in diverse Countries in England,
( Vid. The Reason in the Introduction.
but without any mention of the Crown;) he also leaves other Lands there
recited to his Younger Son; the like he does for each of his Daughters, to whom
he gives diverse Lands there particularly set down; and then bequeaths to Athelm
and Aethelwald his Brother's Sons, diverse Towns there also particularly
recited; then follow his Legacies in Money to his Sons, Daughters and Servants,
and to his Kinsmen above mentioned; as also to Ethelred, General of his
Militia, and to the Archbishop of Canterbury, Asser Bishop of Shireburne, and
several other Bishops; all which would be too tedious here to be set down,

And to let you see that Entails were then in force,

He farther Wills, That those to whom he had given his Free-Hold-Lands, should
not alienate them beyond their own Lives, and if they had no Children they
should go to the next of Kin, especially to the Eldest Son as long as any one
of them remained alive; for so his Father had bequeathed his Inheritance; but
if it should any ways happen that his said Lands should come into the hands of
Women, then he Wills, That after their Decease those Lands should revert to his
next Male Kindred descending from their bodies, etc.

And then concludes with an earnest Exhortation and desire, that none of his
Relations should any ways disquiet each other concerning those things which he
had already given and bequeathed to them; since the whole Nobility of the West
Saxon Nation had already agreed with him, that it was but Just and Right that
he should leave them as free as the Thought of Man could make them.

This is the substance of King Alfred's Will, which I have been the more
particular in reciting, because it is one of the most Remarkable Pieces in our
English Saxon Antiquities, and shows us the manner of Succession, not only to
private Estates; but to the Crown it self in those Days. Tho we could have
wished that the Original had been preserved, being in the English Saxon Tongue,
of which this is only a Translation made by Asser at the end of this King's
Life.

The Latin of which is indeed so barbarous, and obscure, that I would rather
advise the curious Reader to peruse the Original itself, then venture to give
him an imperfect interpretation of any more of it; having here already set down
the most material heads, and which I thought did principally conduce to our
present design.

King Alfred had born to him by the Queen his Wife abovementioned, Aethelflede
his Eldest Daughter, and after her Eadward his Eldest Son then Aethelgeofeu, or
Ethelgiva, then Aelfthryth, and lastly Ethelweard, besides those who died in
their Infancy: Anno Dom. DCCCCI.
Aethelflede when she came to mature Years, was Married to Eadred, Earl of the
Mercians; Aethelgiva vowing Chastity, undertook a Monastic Life; Ethelward the
youngest Child, was by the King's prudent Order, put to School under careful
Masters, together with most of the Nobility's Sons of the Kingdom; in which
School both Latin and Saxon Books were constantly read; and here they also
learned to write: So that before they were admitted to Hunt, or handle Arms,
they were well improved in the Liberal Arts,

As for this Prince Ethelward, Histor. Major.

Vid. Ang. Sacra, 1 vol.


Thomas Rudburne relates from the Annals of Winchester, that he was bred up at
Oxford, and became learned above that Age; but being more given to Letters than
Arms, we find nothing of him in our Annals more than the time of his Death,
though he lived till he was about Forty Years of Age; but he had two Sons, Edwin,
and Ethelwin, of a more Warlike Temper; who being Slain in a Fight against
Anlafe King of the Danes, were by their Cousin King Athelstan's appointment,
buried in the Church of the Abbey of Malmsbury, as our William the Monk of that
place recites.

As for the Princess Aethelflede, she will make so great a Figure in her
Brother's Reign, that I shall suspend saying any more of her here.

Besides these Children of King Alfred mentioned by Asser, the Chronicle of St.
Swithune tells us of another Son born before Prince Edward, called Edmund, who
lived to be Crowned King by by his Father's appointment, in his Lifetime; but
dying before him, he was buried under a Marble-Stone, on the North side of the
Altar of the Abbey Church of Winchester: So that we may hence perhaps supply
that Chasme in Asser's Life of this Prince; where speaking of those Children of
his, who died Young, says, In quorum numero est -- but no Name being found in
any of the Copies extant, it possibly ought to be supplied with Edmundus: But
since this Prince is not mentioned in any other Historian or Pedigree of our
Kings, I leave it to the Reader's discretion to determine as he pleases
concerning him.

As for the other Sons, Edward and Elfrithe, they were Educated in the King's
Court, with great care of their Governors, and were taught by them to show
great respect toward Strangers, and a tender love to their own People, with a
most Dutiful observance of their Father.

Immediately after his Excellent King's Death and Burial, his Eldest Son
succeeded him under the Title of

King EDWARD, commonly called the Elder.
THis Prince (according to Annals) now began his Reign, Anno Dom. DCCCCI.
being (as Asser and Bromton in his Chronicle relate) anointed King at
Kingston, by Plegmund Archbishop of Canterbury, of whom Ethelwerd in his
History expressly tells us, That he succeeded to the Monarchy, and though the
Eldest Son of King Alfred, yet was he Elected by all the Chief Men of the
Kingdom, and Crowned on Whitsunday. Will. of Malmsbury observes, that though this
Prince was much inferior to his Father in Learning and Knowledge; yet far
exceeded him in Power and Grandeur, enjoying the benefit of those Labors which
his Father had undergone.

Anno D^m. DCCCCI.
But so soon as ever he came to the Crown, as the Saxon Annals relate, he met
with a very great disturbance; for Aethelwald his Cousin German, (Son as is
supposed to Ethered his Father's Elder Brother) pretending he had better right
to the Crown than King Edward, Rebelled against him, and went over to the
Danes: So the Prince presently invaded the King's Territories, and possessed
himself of the Royal Towns of Tweoneam, (now Tweoxbeam) and Winburne, without
the King's privity; whereupon he advanced his Army, and pitched his Camp at a
place called Baddanbyrig, (a Hill near Winburne;) but Aethelwald, with those
Men who were joined with him, kept themselves within the Town, and having shut
up all the Gates, King Edward commanded them to Surrender; but he Swore that he
would there either Conquer or Die; yet notwithstanding all this blustering, he
privately withdrew himself by Night, and marched back to the Danish Army in
Northumberland: Upon this, the King gave Orders to his Men to pursue him; yet
though they did so, they could not overtake him; so he got safe to the Danish
Army, where they joyfully received him for their King.

But Ranulh Higden in his Polychron tells us, That having taken away a Nun
along with him out of the Monastry of Winburne, he went over to the Danes,
which if so, (as is most likely) the King could not then Apprehend her; but it
seems King Edward followed him so close, that he forced him to go over into
France, (as Mat. of Westminster relates) that he might there obtain more
Recruits, to give the King fresh disturbance; and therefore it is most
probable, what Mat. Westminster, and Bromton's Chronicle tells us, That the
King after Aethelwald's departure, seized his Wife, whom (having been a Nun) he
had taken against the Command of the Bishop, from the Monastry abovenamed,
whither she was now brought back again.

In the mean time (according to Mat. Westminster) the King improved his
Dominions, by building new Towns, and repairing some Cities, which had been
before destroyed.

Anno Dom. DCCCCII.
This Year was fought a Battle at Holme, between the Kentish Men and the
Danes.] But Florence of Worcester with greater probability places this Action
two Years after, when Adelwald (as he there calls him) was now returned out of
France.

Anno Dom. DCCCCIII.
About this time deceased Athulf the Ealdorman, Brother of Q. Ealswithe, King
Edward's mother, as also Virgilius the Scottish Abbot, and Grimbald the Priest,
(one of King Alfred's Instructors) 8 Ides of July. This Year also was
consecrated the new Monastery of Winchester, about the Feast of St. Judoc.

Here was also a College of Secular Chanons, first placed by King Edward,
according to the will of his Father King Alfred, and it was called the New
Minster, to distinguish it from the Old Minster or Cathedral.

The nearness of these two Monasteries afterward occasioned great differences
between them, until the Monks of this new Abbey, (who were placed here in the
room of the Secular Chanons, by Bishop Ethelwald, Anno Dom. 963.) were removed
without the Walls, to a place called Hyde, as you shall hear in due time; and
here also the Bones of King Alfred were new Buried by King Edward his Son, (as
Will. of Malmsbury relates) because of some foolish Stories made by those of
the Old Monastery, concerning the dead King's Ghost walking in some Houses
adjacent to the Church.

This Year also, according to our Annals, the Moon was Eclipsed. Anno Dom.
DCCCCIV.


The next Year Prince Ethelwald incited the Danish Forces in East-England to
Arms; so that they overran and spoiled all the Country of Mercia, Anno Dom
DCCCCV.
as far as Crekelade, (now Crekelade in Wiltshire); and there passing the
Thames, they took in Braedene, (now Braedon Forest in Wiltshire) whatsoever
they could find, and then returned home. In the mean time King Edward, so soon
as he could get his Army together, followed them, and destroyed all the Country
which lies between the Ditch and the River Ouse, as far as the Northern Fens.

By the Ditch abovementioned, Florence of Worcester understands that bound, or
limit drawn between the Territories of the late King Edmund, and the River
Ouse, which at this day is known by the name of the Devil's Ditch, that
formerly divided the Mercian Kingdom from that of the East Angles.

And Bromton's Chronicle under this Year further adds, That Ethelwold having
thus passed the Thames at Crekelade, took Brithenden, and marched as far as
Brandenstoke (now Bradenstoke in Wiltshire) so that (as Mr. Camden well
observes in his Britannia) our Modern Historians have been much mistaken in
supposing that place to be Basing-Stoke in Hampshire: But to return to our
History.

As soon as the King resolved to quit those parts, he ordered it to be
proclaimed throughout the whole Army, that they should all march off; but the
Kentishmen staying behind, contrary to his command, he sent Messengers to them
to come away; yet it seems, before they could do it, the Danes had so hemmed
them in, that they were forced to fight, and there Eadwald the King's Thane,
and Cenwulf the Abbot, with many more of the English Nobility were slain; and
on the Danes part were killed Eoric their King, and Prince Ethelwald, who had
stirred them to this Rebellion, and Byrtsig the Son of Prince Beornoth, and
Ysopa General of the King's Army, and abundance of others; which it would be
too tedious to enumerate: But it was plain that there was a great slaughter
made on both sides, yet nevertheless the Danes kept the Field of Battle.

Also this Year Queen Ealswithe, (the Mother of King Edward) deceased; in which
also a Comet appeared.

Who this Eoric, King of the Danes, was, is uncertain; I suppose him to have
been the Danish King of the East Angles, whose death (according to Will. of
Malmesbury's Account) falls about this time, for he says thus; That this King
was killed by the English, whom he treated tyrannically, but for all this, yet
they could not recover their Liberty; certain Danish Earls still oppressing, or
else inciting them against the West Saxon Kings; till the Eighteenth Year of
this King's Reign; when they were all by him overcome, and the Country brought
under obedience.

To this time we may also refer that great Council, which was held by King
Edward the Elder, where Plegmond, Archbishop of Canterbury presided; though the
place where is not specified, yet the occasion of it (as we find from Will. of
Malmesbury, as well as the Register of the Priory of Christ-Church in
Canterbury, cited by Council, 1. Vol. p. 387.
Sir H. Spelman) was thus; Pope Formosus had sent Letters into England,
threatening Excommunication, and his Curse to King Edward and all his Subjects,
because the Province of the West Saxons had been now for Seven Years without
any Bishops; whereupon the King summoned a great Council or Synod of Wise men
of the English Nation, wherein the Archbishop read the Pope's Letters; then the
King and the Bishops, with all his Lay-Subjects, upon mature deliberation,
found out a safe course to avoid it, by appointing Bishops over each of the
Western Counties, Anno Dom DCCCCV.
dividing what Two Bishops had formerly held, into Five Diocesses.

The Council being ended, the Archbishop went to Rome, and reciting the King's
Decree with the Advice and Approbation of the Chief Men of his Kingdom; He
thereby, and with rich Presents, so pacified the Pope, that Plegmond obtained
his confirmation thereof; and then returning into his own Country, he ordained
five Bishops in one day, (to wit) Fridestan to the Church of Winchester,
Aldestan to Cornwall, Werstan to Shireborne, Athelm to Wells, and Eadwulf to
Crediton in Devonshire.

But Archbishop Parker, in his Antiq Britannicae, under this very Year thus
recites this Transaction out of a very Ancient Manuscript Author, whom he does
not particularly name; viz. That Plegmund Archbishop of Canterbury, together
with King Edward, called a great Council of the Bishops, Abbots, Chief men,
Subjects and People, in the Province of the Gewisses, where these two
Bishoprics were divided into five.

So that you see here was no less than five new Diocesses erected at once, by
the Authority of both the King and the Great Council of the Nation, though, it
seems, the Pope took upon him the confirmation of this Decree.

The same Authors likewise tell us, That Archbishop Plegmond ordained two more
Bishops over the Ancient Provinces (to wit) one Bernod, for the South Saxons,
and Cenwulf for the Mercians, whose See was at Dorchester in Oxfordshire.

Cardinal Baronius in his Annals, having given us a Copy of these Letters of
Pope Formosus, has found a notable Error in the Date of them, for being
written Anno Dom. 904, or 905. they could not be sent by that Pope who was dead
about 9 or 10 years before, and therefore the Cardinal would put the time of
this Council back to Anno Dom. 894. but then as Sir H. Spelman in his Notes
upon it well observes, the fault will be as great this way as the other; for
King Edward, under whom this Council was held, was not King till above 10 years
after; therefore some would place this Council in the latter end of King
Alfred's Reign, after the Kingdom came to be settled upon the expulsion of the
Danes; but Sir H. Spelman affirms, That these things being written long after
the time when they were transacted, the name of Formosus might be put into the
Copies of these Letters, instead of Pope Leo the Fifth, and then all things
will fall right enough. But as to Frithestan Bishop of Winchester, this Account
of Will. of Malmesbury will not hold, for our Annals tell us, That he was not
made Bishop till Anno Dom. 910. upon the death of Bishop Denulph, and therefore
that See could not be so long void, as this Relation would have it. The like
mistake is in making Werstan to be then Bishop of Shireborne.

Anno D^m. DCCCCVII.
This Year Elfred, who was Gerefe of Bathe, died, and about the same time there
was a Peace made between King Edward and those of East-England and
Northumberland; That is, as Florence interprets it, with the Danish Army
inhabiting those Provinces, at Ityngaford; but where the place was, is now
unknown to us, unless it be Ilford near Christ-Church in Hampshire, which is
seated in the new Forest, called Itene in English-Saxon. This Year also
Ligceaster, now Leicester was repaired.

And Florence of Worcester likewise relates it to have been done in the Year
908. by the care of Ethelred Duke of Mercia, and the Lady Elfleda his Wife; and
this Author does also inform us, That this Year the King subdued Eastseax,
East-England, and Northumberland, with many other Provinces, which the Danes
had a long time been possessed of, but East-England was not reduced till some
Years after; also that he conquered the borders of the Scots, Cumbrians and
Galloway Men, with the Western Britains, and forced their Kings to yield
themselves to him, Anno Dom. DCCCCVII.
and then he returned home with great Glory and Honor.

This Year also Cadelh, Prince of South Wales, died; he was second Son to
Roderic the Great, and Father to Howel Dha, (i. e. the Good,) who succeeded him
in that Dominion.

Some of the South Wales Antiquaries have endeavored to prove this Cadelh to
have been the eldest Son of Roderic the Great; but Mr. Vaughan has so
Learnedly confuted this Mistake in a small Treatise which he published on that
Subject at Oxford 1663, that I think no Man can have any Reason to be
dissatisfied with it.

This Year (according to Florence of Worcester) the ancient City of Caerlegion,
that is in the English Legeceaster, (and now Westchester, Anno Dom. DCCCCVIII.
) was by the Command of Earl Ethered, and Ethelflede his Wife, repaired. Which
tho Mr. Camden in his Britannia will needs have to be Leicester, yet that it
was not so, may appear from the British Name of Caerlegion, which was never
given to Leicester, but only to Westchester by the ancient British Inhabitants.

'This Year deceased Denulph, who was Bishop of Winchester. Anno Dom. DCCCCIX.
] This is he of whom our Historians tell us, That the King lighting on him as
he lay concealed at Athelney, being then but a Swineheard, and finding him a
Man of excellent Natural Parts, set him to School to learn; and he became so
good a Proficient in Letters, that he was made first a Doctor, and afterward a
Bishop.

This Year also the Body of St. Oswald was translated from Bardenigge (that is,
Bardeney in Lincolnshire) into Mercia.

Frith^stan now took the Bishopric of Winchester, Anno Dom. DCCCCX.
and Bishop Asser also deceased soon after, who was Bishop of Shireburne. Also
the same Year King Edward sent an Army of the West Saxons, together with the
Mercians, who very much wasted Northumberland; and staying there five Weeks,
destroyed many of the Danes.

Florence of Worcester and Simeon of Durham give us a very good Reason for this
Action, viz. That the Danes had now broken the League they had entered into with
King Edward; so that he never lest them till he had forced their Kings and
Commanders again to renew the Peace, which however it seems they kept not long.

For the next Year our Annals tell us,

That the Danish Army in Northumberland not regarding the Peace which King
Edward and his Son had made with them, Anno Dom. DCCCCXI.
again wasted the Province of the Mercians; but the King being then in Kent,
had got together about 100 Ships, which sailed toward the South-East to meet
them, and then the Danes supposing that the greatest part of the King's Forces
were in his Fleet, thought they might march safely whither they would without
fighting; but so soon as the King understood they were gone out to plunder, he
sent an Army consisting of West Saxons and Mercians, who following the Danes in
the Rear, as they returned home met with them (in a place called Wodnesfield,)
and fought with them, routing and killing many Thousands of them, with Eowils
and Healfden their Kings, with several Earls and Chief Commanders of their
Army; whose Names I forbear to give, because I would tire my Reader as little
as I could.

But to these Kings, as the MS. in Bib. Cot. T. b. c. 4.
Annals of Winchelcomb^ inform us, one Reginald succeeded.

Anno Dom. DCCCCXI.
Also the same Year, as Florence has it, there was a remarkable Battle between
the English and the Danes in Staffordshire, but the former obtained the Victory.

Anno Dom. DCCCCXII.
This Year Aethered, the Ealdorman of the Mercians, deceased; and the King then
took the Cities of London and Oxenford into his own hands, with all the
Territories belonging to them.

But it seems the Lady Elflede, now a Widow, kept all the rest of Mercia; for
this Year the Annals say, That she being Lady of the Mercians, came on the
Vigil of the Feast of Holyrood to a place called Sceargeat, (which is now
unknown,) and there built a Castle; and the same Year did the like at Bricge,
which Mr. Camden supposes to be Bridgenorth in Shropshire, that Town being
called Brigge by the common People at this day. And Florence also adds, That
about this time she built the Town of Bremesbyrig.

Anno Dom. DCCCCXIII.
Now about the Feast of St. Martin King Edward Commanded the Town of Heortford
to be new built, lying between the Rivers Memar, Benefican, and Lygean, the
first and second of which Rivers is now hard to name right, only it is certain
they were two Rivulets that discharged themselves into the River Lee, (then
called Lygean,) between Hartford and Ware.

Anno Dom. DCCCCXIV.
After this, the Summer following, between Lent and Midsummer, the King marched
with part of his Forces into East-Seax as far as Maeldune, (now Maldon,) and
there encamped, whilst a Town could be built and fortified at Witham, (near
adjoining,) and then a great part of the People, who had before been under the
Danish Dominion, became subject to him: In the mean time, whilst part of his
Forces built the Town of Heortford, on the South side of Lee, the Lady
Aethelfleda marched with all the Mercians to Tamaweorthige (now Tamworth) in
Staffordshire, and there built a Castle; and before the Feast of All Saints did
the like at Staeford; and the Year following she built another at Eadesbyrig,
(supposed by Mr. Camden to be Edesbury in Cheshire;) and also the same Year,
about the end of Autumn, she built another at Weringwic, (now Warwick;) and the
Year following that, another at Cyricbyrig (now Cherbury) in Shropshire; and
another at Wearbyrig, (supposed by Mr. Camden to be Wedesbury in
Staffordshire;) and before Christmas another at Run-Cafan; (that is, Runckhorne
in Cheshire.) But Florence places these Actions more rightly three Years after.

All which Castles (being built in the space of the two following Years) must
be supposed to have been done not casually, but as the exigence of Affairs
required, to secure the Mercian Frontiers against the Danish, as well as the
Welsh Incursions.

But it is now time to cast our Eyes a little on the Affairs of that part of
England, called Wales; where we find in the Chronicle of Caradoc, That this
Year Anarawd chief King of Wales died, leaving behind him two Sons, Edwal Ugel,
(i. e. the Bald,) who Reigned after him, and Elise; and (as some say) a third
Son named Meyric. This Edwal is he, whom our Historians style Idwal Rex omnium
Wallensium; i. e. Supreme King of all Wales.

And I shall here likewise subjoyn what Mr. Vaughan, in his Notes upon this
Chronicle, has also added concerning the Welsh Affairs during the Reign of
this Prince, tho happening somewhat before this time, viz.

That after the Death of Roderic the Great, Anno Dom. DCCCCXIV.
the Northern Britains of Straetclwyd and Cumberland were (as Hector Boethius
and Buchanan relate) much infested and weakened with the daily Incursions of
the Danes, Saxons, and Scots; which made many of them (that is, all that would
not submit their Necks to that Yoke) to quit their Country, and seek out more
quiet Habitations; so that under the Conduct of one Hobert they came to Gwyneth
(i. e. North Wales) in the beginning of Anarawd's Reign, who commiserating
their distressed Condition, gave them the Country from Chester to the River
Conwey to inhabit, if they could beat out the Saxons, who had lately possessed
themselves thereof.

These Britains having returned Thanks to Prince Anarawd, (as was meet,) fell
upon the Saxons, and Necessiry giving edge to their Valor, they soon drove
them out thence, being yet scarce warm in their Seats; and Edred, or Ethered,
Earl of Mercia, made great Preparations for the regaining of the said Country:
But the Northern Britains, who had settled themselves there, having
Intelligence thereof, for the better securing of their Cattle and Goods,
removed them over the River Conwey. In the mean time Anarawd was not idle, but
gathering together all the Strength he could make, his Army encamped near the
Town of Conwey, at a place called Cymryt, where his Men, making a gallant
Resistance against the Assaults of the Saxon Forces, at length after a bloody
Fight obtained a complete Victory over them. This Battle was called Gwaeth
Cymryt Conwey, because it was fought in the Township of Cymryt, hard by Conwey;
but Anarawd called it Dial Rodri, because he had there revenged the Death of
his Father Rodri. In this Battle Tudwal, the Son of Rodri Mawr, received a Hurt
in the Knee, which made him be called Tudwall Gloff, or The Lame, ever after.

His Brethren, to reward his Valor and Service, gave him the Lands of
Unchellogoed Gwynned; and then the Britains pursuing their Victory, chased the
Saxons quite out of Wales into Mercia, where having burnt and destroyed the
Borders, they returned home laden with rich Spoils And Anarawd, to express his
Thankfulness to GOD for this great Victory, gave Lands and Possessions to the
Church of Bangor, as the Records of that See do testify, and likewise to the
Collegiate Church of Clynnoc in Arvon, as we read in the Extent of North Wales.
After this the Northern Britains came back from beyond the River Conwey, and
possessed again the Lands assigned to them between Conwey and Chester, which
for a long time after they peaceably enjoyed. Some English Writers, as Mat.
Westminster, etc. not considering that the Britains had Lands in Loegria and
Albania, after King Cadwalader's time, mistake those of Cumberland and
Straetclwyd for the Britains of Wales; but Asser Menev. who lived about the
year 875, says, That Halden the Dane marched into Northumberland, which he
subdued, having before conquered the Picts and Britains of Straetclwyd in
Northumberland.

I have given you this Relation at length, because it is not found in any of
our Historians, and it ^ets us see, that the English, as well as the W^lsh,
have been very sparing to record their own Defeats. But to return again to our
History.

About this time, Anno Dom. DCCCCXV.
(according to the Vi. Fuller 's Church History.
Copy of a Charter of King Edward, extant in an old Manuscript belonging to
Clare Hall in Cambridge,) He by the Command of Pope John and Archbishop
Plegmund, and by the Advice of all the Bishops and Chief Men of his Kingdom,
confirmed to the Doctors and Scholars of Cambridge, Anno Dom. DCCCCXV.
as also to their Servants, all Privileges which had been granted by himself
or his Predecessors for ever to endure by a perpetual Right. This Charter
bears Date at Grantecester (i. e. Cambridge) in the Year 915, and is directed
to Frithestan, then Chancellor and Doctor.

But if Sir John Spelman thought he had Reason to suspect the Truth of that
Passage we have cited out of Asser's History of the Life of King Alfred,
concerning the Studium or School at Oxford before King Alfred's time, our
Antiquaries may have as much (if not more) Reason to question the Truth of this
Charter; since the Original of it is not to be found, but only this Transcript
in the Book above cited; for they say it looks very improbable, that Cambridge
should have continued an University during all the time of the Danish Wars, and
under the Possession of those three Danish Kings, the last of whom enjoined it
till the latter end of this King's Reign, as appears by our present History:
And besides all this, the barbarous and pedantic Latin at the Conclusion of
this Charter, where the King is made to confirm it in these Words. Stabili jure
grata and rata decerno durare, quamdiu vertigo Poli circa terras atque Aequora,
Aethera Syderum justo moderamine volvet: Which seems to betray the ignorant
Monk's Pen that counterfeited it; but John Rouse, in his Manuscript History De
Regibus Angliae, cited by Bale, relates from an ancient Table and Chronicle of
the Abbey of Hyde near Winchester, C^nt. 8. Number. 53.
(which himself by the Favor of the Abbot had perused) the Restoration of the
University of Cambridge by King Edward, as follows.

Therefore for the Augmenration of Clerk-like Learning, as his Father had done
to Oxford, so he again raised up Cambridge to her first Glory, which for a long
time with other general Schools, had lain desolate and destroyed; as also, like
a most loving Nourisher of Scholars, he commanded that Halls for Students,
Chairs and Seats of Doctors and Masters, should there be erected, and built at
his own proper Charges, for he sent from Oxford University, (which his Noble
Father the King had founded,) Masters of those Arts which we call Liberal,
together with Doctors in Divinity, and invited them there formally to Read and
Teach.

But since the Author here cited is but of modern Times, in comparison to this
famous University, and also that Passage he has cited out of the Annals of
Hyde, is not now to be found in the Copies we have of them: I shall give the
Reader a much more ancient Testimony out of Tho. Rudborn's larger History of
the Church of Winchester, Lib. 3. c. 2.
where he cites an Epistle of one Bonagratia de Villa Dei, to the Black Monks
of England, wherein there is this Passage, which I shall here Translate, viz.
That whilst he was banished from his Country into England, and sojourned with
the most Holy and Religious Monks in the City of Winchester, Helmestan Abbot of
the said Cathedral Church, and the Venerable Swithune, Praepositus, (i. e.
Bishop of the same,) who had been before in Professione sacrae Theologiae in
Studio Canterbriggiensi Cathedratus, (i. e. Professor of Divinity in the
University of Cambridge,) had often relieved him during the many Hardships he
suffered in his Banishment, with special Favor he desired always should be
acknowledged.

If we were assured that this Epistle was Genuine, it would advance the
Antiquity of this University far higher than the time we are now treating of,
and would make it Ancienter than the time of King Alfred, Anno Dom. DCCCCXV.
in the latter end of whose Reign St. Swithune sat Bishop of Winchester: But
since we have not the Originals, but only Citations from these ancient Pieces,
I shall not take upon me to determine of their Validity, but leave that, as
also this Authors Credit, to the Reader's Judgment. But to return to our Annals.

This Year Egbriht, the innocent Abbot, Anno Dom. DCCCCXVI.
was slain on the 16th Kal. of July, a little before the Summer Solstice; and
about three Days after Aethelfleda sent an Army against the Welsh, which took
Brecenanmere, (supposed to be either Brecknock Castle, or else some place near
it,) and there she took the King's Wife, and about thirty four Prisoners.

The Danes marching now on Horseback after Easter from Hamtune (i. e.
Northampton) and Lygraceaster, Anno Dom. DCCCCXVII.
(now Leicester) slew many Men at Hocneratune, (now Hoocnorton in Oxfordshire)
and the places adjoining; and as soon as they had returned home again, they
sent out another Company of Robbers, which marched toward Ligtune, (most
likely to be Leighton in Bedfordshire;) but the People of that Country being
forewarned of their coming, fought with them, and not only put them to flight,
but also recovered whatsoever they had taken away, so that they left a great
many of their Horses and Arms behind, them.

Now a great Fleet sailed from the Southern Parts of Armorica, Anno Dom.
DCCCCXVIII.
under the Command of two Earls, Ohtor and Rhoald, and sailing about toward the
East, entered the Mouth of the River Severne, and there spoiled all the Coasts
of North Wales toward the Sea, as far as they could; and they also took
Cumeleac the Welsh Bishop in Yrcingafield (now Archenfield) in Herefordshire,
and carried him Prisoner to their Ships; but King Edward within some time
Ransomed him for Forty Pounds; but after this, the Danes quitting their Ships,
marched again toward Yrcingafeild, where the Men of Hereford and Gleawcester,
and the neighboring Towns, fought them, and put them to flight, and there slew
Rhoald, and a Brother of Earl Ohtor's, with a great part of their Army, and
drove them into a certain Wood, where they besieged them, till they made them
give Hostages to depart out of King Edward's Kingdom: But at last it seemed
advisable for the King to place a good Guard from the South part of the Mouth
of Severne, and from the West of Wales toward the East as far as the River
Avon, that so the Danes might not Land any more on that side; nevertheless
leaving their Ships, they stole away privately by Night in two Companies to
plunder, the one to Weced (now Watchet in Somersetshire,) and the other to
Portlocan (now Portlochbay) in the same County, but they were routed in both
places; insomuch, that few of them escaped alive, unless it were those who swam
off to their Ships: Then they besieged an Island at Bradanrelic, (Florence
calls it Reoric,) which is supposed to be a little Island (now called Shepholm)
in the Mouth of Severne, where they were in such great want of Victuals, that
many died with Hunger, because they could get no Provisions there. After this
they went to Deomed, (supposed to be South Wales) from whence they passed into
Ireland.

All this happened in Autumn: And the same Year, a little before Martinmass,
King Edward marched with his Army to Buckingaham, and there stayed a Month,
building two Forts on each side the River Ouse; before he parted thence,
Thurkytel the Danish Earl owned him for his Lord, as also all their chief
Commanders, Anno Dom. DCCCCXVIII^
and almost all their Noblemen, who were at Bedanford (now Bedford) with many
of them that belonged to Hamptune.

This Year also Ethelfleda, Lady of the Mercians, before Whitsontide took the
Town of Deorby, where within the Gates were killed four Thanes, who were very
dear to her.

Also we read, in the Collections of that Learned Antiquary Mr. Lambert, (and
by him given to the Vesp. A. 5.
Cottonian Library,) that it is found in an Ancient Chronicle, once belonging
to the Monastry of Rochester, and collected by one Edmund de Hadenham, That
this Year the Lady Elfleda, by the Assistance of the King her Brother, besieged
the City of Canterbury, and taking it, slew a great many Danes that were
therein.

Anno Dom. DCCCCXIX.
King Edward marching with his Army to Bedanford about Martinmass, had the Town
surrendered to him, and then all the Inhabitants who were his Subjects returned
thither, and there he stayed a Month; and before he departed, he commanded a
Castle to be built there on the South Side of the River.

Anno Dom. DCCCCXX.
After this King Edward went to Maeldune (now Maldon,) and rebuilt the Town,
and saw it fortified whilst he was there. Also Earl Thurkytel passed over into
France by K. Edward's Leave and Convoy, with all those Danes that would follow
him; as likewise Aethelfleda brought under her Dominion the Town of Legracester
(now Leicester,) and a great many of the Danes, belonging to that place, became
subject to her, as also those who were at York; nay, some of them confirmed it
both with an Oath, and by giving of Hostages, that they would continue so; but
as soon as this was done, she departed this Life twelve days before Midsummer
at Tammeworth, it being the Eighth Year of her Government over the Mercians
(after her Husband's Death,) with great Moderation and Justice: Her Body lies
buried at Gleawcester in the East Isle of St. Peter's Church.

This Lady's Death is placed in our printed Annals, under the Year 918, and
that more rightly, for the Cottonian Copy of these Annals is certainly
mistaken, in putting the Death of this Princess two Years later than this, viz.
920. though they all agree in Substance, viz. that she died at Tamworth about a
Fortnight before Midsummer; and that thereupon King Edward going thither, the
whole Nation of the Mercians submitted to him. But whenever this Princess died,
she was certainly a Woman of great Virtue, Prudence, and Courage; and truly
resembled her worthy Father King Alfred, as far as the Difference of Sex would
permit.

But to return again to our Annals,

The same Year the Daughter and Heir of Ethered, Lord of the Mercians, called
Aelfwinna, whom her Mother had left her Heir, was deprived by the King of that
Dominion; and she was, about three weeks before Christmas, brought into
West-Seax.

John Bevour, (who calls himself Castoreus,) in his Manuscript History of the
Kings of England, gives us a very good Reason, if true, why the King dealt thus
severely with this young Princess his Niece, which was this; That Aelfwinna,
not making the King her Uncle, (whom her Mother had appointed her Guardian,)
privy to her Designs, had contracted a Marriage with Reginald, King of the
Danes: Whereupon King Edward, to prevent his Enemy, entered the Country of
Mercia, and took it into his own Hands, and also carried the said Lady away
with him. The same Author likewise reports, That about this time Leofred a
Dane, Anno Dom. DCCCCXX.
and Griffyth ap Madoc, Brother-in-Law to the Prince of West-Wales, came from
Ireland with a great Army to Snowdon in Caernarvonshire; and designing to bring
all Wales and the Marches thereof to their subjection, overran and subdued all
the Country as far as Chester, before ever King Edward had Intelligence of
their Arrival; whereat he was very much offended; but being loath to trouble
his Subjects in that behalf, he made a Vow, That he and his Sons with their own
people, would be revenged on Leofred and Griffyth; and thereupon he came to
Chester, and took the City from them: After this he made two Divisions of his
Army, whereof he and his Son Athelstan led the first, and Edmund and Edred the
second; and followed them with such Celerity, that he overtook them at the
Forest of Walewode (now Sherwood), where Leofred and Griffyth set upon him so
fiercely, that the King at the beginning was in some distress, until Prince
Athelstan stepped in between his Father and Leofred, and gave the Dane such a
Wound in the Arm, that it disabled him from holding his Spear, whereupon he was
soon taken, and committed to the Custody of Athelstan. In the mean time Prince
Edmund and Edred encountering with Griffyth, slew him, and brought his Head to
their Father: Upon that Athelstan caused Leofred to be beheaded likewise, and
so both their Heads were set up together on the top of the Tower of Chester;
and Edward and his Sons returned home with a great Triumph.

But it appears by the Age of Prince Edmund when he came to the Crown, that
this Relation concerning himself and his Brother Edred's commanding part of
their Father's Army, cannot be true; for he was not above Four years old when
King Edward his Father died, and not above Eighteen when he began to reign.

This year (according to our Annals) King Edward commanded his men to go to the
Town of Tofeceaster (now Tocester in Northamptonshire) and to rebuild it; after
which, the same year about Lent, Anno Dom. DCCCCXXI.
he commanded the Town of Wigingamere (now Wigmore in Herefordshire) to be
rebuilt: But the same Summer, between Whitsuntide and Midsummer, the Danes of
Hamptune (i. e. Northampton, as was said before) and Ligeracester, and those
that lay Northward, broke the Peace, and marched to Tofeceaster, and assaulting
the Town a whole day hoped to take it, but those that were within defending it
until such time as more men could come to their assistance, the Danes were
forced to leave the Town, and marched off: After this they often went out by
night to plunder, and falling upon those that were unprovided, took a great
many men and much Cattle, between Barnewoode and Eglesbyrig (the former of
which was Barnwood Forest near Bury-hill, and the latter Alisbury, both in
Buckinghamshire). About the same time the Danes of Huntandune (i. e.
Huntington) and the East Angles, marched out and built a Castle at Temsford,
where they settled themselves, for they had left that at Huntandune, supposing
that from thence they might recover a greater share of the Country; and so
they marched till they came to Bedanford, but the men who were within it going
out to meet them, killed great numbers of them, putting the rest to flight:
After this a great Army of Danes being got together, advanced to the Town of
Wiggingamere, and stormed it for most part of the day; but those who were
within defending it very well, they were forced to leave the Town, Anno Dom.
DCCCCXXI.
and retreat, carrying away with them all the Cattle they found thereabouts:
After this also, the same Summer, there were great Forces assembled of King
Edward's Subjects from the Towns round about Temesford, whither they went, and
laying close Siege to the Town, they at length took it, and killed a Danish
King, and Taglosse an Earl, and Mannan his Son, together with his Brother, and
all those who defended the Town.] From which time (according to Florence) the
Danish Power did by little and little decrease, and that of the English
increase. But this Author places all these actions of this year under Anno 917.

The same year a great many men assembled together in Autumn, as well from
Kent, Surry, and Essex, as from the neighboring Towns, and marching to
Colneceaster (i.e. Colchester) assaulted that City till they took it, and all
the Plunder they found in it, and killed all the men, except those that escaped
over the Wall: After which also the same Autumn a great Army of Danes were got
together with the East Angles, both Land-Soldiers and Pirates, whom they had
invited to their assistance, hoping thereby to revenge the Defeat they had
lately received; wherefore they went directly to Maeldune, and besieged that
Town, till such time that more men coming to its assistance, the Danes were
forced to quit it, and retreat; but the men who were within it, together with
those that came to their assistance, overtaking the Danes, killed many hundreds
of the Land-men as well as Pirates; not long after which, King Edward marched
with an Army of South Saxons to Passenham (i. e. Pasham in Northamptonshire)
and there continued till the Town of Tofeceaster could be encompassed with a
Stone-Wall, where Earl Thurferth and the chief Commander of the Danish Forces
that belonged to Hamtune, with all toward the North as far as Weolade (that
is, the River Weland) accepted King Edward for their Lord and Protector; but
about the time that the King's Army was to return home, he sent out fresh
Forces to the Town of Huntandune, who repaired and rebuilt it in those places
that were destroyed, according to the King's Command; so that all the people of
that Country that ramained alive, surrendered themselves to King Edward, and
sought his Peace and Protection. Likewise this very year before Martinmass the
King marched with an Army of West Saxons to Colneceaster, and rebuilt the Wall,
and repaired all places which were ruinous. Then many as well of the
East Angles, as also of the East Saxons, who were before under the Danish
Dominion (and had been so for above thirty years), now delivered themselves up
to the King, and also all the Danish Army in East-England swore Allegiance to
him, promising to do whatever he thought good, and to defend his Subjects as
well by Sea as by Land; but the Army that belonged to Grantanbyrig (i. e.
Cambridge) did by themselves choose the King for their Lord and Patron,
confirming it by their Oaths as he had appointed him. This year also Sytric
(the Danish King) slew Neil his Brother.

And under this year I suppose we may justly place the total subduing of the
Danes, and subjection of the East Angles, and consequently their being freed
from the Danish Yoke, under which they had groaned for above fifty years;
though what Government they had from the Death of the last Danish King Eoric,
is hard to determine; William of Malmesbury, the only Ancient Author that has
mentioned these Affairs, Anno Dom. DCCCCXXI.
telling us in general, That after the Death of this Eoric, the Danish Earls or
Governors either oppressed them, or else excited them against the West Saxon
Kings, until this King Edward by driving out the Danes restored the English to
their Liberties, and added this Kingdom to his own Dominions fifty years after
the death of King Edmund, which falls out much about this time.

But Polidore Virgil (I know not from what Author) has a long Story how King
Eoric abovementioned made War against King Edward, and being routed by him in
a great Battle, and returning home, fell so far into the Hatred and Contempt of
his Subjects, that they rose up against him, and being then divided into
Factions, were forced to submit themselves to King Edward. This (if it were
true) would give a great light into this dark part of the History of the
East Angles, of which we have but a very imperfect Account: But since this
Relation is found in no other Author except Polydore; and besides, expressly
contradicting the Testimony of William of Malmesbury, a much more Authentic
Writer, by whose Account (as well as by the Saxon Annals) it appears that this
Eoric was dead long before: I think we may justly look upon Polydore's Relation
as a mere Fiction, either invented by himself, or else taken from some Modern
Author of no great Credit: Therefore I must now warn the Reader concerning this
Historian, That though he had the Perusal of a great many Rare Manuscripts, yet
since he very seldom cites any Authors, and that we find he sometimes differs
from our most Ancient Writers, and is plainly mistaken in diverse Relations, we
have great reason to refuse his Testimony, where it is not agreeable with more
Authentic Authorities.

I have nothing else to add under this year, De Gest. Pontif. lib. 2.
but that as William of Malmesbury tells us, the Body of King Edmund the Martyr
having lain for above Fifty Years obscurely buried at a place called Halesdon
in Suffolk, was now by some devout people removed to a Town adjoining, called
Badricesworth (now St. Edmundsbury), where there was quickly a Church built
over him, and unto which King Edmund, Brother to King Athelstan, was a great
Benefactor; though this place was not much taken notice of, until King Cnute,
to gain the Favor of this Saint whom his Countrymen had murdered, here
afterward built a Noble Monastery.

This year also (according to Florence of Worcester and Mat. Westminster) the
King of Scots, Reginald the Danish King of Northumberland, with the Duke or
Earl of the Gallawy Welshmen or Britains, came to King Edward, and submitting
themselves to him, made a firm League with him. This is the first time we find
any Submission of the King of Scots; which whether it amounted to a downright
Homage, and to hold that Kingdom of the Crown of England, may be much
questioned, and is absolutely denied by the Scottish Historians.

Between Lent and Midsummer King Edward marched with his Army to Stanford, Anno
Dom. Dccccxxii.
and there commanded a Castle to be built on the South Side of the River
Weland; so that all the people who dwelt in the Town on the North-side of that
River submitted themselves, and besought him to be their Lord.

Also (according to the Cottonian Copy of these Annals) Howel, and Cledauc, and
Jeothwell, (Prince of Wales) with all the Nation of the Northern Britains, Anno
Dom. Dccccxxii.
desired to take the King for their Lord.] But in this the Welsh Chronicles are
wholly silent, as commonly they are of any action that tends to the lessening
of their Country.

Out of Wales the King marched to Snottingaham, and took the Town, and
commanded it to be repaired, and Garrisoned with Danes as well as English; and
then all the people in the Province of Mercia, of both those Nations came over
to him.

This year also (according to Florence) Athelward, Brother to King Edward died,
and was buried at Winchester: This is that Learned Prince, Son to King Alfred,
whose Character we have already given.

Anno Dom. Dccccxxiii.
This year King Edward carried his Army about the end of Autumn, to Thaelwale,
(that is, Thaelwalle in Cheshire, and which is supposed to have been so called
from its being encompassed at first with a Wall made of Bodies of Trees, called
in the Saxon Tongue Thal), where he ordered that Town to be repaired; and he
commanded another part of his Forces, whilst he stayed there, to march out of
Mercia to Manigeceaster, (now Manchester in the Kingdom of Northumberland) and
ordered it to be rebuilt, and strengthened with a Garrison: This year also
Plegmond Archbishop of Canterbury deceased, and Reginold (the Danish King) took
Eoferwick (that is, York.)

Before Midsummer King Edward marched with his Army to Snottingaham, Anno Dom.
Dccccxxiv.
and ordered a new Town to be built on the South Side of the River Trent,
over against that on the other side, and made a Bridge over the River between
the two Towns; from thence the King went into Peakland (that is, the Peak in
that Shire) to Bedecanwell (which is supposed may be Bakewell in D^rbyshire),
and commanded a Town to be built near to it, and to be fortified with a
Garrison. Then also the King of Scots, with all the Scottish Nation, and Reginald
the Son of Eardulph (the Danish King of Northumberland) with all the
Inhabitants of that Kingdom, whether English or Danes, together with the King
of the Straecled Welshmen, and all his Subjects, did choose King Edward for
their Patron and Lord.

But this year's actions are placed by Florence of Worcester and Mat.
Westminster three years sooner; which shows the Copies they had of these Annals
differed from those we have, though which of them is the truest, I shall not
now take upon me to affirm; but it sufficiently shows, that both these Copies
were not written at one and the same time.

And now King Edward deceased at Fearndune in the Province of the Mercians (now
called Farrington in Berkshire); Anno Dom. Dccccxxv.
and Aelsweard his Son also deceased not long after him at Oxnaford; (i. e.
Oxford).

But the Canterbury Copy of these Annals, as also Florence of Worcester, place
the Death of these two Princes under the foregoing year; and indeed they seem
to have been in the right. But this is most certain, that this Prince, who is
called Aethelward by William of Malmesbury, was his Eldest Son by Queen
Aelfleda his Wife, the Daughter of Earl Aethelune, and being very well
instructed in Learning, did much resemble King Aelfred his Grandfather as well
in Face as Disposition: yet though he survived his Father, he never took upon
him the Title of King, because he outlived him so little a time, that he could
not be solemnly Elected and Crowned King according to the Law and Custom of
Succession in those times.

I have nothing more to add to this Reign of King Edward the Elder, Anno Dom.
Dccccxxv.
but only the Laws he made, which since it is not specified in what year of his
Reign, nor in what Common Council of the Kingdom they were enacted, I thought
best to refer to this place.

In the Preface to his Laws he strictly charges and commands his Officers, that
as much as in them lies they do Justice according as it stands in the Judicial
Book (supposed to be some Book of Presidents or Judgments); and without all
fear boldly dispense common Right to all men; and that they set and appoint
certain days for determination of the several Causes depending before them.

The first Law is concerning Traffic, and in way of confirmation of the fourth
Article of the League made betwixt his Father and the Danish King Guthrun,
ordains, that if a man will sell any thing, he shall have one to vouch and make
good the sale; and that no man buy any thing without the Town, unless he have
the Portreeve for witness, or some other men worthy of Credit; otherwise he
shall undergo the Penalty of Contumacy against the King; This Vouching or
Warranty shall also proceed from one to another, till it end with him who first
sold it: The rest of this Law, containing in what cases the Buyer, and likewise
the Demandant, shall find sufficient Testimomony or Oaths of the true buying of
the Goods so bought, being long, I refer the Reader to the Law it self.

The second of King Edward's Laws ordains, That whosoever denies another man
his Right either in Bocland or Folcland, demanding it before the King's
Sheriff, when as he has no Right in either, shall pay to the King for the
first Offense Thirty Shillings, and as much more for the second; and if he
offend the third time, then to pay an Hundred and twenty shillings for his
Contumacy against the King.

The third adjudges that for one who had forsworn himself, or born false
witness, no credit should be given to him for the time to come, but that he be
put to Ordeal, in all cases where his Oath is required.

The fourth declares, That King Edward lying at Exeter, and consulting with his
Wise Men by what means he might best provide for the Public Peace and
Tranquillity, it then seemed to them that what he had commanded was too remissly
executed; therefore he now required all that will amend and reform these
things, and would with him enjoy common society, that they would prosecute with
their utmost hatred the same persons as he did both by Sea and Land; and that
they would take care not to do wrong or injury to any man. He that does
contrary, let him (as was formerly ordained) pay thirty shillings to the King;
and if he offend the second time, as much more; if the third, an hundred and
twenty shillings.

The fifth commands, that that Reeve or Judge who does not Justice according to
the testimony of such as are summoned, pay an hundred and twenty shillings for
his Contumacy against the King.

The sixth wills, That if a Servant be accused of Theft, he that recommended
him to his Master, or other of his Friends (if he have any), be Sureties for
him that he discharge himself of what is deposed against him; and if he have
none to interpose on his behalf, those that are concerned may seize his Goods;
but if he have neither Goods nor Friends, let him be taken into custody.

Anno Dom. Dccccxxv.
The eighth Law enjoins that no man knowingly and voluntarily have peace with,
or harbor one that is condemned for any Crime; he that acts contrary, and
thereby breaks his Oath, and the Faith given by him and all the people, let him
undergo the Mulct prescribed in the Judiciary Book; which if he refuse to pay,
he is to be deprived of the King's Favor, and all other men's Friendship, and
farther forfeit all his Estate; and if any afterward relieve him, let him also
incur the Penalty expressed in the said Book; and farther, whosoever shall
relieve a Fugitive either in this Country, or in the Eastern or Northern parts
of the Kingdom, (i. e. in East-England and Northumberland) let him be punished
as by the Articles of Peace is ordained.

The ninth provides, that if one deprived of his liberty for stealing, steal
again, so that all his Kindred forsake him, and none will engage for him, he is
to be set to servile and hard labor, as opportunity shall offer, and his
Kindred shall lose the valuation of his head.

The tenth Law forbids any man to receive another man's Servant without his
leave, and that he has fully satisfied his Master; he that does otherwise,
shall be punished as contumacious against the King.

The eleventh and last commands, That about every fourth Week every Sheriff or
Judge hold the Gemot or Assembly, and administer Justice to every man, and
determine all Causes at the days appointed; if he do otherwise, he is to be
punished as was before said.

From all which Laws we may observe, First, That the Law concerning redeeming
of all Crimes by Pecuniary Fines was not yet abolished, nor in some Ages after;
but the strict Laws for vouching of Goods sold, as also against Fugitives and
Runaway Servants, were but necessary in such licentious and turbulent times,
when it was so very easy for Offenders to pass out of the English Territories
into those of the Danes. You may also here observe the Antiquity and Power of
the County Court, which was then held (as now) every Month, but had much more
Power anciently than at this day.

As for the Laws that follow, and which are entitled in Mr. Lambard's Copy,
The Ecclesiastical Laws of Edward the Elder, King of England, and Gutherne King
of the Danes in East-England, which were first made by the Kings Alfred and
Gutherne, and were now said to be again confirmed by King Edward Son to Alfred,
and the same King Gutherne, there must certainly be an Error in the Name of the
Danish King here mentioned, since it appears by our Annals that Gutherne died
ten years before King Alfred; therefore since we do not find any other Danish
King of this Name, we may rather suppose that these Laws were made by King
Edward and Eoric the Danish King who succeeded Gutherne in that Kingdom; but be
it as it will, I shall not trouble the Reader with their Recital, since they
relate chiefly to Ecclesiastical Affairs, and are in most points but a
Repetition of those things which had been before agreed upon by King Alfred and
King Gutherne some years before.

King Edward dying, after four and twenty years Reign, was buried in the
Monastery at Winchester, which his Father had founded, leaving by his Testament
Athelstan his Eldest Son to succeed him; who (as Florence of Worcester, and
William of Malmesbury, and most other Writers relate) was not born of the
Queen, but of one Egwinna a Lady, the Daughter of a Nobleman; whose Name, Anno
Dom. Dccccxxv.
though William of Malmesbury does not tell us, because he says he had not
found it in writing, yet the Chronicle ascribed to Abbot Bromton tells us a
long and improbable Story of the getting and Birth of this Prince; which being
no where else to be found, as I know of, I shall here give you: That in the
Reign of King Aelfred, when his Son Edward was young, there was in a Village of
the West Saxons, the Daughter of a certain Shephard, called Egwinna, who
falling asleep, dreamed that the Moon shone out of her Womb so bright, that all
England was enlightened by its Splendour: This Dream she told to a Grave Matron,
that had been Nurse to several of the King's Children: Upon this she takes her
into her house, and educates her as carefully as if she had been her own
Daughter, instructing her so to demean her self, as might become a Person both
of Birth and Breeding. In process of time it happened, that Prince Edward, the
King's Eldest Son, passing upon some occasion through this Town, thought
himself obliged in Honor and Good Nature to visit his Nurse; by which means he
got sight of this Maid, and she being exceeding beautiful, fell passionately in
love with her, and by his violent Importunity he got her Consent to lie with
him, and by one Night's Lodging she proved with Child, and being afterward
delivered of a Son, in respect to the Mother's Dream the Father gave him the
Name of Athelstan, which signifies, The most Noble.

If this Story be true, that he married this Woman without the Consent of his
Father, and kept the Marriage private, the Authors abovecited had good cause to
suppose her to have been rather his Concubine than his Queen; though there be
also other Historians, who make her to have been his Lawful Wife: But thus much
is more certain, That King Edward had Prince Ethelward abovementioned, by his
Wife Aelfleda the Daughter of Earl Aethelem, as also another Son, called Edwin,
of the manner of whose Death William of Malmesbury says he cannot certainly
tell us; but gives us an exact account of what became of all the rest of his
Children: He had also by her six Daughters, viz. Edelfleda, Edgiva, Ethelhilda,
Ethilda, Edgitha, and Elgiva; of whom, the first and third vowed their
Virginity to God, and both of them lie buried by their Mother in the Monastery
of Winchester; as for Edgiva, her Father bestowed her upon Charles King of
France; and for Ethilda, her Brother King Athelstan bestowed her in Marriage
upon Hugo, a King or Prince of the French; and Edgitha and Elgiva their Brother
sent to Henry the German Emperor, the Second of which he married to Otho his
Son, and the Elder to a certain Duke near the Alps. King Edward also begot of
his Third Wife Edgiva, Edmund and Edred, who both reigned successively after
their Brother King Athelstan, as also two other Daughters, Eadburga and Edgiva;
the former became a Nun, but the latter being a great Beauty, was bestowed in
Marriage by her Brother Athelstan on Lewis Prince or Duke of Aquitain: But King
Edward had so well bred all his said Daughters from their Infancy, that they
were wont all of them to bestow their leisure time upon good Letters, and after
that were wont to exercise both their Distaff and the Needle; and in this
manner they passed the first years of their Virginity: Likewise his Sons were
so inured to Learning, that not being rude and ignorant in Knowledge, they
became (like Plato's Philosophers) fit to Govern the Commonwealth; as our
Author handsomely expresses it.

Anno Dom. Dccccxxv.
This King seems by his History to have been a Prince of great Mildness and
Humility, as well as Courage; which appears by this Story; but tho it be not
found in any of our Historians, is yet related by Walter Mape in his Nugis
Curialium in Manuscript, as follows; That when K. Edward the Elder came to
Austelin, (I suppose, that which we now call Aust, where is a Ferry to pass out
of Somersetshire into Wales) Lewelyn Prince of North Wales came to Bethesley
about a Treaty of Peace, he refused first to cross the Severne; but when King
Edward heard it, he took Boat and rowed toward him; but the Prince (being then
by the Waterside) when he saw him, and knew who he was, he cast off the Rich
Robe he then had on (which he had provided for that meeting), and entering the
River breast-high, taking hold of the end of the Boat, submissively said, Most
Sage King, thy Humility has overcome my Insolence, and thy Wisdom triumphed
over my Folly: Come, pray Sir, get upon this Neck, which I (like a Fool as I
am) have lifted up against thee; and thus enter that Land which thy benign
Clemency has made this day thine own: So taking the King upon his Shoulders,
and setting him on shore, he made him to sit down upon his own Royal Robe, and
putting his own hands between the King's; there did him Homage.

But this Circumstance only serves to bring all the rest of this Story into
question; for it is certain this Ceremony of doing Homage was not in use till
after the coming in of the Normans.

Besides, the Welsh Chronicles mention no such thing, nor can I find any Prince
either of North or South Wales, called Lewelyn at that time, till Anno 1015, in
the Reign of King Cnute, above a hundred year after the death of King Edward
the Elder; but perhaps the Story may be true, being told by Tradition, though
the Name of the Prince may be mistaken; and Lewelyn put instead of Howel, who
was now King of South Wales, and in whose Territories this Action must have
happened.

But whether this Relation be true or false, we may from it draw this
Observation, That it is not always Wisdom in Princes to insist too nicely upon
Circumstances, especially in Ceremony, but that sometimes to recede from them,
may tend to the greater Advantage of that Prince that does it.

King ATHELSTAN.
THE same year, not long after King Edward's decease, Anno Dom. Dccccxxv.
the Saxon Annals tell us, That Aethelstan was elected King by the Mercians,
and afterward Crowned at Kingstune upon Thames (being then a Royal Town).
Note, He was crowned in the midst of the Town upon a Scaffold built on purpose,
whereon the Ceremony of the Coronation was performed in the open view of all
men, by Athelm Archbishop of Canterbury, with great Acclamations of the People.

Also St. Dunstan was born, and Wulfhelme was consecrated Archbishop of
Canterbury, upon the Death of Athelm.

From whence you may observe, the Mercians had not yet lost their Ancient Right
of choosing their own King; and no doubt but the West Saxons did so likewise,
though it be not particularly expressed in the Annals: For an Ancient
Manuscript Chronicle in the * Cottonian Library, says only, Electus est in
Regem.

And you may also hence observe, That the King's Consecration or Coronation is
placed as a different action from his Election; as it is also in the Author
last cited, and in H. Huntington, who therein follow our Annals, and say
expressly, That he was Elected. But it seems before his Election, one Alfred,
with some factious men of his Party, endeavored to hinder King Athelstan's
coming to the Crown, because he was begot on a Concubine; which, says William
of Malmesbury, if it were true (as he seems there to doubt), yet had he nothing
else ignoble in him, for he surpassed all his Predecessors as well in his
Devotion as his Victories: So much better is it (as he well observes) to excel
in good Qualities, than in his Ancestors, the former only being truly a man's
own.

Hither we may also refer what the same Author tells us concerning this Alfred
abovementioned, out of the Preface to King Athelstan's Charter, whereby he
confers the Lands once belonging to this Alfred upon the Church of Malmesbury,
for the Souls of his Cousins, Ethelred, Edwin, and Ethelwin, there buried: And
to testify to the world, that he gave what was his own, he there at large
relates the whole Conspiracy which Alfred had laid, together with his
Accomplices, to seize him in the City of Winchester, and to put out his Eyes; but
the Plot being happily discovered, and Alfred denying it, he was sent to Rome
there to purge himself before Pope John; where coming to take his Oath at the
Altar of St. Peter, he fell down, and being carried by his Servants into the
English School, there died the third night after: but, it seems, the Pope would
not dispose of his Body, till he had sent to ask King Athelstan's Judgment what
should be done with it; when by the Advice and at the Request of the Chief Men,
the King assented that it should (though unworthy of that Honor) be laid among
the Bodies of other Christians; but his whole Estate was adjudged confiscated
for so black a Treason.

Anno Dom. Dccccxxv.
But one of the first things this King performed after his coming to the Crown
(as we find in Florence of Worcester) was his bestowing his Sister Edgitha in
Marriage to Sihtric the Danish King of Northumberland, who desired the Alliance
of King Athelstan; And, as Matthew Westminster relates, this Prince professing
himself a Christian, was a little before his Marriage baptized; but did not
long continue so, for he relapsed again to his former Paganism. And the next
year,

Anno Dom. Dccccxxvi.
According to Florence, and Simeon of Durham, he deceased; after whose death the
Lady abovementioned retiring to her Brother King Athelstan, became a Nun at
Pollesworth.

Nor can I here omit the Falsehood of the Scottish Historians, who out of spite
to King Athelstan's Memory, make Sihtric to have been poisoned by this Lady,
whom they call Beatrix, and that at the Instigation of her Brother King
Athelstan; whereas her Name was not Beatrix, but Edgitha, or Orgiva; and was a
Woman of as great Reputation for her Sanctity, as the King her Brother was for
his Valor and other Noble Virtues, which rendered him above the putting his
Sister upon so base an Action.

But before I dismiss this Relation, I cannot omit what John of Wallingford
adds concerning this King Sihtric; whom he calls Sictric; viz. That upon this
Marriage with King Athelstan's Sister, he advanced him to the Title of King,
that his Sister might not stoop so low as to that of Countess; and that Sictric
then had for his Kingdom all the Country from the River Theys, as far as
Edinburgh, from which time the Danes began to settle in those parts, who before
rambled about over all England; to which Settlement, as also to a fresh
accession of more, the Northerly Situation of that Country, lying over against
Denmark, contributed very much, as this Author well observes.

This year (according to Florence of Worcester, and Simeon of Durham) Sihtric
King of the Northumbers departed this life; so that it seems that this King
survived his Marriage but a small time.

Also the same year (according to Florence) Hugh, the Son of Robert King of the
French, married King Athelstan's Sister; and after the death of King Sihtric,
Guthfrith his Son succeeded him, though but for a little while; for the year
following our Annals tell us,

Anno. Dom. Dccccxxvii.
That King Aethelstan expelled the said Guthfryth King of Northumberland, and
added his Dominions to his own: And the same year Wulfhelm the Archbishop went
to Rome.

From which Conquest of the Kingdom of Northumberland we may observe, That as
King Edward had before conquered the Danes of East-England, and had also added
Mercia to his own Kingdom; so King Athelstan, by the Expulsion of King
Guthfrith (who was also of the Danish Race) became the first King that ruled
all England, without any King under him.

Of this Prince also John of Wallingford relates, That being a Young Man he was
stirred up to this Rebellion by the suggestion of the Northumbers, who told him
that their Country had always enjoyed a King of their own, without being
Tributary to the Southern English: And indeed, from the first arrival of the
English Saxons, they had been never subject to any of the West Saxon Kings,
except King Athelstan: Therefore this Guithfrith, or Gutred, moved by these
instigations, took upon him the Name of King, without King Athelstan's consent,
and casting out the Garrisons, seized all the Forts and Castles of that Country,
Anno. Dom. Dccccxxvii.
and flatly denied to pay the Tribute imposed upon his Father; with which K.
Athelstan being much provoked, he not only raised great Forces of his own
Subjects, but also sent for Aid to his Friends in Neighboring Kingdoms; and so
in few days gathering together a great Army, totally expelled him his Kingdom.

And therefore Alfred of Beverly, an Ancient Author still in Manuscript, very
well observes of this Prince, That by subduing the Scots, Welsh, and all the
Kings of Britain, he justly deserved the Title of the first Monarch; though his
Modesty was so great, that he never gave himself that Title, but left it to his
Brother Edred to take, as shall be shown in his Reign.

This year William (Son to Rollo) succeeded to the Dukedom of Normandy, and
held it fifteen years. Anno Dom. Dccccxxviii.


Byrnstan was consecrated Bishop of Winchester, and held that Bishopric two
years and an half.] The year following, Anno Dom. Dccccxxxii.


'Frithelstan the Bishop deceased.] Florence of Worcester, and Simeon of
Durham, as also the Chronicle of Mailrosse, do all agree, Anno Dom. Dccccxxxiii.
that this Bishop Frithelstan did before his death ordain Bishop Byrnstan in
his room; and if so, he resigned the Bishopric of Winchester to him, and lived
only one year after it.

Also the same year (according to our Annals) Edwin Aetheling was drowned.

This Edwin here mentioned in our Annals, was Brother to King Athelstan, whose
Death being the greatest Blot of this King's Reign, diverse Authors have
concealed it; but notwithstanding, it is thus given us by William of
Malmesbury, and the Chronicle called Abbot Bromton's; Alfred abovementioned
having conspired against King Athelstan, (as you have already heard) had
several Accomplices in that Treason; and there were not wanting some Court
Sycophants to accuse Prince Edwin of being in that Plot, for he was the eldest
Legitimate Son then living of King Edward by his Lawful Wife; since therefore
the apprehension of a Rival usually overpowers all Obligations both of
Friendship and Nature, though Edwin both by Word of Mouth, and by Oaths and
Imprecations, protested his Innocence; yet all this would not prevail against
these Court-Whisperers, who affirmed that if he were only banished, he would be
commiserated by Foreign Princes, and still more endanger the King's safety;
whereupon such a way was found out, that under the Notion of Banishment he
might with the least appearance of Cruelty be dispatched: In short, an old
rotten Vessel was provided, and only the Prince and his Esquire were put into
it, without any Pilot or other body to steer or manage it; and thus for some
time they weathered it at Sea; but the Young Prince being brought up tenderly,
and not used to hardship, despairing of his Life, cast himself headlong out of
the Vessel, and so perished in the Ocean; whilst his Servant being more
courageous, was resolved to save himself if he could; and meeting with better
fortune, was driven on shore at a place called Whitsand, on the Coast of
Picardy, not far from Dover.

The Fact was not long done, before Athelstan sorely repented of it; which he
is said by a Seven Years Penance to have testified to the world, as also by the
Punishment of him who was the principal Instrument in this Fratricide, and had
whispered this Jealousy into his Breast, who being his Cup Bearer, Anno. Dom.
Dccccxxxiii.
as he was going to present a Cup of Drink to him, one of his Feet slipped; but
by the Nimbleness of the other recovering himself, he said, Thus one Brother
helps another; which the King hearing, and sadly calling to mind how little he
himself had assisted his Brother, oppressed by the Calumnies of this Parasite,
caused him to be put to death.

This is the Tale told by William of Malmesbury, and the other Author; the
latter of whom delivers it as a certain Truth, whilst the former tells it only
as an old Story, sung in certain Ballads, and of which he himself doubted the
Truth. But Buchanan the Scotch Historian (I suppose out of malice to this
King's Memory for routing his Countrymen) makes King Athelstan not only to
have procured the Death of his Brother Edwin, but also of his Father King
Edward, whom he therefore fancies to have been called Edward the Martyr; and
not content with this neither, he adds, that he put his Brother Edred to death
also: Yet certainly there can scarce be more Mistakes committed in so few Lines
than he has been guilty of in these; for in the first place it is agreed by all
our Historians, that King Edward died a Natural Death; and as for him whom he
calls the Martyr, he was the Son of King Edgar; nor did he begin to reign till
above an hundred and fifty years after, as shall be shown when we come to his
Reign.

But as for what Buchanan objects against some of our later Historians, for
making Athelstan to be King of all Britain, and to have restored Constantine
King of Scots to his Kingdom, and to have forced him to do him Homage for it;
we must confess, that Buchanan is so far in the right, that neither our Saxon
Annals, nor Marianus Scotus, nor Florence of Worcester, mention any thing of
it, though they all do relate the great Victory which King Athelstan obtained
over the Scots, but yet are wholly silent either about his driving of the King
of Scotland out of his Kingdom, or of causing him to do him Homage for
restoring him to it. This is to show, that I would not be partial to the
Historians of our own Country, as if they could not also be sometimes guilty
of great Errors; Anno Dom. Dccccxxxiv.
and therefore I thought good to take notice of it here.

This year (as our Annals relate) King Athelstan made an Expedition into
Scotland with a great Army by Land, as also with a considerable Fleet by Sea,
and laid wast great part of that Kingdom. The same year also Bishop Byrnstan
deceased at Winchester, on the Feast of All Saints.

But as for the Causes of this War made by King Athelstan against Scotland,
since not only our Annals but many of our other Authors are silent in it, we
must supply that defect from William of Malmesbury, and Roger Hoveden, and the
Chronicles of Mailrosse, who relate, that Anlaf the Son of Sihtric King of
Northumberland, having fled into Ireland, and the late King Godefrid, his
Brother, into Scotland, King Ath^lstan sent Ambassadors to Constantine King of
Scots, demanding the Fugitive to be given up to him, or else upon his Refusal
denouncing a speedy War against him, which War indeed he made; for marching
into Scotland with a great Army both by Sea and Land, he drove his Enemies
before him as far as Dunfeodor and Wertermore, and by Sea as far as Cathness;
but Malmesbury affirms, that they not daring in any thing to displease him,
went to a place called Dacor (or Dacre) in Cumberland, where each surrendered
up himself and all his into the hands of the English King, who was Godfather to
the Son of Constantine, and now ordered him to be baptized in testimony of that
Accord; Anno Dom. Dccccxxxiv.
whom also (together with great Presents) he left as a Hostage with the King;
and so Peace being thus happily concluded, he returned home into his own
Country. But the Scottish Historians do not mention this Invasion at all, nor
will allow King Constantine to have had any Son: And indeed it seems
improbable, that if Constantine had now given his Son to King Athelstan as a
Hostage, he would have dared to renew the War again so soon after this
Agreement. But for all this, Godefrid escaped while they were preparing for the
Journey, and traveling with one Turfrid into several parts of the Country, at
length got some men together, and laid Siege to York, the Inhabitants of which
they tempted both by fair and foul means to let them in; but not being able to
prevail with 'em, they went their ways, and were both taken shortly after, and
shut up in a Castle; from whence making their escape by deluding their Keepers,
Turfrid not long after was shipwrecked at Sea, and became a Prey to the Fish;
but Godefrid endured much more misery both by Sea and Land, and at last came as
a Suppliant to the King's Court, who kindly received him: but after he had been
profusely feasted for four days together, he got away again to his Ships, and
then returned to his old trade of Piracy. In the mean time Athelstan demolished
a Castle which the Danes had fortified at York, that so they might not shelter
themselves any more there; and the large Booty he found in it, he divided
amongst his Soldiers, to every one a share: For so Worthy and Liberal was this
Prince, that he never sought to hoard up Money for himself, but bestowed
whatever he got, either upon those Servants he found faithful to him, or else
upon Monasteries: No wonder then if he won the hearts of all the Monks, who
were the only Historians of those times.

Now also (as Florence relates) Wulfhelm Archbishop of Canterbury deceasing,
Odo Bishop of Wells succeeded him.

This Man was of a Danish Race, whose Parents had come over hither in King
Alfred's Reign; but their Son had been first a Soldier under him, and then
turning Priest, was at last by King Athelstan's Recommendation made a Bishop;
but having never been a Monk, and none but Monks having been hitherto made
Archbishops of Canterbury, he for a long time refused it; till at last he was
persuaded to go over into France, and there taking upon him the Habit of a
Monk, and returning home, was immediately consecrated Archbishop. This Man was
a Prelate of great Sanctity according to those times, and a severe Exactor of
Ecclesiastical Discipline, as you will find hereafter.

This year also (according to the Annals) Bishop Byrnstan abovementioned
deceased at Winchester. And the following year, Anno Dom. Dccccxxxv.


'Bishop Elfeage succeeded him in that Bishopric.

About this time, according to De Pontif. Lib. 2.
William of Malmesbury, Anno Dom. Dccccxxxvi.
King Athelstan drove the Welsh out of Exeter, and built new Walls about it;
and then founded a Monastery of Benedictines, which was afterward changed
(upon the removal of the Bishop's See from Credition to this City) into a Dean
and Secular Chanons, as shall be shown in due time. But after two years,

The War was again renewed between King Athelstan and Constantine King of
Scots, and a great Battle followed, Anno Dom. Dccccxxxviii.
of which our Annals give us (contrary to their custom) a Poetical, if not a
Romantic Relation, which to translate verbatim would be ridiculous; Anno Dom.
Dccccxxxviii.
but the Substance of it is thus; That this year King Athelstan and his Brother
Eadmund Aetheling overcame the Scots in Battle about Brunanburh (now Bromrige
in the County of Northumberland, as Cambden supposes) breaking through their
Works, and killing many of their Noblemen; so that both Armies fighting from
Sunrising to Sunset, there perished a great multitude of Scots, Irish, and
Danes.] For it seems by Florence of Worcester, that another Anlaf, Son to the
King of Dublin, being excited by his Father-in Law, King Constantine, had
sailed up the River Humber with a great Fleet, and landing, King Athelstan and
his Brother Edmund met them with a powerful Army at the place abovementioned;
and if so, it could not be in Northumberland, as Mr. Cambden supposes, but
rather in Yorkshire or Lincolnshire.

But to proceed with our Annals; the Success of this Fight was, That the
English-Saxons toward the latter end of the day utterly routed and put to
flight the Enemies Forces, and pursued them as long as daylight lasted; so
that in that place there fell no less than five Kings, besides seven other
Commanders on Anlaf's side, (not reckoning those of the Naval Forces, and the
Scots Fleet, who were killed without number); so that Anlaf was forced to save
his Life by going on board his Ships with a small Company; as also one Froda by
flight returned into his own Country.] This Froda was (it seems) some Norman
or Danish Commander, who came to assist Anlaf.

Neither could King Constantine brag much of the success of this Fight among
his Relations, for they most of them fell that day in Battle, the King leaving
his Son dead upon the Spot behind him, having received many Wounds. Nor could
King Anlaf himself boast of much better good fortune, for they had all reason
enough to repent their having tried the Valor of these English Princes. And
not only the Scotch but Irish King with great difficulty got home to Difiline
(now Dublin) in Ireland. But King Athelstan and the Prince his Brother returned
home with Honor and Glory into their own Country, leaving their Enemies
Carcasses to be devoured by the Fowls of the Air, and Beasts of the Field;
insomuch that there never was a greater Slaughter in this Island mentioned by
Historians, since the time that the English-Saxons conquered this part of
Britain.

So far you have from the Peterburgh Copy of these Annals; but that in the
Cottonian Library says no more, than that This year King Athelstan and King
Eadmund his Brother led their Army to Brunanburgh, and there fighting with
Anlaf, by the help of Christ obtained the Victory.

But having given you a short Relation of this Battle from the Saxon Annals,
who only relate the Success of this Fight, without giving us any Causes or
other Circumstances of it; I shall both from Ingulph, as also from William of
Malmesbury, give you a more perfect Account of it; which is thus:

Constantine King of the Scots being exasperated by the late Invasion made in
his Kingdom, joined with Anlaf the Son of Sihtric (whom Florence more probably
supposes to have been not this Sihtric, but some other of his name, who was
King of Ireland and the Isles adjacent, and had married the Daughter of King
Constantine) who also drew in Eugenius Prince of Cumberland, with great Forces
which he had raised out of several Countries, to their Assistance; and after
near four years preparation, they invaded England by the River Humber, Anno
Dom. Dccccxxxviii.
and passed through the Country to a place called Brunanburgh, or Bruneford;
Athelstan all this time feigning a Retreat, on purpose that he might obtain
some better advantage against them, as some write; or, as others, that they
^eing fearful to grapple with him; Anlaf perceiving with whom he had to do,
puts off his Royal Habit, and becomes a Spy upon him in the Disguise of a
Musician, attending with an Harp in his Hand at Athelstan's Tent; by which
means he was easily admitted into the King's Presence, diverting them by his
Music, till such time as they having eaten and drank sufficiently, they began
to debate seriously about the Work they had in hand; and he all the while made
what Observation he could; at last, when he had received his Reward, and was
commanded out of the Tent, he scorning to carry the Money away with him, hid it
in the Earth, which a certain Soldier who had formerly served him, taking
notice of, thereby came to know him, and after he was gone, acquainted the King
who he was; but being blamed for not giving him more timely notice, the Soldier
excused it, as having formerly taken a Military Oath in Anlaf's Service;
affirming, that had he betrayed Anlaf, he himself to whom now he was in the
same Relation, might have expected no better Fidelity; but however, he advised
King Athelstan to remove his Tent into another place: This Advice was looked
upon as good and wholesome, and indeed, how seasonable it proved, very shortly
appeared; for a certain Bishop coming to the Camp that night, pitched his Tent
in the same place; when Anlaf, with a design to destroy the King, assaulted
that part of the Camp, being ignorant of what had passed, and easily killed the
Bishop with all his Followers.

Ingulph (who seems more exact than any other Historian in this matter) writes,
That Anlaf, tho he had brought with him an infinite multitude of Danes,
Norwegians, Scots, and Picts, yet either out of Diffidence, or Craft familiar
to his Nation, chose rather by night to surprise his Enemy, than fairly to give
him Battle in the open field, and by daylight; so he fell suddenly upon the
English, and killed a Bishop who was come but the Evening before to the Camp,
which causing a great Clamor and Tumult, the King, 'tho a Mile off, took the
Alarm with his whole Army, who putting themselves into such order as the
Surprise would permit, by break of day came up to the Enemy, where finding them
tired and disordered by their late March for want of sleep, King Athelstan in
Person leading on the West Saxons, fell upon Anlaf himself, whilst Turketul his
Kinsman and Chancellor, (who had the Conduct of the Londoners) and the
Mercians, assaulted Constantine the Scottish King; their Missil Weapons being
quickly spent, they came to handblows, and to fight it out with Sword and
Buckler, where many of them lost their Lives, and the Carcasses of mean persons
lay confusedly together with the slain Bodies of Princes, Death making no
distinction. The Dispute continuing very long and violent by reason the
multitude of Enemies was so great, Turketul took with him some of the Londoners
whom he knew to be most valiant, and a Captain of the Worcestershire-men,
called Singin, one of approved Courage, who being taller than the rest, and of
well compacted Limbs, and the stoutest of all those London Heroes that
accompanied him; then Turketul rushing into the very midst of his Enemies, and
laying vigorously about him, Anno Dom. Dccccxxxviii.
hewed down whole ranks of men on both sides of him, insomuch that he passed
through whole Troops of Orcadians and Picts, bearing a Wood of Arrows on his
Breast Plate, and making his way through whole Companies of Cumbrians and
Scots, he at length reached Constantine himself, whom he dismounted, and would
have taken alive; but the Scots were so concerned for their King, that they had
a very smart Conflict about him, and many of them pressing upon the few English
that followed him, and all of them aiming chiefly at Turketul, he began to
repent of his Rashness, seeing no means either of escaping himself, or getting
off his Prisoner; when on the sudden Captain Singin coming in afresh to his
Rescue, killed King Constantine: And now their King being slain, the Scots were
so discouraged, that they soon retired; and the Report of their Discomfiture
flying about the Army, Anlaf and all his Followers ran away, after an
incredible Slaughter of Danes and Scots upon the place.

So much Ingulph relates, for the greater Honor of this Turketul, the
Chancellor, who was afterward Abbot of the Abbey of Croyland, and his
Predecessor in the Government of that Monastery, where he left a large Memorial
of his Secular Employments. And the same Author farther adds, that besides
Constantine, five other Kings were there slain, twelve Earls, and an infinite
number of Common Soldiers.

But though Ingulph and William of Malmesbury do thus confidently relate
Constantine King of Scots to have been slain in this Battle, yet all the Scotch
Historians, as well as our own Annals asserting the contrary, it is not to be
insisted on as true, and therefore I shall pass it by; yet granting he was not
killed in that Battle, John Fordon and Buchanan do both agree, that he became
not long after dead to the world; for being quite tired out with his late ill
success, he professed himself a Monk amongst the Culdees of St. Andrews, (an
Order of Monks so called) of whom this King became Abbot. But the Scotch
Historians do all confess the greatness of the Victory on the English, and the
great Loss on their own side; acknowledging the Fall of Eugenius King of Deira,
(whom our Historians call King of Cumberland), but will not own King
Constantine to have been so much as present at this fight, but only Malcolme
his Cousin, who upon his retiring into a Monastery, was declared King in his
room: Yet Hector Boethius, and Buchanan, to lessen this Victory as much as they
can, do suppose, (though I do not know from what Authority, since Fordon
mentions no such thing) That the English under King Athelstan being much weaker
in Forces, he was fain to supply that by Cunning and Artifice; and having
strengthened his Army by fresh Supplies, he commanded them at the first Onset
to make as if they fled, and when they found the Enemy had broken their Ranks,
to turn again on their Pursuers; which being punctually observed by King
Athelstan's Army, the Danes and Scots supposing themselves to be Victors,
immediately fell to spoiling the Enemies Camp; and thereupon a Sign being given
by King Athelstan, they fell upon the Enemy, now laden with Prey, and destroyed
them like so many Sheep, insomuch that in this Fight most of the Scotch
Nobility were slain, whilst they rather chose to dye than to survive the
Ignominy of having deserted their Companions.

But this sounds very Romantic, as does also his Relation of the Battle, which
neither agrees with the plain downright way of fighting used in that age, nor
with the Stout and Martial Genius of this King: Anno Dom. Dccccxxxviii.
But let the Manner of gaining the Victory be as it will, they all agree upon
the Effect of it; That King Athelstan (his Enemies being astonished with so
great a loss) took Cumberland and Westmorland from the Scots, and recovered
Northumberland from the Danes.

But since the Monks will scarce let so great a Victory pass without a Miracle,
I cannot forbear relating what Fordun, and the Chronicle ascribed to Abbot
Bromton, have related from a certain Legend of St. John of Beverly; viz. That
King Athelstan going to make War against the Scots, and by the way paying a
Visit to the Tomb of that Saint, there pawned his Knife at the Altar, promising
to redeem it at his return; but when they had thus fought against the Scots, he
begged of God a Sign, whereby it might appear to future Ages, that they were
justly vanquished by the English; and thereupon the King striking a certain
Rock with his Sword near the Castle of Dunbar, he made a Gap in it an Ell deep;
this Miracle is so gross, that even John Fordon himself ridicules it. But it
seems King Athelstan made good his Promise, and upon his return with Victory,
enriched the Church of St. John with great Possessions; and so, I suppose, got
his Knife again.

As for the other Miracle related also by the Monks, of King Athelstan's Sword
being lost out of the Scabbard just when he was ready to fight, and another was
by Miracle put in the place, at the Prayers of Archbishop Odo; which Sword they
pretend was kept in the King's Treasury; it is no less a Wonder than the
former; and one such as these is enough at one time.

This year (according to Florence) King Athelstan founded the Abbey of Middleton
in Dorsetshire, Anno Dom. Dccccxl.
to expiate the Death of his Brother Prince Edwin, whom through false
suggestions he had destroyed, (as you have already heard).

About this time also (according to the Welsh Chronicle) Howel Dha. Prince of
South Wales and Powis, after the death of Edwal Voel, his Cousin, Prince of
North Wales, took upon him the Government of all Wales, the Sons of Edwal being
then in Minority. This Howel made that Excellent Body of Laws that go under his
Name, and which you may find in Sir H. Spelman's first Volume of Councils: This
Prince, for his Discreet and Just Government, not only made himself highly
beloved, but also rendered his Memory very glorious to After-Ages.

But it seems King Athelstan did not long survive this Victory; for (as our
Annals relate) he deceased this year on the 6th Kal. November. just Forty years
after the death of King Alfred his Grandfather, Anno Dom. Dccccxli.
having reigned Fourteen Years and Ten Months:] But there is certainly an Error
in this Account; for either this King must have reigned a year less, or else
the King his Father must have died a year sooner than our Annals allow him; and
perhaps with greater Certainty; for Florence of Worcester places his Death in
Anno Dom. 924.

Nor can we before we finish this King's Life, omit taking notice, That
Bromton's Chronicle and other Modern Writers do place the long Story of the
Danes invading England in this King's Reign; and that one Guy Earl of Warwick
returning home by chance from the Holy Land in the Habit of a Pilgrim, just
when King Athelstan was in great distress for a Champion to fight with one
Colebrand a monstrous Danish Giant, Anno Dom. Dccccxli.
whom the King of the Danes had set up to fight with any Champion the English
King should bring into the field; that Earl Guy accepted this Challenge, and
without being known to any man but the King, fought the Giant near Winchester,
and killing him, the Danes yielded the Victory; whilst Earl Guy privately
retired to a Hermitage near Warwick, and there living a Hermit's life, ended
his days.

But though John Rouse in his Manuscript Treatise de Regibus Anglorum, places
this Action under Anno 926, as soon as ever King Athelstan came to the Crown;
and that Tho. Rudburne in his History of Winchester says, That this Gyant's
Sword being kept in the Treasury of the Abbey of Winchester, was shown in his
time; yet since neither the Saxon Annals, nor any other Ancient Historian,
mention any Invasion of the Danes in this King's Reign, nor any thing of such a
Combat, it ought to be looked upon as a Monkish Tale, only fit for Ballads and
Children.

But since the Monks are very profuse in the Praises of this Prince, I will
give you William of Malmesbury's Character of him; That as for his Person, he
did not exceed the ordinary Stature, being of a slender Body; his Hair (as he
had seen by his Relics) was Yellow; that as for his Natural Temper and
Disposition, he was always kind to God's Servants (i. e. the Monks), for there
was scarce a Monastery in England, but what had been adorned by him with
Buildings, Books, or Relics. And though he was grave and serious amongst his
Nobles, yet was he affable to the Inferior sort, often laying aside the Majesty
of a King, to converse the more freely with ordinary men. This made him as much
admired by his Subjects for his Humility, as he was feared by his Enemies and
Rebels for his Invincible Courage and Constancy.

An Eminent Instance of this was, in that he compelled the Kings of North Wales
(for some time standing out) to meet him at Hereford, and submit themselves to
him: I wish our Author had told us the Year when it was done, since our Annals
have wholly omitted it; for tho Ran. Higden in his Polychronicon has put it
under Anno 937; and also relates from Alfred of Beverly, that this King
restored both Constantine King of Scots, and Hoel King of the Britains, to
their Kingdoms; saying, It was more glorious to make a King, than to be one;
yet I do not see any Authority for it: But this is agreed upon by all, That
Athelstan did about that time enter Wales with a powerful Army, and effected
what no King had ever presumed to think of before; for he imposed a Yearly
Tribute upon those Kings, of Twenty Pounds in Gold, and Three hundred Pounds in
Silver, and Twenty five thousand Head of Cattle. Yet the Laws of Howel Dha
appointed the King of Aberfraw to pay yearly to the King of London, no more
than Sixty six Pounds for a Tribute, besides Hawks and Hounds.

John of Wallingford makes this King the first who reduced all England into one
Monarchy, by his Conquest of Northumberland, Cumberland, and Wales; yet that he
was in his own nature a Lover of Peace; and whatever he had heard from his
Grandfather, or observed in his Father, he put in practice, being Just in his
Judgments, and by a happy conjunction of many Virtues, so beloved by all men,
that to this day Fame, which is wont to be too severe to the Faults of Great
Men, can relate nothing to his prejudice.

William of Malmesbury also gives us a short Account of his Life and Actions
from his very Childhood; wherein he tells us, That this Prince when he was but
a Youth, Anno Dom. Dccccxli.
was highly beloved by his Grandfather King Alfred, insomuch that he made him a
Knight, girding him with a Belt set with Precious Stones, and whereat hung a
Golden-hilted Sword in a Rich Scabbard; after which, he was sent to be bred
under his Uncle Ethelred Earl of Mercia, to learn all those Warlike Exercises
that were befitting a Young Prince.

Nor does he only relate him to have been Valiant, but also competently
Learned, as he had been informed from a certain old Author he had seen, who
compared him to Tully for Eloquence; though (as he rightly observes) the Custom
of that Age might very well dispense with that Talent; and perhaps a too great
Affection to King Athelstan, then living, might excuse this Author's over-large
Commendations.

But this must be acknowledged, that all Europe then spoke highly in his
Praise, and extolled his Valor to the Skies; Neighboring Kings thinking
themselves happy if they could purchase his Friendship either by his Alliance,
or their Presents. Harold King of Norway sent him a Ship whose Stern was
Gilded, and its Sails Purple; and the Ambassadors by whom he sent it, being
Royally received in the City of York, were rewarded with Noble Presents. Hugh
King of the French, sent Anwulf, Son of Baldwin Earl of Flanders, (Grandson to
King Edward by Aethelswine his Daughter) as his Ambassador, to demand his
Sister in Marriage; who when in a Great Assembly of the Nobility at Abingdon he
had declared the Desires of this Royal Woer, besides Noble Presents of Spices,
and Precious Stones, especially Emeralds, such as had never been seen in
England before, and also brave Horses richly equipped, he sent the King a
certain Vessel made of an Onyx, curiously engraven with Vines, and the Figures
of Men; he likewise presented him with the Sword of Constantine the Great; in
the Hilt of which (being all overlaid with Plates of Gold) was set one of the
Nails of Christ's Cross; also with the Lance of Charles the Great, and the
Banner of the Martyr St. Maurice, both which the said King had made use of in a
Battle against the Saracens; and a Gold Crown or Diadem set with Precious
Stones: But that which was more Valuable than all the rest, was a little Piece
of Christ's Cross, and a Bit of his Crown of Thorns, both set in Crystal, and
which the King afterward bestowed upon the Abbey of Malmesbury, with very large
Endowments, (as appears by his Charters above cited) and in whose Church he had
ordered the Bodies of his Cousins Aelwin and Aethelwin, the Sons of his Uncle
Aethelward, to be interred, whom he lost in the Battle against King Anlaf: And
though this King died at Gloucester, yet was his Body carried to Malmesbury,
and there interred with great Pomp.

There is yet to be seen in the said Church (of which only the Nave is now
left) an Image made for him in Stone, though of no Antiquity, as any one may
easily discover, that observes it.

But since this King also made many good Laws, some of them which are the most
remarkable, I shall here set down from Mr. Lambard's Saxon Copy.

These Laws were made at Graetanleage, in a Great Council there held by King
Athelstan; but the Year not being expressed, it is supposed to be about Anno
928.

After a Religious Preface, The first Law is against Thieves, requiring that if
a Thief be taken in the Fact, no man shall spare him, if he be above twenty
years old, Anno Dom. Dccccxli.
and had stole any thing above the value of eight pence: If any one do
contrarily thereunto, he shall pay the value of the Thief's Head, or make
amends for the fault, and yet the Thief himself shall not be spared; who if he
contumaciously make Resistance, or fly for it, shall find no favor. A Thief
cast into Prison, shall there stay forty days, and then after the payment of an
120 shillings be discharged; but his Kindred must give Security for his future
good behavior; after which, if he steal again, they must either pay the value
of his Head, or bring him back to Prison; and in case any one resist, he shall
pay to the King, or to any other whom it concerns, the value of his own Head;
and if any stand by him (i. e. defend him) he shall pay to the King an 120
shillings.

The sixth Law is against Witchcrafts, Enchantments, and such like deeds that
procure Death; that if any one by them be made away, and the thing cannot be
denied, such Practisers shall be put to death; but if they endeavor to purge
themselves, and be cast by the threefold Ordeal, they shall lie in Prison an
hundred and twenty days; which ended, then their Kindred may redeem them by the
Payment of an 120 shillings to the King; and farther pay to the Kindred of the
slain the full valuation of the Party's Head; and then the Criminals shall also
procure Sureties for their good behavior for the time to come.

The same Punishment shall be inflicted on Incendiaries, and such as rescue
Thieves; nay, such as endeavor to rescue them, though no man be wounded in the
attempt, shall pay an 120 shillings to the King.

As for Enchantments, mentioned in this Law, the Saxon word is Liblacum, which
signifies the Art of Conjuration or Witchcraft, yet not all in general, but
that sort of it properly called Fascination, or Enchantment used by certain
Ligatures, Fasciae, or Bands.

The seventh ordains concerning simple Ordeal, That if one accused several
times of Theft, be cast by it, and have no body to be Surety for him, he shall
be sent to Prison, and thence freed by his Kindred, as was before said.

The tenth forbids any Commutation of Goods, unless in the presence of the
King's Reeve, the Priest of the Town, or the Lord of the Soil, or some other
credible person, under the penalty of thirty shillings, and the forfeiture of
the thing changed to the Lord of the Soil; and if any shall bear false witness,
he shall be infamous, and no credit given to him ever after, and also shall
forfeit 30 shillings.

The twelfth confirms the first part of the Law of King Edward the Elder,
decreeing no man's buying any thing out of a Town which exceeds the value of
twenty-pence; and within the Town, unless in the presence of the Portreeve, or
some other credible person; or else in the presence of the King's Sheriff or
Justice in Folcmote.

The fourteenth appoints through all the King's Dominions that one and the same
Money be current, and that it shall not be coined out of some Town; and if any
Minter or Coiner shall embase the Coin, he shall lose his hand; which being cut
off; shall be affixed to the Workhouse: If any be accused of adulterating
Money, and will purge himself, he shall by the Ordeal of hot Iron cleanse his
hands of such wickedness; but if by Ordeal he be cast, then he shall be
punished as now was said. Then follow the places appointed for Public Mints;
Anno Dom. Dccccxli.
viz. at Canterbury there shall be seven Minters or Coiners, whereof four for
the King, two for the Bishop, and one for the Abbot. At Rochester there shall
be three, whereof two for the King, and the third for the Bishop. At London
eight. At Winchester six. At Jews two. At Hastings one. At Chichester one. At
Hampton two. At Werham two. At Excester two. At Salisbury as many, and in every
other great Town one.

That which follows, commands, That for every Plow a man shall keep two
well-furnished Horsemen.

Which shows, that this Law for the Militia's being laid according to the Rate
of Estates, is one of the ancientest of this kind in England, as also the most
general Tax, being laid upon Corn, then the most staple Commodity of the
Kingdom.

The eighteenth forbids Horses to be transported, except such as are sent
abroad as Free Gifts or Presents.

The twentieth Law enacts, That if any one absent himself from Folcmote thrice,
he shall be punished as contumacious against the King, if so be that the
holding of the Assembly was declared a seven-night before; in such case if he
refuse to do Right, and pays not his Mulct to the King, the ancient men of the
Country are to go and seize upon all that he has, and take Security for his
appearance.

The twenty second, in confirmation of a former Law, requires, that no person
receive another man's Man (as this Law words it) into his Family, without leave
first obtained of his Master; he that does otherwise, shall restore the man,
and pay the Mulct of Contumacy against the King; and no man is to put away his
men accused of any Crime, till they have first made satisfaction.

By this it appears how ancient in this Nation the Custom is of calling a
Servant by the word used for the whole Species of Mankind, a Phrase in use as
well with the Romans and others more ancient, as with modern people.

The twenty fourth is concerning Traffic; and in confirmation of former Laws
ordains, That if a man buy any thing with witness, which another man challenges
for his own, the Seller shall make it good, and secure the bargain, whether he
be Bond or Free: But on the Lord's day no Market shall be held, under penalty
or forfeiture of the Wares, and a Mulct of 30 shillings besides.

The next thing that follows at the end of these Laws, relating to the Civil
State, is the Valuation of men's Heads, which we have often heard mentioned by
these Laws, but never yet to what it particularly amounted: First then, says
the Text, The valuation of the King's Head, according to the English Common
Laws, is thirty thousand Thrymses, whereof fifteen thousand are properly the
value of his Head, the rest being due to the Kingdom; so that the latter
fifteen belonged to the Nation, the former to his Kindred. An Archbishop's and
Earl's Weregild (as the Saxons called the valuation of his Head) is fifteen
thousand Thrymses: A Bishop's and Ealdorman's eight thousand. A General's of an
Army, or an High Marshal's four thousand Thrymses. The valuation of a Spiritual
Thane or Priest, as also of a Temporal Thane, was two thousand Thrymses. That
of a Countreyman (or C^orl) by the Danish Law was 267 Thrymses. But if a
Welshman grow so rich as to maintain a Family, have Land, and pay a yearly Rent
to the King, Anno Dom. Dccccxli.
he shall be valued at 120 shillings; if he possess half a Hide of Land, at 80
shillings: If he have no Land, yet if he be a Freeman, the value of his Head
shall be seventy shillings. If a Ceorl or Countreyman be so wealthy as to
possess five Hides of Land, in case he be killed, the price or value of his
Life shall be two thousand Thrymses; but if he come to have a Corslet, an
Helmet and a Gilt Sword, tho he have no Land, he shall be accounted a
Sithcundmon; and if his Children or Grandchildren shall grow so rich as to
possess five Hides of Land, all their Posterity shall be reckoned as so many
Sithcundmen, and be valued at two thousand Thrymses. The Mercians value a
Countreyman at two hundred shillings, a Thane at twelve hundred. They are wont
to equal the single value of the King's Head with six thousand Thanes, that is,
thirty thousand Sceats, for so much is the value of the King's Head, and as
much more must be paid as a recompense for his death; the value of his Head
belongs to his Kindred, and the compensation of his Death to the people. He
that is valued at 1200 shillings, his Oath shall be of the same esteem as those
of six Countrymen; for where such an one is slain, six Countrymen would
satisfy over and above for the value; therefore the value of him and all them
shall be the same. By the English Law the Oaths of a Priest and a Thane are of
the like esteem.

By these valuations of Heads from the highest to the lowest Rank, we may
perceive that in those Ancient Times Punishments consisted rather in Mulcts
than in Blood; contrary to our present Custom, whereby small Offenses in
comparison (especially if reiterated) are become Capital; which whence it has
proceeded, whether from this consideration, that Crimes in latter Ages do more
abound, or from other reasons, is not evident. As for the Sithcundmon mentioned
in this Law, Mr. Somner derives this word from Sith or Gethysa, Vid. Somn.
Gloss.
an Equal or Companion, and cund kind, and Mon man; so that he seems to have
been one equal to a Thane.

King EDMUND.
NOT long after King Athelstan's Decease, Prince Edmund his Brother succeeded
him at the Age of Eighteen Years, and reigned Six Years and an half.

This year (according to the Annals) King Edmund, Anno Dom. Dccccxlii.
Lord of the English, and the Protector of his Subjects, invaded Mercia on that
side where the River Humber and the This way we know not.
Way of the White Fountain divide the Country; he there took in five Cities
(viz.) Ligoracester (now Leicester), Lindcolne (now Lincoln), and Snotingaham,
Stanford, and Deorby* which were all before under the power of the Danes, being
forced to submit to them, having been long under their Tyrannical Yoke.

This seems very strange, for most of those places are mentioned to have been
before recovered from the Danes by King Edward his Father; and how they could
be conquered again in the time of so great a Warrier as King Athelstan was, I
could not understand, were it not explained by other Authors.

The same year King Aeadmund received King Anlaf to Baptism, and some time
after he likewise received King Reginald at his Confirmation. This year also
King Anlaf deceased, and Richard the Elder took upon him the Dukedom (of
Normandy) and governed it 52 years.

But R. Hoveden and Mat. Westminster (from what Authority I know not) relate,
That this Anlaf the Dane, abovementioned, and Norwegian by Extract, who had
been in the time of King Athelstan expelled the Kingdom of Northumberland,
about this time landed in Yorkshire with a great Fleet, resolving to subdue the
whole Kingdom of England; and marching Southward besieged Northampton; but not
succeeding there, he marched back to Tamworth, where having wasted the Country
round about, came at last to Legacester (now Westchester); which when King
Edmund heard of, he marched with a powerful Army, and met him at that City, and
having fought with him most part of the day, the two Archbishop of Canterbury
and York, seeing the great Danger and Hazard the Kingdom was then in, made an
Agreement betwixt the two Kings, That Anlaf should possess that part of England
lying North of Watlingstreet, and King Edmund that part which lay South of it,
and that the Survivor of them should quietly enjoy the whole Kingdom; and
thereupon Anlaf married Alditha the Daughter of Earl Orme, by whose Counsel and
Assistance he obtained the late Victory. But William of Malmesbury tells this
Story somewhat different; viz. That about this time the Northumbers rebelling,
recalled this Anlaf out of Ireland, whom they made their King, but whom
nevertheless King Edmund conquered, and at last expelled the Kingdom, and so
once again added Northumberland to his own Dominions; which shows the great
uncertainty of the History of these times.

Anno Dom. Dccccxlii.
But R. Hoveden and Mat. Westminster do further add, That when this Anlaf had
not long after his Marriage spoiled and burned the Church of St. Balther, and
had burnt Tiningaham; by the just Judgment of God, he miserably ended his Life,
but without telling us by what means.

And they both further relate, That Anlaf the Son of Sihtric after this reigned
again over the Northumbers, and was this year expelled that Kingdom by King
Edmund. But it seems R. Hoveden and Mat. Westminster make this latter Anlaf a
quite different person from the former, who is supposed to have reigned in
Ireland; whereas this was the Son of Sihtric late King of Northumberland, and
whom we shall meet with again more than once in the following History. But John
of Walingford's Chronicle, makes this King, whom he calls Olaf, a Norwegian,
whom the Northumbers had called in, and bestowed upon him the Title of King,
and under him rebelled against K. Edmund. As for this Reginald her mentioned in
our Annals, I suppose he is the same whom H. Huntington calls King of York,
because he had conquered the Country: But tho the History of these
Transactions are very short and obscure, yet that which has been already
related from these Authors, will serve to explain what would have been
otherwise in the dark; viz. how the Cities and Towns abovementioned now came
to be recovered from the Danes, as having been taken by their King Anlaf
aforesaid.

Anno Dom. Dccccxliii.
This year Queen Aelgiva was brought to Bed of Prince Edgar (afterward King) as
Florence relates: Yet she lived not long after, but died the year following,
according to Ethelward's Chronicle.

Anno Dom. Dccccxliv.
King Edmund reduced all the Country of Northumberland under his own Dominion,
expelling thence the two Kings, Anlaf the Son of Sihtric, and Reginald the Son
of Guthferth.

But Ethelwerd relates this action to have been done by this King's
Lieutenants; viz. Bishop Wulstan, and the Ealdorman of Mercia, whose Name he
does not give us, only that these two expelled certain Deserters, viz. Reginald
and Anlaf out of the City of York, and reduced it wholly under this King's
Power.

John of Wallingford also makes this Anlaf to be the King's Nephew, and
different from Anlaf the Norwegian.

Anno Dom. Dccccxlv.
King Eadmund subdued the whole Country of Cumberland, and gave it to Malcolme
King of Scots, upon condition that he should assist him in his Wars both by Sea
and Land.

For the Reader is to observe, that hitherto the Britains, though much
disturbed by their Neighbors (the Picts, Scots, and English), had ever since
the coming in of the Saxons still there continued a distinct Principality, and
after several of them had been wearied out, they retired into North Wales, and
there erected the Colony of Straetcluyd, as we formerly said; though the
History and Succession of these Kings are wholly lost, unless it be such
scattered Remains as we have given you in the former Book. But Mat. Westminster
(though under the next year) adds that which is very unlikely to be true, that
King Edmund conquered this Country by the Assistance of Lewellyn Prince of
Wales, and put out the Eyes of the two Sons of Dunmaile King of that Province;
though what he adds further, appears somewhat more probable, That he granted it
to the King of Scots upon this condition, viz. To defend the North-parts of
England from the Invasion of Enemies both by Sea and Land. To which Bromton's
Chronicle adds likewise, Anno Dom. Dccccxlvi.
That he was also to attend the King of England at several Great Feasts in the
year, when he held his Common Council; and that the King of Scots had for that
end several Houses assigned him to lie at by the way.

Also this year Mat. Westminster relates, that King Edmund gave one of his
Royal Towns, then called Beadricesworth, with diverse other Lands, to build a
Church and Monastery, in Memory of St. Edmund the Martyr, whose Body was there
enshrined.

This year likewise (as Florence relates) King Edmund sent Ambassadors to
Prince Hugh of France, for the Restitution of King Lewis; whereupon the said
Prince held a Solemn Council with all the Chief Men of the Kingdom concerning
it: But not long after,

King Edmund deceased at the Feast of St. Augustine; having held the Kingdom Six
Years and an half.

But the Laudean or Peterburgh Copy of these Annals, as also Ethelwerd's
Chronicle, place the Death of this King Anno Dom. 948; which without doubt is
the truest Account.

So that he died in the very Flower of his Age, being not yet Five and twenty
years old: But we shall give you the manner of his Death, from William of
Malmesbury, as well as from other Authors, since he met with such an End, the
like to which I have not read of any other Prince, taking all the Circumstances
together: And thus we find it: He having made a Great Entertainment at a place
called Pucklekirk, upon the Holiday of St. Augustine Archbishop of Canterbury,
for all his Nobility and Chief Men, and there spying toward the end of Dinner
a certain Notorious Thief called Leof, sitting at the Table, whom he had before
banished, commanded Leon his Sewer to lay hold on him: But the Thief not only
resisted him, but was also like to have killed the Sewer: Whereupon the King
(leaping from the Table, and) going to rescue him out of the Villain's hands,
and having now laid hold on him, and thrown him on the ground, he twisted his
hands in his hair; upon which the Thief pulling out a Dagger, stabbed the King
(who lay upon him) into the Breast, so that he immediately expired; but the
King's Servants presently coming in, soon cut the Villain to pieces; though
some of them were first wounded by him. The King's Body was thereupon carried
to Glastenbury, and there buried; and the Town wherein he was killed was
bestowed on the same Monastery to sing Masses for his Soul. To this Place the
Prince (as well as his Brother) was a great Benefactor; as appears by his
recited Charter in William of Malmesbury, whereby he confers diverse large
Privileges upon that Abbey, of which St. Dunstan was then the Abbot: And it is
also to be observed, that He there styles himself in the beginning of his
Charter, Edmund, King of the English, and Governor and Ruler of the other
Nations round about; and says, That with the Advice, and by the Consent of his
Chief Men, and for the Remission of his Sins, He made that Grant to the Church
of St. Mary at Glastenbury. This Charter bore date Anno 944. in Letters of
Gold, and was written at the end of a Book of Gospels which he had given to the
same Church, most curiously bound. So that it is no wonder if he had the good
words of the Monks; though he might also very well deserve them; yet this last
Action speaks him to have been extremely transported with Passion, thus to
debase the Majesty of a King, in going about to seize a common Malefactor with
his own hands; Anno Dom. Dccccxlvi.
and indeed he paid too dear for thus acting below his Character.

This King made diverse good Laws; which since the Title does not recite in what
year they were made, I have referred to this place; some of which I shall here
give you, translated from the Latin Copies in Abbot Bromton's Chronicle, as
well as from Mr. Lambard's Collection.

In the Preface of which we are told, That at the solemn Feast of Easter the
King had held a Great Council at London, as well of Ecclesiastics as Laics,
where were present Odo and Wulstan, Archbishops, with many other Bishops, to
consult for the good of their own Souls, and of those that were committed to
their Care and Government.

At which Synod or Council were enacted several Laws; viz. but they being six
in number, of mere Ecclesiastical Concernment, as for paying Tithes, and
against Fornication with Nuns, and Perjury, I omit them.

Then Follow, in Bromton's Copy, seven other Constitutions of Civil
Concernment, said to have been made by the King, his Bishops, and Wise Men, at
Cullington, not extant in the Saxon Edition.

The first of these requires an Oath of Fidelity to be taken by all to King
Edmund, in like manner as a man ought to bear Faith to his Lord, without any
Controversy or Sedition, both in public and private; to love whom the King
should love, and to hate whom he should hate; and before the Oath be given,
that no man should conceal a Crime in his Brother or Neighbor, more than in a
Stranger.

The second, concerning the apprehension of Thieves, enjoins, that if it be
known for certain where a Thief is, the Twelfhind and Twihind men (i. e. the
former worth Twelve hundred, and the latter Two hundred Shillings of Estate)
should combine together, and take him either alive or dead; but in case any man
take up a mortal Feud against another for so doing, he is to be esteemed as the
Enemy of the King, and all his Friends: And if any refuse to assist in his
apprehension, he shall forfeit to the King an 120 shillings, and to the Hundred
30 shillings.

The fourth enjoins, That if several Thieves do steal, the eldest of them shall
be hanged, and each of the rest be whipped thrice, and for an Example have his
little finger cut off.

This I take notice of, because it is the first Law whereby Thieves are
expressly ordered to be hanged, without being admitted to pay their Weregild, or
Price of their Heads.

The fifth and sixth being against buying and receiving Strangers Cattle, I
pass by.

The seventh enjoins, that every Person make his Servants, and all that live
within his Peace ( i. e. his District), and on his Lands, to give Security; and
also that all others of Ill Fame who lie under Accusations, should have
Security given for them; and what Officer, Thane, Ealdorman, or Countreyman
soever he be, that refuses to do according thereunto, shall forfeit 120
shillings, and further be deemed worthy of such Punishments as have been before
mentioned.

After these follow seven other of King Edmund's Laws, found both in Bromton
and Lambard's Copies; before which also we find a Preface, Wherein the King
signifies to all Subjects both old and young, that he had most studiously
enquired in a Solemn Assembly of Ecclesiastics and Laics, Anno Dom. Dccccxlvi.
by what means the Christian Life might best be maintained; and that it seemed
most convenient to them all, that he should cherish and procure Love and mutual
Friendship through all his Dominions; for they were much troubled at the unjust
Divisions and Contentions among them; therefore the King and they did now
ordain.

First, That if hereafter one man kill another, he alone should bear the Deadly
Feud or Enmity of the Kindred of the Party slain, unless within Twelve Months
by the assistance of his own Kindred, he should pay the Weregild, or value of
the slain man's head, of what condition soever he was; and then they should not
be taken for Enemies; in the mean time they shall not relieve him, nor have
peace with him, and if they do or have, they shall forfeit all their Estate to
the King; and he that shall kill any man, shall be taken as an Enemy by all the
Kindred of the slain, and they may maintain Deadly Feud against him; and if any
shall revenge himself upon, or prosecute any other of his Kindred besides the
Manslayer himself, he shall forfeit all he has, and be taken as an Enemy both
by the King and all that love him.

Which Law was made, because before this, if one man killed another, the
Kindred of the slain had a Mortal Feud, and revenged his Death upon any of the
Relations of the Murderer; as they do among the Indians even to this day.

The second denounces, That if a man fly to a Church, or to the King's Town,
and there any one set upon him, or do him harm, he shall be punished in the
same manner.

By the third, the King expressly forbids, that any Fyhtwite, or Manbote (that
is, any Fine for fighting or killing) be remitted.

By the fourth, the King op^nly declares, that his House shall afford no
shelter to him that has shed blood, except he have first made satisfaction to
God, and the Kindred of the Party slain, and done whatsoever was enjoined him
by the Bishop in whose Diocese the Fact was committed.

The sixth enjoins, That he that breaks the Peace, and sets upon a man in his
own house, shall forfeit all he has, and his Life be at the Kings's Mercy.

The seventh and last of these Laws is also concerning Enmities or Deadly
Feuds; declaring that it is the Duty of all Wise Men to suppress them, and
prescribing the way and means of doing it. As

First, That an Indifferent Friend be sent before to the Kindred of him that is
slain, to signify to them, that he that killed him will make all due
satisfaction; upon which the Manslayer shall be delivered into his hands, that
he may safely appear, and give Caution for the Payment of the value of the dead
man's head; which as soon as he has done, the King's Peace is next to be made
betwixt them: Then after the end of one and twenty days, he shall pay Halsfage
(according to Bromton's Copy, or as the Saxon Text has it, Healfange) that is
(as Mr. Lambard interprets it) that which was paid in Commutation for the
Punishment of hanging by the Neck, to the King or Lord. The rest, as being
tedious, I omit; for I think sufficient to let the Reader understand the nature
of these Deadly Feuds, or Family Quarrels, among the English who were derived
from the Ancient Saxons, Germans, and other barbarous Northern Nations, Anno
Dom. Dccccxlvi.
that commonly maintained private Quarrels by their whole Kindred, thereby
rendering their Feuds as it were Hereditary. So Tacitus writes concerning the
Germans, that they were forced to take up the Quarrels and Friendships of their
Fathers and Kinsmen.

Besides these Laws beforementioned, there is some other Constitutions
ascribed to the same King Edmund, concerning the Manner and Rites of Marriage;
and though found by Sir H. Spelman in Saxon (in an Ancient Book belonging to
Corpus Christi College in Cambridge) tacked to the Laws of King Alfred; yet
Col. 861.
Bromton reckons them amongst the Laws of King Edmund, and I think they ought
rather to be supposed his: They are to this effect; That where a man resolves
to marry a Woman with her Friends Consent, the Bridegroom shall give Caution or
Security by his Friends, not only to marry her, but also to fulfill the
Covenants made between them, and shall also engage to maintain her. After that,
the Bridegroom is to declare what he will give his Bride, besides that which
she formerly made choice of with his good liking, if she survive him. In case
they so agree, it provides, that after his Decease she shall have the one half
of all his Estate; and if they have a Child betwixt them, the whole, till such
time as ^he marry again. Then when they have agreed on all things, the Kindred
of the Bride shall contract her to him, and engage for her Honesty; and at the
same time they shall give Caution for the Celebration of the Marriage. The rest
being not very material, I omit; and have only set down these, to let the
Reader see the Antiquity of Covenants before Marriage, and of Bonds for the
performance of them; as also of Jointures, the Thirds of the Estate not being
then settled by Law, as Dower, by what I can find.

Having now finished the Reign of King Edmund, I have no more to observe, but
that though he left two Sons by the Queen his Wife, ( viz. Edwi and Edgar), yet
notwithstanding his Brother Edred succeeded to him as Next Heir, (for so
Ethelwerd, as well as Florence of Worcester, styles him.

King EDRED.
THIS year (according to our Annals) Eadred Aetheling after his Brother's
Decease was made King, Anno Dom. Dccccxlvi.
and presently reduced all Northumberland under his Obedience: Upon which the
Scots also swore to perform whatever he would require of them.

But the Manuscript Life of St Dunstan, written by a Monk of those times, and
which is now in the Cottonian Library, Cleop. D. 7.
is much more particular concerning this King's Succession; saying, That King
Edmund being slain, Eadred took the Kingdom, succeeding to his Brother as his
Heir. Which is also confirmed by Florence of Worcester, who says, That Edred
being Next Heir to his Brother, succeeded him: And Ethelwerd gives us the
reason of it more fully, That he succeeded him quippe ejus Haeres, because he
was Next Heir. And Simeon of Durham further adds, That this King was Crowned at
Kingston, by Odo Archbishop of Canterbury.

H. Huntington and Mat. Westminster give us the Particulars of this War against
the Northumbers and Scots more at large; viz. That he subdued the Northumbrians
with a powerful Army, they refusing to submit to his Dominion; and that the
Scots thereupon being afraid, submitted themselves to him without any War at
all; and that the King of the Scots swore Fidelity to him.

It seems here by Ingulph, that this Submission of the Northumbers was wrought
by the means of Turketule, Chancellor to King Edred, and afterward Abbot of
Croyland, who was now sent Ambassador to the Northumbers, to reduce them to
their Duty; which he upon his Arrival at York performed with that Prudence and
Diligence, that he brought back the Archbishop and all the People of that City
to their former Allegiance.

But R. Hoveden places the Oath taken by the Northumbrians, Anno Dom.
Dccccxlvii.
under this year; and that Wulstan Archbishop of York, and all the Northumbrian
Lords, swore Fealty to King Edred, in a Town called Tadencliff, though they did
not long observe it.

Under this year most of the Welsh Chronicles place the death of that Worthy
Prince Howel Dha; and say, That he left his four Sons, Owen, Anno Dom.
Dccccxlviii.
Run, Roderic, and Edwin, his Heirs of all his Territories in South Wales: But
as for North Wales, it returned to the two Sons of Edwal Voel, called Jevaf and
Jago, (because Meyric their Elder Brother was not thought fit to govern):
These, as being of the Elder House, would have had the Supreme Government of
all Wales, which, being denied them by the Sons of Howel, caused great and long
Wars between them.

Yet nothwithstanding, other of the Welsh Chronicles place the death of Howel
Dha much later, for they make him Contemporary with our King Edgar, as shall be
shown when we come to the History of his Reign in the next Book.

Anno Dom. Dccccxlviii.
Also the same year (according to R. Hoveden) King Edred being much provoked by
the Treachery of the Northumbers, laid all Northumberland waste; in which
devastation the Monastery of Ripun which had been built by Bishop Wilfrid, was
burnt: But our Annals defer this Rebellion of the Northumbers to the year
following; When Anlaf again returned into the Country of the Northumbers. Anno
Dom. Dccccxlix.


This is also confirmed by Florence of Worcester, and H. Huntington; viz. That
King Edred being returned into the Southern parts of the Kingdom, Anlaf who had
been formerly expelled the Kingdom of Northumberland, re^urned thither with a
great Navy, and being received with joy by the people, was again restored to
his Kingdom.

Anno Dom. Dccccl.
About this time, Jago and Jevaf, Princes of North Wales, entered South Wales
with a great and powerful Army, against whom came over the Eldest Son of Howel
with his Brethren, and fought a Battle at the Hills of Carne, where Jevaf and
Jago obtained the Victory. And the year following, the same Princes twice
invaded South Wales, and spoiled Dyvet, and slew Dunwallon, Lord thereof. And,
to place these Welsh Wars together, in the year 952. the said Sons of Howel Dha
gathered their Forces together against Jevaf and Jago, and entered their
Country as far as the River Co^^y; where they fought a cruel bloody Battle, at
a place called Gwrhustu, or Llanrwst, Multitudes being slain on both sides, as
Edwin the Son of Howel Dha, with other Welsh Princes; and the Sons of Howel
being vanquished, Jevaf and Jago pursued them as far as Curdigan, destroying
their Country with Fire and Sword.

Anno Dom. Dccccli.
This year (according to the Annals), Aelfeag Bishop of Winchester deceased at
the Feast of St. Gregory.

Anno Dom. Dcccclii.
The Northumbers again expelled King Anlaf, and set up Eric the Son of Harold
for their King.

This is the same with Eric mentioned by Hoveden, who yet did not immediately
enter upon the Throne (as that Author supposes) till Anlaf had been expelled;
but Florence of Worcester and the Chronicle of Mailrosse, place the expulsion
of Anlaf, and the setting up of Eric, two years sooner, and perhaps with better
reason: For the same year, according to Hoveden, King Edred made Wulstan
Archbishop of York, close Prisoner at Witharbirig, because he had been often
accused to him upon diverse accounts; Yet Will. Malmesbury tells us expressly, it
was for favoring or conniving at his Countrymen in their late Rebellion. But
after he had kept him a long time in Prison, he thought fit to pardon him, out
of reverence to his Function: And the year following, the Chronicle of
Mailrosse relates, that Archbishop Wulstan being set free, was restored to his
Episcopal Function at Doncacester. But this is certain, King Edred could not
have done this till after Eric had been driven out (as this Author more truly
reckons), tho our Annals do it the next year; saying, That

Anno Dom. Dccccliv.
The Northumbers drove out King Eric, and King Eadred again possessed himself
of that Kingdom.] With which also H. Huntington agrees, tho he places it a year
sooner, relating, That then the Northumbers being weary of the Government of
this Eric, did as easily cast him off, as they had before lightly received him;
and calling in Edred, they again placed him on the Throne; though this does not
accord with William of Malmesbury his Account, that King Edred expelled Eric by
force, and wasted all that Kingdom with fire and sword. After which the
Northumbrians being wholly subdued, were no more governed by Kings but Earls; a
Catalogue of which Roger Hoveden has there given us, as far as the Conquest.

King Edred having been (as Malmesbury informs us) long tormented with frequent
Convulsions in several parts of his Body, Anno Dom. Dcccclv.
being admonished by Archbishop Dunstan of his approaching death, did not only
bear that affliction with Patience, but spending his time in acts of Devotion,
made his Palace a School of all Virtues, and being at length consumed by a
tedious long sickness, he (according to the Annals) departed this life at the
Feast of St. Clement, in the very flower of his Age, to the great grief of all
his Subjects, after having Reigned Nine Years and an half.

But the Manuscript life of St. Dunstan (already cited) is much more particular
as to the Disease he died of, viz. that not being able to swallow his Meat, he
could only eat Broth, so that being wasted away, he died.

This Relation of King Edred's not being able to swallow his Meat, gave
occasion to John of Wallingford absurdly to tell us in his Chronicle (not long
since Printed) that King Edred having his Teeth fallen out by reason of Old
Age, could not Chew his Meat, Edit. Oxon. 1691.
and the Broths they made for him were not sufficient to keep him alive, and so
he died of Hunger.

But this is altogether as true as the story that follows, not only in this
Author, but in most other Monkish Writers of the History of those times (from
the Relation of the above cited Author of St. Dunstan's Life) that St. Dunstan
hearing how dangerously Ill the King was, and making haste to Visit him before
he died, as he rode on the way thither, there came a Voice from Heaven, which
cried aloud to him, King Edred is now dead; at which all present being
astonished, the poor Horse, upon which St. Dunstan was then Mounted,
immediately fell down dead. But William of Malmesbury, though he mentions this
story of the Voice, yet is so wise as to pass by the death of the Horse, being
sensible it was a Pill too large to be easily swallowed.

As for the Character of this King, the Monkish Writers of those times, give
him that of a most Virtuous and Pious Prince; and as to his Valor, William of
Malmesbury says, he was not inferior in Magnanimity to either of his Brothers;
he was also the first King of England who (as I can find) styled himself Rex
Magnae Britanniae, King of Great Britain, in a Charter to the Abbey of Croyland
recited by Ingulphus; as also in another Charter to the Abbey of Reculver; in
Monast. Anglic. he styles himself Totius Albionis Monarchus, Vol. 1.
i. e. Monarch of all England; In which Style he was also followed by his
Nephew King Edgar; from whence we may observe, That King James was not the
first who took upon him the Title of King of Great Britain, though as being
also King of Scotland, he did much better deserve it than the former.

But as for King Edred, he could not fail of the good will of the Monks, since
the same Manuscript Author of St. Dunstan's Life relates, That he put such
great confidence in that Holy Abbot, that he committed the chief Muniments and
Treasures of his Kingdom to his Care, to be kept at his Abbey of Glastenbury;
and that as the King lay on his Deathbed, Anno Dom. Dcccclv.
St. Dunstan was then carrying them back to him to be disposed of as he should
think fit, but he just before received the News of his death, as you have
already heard.

Nor did this King die without Issue (as many believe) for Mr. Speed proves the
contrary from certain ancient Charters Cited by him at the end of this King's
Life; wherein you will find that his Two Sons Elfrid and Bertfrid were
Witnesses to them, tho they did not Succeed their Father, but Edwi Son to his
Elder Brother Edmund.

King EDWI.
IMmediately after King Edmund's decease, our Annals tell us, Anno Dom. Dcccclv.
Edwig, Son to the late King Edmund and Elgiva, began his Reign; and he banished
St. Dunstan out of England.] This King, as all our Historians agree, was
crowned at Kingston by Odo Archbishop of Canterbury, but William of Malmesbury
gives us the cause of this Disgrace of St. Dunstan, to this effect: That this
King being a Youth of great Beauty, and amorous above his years, was mightily
in love with a young Lady, his near Kinswoman, whom he fain would have married,
but the Bishops and Nobles of his Kingdom were utterly averse to it, not only
because of the nearness of their Relation, but because she had none of the best
Reputation, as to her Chastity.

But though William of Malmesbury gives us all the rest of this Story, yet I
shall rather choose to take it from the In Bib. Cotton. Cleop. B. 13.
Manus^ript Life of St. Dunstan, who lived about the same time, and out of
which that Author borrowed it; and it is thus: That on the very day, that by
the common Election of all the chief Men of England, Edwig was anointed King;
after the Coronation-Dinner was over, he and the chief Bishops and Nobility
being retired into a private Room, there treating of the Great Affairs of the
Kingdom, the King (perhaps at that Critical Juncture being weary of their
company) stole into the Apartment of this Beautiful Lady, to enjoy some
pleasurable moments with her; which the Nobility hearing of, they highly
resented it, but none would adventure to bring him back; only Abbot Dunstan,
and a Bishop whose Name was Cynesius, the King's Cousin, went boldly into the
Chamber, where they found him with his Crown off his head, lying between the
Mother of this Lady, and her Daughter, upon which they not only reproved him,
but putting on his Crown again, and taking him by the hand, they pulled him
away from them, and carried him back by force into the Room where his Nobles
were; but Athelgiva (for it seems so was this Lady sometimes called) being
highly provoked at this Affront, did not fail to exasperate the King against
Dunstan; so that in revenge he banished him the Kingdom; who thereupon (as R.
Hoveden relates) retired to a Monastery in Flanders.

Nor did the King's Resentments stop here, but out of hatred to Dunstan, he not
only turned the Monks out of Glastenbury, but out of diverse of the greatest
Monasteries in England; where also, De Gest. Po^^. Lib. 1.
as William of Malmesbury words it, his own Abbey was turned into a Stable for
Clerks; that is, Secular Chanons were put in their places, not only there, but
in all other Abbeys where the Monks were expelled.

But tho the King's violence to Abbot Dunstan, and the Monks, is by no means to
be justified, yet this rudeness to the King, and pressing upon his privacy, and
carrying him by force out of the Room from his Mistress, or Wife, (for some
Historians tell us that he had been privately married to her) can as little be
excused: So that no wonder if a young King, Anno Dom. Dcccclv.
and an enraged Woman, did all they could to revenge so great an Affront.

Yet it seems by the same Author of St. Dunstan's Life, that Archbishop Odo was
severely revenged on this Lady; for he not only sent Armed men, to take her out
of the Court by force, but also branded her with a hot Iron on the Cheeks, to
take off the King's Affections from her, and then caused her to be sent into
Ireland; but whether this was done by the Great Council of the Kingdom, or by
his own Authority, I do not find: But it seems, upon her return thence again,
being on her way to the King, the said Archbishop's Officers met her, and cut
her Hamstrings; so that not being able to stir, she is supposed to have died
not long after, of this cruel Treatment. But however, this did not happen
immediately, but some time after; for this Year all the People North of Humber,
together with the Mercians, as far as the River Thames, rose against King Edwi,
with an intention to expel him the Kingdom, for his violence done to the Monks;
so that, as Vid. Ang. Sacra. Vol. 1.
Osborne in the Life of Dunstan relates, he was forced to fly with his
Adulteress to the City of Gloucester: But Florence of Worcester, and Simeon of
Durham, are more particular in this Relation, saying, that the Mercians and
Northumbrians hating and despising King Edwi for his Evil Government, deserted
him, and having deposed him, they elected his Brother Prince Edgar King over
them; which it seems was also confirmed by the Common Council of the Kingdom;
for the above cited Author of the Life of St. Dunstan, says it was done by the
Common Consent of all the Wise men of the Kingdom. So that Edwi having no more
left him than the Kingdom of the West Saxons for his share, the River Thames
was made the Boundary between their two Kingdoms.

Henry de Knighton, out of some Ancient Chronicles then preserved in the Abbey
of Legcester, here farther relates, That after the Expulsion of King Edwi for
his Evil Life, and the Enormous Deeds which he committed against the Church,
the Throne was vacant for above a year, and many Murders and Robberies, and
other Mischiefs were committed in the Kingdom, for want of Government, till
some Good men of the Clergy and Laity, seeking God by frequent Prayers, heard
at last a Voice from Heaven, commanding them to Crown Prince Edgar (being yet a
Youth) their King, which they immediately obeyed.

But this sounds like a Monkish Legend, only to enhance the Excellency of King
Edgar's Reign, which with them must owe its Original to no less an Author than
Heaven it self; but no other Historians mention any such thing, but agree that
King Edwi was never deprived of more than the Kingdoms of Mercia and
Northumberland, and there was no Vacancy of the Throne, that Division being
made presently upon the aforesaid Defection of the People of these Kingdoms,
and immediately confirmed by an Act of the Witena Gemote, as has been already
related.

But however it happened, King Edwi was forced to rest contented with this
unequal division, since not having the good will of his Subjects, it was well
he could keep what he had. From whence we may observe, how dangerous a thing it
was, for Princes to provoke the Ruling Part of the Priests and People of those
times, who could so easily turn the hearts of their Subjects against them.

Our Annals, though they are very short in this Relation, yet confirm the
deposing of King Edwi; viz. That this Year Edgar Atheling took upon him the
Kingdom of the Mercians; and also adds, That not long before, Wulstan,
Archbishop of York, deceased.

Although the printed Copy of the Saxon Annals place the Death of King Edwi
under the year 957, Anno Dom. Dcccclix.
yet it appears by the Manuscript Laudean Copy of these Annals, as also by
Florence of Worcester, that he died not till this very year; for we cannot
otherwise make up the space of near four years, which all our Historians allow
to this King's Reign: Of whom they give us this Character, That though he was
extraordinary Handsome, yet he abused that Comeliness of his Person by his
excessive Lust; and yet we do not hear of above one Mistress he kept, and that
too whom he was either married to, or else lived withal like a Wife. But it is
no wonder if he have a very bad Character of them, when the Monks, his Enemies,
are the only persons that have given it to us: But H. Huntington, who was a
Secular Priest, and no Monk, is more moderate, by telling us that this King did
not uncommendably hold the Scepter. But when in the beginning of his Reign his
Kingdom began to flourish, an Untimely Death put a stop to those happy
Expectations from him. His Body was buried at Winchester, with his Uncle's.

And with this King's Reign I shall also put a Period to this Book, lest it
should swell beyond a due proportion.

The End of the Fifth Book.
THE General History OF BRITAIN, NOW CALLED ENGLAND: As well Ecclesiastical, as
Civil. BOOK VI. Containing the General History of England from the Reign of
King EDGAR, to the Death of King HAROLD; being One hundred and seventeen Years.
King EDGAR.
I Have begun this Period with this Prince's Reign; for though it does not
exactly divide the Space of Time between King Egbert and the coming in of King
William, surnamed the Conqueror, into two equal parts, yet will it much better
suit with the Proportion of the Books into which we have divided this Period:
Besides, King Edgar by again reuniting the Kingdom, and enjoying by his Valor
as well as his good Fortune, a happy and peaceable Reign, though he was not the
first Prince who took upon him the Title of Monarch of all Albion or England,
as has been already shown, yet since all the Kings of this Island did
willingly submit themselves to his Dominion, he seems to have best deserved
that Title, of any I can find.

King Edwy being now dead, as our Annals have related, King Edgar his Brother
began to reign, not only over the Mercians and Northumbers, but also over all
the West Saxon Kingdom; that is, (as the Manuscript Author of St. Dunstan's
Life relates) he succeeded in his Brother's Kingdom as Heir, and was elected by
the Clergy as well as Laity, over both Kingdoms: Which is also confirmed by
Florence of Worcester, and R. Hoveden, who expressly tells us he was elected
King by the whole English Nation, in the Sixteenth Year of his Age: So that (as
the Annals observe) In his days all things succeeded prosperously, God giving
him Peace as long as he lived, because he loved his Law, and consulted the Good
and Peace of his People, beyond all the Princes that had been in the memory of
man before him; and therefore that he had greater Honor in all Nations round
him, as well as in his own; and he was by a peculiar Blessing from above so
assisted, that Kings and Princes every where submitted themselves to him;
insomuch that he disposed of all things as he pleased, without fighting.

But one of the first things (that we find in the said Author of St. Dunstan's
Life) he did, was, That a great Council being held at a place called Bradanford
(now Bradford in Wiltshire) Abbot Dunstan was by the general consent of all
there present, chosen Bishop of Worcester, for his great Piety and Prudence.
And also King Edgar being now well instructed by the said Bishop and other Wise
Men of the Kingdom, in the Arts of Government, began to discountenance the
Wicked and Vicious, and to favor and advance the Good; as also to repair the
decayed and ruined Monasteries, and then to replenish them with God's Servants,
( i. e. the Monks); and in short, to undo whatsoever his Brother had done
before.

This year, according to our Annals, Odo, Archbishop of Canterbury, dying, Anno
Dom. DCCCCLXI.
Dunstan, Bishop of Worcester, succeeded in the Archbishopric: But in this the
Author of these Annals is mistaken; for William of Malmesbury, as well as other
Authors, assure us, That it was not Dunstan, but Elfin, Bishop of Winchester,
who by the means of some Courtiers whom he had gained over to him by the
prevailing Power of his Presents, procured King Edgar's Precept to make him
Archbishop. From whence we may observe, That notwithstanding the former Decrees
of Synods and Councils in England, yet those Elections which were called
Canonical, were neither then nor a long time after this observed.

But as for Bishop Elfin, he is said by our Authors to have trampled upon the
Tombstone of that Pious Archbishop, Odo, his Predecessor, and to have uttered
opprobrious Language against his Memory; which his Ghost (it seems) so far
resented, that appearing to the new Archbishop in a Vision, it threatened him
with a speedy destruction; but he looking upon it only as a Dream, made what
haste he could to Rome, to get the Pope's Confirmation, by receiving of his
Pall; but in his Journey over the Alps he was frozen to death, being found
with his Feet in his Horse's belly, which had been killed and opened, to
restore heat to them.

But no sooner did the News arrive of Elfin's death, when (according to
Florence) Brythelm, Bishop of Wells, was made Archbishop; But because neither
of these last Archbishops ever received their Palls from Rome, which was then
counted essential to that Dignity, I suppose these two last were omitted in our
Annals: But this Brythelm being not found sufficiently qualified for so great a
Charge, he was (as Osbern relates) commanded by the King and the whole Nation
to retire; whereupon he quietly submitted, and returning again to his former
Church, Dunstan, now Bishop of London, (who also held the Sea of Worcester in
Commendam) was by the general Consent of the King and all his Wise Men in the
great Council of the Kingdom, elected Archbishop of Canterbury, for his
supposed great Sanctity: Anno Dom. DCCCCLXI.
Of which the Monks of that Age relate so many Miracles, that it is tedious to
read, much more to repeat such stuff; insomuch, that one would admire, (were it
not for the extreme Ignorance of that Age) how men could ever hope they should
be believe in so short a time after they were supposed to be done.

Such are those of this Bishop's Harp being hung against the Wall, and playing
a whole Psalm without any hands touching it; nay, the Monks can tell us, not
only the Tune, but the very Words too. Then the stopping of King Edmund's
Horse, when he was just ready to run down a Precipice, at that King's only
pronouncing of St. Dunstan's Name to himself. Next, his often driving away the
Devil with a Staff, troubling him at Prayers sometimes in the shape of a Fox,
sometimes of a Wolf or a Bear. But above all, his taking the Devil by the Nose
with a Pair of red hot Tongs; who (being, it seems, an excellent Smith) was
once at work in his Forge, when the Devil appeared in the shape of a Handsome
Woman, but met with very rough entertainment; for going about to tempt his
Chastity, he took his Devilship by the Nose with a Pair of red hot Tongs, till
he made him roar. Now if such Grave Authors as William of Malmesbury are guilty
of relating such Fictions, what can we expect from those of less Judgment and
Honesty?

But this must be acknowledged, that this Archbishop was a great Propagator of
Monkery; many Monasteries being either new built or new founded in his time;
and the Clerks or Secular Canons of diverse Churches being now to be turned out,
were put to their choice, either to quit their Habits or their Places; most of
whom rather chose the former, and so gave place to those who being of William
of Malmesbury's own Order, our Author calls their Betters.

Archbishop Dunstan also exercised Ecclesiastical Discipline, without respect
of persons, imposing upon King Edgar himself a Seven Years Penance, part of
which was, to forbear wearing his Crown during all that time; and this was for
taking a Nun out of a Cloister at Wilton, and then debauching her. From all
which we may observe, how necessary it was in those days for a Prince's Quiet
as well as Reputation, to be blindly obedient to that which was then called the
Church Discipline; since King Edwin having to do but with one Woman whom they
did not like, is branded as one excessively given to Women; whilst King Edgar,
who gave many more Instances of his Failings in this kind, is reckoned for a
Saint. But as for this Nun, whom they call Wilfrede, William of Malmesbury
tells us, that tho she were bred in that Monastery, yet was she not then
professed, but took upon her the Veil, only to avoid the King's Lust, which
yet, it seems, could not secure her from it; for he begot on her that beautiful
Lady Editha, who became also a Nun in the same Monastery of Wilton, where her
Mother had been professed before; and of which this Young and Virtuous Lady
being made Abbess, died in the flower of her Age, as William of Malmesbury
informs us.

The same Year also, according to the Welsh Chronicle, North Wales was sorely
harassed by the Forces of King Edgar: The Cause of which War, was the
Non-Payment of the Tribute due from the King of Aberfraw to the King of London:
But in the end, as John Beaver informs us, Anno Dom. DCCCCLXI.
a Peace was concluded on this condition, That King Edgar hearing the great
Mischief which both England and Wales then received by the vast multitude of
Wolves which then abounded, especially in Wales, released the Tribute in Money,
which the King of North Wales was hitherto obliged to pay, and instead thereof
engaged the Prince of Wales to send him a Yearly Tribute of so many Wolves
Heads, in lieu of that Tribute; which the said Prince performed, till within
some Years, there being no more Wolves to be found either in England or Wales,
that Tribute ceased.

But to proceed with our Annals: This Year deceased Aelfgar, Cousin to the
King, (and Earl also of Devonshire) whose Body lies buried at Wilton. Sigeferth
likewise (here called a King, though he was indeed no more than Vice-King, or
Earl of some Province) now made himself away, and was buried at Winborne. The
same Year was a great Mortality of Men, and a very Malignant Fever raged at
London: Also the Church of St. Paul's (at London) was this Year burnt, and soon
after rebuilt; and Athelmod the Priest went to Rome, and there died.

I have nothing else to add that is remarkable, under this Year, but the
Foundation of the Abbey of Tavistock, by Ordgar Earl of Devonshire, afterward
Father-in-law to King Edgar; though it was within less than fifty years after
its foundation burnt down by the Danes in the Reign of King Ethelred; but was
afterward rebuilt more stately than before.

This Year Wolfstan the Deacon deceased, and afterward Gyric the Priest. Anno
Dom. Dcccclxiii.
These, I suppose, were some men of remarkable Sanctity, in that Monastery, to
which this Copy of these Annals did once belong.

The same Year also, Abbot Athelwald received the Bishopric of Winchester, and
was consecrated on a Sunday, being the Vigil of St. Andrew: The second year
after his Consecration, he repaired diverse Monasteries, and drove the Clerks (
i. e. Canons) from that Bishopric, because they would observe no Rule, and
placed Monks in their stead. He also founded two Abbeys, the one of Monks, and
the other of Nuns; and afterward going to King Edgar, he desired him to bestow
upon him all the Monasteries the Danes had before destroyed, because he
intended to rebuild them; which the King willingly granted: Then the Bishop
went to Elig, where St. Etheldrith lies buried, and caused that Monastery to
be rebuilt, and then gave it to the care of one of his Monks, named Brightnoth,
and afterward made him Abbot of the Monks of that Monastery, where there had
been Nuns before: Then Bishop Athelwald went to the Monastery which is called
Medeshamstead, which had also been destroyed by the Danes; where he found
nothing but old Walls, with Trees and Bushes growing among them; but at last he
spied hidden in one of these Walls, that Charter which Abbot Headda had
formerly wrote; in which it appeared, that King Wulfher, and Ethelred his
Brother, had founded this Monastery; and that the King with the Bishop had
freed it from all secular servitude; and Pope Agatho had confirmed it by his
Bull, as also the Archbishop Deus Dedit.

Which Charter, I suppose, is that, the Substance of which is already recited
in the Fourth book, Anno 656. and which I have there proved to be forged; for
the Monks had then a very fair opportunity to forge that Charter, Anno Dom.
Dcccclxiii.
and afterward to pretend they found it in an old Wall: But letting that pass,
thus much is certain from the Peterburgh Copy of these Annals, That the said
Bishop then caused this Monastery to be rebuilt, placing a new Set of Monks
therein; over whom he appointed an Abbot called Aldulf: Then went the Bishop to
the King, and showed him the Charter he had lately found; whereby he not only
obtained a new Charter of Confirmation of all the Lands and Privileges formerly
granted by the Mercian Kings, but also many other Townships and Lands there
recited; as particularly Vndale, with the Hundred adjoining, in
Northamptonshire, which had formerly been a Monastery of it self, as may be
observed in the account we have already given of the Life of the Archbishop
Wilfrid.

The King likewise granted, That the Lands belonging to that Monastery, should
be a distinct Shire, having Sac and Soc, Tol and Team, and Infangentheof, (
Vid. the Introduction.
which terms I shall explain in another place); the King there also grants them
a Market, with the Toll thereof; and that there should be no other Market
between Stamford and Huntington; and to the former of these the King also
granted the Abbot a Mint. But as for the Names of the Lands given, together
with the Limits and the Tolls of the Market there mentioned, I refer the Reader
to the Charter it self. Then follows the Subscription of the King with the Sign
of the Cross, and next the Confirmation of the Archbishop of Canterbury, with a
dreadful Curse on those that should violate it; as also the Confirmation of
Oswald Archbishop of York, Athelwald Bishop of Winchester, with several other
Bishops, Abbots, Ealdormen, and Wisemen, who all confirmed it, and signed it
with the Cross: This was done Anno Dom. 972. of our Lord's Nativity, and in the
sixteenth year of the King's Reign; which shows this Copy of the Annals to be
written diverse years after these things were done; as does also more
particularly that short History concerning the Affairs of this Abbey, and the
Succession of its Abbots for many years after this time. As how Abbot Adulf
bought many more Lands, wherewith he highly enriched that Monastery, where he
continued Abbot, till Oswald Archbishop of York deceased, and he succeeded him
in the Archbishopric; and then there was another chosen Abbot of the said
Monastery, named Kenulph, who was afterward Bishop of Winchester; he first
built a Wall round the Monastery, and gave it the name of Burgh, which was
before called Medeshamested; but he being sometime after made Bishop of
Winchester, another Abbot was chosen from the same Abbey, called Aelfi, who
continued Abbot fifty years: He removed the Bodies of St. Kyneburge, and St.
Cynesuith, which lay buried at Castra; and St. Tibba, which lay entombed at
Rehala, (i. e. Ryal in Rutlandshire) and brought them to Burgh, and dedicated
them to St. Peter, keeping them there as long as he continued Abbot. I have
been the more particular in the Account of this so Ancient and Famous
Monastery, as having been the Episcopal See of the Bishops of Peterburgh almost
ever since the Dissolution of that Abbey in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.

This Year also (according to Simeon of Durham) King Edgar married Ethelfreda,
the Daughter of Ordgar Earl of Devonshire, after the Death of her Husband
Ethelwald, Earl of the East Angles: Of her he begot two Sons, Edwald and
Ethelred, the former of whom died in his Infancy, Anno Dom. Dcccclxiii.
but the latter lived to be King of England. But before he married this Lady,
it is certain he had an Elder Son by Elfleda, surnamed The Fair Daughter of
Earl Eodmar; of whom he begot King Edward, called the Martyr: But whether King
Edgar was ever lawfully married to her, may also be doubted; since Osbern, in
his Life of St. Dunstan, says, That this Saint baptized the Child begotten on
Ethelfleda the King's Concubine; with whom also agrees Nicholas Trevet, in his
Chronicle; though, I confess, the Major part of our Historians do make her to
have been his Lawful Wife. And it was upon this Pretense of Illegitimacy, that
Queen Elfleda, and those of her Party, would have afterward put by Prince
Edward her Son, from being chosen King; as shall be further related in its
proper place. But Florence of Worcester, and R. Hoveden, place King Edgar's
Marriage with this Lady, under the next year.

Anno Dom. Dcccclxiv.
This year King Edgar expelled the Priests (or Chanons) both from the old and
new Monastery of Winchester; as also from Ceortesige, (or Chertsy) and
Middletune, and put Monks in their rooms; he also ordained Aethelgar Abbot of
the new Monastery, and Ordbryght Abbot of Ceortesige, and Cyneweard of
Middletune. But as soon as Dunstan was made Archbishop, he went to Rome, and
there obtained his Pall of the Pope.

This Year also, the Irishmen (according to the Welsh Chronicles) landed in
Anglesey, and destroyed Aberfraw, and also slew Rodoric, one of the Sons of
Edwal Voel, late Prince of Wales.

Anno Dom. Dcccclxvii.
King Edgar (according to R. Hoveden, and Simeon of Durham) placed Nuns in the
Monastery of Rumsey in Hampshire, which his Grandfather King Edward had
founded, and made his Daughter Merwina Abbess over them.

About this time (as Caradoc's Chronicle relates) there arose a great Quarrel
between the two Brothers, Princes of North Wales, Jevaf and Jago, who had
governed jointly ever since the death of Howel Dha, till then; when Jago
seizing upon his Brother Jevaf by force, kept him cruelly in Prison for near
six years; about which time also Eneon the Son of Owen, Prince of South Wales,
taking advantage of these Civil Dissentions, made War upon North Wales, and
subdued all the Country of Gwyn: So that it is no wonder if the English were
too hard for these British Princes, since they never could agree amongst
themselves.

Anno Dom. Dcccclxix.
King Edgar this year commanded all the Country of Thanet to be laid waste.

As Bromton's Chronicle informs us, the King did not do as an Insulting Enemy,
but as a King, who punished one Evil with another, because the Inhabitants of
that Island had despised his Royal Laws. But Matthew Westminster's account of
the reason of the King's severe proceeding with them, seems far more
satisfactory; viz. That it was because certain Merchants coming with Goods from
York, and touching upon this Island, the Inhabitants seized the men, and
plundered them of what they brought.

This Year also, (according to the History of the Abbey of Ramsey) Aylwin the
Ealdorman, by the persuasion of Oswald Archbishop of York, and with the consent
of King Edgar, founded the Abbey of Ramsey, to the Honor of St. Mary and St.
Benedict, as appears by the Charter of King Edgar, which you will find at large
in Anno Dom. Dcccclxxiii.
Monast. Anglican. AIR King Edgar, at the persuasion of Bishop Athelwald, now
caused the Chanons to be driven out of all the greater Monasteries in Mercia,
and Monks to be put in their places.

This Year Archbishop Oskitel deceased, who was first consecrated Bishop of
Dorcester, Anno Do^ Dcccclxx.
and afterward by the consent of King Edward and all his Wisemen, consecrated
Archbishop of York. He was Two and twenty years Bishop, and deceased on the
Vigils of All Saints, at Them; but Thurkytel being his Kinsman, carried the
Bishop's Body to Bedford, because he was Abbot there at that time.

But there is certainly a mistake in the King's Name; and instead of Edward, it
should be Edred; for King Edward the Elder was dead long before this Bishop's
Consecration.

Eadmund Etheling, Son to King Edgar, died this year, Anno Dom. Dcccclxxi.
whose Body lies buried at Rumseig, i.e. Rumsey in Hampshire.

Oskytel Archbishop of York deceasing, Anno Dom. Dcccclxxii.
his Kinsman Oswald, Bishop of Worcester succeeded him, (as Florence of
Worcester relates.)

About this time also, Godfred, the Son of Harold the Dane, subdued the whole
Isle of Anglesey; which yet he enjoyed not long.

This year, Edgar, Ruler of the English, Anno Dom. Dcccclxxiii.
was with great Honor crowned King, in the Ancient City called Akmanceaster,
which the Inhabitants called Bathan; so that there was great Joy among all men
that happy Day, being that which is commonly called Pentecost; where was a
frequent Assembly of Priests and Monks, as also a great Council of the Wites,
or Wisemen. This happened in the Thousandth Year of Christ, wanting but 27; and
in the Thirtieth Year of this King's Age.

Also about this time, (according to Caradoc's Chronicle) Howel the Son of
Jevaf, having raised great Forces against his Uncle Jago abovementioned, to
deliver his Father out of Prison, and having vanquished his Uncle, and driven
him out of the Country, restored his Father to his Liberty, though not to his
Dominion; for he took upon himself the sole Government of all North Wales.

But Mr. Vaughan, in his Additional Notes to this Chronicle, farther relates
from some other Welsh Annals, That Jago being thus expelled, fled to King
Edgar, and prevailed so far, that he brought an Army into North Wales, to
restore him; but coming as far as Bangor, Howel met him, and at the King's
request consented that his Uncle Jago should enjoy that part of the Country
which he had in his Father Jevaf's time; so King Edgar having founded a new
Church at Bangor, and dedicated it to the Virgin Mary, returned with great
Honor to Chester, having these two Welsh Princes in his Company; where also
met him by his appointment, Six other Princes; as shall be farther related by
and by.

It has been much questioned, what should be the reason that this King should
thus long defer his Coronation: Some of the Monks impute it to the Penance
imposed upon him by Archbishop Dunstan, for debauching the Nun above mentioned;
but that is not at all likely, since that Penance was but for Seven Years,
whereas he had now reigned twice as long since that Sin was committed. But I do
rather suppose, that he was Crowned long before, in the very beginning of his
Reign, though our Monkish Chroniclers have either forgot to mention it, or else
have omitted it on purpose, to add the greater Luster to Archbishop Dunstan:
Anno Dom. Dcccclxxiii.
For it is very certain, that neither in this King's time, nor long after the
Conquest, was it ever known, that the King Elect took the Title of King, till
after his Coronation.

Now that our Kings did upon some great occasion repeat the Ceremony of their
Coronation, I shall prove from the Examples both of King Ethelred, as well as
of King Richard the First, and Henry the Third; and why it might not be so in
the Reign of this King, as well as in either of them, I can see no reason;
though the occasion of it is not any where expressed, as I know of.

But to return to our Annals: After this the King sailed with all his Fleet to
Legancester, (i.e. West-Chester) where met him Six Kings, who all making a
League with him, promised to be his Assistants both by Sea and Land.

And now we have spoke of this King's Fleet, it is fit we give a larger
Relation of it, as also of these Princes that here met him, from William of
Malmesbury, Florence of Worcester, and other Authors, who increase their Number
to Eight Thousand; which being so glorious for our Nation, I shall here set
down at large.

This King was the first who was truly Lord of our Seas; for every Summer
(says William of Malmesbury) immediately after Easter, commanding his Ships
from every Shore to be brought into one collected Body, he sailed usually with
the Eastern Fleet to the Western part of the Island; and then sending it back,
sailed with the Western Fleet unto the Northern; and thence with the Northern
he returned to the Eastern Coasts; sailing in this manner quite round the
Island; being exceeding diligent to prevent the Incursions of Pirates, and
courageous in the defense of his Kingdom against Foreigners, and diligent in
the training up of himself and his People for Military Employments.

Each of these Fleets (as we are told) consisted of One thousand and two
hundred Ships, and these also very stout ones for those times: So that the
number of all must have amounted to Three thousand and six hundred Sail, as
some of our Author expressly relate, but others, Four thousand Vessels; and
there are some also that add to these Three, a Fourth Fleet; by which means the
Number will be increased to Four thousand and eight hundred Sail; as may be
seen in Matthew Westminster. To sustain which Charge, besides the private
Contributions of his Subjects, he had also (in the latter end of his Reign) Six
Petty Kings under him, who were bound by Oath to be ready at his Command, to
serve him both by Sea and Land; which Oath they took at Chester, (as the Annals
relate) where he had given them order to meet him, as he sailed about the North
of Britain with a great Navy. Their Names are Kened or Kineth, King of the
Scots; Malcolm King of Cumberland, (who at this time, it seems, were so called,
though, as we said, the Cumbrians had now thrown off that Title, and taken that
of (Earls); Maccuse, Lord of the Isles; with five Princes of Wales, the Names
of whom were, Dusnal, Griffyth, Huuald, Jacob, and Judethil; who all meeting
him at his Court at Chester, to set forth the Splendour and Greatness of his
Dominion, one day he went into a Galley, and caused himself to be rowed by
these Petty Princes, he himself holding the Stern, and steering the Vessel
along the River Dee, was waited on by all his Nobles in another Barge; so he
sailed to the Monastery of St. John Baptist; where an Oration being made to
him, in the same State and Pomp he retutned to his Palace: Where when he
arrived, Anno Dom. Dcccclxxiii.
he is said to have told his Nobles about him, That then his Successors might
boast themselves to be truly Kings of England, when they should be (like him)
attended by so many Princes his Vassals; as Florence of Worcester, and William
of Malmesbury relate it. As for these Petty Kings abovementioned, Maccuse, by
the said Florence, Matthew of Westminster, and R. Hoveden, is called a King of
Man, and many other Islands; but William of Malmesbury styles him an
Arch-pirate; by which word a Robber is not to be understood, but (as Asser, and
others of that Age use that Appellation) one skilled in Sea Affairs, or a
Seaman; so called from Pira, which in the Attique Tongue, signifies a Craft or
Art; but afterward it came to be applicable only to such as without any Right
infested the Seas.

Another of the Kings, and that of Wales, was Huual or Hewal, who tho he be not
placed the first in order, yet if we follow the account of some Authors, must
have been the chief of them all, the Prince to whom all the rest performed
Obedience: The Book of Landaff bids us take notice, that at the same time with
Edgar lived Howel Dha, and Morgan Heu, (which two yet were the Subjects of King
Edgar.) But in this, either that Author, or the Chronicle of Caradoc must be
mistaken, who places the Death of Howel Dha under the year 948: And therefore
it is more likely that the Howel here mentioned, was not Howel Dha, but Howel
the Son of Jevaf, who had the year before expelled his Uncle, and taken upon
himself the Principality of Wales, notwithstanding his Father was then alive.

But as for all the rest of these Welsh Princes, I do not know how to make them
out from their Chronicles, (which give no account of this Action); only I take
Dufnal to be the Son of Howel Dha, and as Matthew of Westminster says, was then
Prince of South Wales. As for Jacob and Judethel, I suppose they must have been
the same with Jevaf and Jago, as they are called in the Welsh Chronicles: But
as for this Prince Gryffith, I can find none such among any of the Welsh
Princes ruling at that time. But to return to our Annals.

This year Eadgar King of the English, changed this frail Life, Anno Dom.
Dcccclxxv.
for another more Glorious, on the 18 th. day of July: But his Body was buried
with great Solemnity at the Abbey of Glastenbury, to which he himself had been a
great Benefactor; as appears by his Charter, recited at large by William of
Malmesbury in his Treatise of the Antiquity of that Monastery; in which Charter
he also styles himself, Totius Britanniae Basileus, i. e. King of all Britain.

But since our Historians are so very large and full in their Commendations of
his Prince, as that he was most Religious, Valiant, and Wise, and exceeded all
his Predecessors (except King Alfred, and King Athelstan) it will not, I hope,
be amiss to show you how partial these Monks were to the Memory of this Prince;
who though they will needs have to be a Saint, because the either built or
repaired so many Monasteries, yet was certainly (if the same Monkish Writers
are to be believed) guilty of as great Excesses of Lust and Cruelty, as any of
his Predecessors; for William of Malmesbury tells us, that Ordgar Duke of
Devonshire had a Daughter named Elfreda, famed for an extraordinary Beauty,
which caused the King to have great Inclinations for her, upon the bare Report
made of her to him; but to be more certain, he sent a Knight called Athelwold,
Anno Dom. Dcccclxxv.
his Confident to see her, resolving to marry her, if she were found to be
handsome as she was reported. Athelwold made haste, and got a sight of her,
wherewith he was so smitten, that he concealed the Errand on which he came, and
resolved to obtain her for himself; which being easily done, he lessened her to
the King, as a Woman but very ordinary, and of so small a Stature, as would
misbecome his Royal Bed; so that he married her with the King's consent, whose
Thoughts were now diverted to other Objects: But at last, the Earl's Enemies
discovered the Intrigue, and told the King how he had deceived him; and whom
the more to enrage, they omitted no words whereby to set out and enhance the
extraordinary Beauty of the Lady: Upon which, the King concealed his Anger, but
was resolved by another Stratagem to overreach him. And the better to effect
what he intended, he one day told him pleasantly, that at such a time he would
come and see whether his Wife was so fair as she was represented to be. This
unexpected Surprise so exceedingly struck him, that he earnestly begged of her
to consult his Preservation, by putting on her worst Clothes, and deforming her
self by what other means she thought best; for she had now perceived, that
instead of a King she had married a Subject, though an Earl; which raised such
a Female Indignation in her, that against the coming of King Edgar she dressed
her self in the most Gay and Charming manner her Pride and Resentment to be
thus cheated, could devise; which had such powerful effects upon him, that, his
Love being so much the more inflamed, as it had been so long defrauded, he for
a Blind appointed a day of hunting in the Forest called Warewell, (now Harwood
Forest) and there slew Athelwold with a Dart. The Earl's Son coming by when the
Fact was just committed, and looking upon his Father's dead Body, the King
asked him, How he liked this Game? To which he answered, That whatsoever
pleased the King, ought not to displease him: With which flattering Reply, the
King's angry Mind was so appeased, that he ever after highly favored the
Youth; and expiated the Crime committed upon the Father, by the great kindness
he showed to the Son. But a^ Ancient Manuscript called Brutus (now in the
Archbishop's Library at Lambeth) relates the latter end of this Story somewhat
more for King Edgar's Reputation; which since I meet with no where else, I
shall here give you: It is, That King Edgar, not long after, sending this
Athelwold (now made an Earl) to secure the Coast of Northumberland against the
Danes, then like to invade it, as he was in his way thither he was set upon by
certain unknown Soldiers, who there slew him, but whether by the King's Order,
or no, is not said. As soon as the Earl was dead, the King made Love to his
fair Widow, and marrying her, caused her to be crowned Queen, though it much
displeased Archbishop Dunstan, who could never after this endure her: But
William of Malmesbury adds, that to expiate the Murder of her first Husband,
she built a Nunnery in the place where he was slain.

Another thing laid to this charge, and which shows him to have been more
constant in his Love, than could be expected from a Young Prince, so
universally addicted as he was to the Fair Sex, of which you have several
Instances in Story; one of them here shall suffice. It seems, coming one time
to Andover, (a Town not far from Winchester) he would have had the enjoyment of
a certain Ealdorman's Daughter, mightily celebrated for her Beauty, Anno Dom.
Dcccclxxv.
and commanded her to be brought to his Bed: The Mother of the Virgin not
daring flatly to deny, yet abhorring to be a Bawd to her own Daughter, resolved
to put a Trick on him by the favor of the Night, and so sent a Waiting-Maid
she had, in her room, one that was Handsome enough, and not Unwitty, as she
quickly made to appear; for as soon as it was morning she offering to get up,
the King asked her, Why she would make such haste from him? She replied, she
could no longer have the Happiness of his Company, because her Lady had set her
some Work to do. He startling at this, wondered what she meant (for he did not
in the least question, but that his Bedfellow had been the Earl's real
Daughter); she then most passionately besought him to set her free from the
hard and cruel Service of her Lady, as a Reward for her lost Virginity: But the
King being confounded at his disappointment, was for some time divided between
Compassion for the poor Maid, and Anger at his being thus abused; but at last
he put it off with a Jest, and setting her free, carried her along with him,
and loved her to that degree, that he kept himself to her alone, until such
time as he married Elfreda abovementioned.

These were the Stories commonly told in those days of King Edgar, and of which
more noise had been made by the Monks, if he had not built so many Monasteries,
which stopped their mouths from saying much ill of one so devoted to their
Order, and who perhaps admired Chastity in others, though he could not practice
it himself.

But it is certain England highly flourished under his Government, being a Man
so truly answering Homer's Description of a King, that not only secured his
people from Foreign Enemies, but Savage Beasts, by laying a Yearly Tribute of
Three hundred Wolve's Heads on the Prince of Wales, as has been already
related.

What his Employment was in Summer, we have already seen; in Winter he hunted,
but in the Spring he usually rode a kind of Circuit round the Kingdom, to
administer Justice to his People, and take care that his Officers did the like.
He was small of Stature, and Slender, yet of such mighty Courage and Strength,
that he would challenge the most Robust to wrestle with him, forbidding them to
spare him out of respect to his Person.

It happened one time, that Kened King of the Scots, came to his Court, to whom
(as Matthew Westminster relates) he gave Rich Presents, with the whole Country
of Lothian, on condition that he and his Successors at his Festivals should
come and attend on the Kings of England when they sat Crowned; besides, he
assigned certain Lodgings for them by the way, which to ease them in their
Journey, were till the time of King Henry the Second, held by the Kings of
Scotland.

This Kened, as he once sat at his Cups with his Courtiers, said jestingly to
them, It was very strange that so many Provinces should obey such a Little,
Contemptible Figure of a Man, as this Edgar was. These Words soon reached the
King's ears; upon which he presently sends for Kened, and as if he had a mind
to consult him about some Important Affair, carries him into a Wood, where none
being present besides themselves, he delivers into his hands one of the two
Swords he had brought along with him, and then tells him, That as they were now
alone, so they had a very good opportunity to try their Strength and Skill; and
therefore he was resolved to have it forthwith determined which of them ought
to Rule, Anno Dom. Dcccclxxv.
and which to Obey, commanding him not to stir a foot, but decide the
Controversy with him; for it was a base and pitiful thing for a King to vapor
loud at a Feast, and not to be as forward to show his Courage at a Fray. Kened
being struck out of countenance at these words, fell down at his feet, and
earnestly begged his Pardon for what he had spoken in Jest, without any design
of Malice in the least. Upon which the King being as Generous as he was
Courageous, freely forgave him.

But though this King Edgar was certainly a very Great and Heroic Prince, yet
questionless that Charter which makes him to have subdued the greatest part of
Ireland, with the City of Dublin, and to be Lord of all the Isles as far as
Norway, is fictitious, and nothing but a piece of Monkish Forgery, no Author of
that Age making mention of any such thing; and instead of a Great Warrior, he
is usually styled Edgar the Peaceable; for he never made any Foreign Wars, that
we can learn. However, such was his mighty Fame, that if he did not go himself
to Foreigners, they came to him, out of Saxony, Flanders, Denmark, and other
places: Though William of Malmesbury observes, their coming over did much
detriment to the Natives; who from the Saxons, learned Rudeness; from the
Flemings, Effeminacy; and from the Danes, Drunkenness; the English being before
free from those gross Vices, and contented themselves to defend their own with
a natural Simplicity, and not given to admire the Customs and Fashions of other
Nations: Hereupon the Monk tells us he is deservedly blamed in Story for his
too great Indulgence to Strangers.

This Noble Prince died when he had Reigned about Sixteen Years, in the very
flower of his Age, being scarce Two and thirty years old, and with him fell all
the Glory of the English Nation; scarce any thing henceforth being to be heard
of among them, but Misery and Disorder.

He had by Egelfleda, surnamed the Fair, the Daughter of Earl Ordmer, (it is
uncertain whether his Wife or Concubine) a Son named Edward, who succeeded him:
By Wilfrida the Nun he had a Daughter named Editha, who was also a Nun, as has
been already related: And by Elfreda the Daughter of Duke Ordgar, a Son called
Edmund, who died five years before his Father; and another, called Ethelrede,
who reigned after him; but was wholly unlike him in Prudence and Courage.

I have nothing else to add that is considerable, under this year, but the
death of the Noble Turketule, Abbot of Croyland, whom from Chancellor to King
Edred, was (at his own desire) by him made Abbot. He repaired and much enriched
that Abbey, after its being ruined by the Danes; and was the first that by
adding to the Two Great Bells of that Monastery, Six more, made the first
Tuneable Rings of Bells in England; as Ingulph at the end of the account he
gives of his Life, informs us.

But before I dismiss this King's Reign, it is fit I give you a short account
of the chief Laws he made; which since neither the time nor place of their
enacting are any where mentioned, I refer to this place.

The Preface of these Laws is thus; This is the Decree or Law which King Edgar
made, with the counsel (or consent) of his Wites or Wisemen, for the Honor of
God, the Confirmation of his Royal Dignity, and for the Good of his People.

The Laws themselves begin with some Ecclesiastical Canons, Anno Dom. Dcccclxxv.
the first of which is concerning the Immunities of the Church, and about
paying Tithes out of the Lands of the Thanes, as well as of those of Ceorles,
or Contrymen.

The Second is concerning payment of Tithes and First fruits, as well where a
Thane had a Church with a Burying-place, as also where he had not.

The Third appoints the times the Tithes should be paid at; and what Remedy was
to be had, in case they were not paid at the time when they were due.

The Fourth ordains at what time of the year Peter Pence should be paid; and
the Penalty that should be incurred by those that should neglect to pay them in
accordingly.

The last ordains every Sunday to be kept holy, and to begin at Three a Clock
in the Afternoon on Saturday, and to end at break of day on Monday, upon the
penalty appointed by the Judiciary Book.

From which last Law you may observe, how early keeping the Sunday like the
Jewish Sabbath, began in England.

Then follow the Secular, or Temporal Laws.

The First of which enjoins, that every man poor or rich enjoy the benefit of
the Law, and have equal Justice done him; and for Punishments he would have
them so moderated, that being accommodated to the Divine Clemency, they may be
the more tolerable unto men.

The Second forbids Appeals to the King in Suits, From whence we may gather,
that Fines at this time were not Arbitrary, nor could be set above a known
constant Rate; such as a man, according to his Quality, was able to pay,
without the loss of his Life or Liberty.
except Justice cannot otherwise be obtained. And if a man be oppressed he may
betake himself to the King for relief; and in case a Pecuniary Mulct be
inflicted for a fault, it must not exceed the value of the man's head.

The Third imposes a Mulct of an Hundred and twenty Shillings to the King, upon
a Judge that passes an unjust Sentence against any man, except such Judge will
take his Oath that he did it not out of any malice, but only from
Unskilfulness, and Mistake in Judgment; and in such case he is to be removed
from his Place, except he can obtain favor of the King longer to retain it;
and then the Bishop of the Diocese is to send the Mulct imposed upon him to the
King's Treasure.

The Fourth commands, That whosoever maliciously shall defame another man,
whereby he receives any damage either in his Body or Estate, so that the
defamed Party can clear himself of those Reports, and prove them false, then
the Defamer's Tongue shall either be cut out, or he shall redeem it with the
value of his Head.

The Fifth is to the same effect as in another Law we have formerly cited,
commanding every one to be present at the Gemote, or Assembly of the Hundred;
and further ordains, That the Burghmotes, or Assemblies of the great Towns or
Cities, be held thrice a year, and the Shiregemotes, or general Meeting of the
whole County twice, whereat were to be present the Bishop and the Ealdorman,
the one to teach the people God's Law, and the other Man's.

From whence you may observe the Antiquity of our Charges at our Assizes and
Sessions, which no doubt do succeed those Discourses which the Ealdorman and
Bishop then made to the people upon the subjects abovementioned.

Anno Dom. Dcccclxxv.
The Sixth requires, that every man find Sureties for his Good Behavior; and
in case any one commit a Crime, and fly for it, the Sureties should undergo
what should be laid upon him. If he stole any thing, and be taken within a
Twelvemonth, he should be brought to Justice, and then the Sureties should
receive back what they had paid on his account.

Hence we may also take notice, not only of the Antiquity of Frank-Pledges,
which had been long before instituted by King Alfred, but also the continuation
of this Law by King Edgar; from whence it appears, that it was no Norman
invention, introduced to keep under the English Commonalty, as some men have
without any just cause imagined.

The Seventh ordains, That when any one of evil report is again accused of a
Crime, and absents himself from the Gemotes, or public Meetings, some of the
Court shall go where he dwells, and take Sureties for his Appearance, if they
may be had; but if they cannot get them, then they should take him alive or
dead, and seize on all his Estate; whereof the Complaining Party having
received such a share as should satisfy him, the one half of the remainder
shall go to the Lord of the Soil, and the other half to the Hundred: And if any
of that Court (being either akin to the Party, or a stranger to his Blood)
refuse to go to put this in execution, he should forfeit 120 shillings to the
King: And farther, That such as are taken in the very act of stealing, or
betraying their Masters, should not be pardoned during life.

The Eighth and last ordains, That one and the same Money should be current
throughout the King's Dominions, which no man must refuse; and that the measure
of Winchester should be the Standard; and that a Weigh of Wool should be fold
for half a Pound of Money, and no more. The former of those is the first Law
whereby the Private Mints to the Archbishops and several Abbots being forbid,
the King's Coin was only to pass.

But to return to our Annals: Ten days before the Death of King Edgar, Bishop
Cyneward departed this life.

King EDWARD, surnamed the Martyr.
KING Edgar being dead, Anno Dom. Dcccclxxv.
(as you have now heard) Prince Edward succeeded his Father, though not without
some difficulty, for (as William of Malmesbury, and R. Hoveden relate) the
Great Men of the Kingdom were then divided, Archbishop Dunstan, and all the
rest of the Bishops, being for Prince Edward, the Eldest Son of King Edgar;
whilst Queen Aelfreda, Widow to the King, and many of her Faction, were for
setting up her Son Ethelred, being then about Seven Years of Age, that so she
might govern under his Name: But besides, the pretense was, (which how well
they made out, I know not) That King Edgar had never been lawfully married to
Prince Edward's Mother. Whereupon the Archbishops, Dunstan and Oswald, with the
Bishops, Abbots, and many of the Ealdormen of the Kingdom, met together in a
Great Council, and chose Prince Edward King, as his Father before his Death had
ordained; and being thus Elected, they presently Anointed him, being then but a
Youth of about Fifteen Years of Age.

But it seems, not long after the Death of King Edgar, though before the
Coronation of King Edward, Roger Hoveden, and Simeon of Durham, tell us, that
Elfer Earl of the Mercians, being lustily bribed by large Presents, drove the
Abbots and Monks out of the Monasteries, in which they had been settled by King
Edgar, and in their places brought in the Clerks (i.e. Secular Chanons) with
their Wives; but Ethelwin, Ealdorman of the East Angles, and his Brother
Elfwold, and Earl Brythnoth, opposed it; and being in the Common Council or
Synod, plainly said, They would never endure that the Monks should be cast out
of the Kingdom, who contributed so much to the Maintenance of Religion; and so
raising an Army, they bravely defended the Monasteries of the East Angles; so
it seems that during this Interregnum, arose this Civil War about the Monks,
and the abovementioned Dissension amongst the Nobility, concerning the
Election of a new King.

But this serves to explain that Passage in our Annals, which would have been
otherwise very obscure; viz. That then there was ( viz. upon the Death of King
Edgar) great Grief and Trouble in Mercia, among those that loved God, because
many of his Servants, (that is, the Monks) were turned out, till God being
slighted, showed Miracles on their behalf; and that then also Duke Oslack was
unjustly banished beyond the Seas; a Nobleman, who for his Long Head of Hair,
but more for his Wisdom, was very remarkable: And that then also strange
Prodigies were seen in the Heavens, such as Astrologers call Comets; and as a
Punishment from God upon this Nation, there followed a great Famine.

Which shows this Copy of the Annals was written about this very time: And then
the Author concludes with Aelfer the Ealdorman's commanding many Monasteries to
be spoiled, which King Edgar had commanded Bishop Athelwold to repair. All
which being in the Cottonian Copy, serves to explain what has been already
related. But the next year

Anno Dom. Dcccclxxvi.
'Was the great Famine in England, as just now mentioned. About the same time,
(according to Caradoc's Chronicle) Aeneon, the Son of Owen Prince of
South Wales, destroyed the Land of Gwyr the second time.

Anno Dom. Dcccclxxvii.
This year, after Easter, was that great Synod at Kirtlingtun, which Florence of
Worcester, and R. Hoveden, call Kyrleing; but where that place was is very
uncertain; Florence places it in East-England, but Sir H. Spelman acknowledges,
that he does not know any place in those parts, that ever bore that name, but
supposes it to have been the same with Cartlage, (now the Seat of the Lord
North): But had not Florence placed it in East-England, that Town whose name
comes nearest to it, is Kyrtlington in Oxfordshire; which is also the more
confirmed by that which follows in these Annals, viz. That Sydeman the Bishop
of Devonshire (i. e. of Wells) died here suddenly, who desired his Body might
be buried at Krydeanton, his Episcopal See; but King Edward and Archbishop
Dunstan ordered it to be carried to St. Ma^ies in Abingdon, were he was
honorably Interred in the North Isle of St. Paul's Church: Therefore it is
highly probable, that the place where this Bishop died, was not far from
Abingdon, where he was buried, as Kirtlington indeed is: But what was done in
this Council can we no where find; only it is to be supposed that it was
concerning this great Difference between the Monks and the Secular Chanons, as
the former Council was.

The same year also were great Commotions in Wales; for Howel ap Jevaf, Prince
of North Wales, with a great Army both of Welsh and Englishmen, made War upon
all who defended or succored his Uncle Jago, and spoiled the Countries of
Lhyn, Kelynnoc, Vawr; so that Jago was shortly after taken Prisoner by Prince
Howel's men, who after that enjoyed his part of the Country in peace.

Nor can I here omit what some of our Monkish Writers, and particularly John
Pike in his compendious Supplement of the Kings of England, (now in Manuscript
in the Julius, D. 6.
Cottonian Library) relates, That there being this year a Great Council held at
Winchester again to debate this great Affair concerning the turning out of the
Monks, and restoring the Secular Chanons, and it being like to be carried in
their favor, a Crucifix which then stood in the room, spoke thus, God forbid
it should be so; This amazing them, they resolved to leave the Monks in the
condition they then were. But whether these words were ever spoke at all, or if
they were, whether it might not be by some person that stood unseen behind the
Crucifix, I shall leave to the Reader to determine as he pleases.

Anno Dom. Dcccclxxviii.
Next year all the Grave and Wise Men of the English Nation being met about the
same Affair, at Calne (in Wiltshire) fell down together from a certain Upper
Room, (where they were assembled in Council) unless it were St. Dunstan the
Archbishop, who fixed his foot upon a certain Beam; but some were sadly bruised
and hurt, whilst others were killed outright.

But since William of Malmesbury has given us a larger account of this
Council, and what was done in it, I shall give it you in his words: But men's
minds being not yet settled, Anno Dom. Dcccclxxviii.
another Council was summoned at Calne in Wiltshire, (but the King was absent
by reason of his Youth) where the same Affair was again debated with great Heat
and Contention: But when many Reproaches were cast upon Archbishop Dunstan,
that Bulwark of the Church, who could by no means be shaken, upon a sudden the
Floor of the Chamber fell down, all there present being very much bruised,
except Dunstan, who escaped upon a Beam; all the rest being either hurt or
killed. This Miracle, says he, obtained quiet for the Archbishop and all the
Monks of England, who were for ever after of his opinion.

This Accident is also related by Mat. Westminster, and copied by Cardinal
Baronius into his Annals, and is likewise mentioned by other Authors. But it is
very probable, that this Misfortune did not happen without the foreknowledge
(if not the Contrivance) of Archbishop Dunstan, since he had now persuaded the
King not to be there, though he was present at the last Council. But H.
Huntington would have it be a sign from Heaven, that they should fall from
God's love, and be oppressed by Foreign Nations; as followed not long after.

And (according to Florence of Worcester) there was a Third Synod at
Ambresbury; but what was done there, he does not tell us.

But to return to our Annals; The same year King Edward was killed at
Corfesgeate, now Corfe-Castle in the Isle of Purbeck, on the 15th of the
Kalends of April, and was buried at Werham, without any Royal Pomp. There was
not since the time that the English Nation came into Britain, any thing done
more wickedly than this: But though men murdered him, yet God exalted him; and
he that was an Earthly King, is now a Saint in Heaven; and though his Relations
would not revenge his Death, yet God performed it severely. The rest to the
same effect in these Annals I omit, because I would not be tedious. But I shall
give you a more particular account of the manner of this Prince's Death, from
William of Malmesbury, and the Chronicle called Bromton's; the former of which
relates it thus; That as for King Edward, he was of so extraordinary Religious
and Mild a Nature, that for quietness sake, he let his Mother-in-Law order all
things as she pleased, giving her all Respects, as to his own Mother, and
regarding his Younger Brother with all the tenderness imaginable: She on the
contrary, from his Kindness and Love, conceives greater and more implacable
Malice against him; and with the Sovereignty she already enjoyed, was so ill
satisfied, that she must needs take from him the very Title also: This Design
she covered with notable dissimulation, till a convenient opportunity presented
it self for the execution of it: At length the poor Innocent Prince being one
day wearied with hunting, and being very thirsty, (while his Companions
followed the Game, and minded not what became of him) knowing that the Queen's
House was not far off, rode thither all alone, fearing nothing, because of his
own Innocence, and supposing every one meant as honestly as himself.

Whereupon the Queen receives him with all the seeming kindness imaginable, and
fain would have had him to light from his Horse, but he refusing that, and only
asking to see his Brother, she caused some Drink to be presently brought him;
but whilst the Cup was at his mouth, one of her Servants, privately before
instructed, stabbed him with a Dagger in the Back. Anno Dom. Dcccclxxviii.
He, exceedingly astonished at this unexpected ill treatment, clapped Spurs to
his Horse, and fled away as fast as he could toward his Company; but the Wound
being Mortal, and he spent with loss of blood, fell to the ground, and having
one foot in the Stirrup, was dragged through By-ways; but being traced by his
Blood by those she sent after him, they brought back the Dead Corpse, which they
buried privately at Werham, where they imagined they had also buried his Memory
as well as his Body; but the place of his Sepulture (as it is said) soon grew
famous for Miracles.

Queen Elfreda was upon this so convinced of her Wickedness, that from her
Courtly and Delicate Way of Living, she betook her self to very severe
Penances, as wearing Hair-cloath, sleeping on the ground without a Pillow, with
such other Austerities as were used in that Age; and herein she continued all
her life.

So fell this good King Edward, after he had only born the Name of King Three
years and an half; who for his Innocence, and the Miracles supposod to be
wrought after his Death, obtained the Surname of Martyr: Which opinion of his
Sanctity was the more confirmed by other great Miseries which shortly after
befell the Land; which the people did verily believe were inflicted on them for
his Murder.

This year (according to Florence) a strange Cloud appeared about Midnight all
over England, being first seen of the Color of Blood, then of Fire, and then
like a Rainbow of diverse Colors.

King ETHELRED.
IMmediately after the unfortunate Murder of King Edward, Anno Dom.
Dcccclxxviii.
there being no other Male Issue of King Edgar left alive, Ethelred his Brother
was without any difficulty Elected, as the Ancient Annals of Thorney Abbey,
preserved in the Nero c. 7.
Cottonian Library, relate; and was also Crowned King by the Archbishop Dunstan
and Oswald, and ten other Bishops, at Kingston, the 8th Kal. May; he being (as
R. Hoveden describes him) a Youth of a most Comely Aspect, but not being above
Twelve Years of Age, William of Malmesbury gives us this short Character of Him
and his Reign: That he rather distressed than governed the Kingdom for Seven
and thirty years; that the course of his Life was cruel at the beginning,
miserable in the middle, and dishonorable in the conclusion: To Cruelty he
attributes the Death of his Brother, which he seemed to approve of, because he
did not punish; he was remarkable for his Cowardice and Laziness; and miserable
in respect of his Death. His Sluggishness was predicted by Archbishop Dunstan,
when at his Christening he superadded his own Water to that of the Font; and
thereupon Mat. Westminster makes him to swear, By God and St. Mary, this Boy
will prove a Lazy Fellow: But all this looks like a Monkish Story, invented by
those who did not love his Memory; since the same thing, though of somewhat a
grosser nature is likewise related of the Emperor Constantine, from thence
named Copronymus.

Yet sure it was no sign of ill nature, if what William of Malmesbury, and
Bromton's Chronicle relate, be true, That when he wept at the News of his
Brother's Death, it put his Mother into such a violent Passion, that having not
a Rod by her, she beat him so unmercifully with a Wax Taper which she then
light upon, that he was almost dead; which caused in him such an aversion to
Wax-Lights ever after, that he could never endure any such to be brought before
him. But this sounds too Romantic, and therefore I leave it to the Reader's
discretion what credit to give it.

But to come to somewhat more certain and material; all Authors agree, that
Archbishop Dunstan crowned this King with great reluctance; yet he was forced
to do it, as not having any of the Blood Royal fit to set up: But because the
Monks will have their St. Dunstan to have had the Spirit of Prophecy (like the
Prophets in the Old Testament) they relate, that denouncing God's Judgments
against this King at his Coronation, he said thus, Because thou have aspired to
the Kingdom by the Death of thy Brother, thus says the Lord God, The Sin of
thine Ignominious Mother shall not be expiated, neither the Sin of those that
were her Counselors, but by great Bloodshed of thy miserable People; for such
Miseries shall come upon England, as it never underwent since it had that name.
But this Doom was very unjust; for it is certain that the King never knew of,
nor desired his Brother's Death; and it was very hard to denounce God's
Judgments upon the whole Nation, for the Contrivance of one wicked Woman, and
which was put in execution by but a few of her Accomplices: So that if the
Nation was guilty of any fault, it was only in so far conniving at the Crime,
Anno Dom. Dcccclxxviii.
as out of fear or partiality, to permit the Authors of it to pass unpunished;
and for this the Bishops, they having then so great a sway in the whole Council
of the Nation, had as much to answer for, as any of the Laity: But passing by
God's Judgments, which are too deep for us to fathom, About this time (as the
Welsh Chronicles relate) Custenyn Dhu (i. e. Constantine the Black) Son to
Prince Jago (then a Prisoner) hired Godfryd the Dane to bring his men against
his Cousin Howel ap Jevaf, Prince of North Wales; so joining their Forces
together, they destroyed Anglesey and Lhyn: Whereupon Prince Howel gathered an
Army, and setting upon the Danes and Welshmen (who assisted them), at a place
called Gwayth Horborth, routed them, and Constantine was slain. I shall now
return to our Annals, which under the next year relate, That

Anno Dom. Dcccclxxx.
Archbishop Dunstan and Elfer the Ealdorman, having taken up the Body of King
Edward, which lay buried at Werham, they carried and buried it at
Scaeftesbyrig, (i. e. Sbaftsbury) with great Funeral Pomp. The occasion of
which Removal by Elfer, Earl of the Mercians (according to Bromton's Chronicle)
was that old sign of an English Saxon Saint (so often repeated in this History)
whether true or false, I shall not affirm; viz. a Column of Light streaming
down from Heaven, over the place where his Body lay buried; as also, that when
it was taken up out of the Grave, it was as whole and incorrupt as when it was
first buried three years before; whereupon having washed and dressed it in new
Clothes, they buried it with great Solemnity at the Monastery abovementioned,
where his Sister Edith, the Daughter of King Edgar by Wulfritha the Nun, was
then her self professed. But as for the strange Miracles which are here related
to have been done at his Tomb, I willingly omit them. But William of Malmesbury
further adds about this Queen Elfreda, That she took upon her the Habit of a
Nun at Werewell, a Nunnery which she lately founded, and there passed the rest
of her days in great Austerities and Devotions: She also about the same time
built another Nunnery at Ambresbury in Wiltshire; this being the usual way to
expiate the most horrid Murders in those dark times.

This year came seven Danish Ships (full of Pirates) and destroyed Southampton;
Anno Dom. Dcccclxxxi.
and (as Florence adds, though under the year before) plundered the Town, and
either killed or carried away the Townsmen Prisoners. William of Malmesbury
also takes notice of this, because they were so much talked of, as being the
first that had invaded England after above 60 years intermission, and were only
the forerunners of many more that followed: To which we may also refer that
which is added by Simeon of Durham under the year before, but should be put
under this; That the same Fleet also wasted Taenetland, (that is, the Isle of
Thanet); and the same year also the Province of Chester was much spoiled by the
Norwegian Pirates.

The same year the Danish Pirates landed in Cornwall, and burnt the Church and
Monastery of St. Petroc. Also Godfryd the Son of Harold the Dane, landed with a
great Army of his Countrymen in West-Wales, where spoiling all the Land of
Dyvet, with the Church of St. David's, he fought the Battle of Lhanwanoc; though
who had the Victory, the Welshmen or the Danes, Caradoc's Chronicle (which
gives us this relation) does not tell us.

This year, according to R. Hoveden, Anno Dom. Dcccclxxxii.
Three Ships of these Pirates landed in Dorsetshire, and spoiled the Isle of
Portland: The same year also the City of London was miserably destroyed by Fire.

About this time also, according to the same Author, Alfred and Ealdorman, or
English Earl, joining (as the Welsh Manuscript Annals relate) with Howel the
Son of Edwal, destroyed Brecknock, and spoiled a great part of the Lands of
Owen Prince of South Wales; against whom Eneon the Son of the said Owen, and
Howel King of North Wales, raising an Army, met with them, and totally defeated
them; so that the greatest part of Earl Alfred's Army was slain, and the rest
put to flight.

Also about this time the Churches of Wales began first to acknowledge the
Superiority of the Archbishops of Canterbury, Gacon Bishop of Landaffe being
now consecrated by Dunstan Archbishop of Canterbury.

This year Aelfer the Ealdorman deceased, Anno Dom.. Dcccclxxxiii.
and Aelfric his Son took his Government; some of the Monks further add, That
he was eaten up with Lice; the reason is plain, for this Aelfer had not long
before turned the Monks out of their Cloisters (as you have heard), and they
seldom failed to revenge such an Affront upon those that did so, either alive
or dead.

And the same year the Gentlemen of Gwentland in Southwales rebelled against
their Prince, and cruelly slew Eneon the Son of Prince Owen, though he came
only to appease them: This Eneon was a Gallant Young Prince, that did many
brave Actions for the Defense of his Country in his Father's life time; he
left behind him Two Sons, Edwyn and Theodore, from whom descended the Princes
of South Wales.

This year deceased Athelwald that good Bishop of Winchester, Anno Dom.
Dcccclxxxiv.
who was the Father of the Monks. And well might they call him so; for he
rebuilt or repaired above a dozen great Monasteries; so that (as William of
Malmesbury observes) it is a great wonder how a Bishop's Purse could afford to
do that in those days, which a King could scarce perform when he wrote; but the
wonder will be much abated when we consider that he had the King's Purse at his
command, besides those of other people, who then looked upon such Works as
meritorious. But to return to our Annals.

Elfeage, whose surname was Goodwin, succeeded Athelwald, and was consecrated
14. Kal. November. but was enthroned at Winchester, at the Feast of St. Simon and
Jude R. Hoveden tells us, he was first Abbot of Bathe, and then Archbishop of
Canterbury; but at last was killed by the Danes, being a man of great Sanctity
of Life.

Also the same year Howel ap Jevaf, Prince of North Wales, came into England
with an Army, where he was fought with and slain in Battle; but the place is
not mentioned. This Howel having no Issue, his Brother Cadwalhan succeeded him.

This year, according to the Saxon Annals, Anno Dom. Dcccclxxxv.
Aelfric the Ealdorman was banished the Land. Mat. Westminster styles him Earl
of Mercia, and says he was Son to Earl Alfure; but neither of them inform us of
the Crime for which he suffered that Punishment.

King Ethelred laid waste the Bishopric of Rochester; and also there was a
great Mortality of Cattle in England. William of Malmesbury, and R. Hoveden, do
here add much light to our Annals; That the King because of some Dissentions
between him and the Bishop of Rochester, besieged that City, but not being able
to take it, went and wasted the Lands of St. Andrew, (i. e. those belonging to
that Bishopric); but being commanded by the Archbishop to desist from his
Fury, and not provoke the Saint to whom that Church is dedicated, the King
despised his Admonition, till such time as he had an Hundred Pounds sent to
him, and then he drew off his Forces; but the Archbishop abhorring his sordid
Covetousness, is there said to have denounced fearful Judgments against him,
though they were not to be inflicted till after the Archbishop's death.

This year, as the Welsh Chronicles relate, Meredyth, Son to Owen Prince of
South Wales, entered North Wales with what Forces he could raise, and slew
Cadwalhon ap Jevaf in a Fight, together with Meyric his Brother, and conquered
the whole Country to himself: Wherein we may observe how God punished the
wrong which Jevaf and Jago did to their eldest Brother Meyric, who being
disinherited, had his eyes put out; for first Jevaf was imprisoned by Jago, as
Jago himself was by Howel the Son of Jevaf, and then this Howel, and his
Brethren Cadwalhon and Meyric were slain, and lost their Dominions.

This year Weedport (that is, Watchet in Somersetshire) was destroyed by the
Danes. Anno Dom. Dcccclxxxvii.


About this time (as appears by the Charter in the Monast. Angl. p. 284.) the
Abbey of Cerne in Dorsetshire, was founded by Ailmer Earl of Cornwall, near to a
Fountain, where it was said that St. Augustine had formerly baptized many
Pagans. And where also long after, Prince Edwold, Brother to St. Edmund the
Martyr, quitting his Country, then over run by the Danes, lived and died an
Hermit. But it seems from the Manuscript History of Walter of Coventry, this
Abbey was only enlarged by this Earl Ailmer, having been built some years before
by one Alward, his Father, a Rich and Powerful Person in those Parts.

Anno Dom. Dcccclxxxviii.
Goda a Thane was killed, and there was a great Slaughter. But the same Author
last mentioned, writing from some other Copy of Annals, relates this Story
another way; That this Goda being Earl of Devonshire, together with one
Strenwald a valiant Knight, marching out to fight the Danes, they were both
there killed; but there being more of them destroyed than of the English, the
latter kept the field. But to return to our Annals;

This year Dunstan, that Holy Archbishop, exchanged this Terrestrial Life for a
Heavenly one; and Ethelgar (Bishop of Selsey) succeeded him, but lived not long
after, ( viz.) only One Year and Three Months.

This is that Great Archbishop, called St. Dunstan, who was the Restorer of the
Monkish Discipline in England; and who made a Collection of Ordinances for the
Benedictine Order, by which he thought the Rule of that Order might be more
strictly observed in all the Monasteries of England.

Anno Dom. Dcccclxxxix.
Edwin the Abbot (I suppose, of Peterborough) deceased; and Wulfgar succeeded
him. The same year also Bishop Syric was consecrated Archbishop, in the room of
Ethelgar abovementioned; and afterward he went to Rome, to obtain his Pall.

This man is commonly written Siricins; but his Name in English Saxon was
Syric, or Sigeric.

About this time, according to the Welsh Chronicle, Meredyth, Anno Dom. Dccccxc.
Prince of North Wales, destroyed the Town of Radnor; whilst his Nephew Edwin,
(or, as some Copies call him, Owen) the Son of Eneon, assisted by a great Army
of English, under Earl Adelf, spoiled all the Lands of Prince Meredyth in
South Wales, as Cardigan, etc. as far as St. David's, taking Pledges of all the
Chief Men of those Countries; whilst in the mean time Prince Meredyth with his
Forces spoiled the Country of Glamorgan: So that no place in those parts was
free from Fire and Sword: Yet at last, Prince Meredyth and Edwin his Nephew,
coming to an agreement, were made Friends. But whilst Meredyth was thus taken
up in South Wales, North Wales lay open to the Danes, who about this time
arriving in Anglesey, destroyed the whole Isle.

This year Gipiswic was wasted by the Danes (this was Ipswich in Suffolk); Anno
Dom. Dccccxci.
and shortly after Brightnoth the Ealdorman was slain at Maldune. All which
mischief Florence of Worcester tells us was done by the Danes, whose Captains
were Justin and Guthmund, when the Person abovementioned, fighting with them at
Maldon, there was a great multitude slain on both sides, and the said Earl or
Ealdorman was slain there; so that the Danes had the Victory.

The same year also (according to the Annals) it was first decreed, that
Tribute should be paid to the Danes, because of the great Terror which they
gave the Inhabitants of the Seacoast: The first Payment was Ten thousand
Pounds; and it is said Archbishop Syric first gave this Counsel

To which also R. Hoveden adds, That Adwald and Alfric the Ealdormen, joined
with him in it; but which (as William of Malmesbury well observes) served only
to satisfy for a time the Covetousness of the Danes; and being a thing of
infamous example, a generous Mind would never have been prevailed upon by any
violence to have submitted to; for when the Danes had once tasted the sweetness
of this Money, they never left off exacting still more, so long as there was
any left; but they now met with a weak and unwarlike Prince, most of whose
Nobility were no better than himself; and so, as the same Author farther
observes, they were fain to buy off those with Silver, who ought to have been
repelled with Iron.

This year Oswald, that blessed Archbishop of York, Anno Dom. Dccccxcii.
departed this life; as also did Ethelwin the Ealdorman.

The former of them, Simeon of Durham tells us had the year before consecrated
the Abbey Church of Ramsey, which the latter had newly founded; and as Florence
adds, was buried in the Church of St. Mary in Worcester, which he had newly
built.

The same year also the King and all his Wise and Great Men decreed, That all
the stronger Ships should be got together at London; and the King made Ealfric
and Thorod the Ealdormen, Admirals of this Fleet; as also Aelfstan and Aestwig,
Bishops; commanding them that they should endeavor, if it were possible, to
encompass the Danish Fleet; but Ealfric sent to them underhand, to take care of
themselves; and the Night before they were to give Battle, he (to his perpetual
Infamy) secretly withdrew himself from the King's to the Danish Fleet; so that
all the Danes escaped by flight. But Florence is more plain than the Annals in
the Relation of this Flight; and tells us, that the King's Fleet immediately
pursued them, and took one of their Ships, all the rest escaping; Anno Dom.
Dccccxcii.
only the Londoners meeting with the Ships of the East Angles by chance, and
fighting with them, killed many Thousands of the Danes, and took the Ship
wherein Earl Ealfric was, with all the men, himself hardly escaping.

The same year the Inhabitants of the Isle of Anglesey, having been cruelly
harassed by the Danes, and finding no Protection or Defense from Meredyth their
Prince, then employed in other Wars (as you have already heard) they cast him
off, and received Edwal ap Meyric, the right Heir of North Wales, for their
Prince, who better defended his Subjects from Foreign Invasions; for not long
after, Meredyth, Prince of North Wales, resolving again to recover so
considerable a part of his Dominion, entering Anglesey, Prince Edwal with his
Forces met him at Lhangwin, and routed him in a set Battle; so Theodor, or
Tewdor Mawr, Nephew to Prince Meredyth, was there slain, and he himself forced
to fly.

Anno Dom. Dccccxciii.
This year also (according to our Annals) Vnlaf, (or Anlaf) the Dane, came with
Ninety three Ships as far as Stane, (now Stains upon the River Thames), and
there wasted the Country round about; and from thence they went to Sandwic,
and from thence to Gypswic, and spoiled all that Country.

But I suppose this is a Mistake in the Cambridge Copy of these Annals; which
repeat that Action of the Danes, together with the Death of Duke Bryghtnoth,
which had been already said in the Laudean and Cottonian Copies to have
happened Anno 991; and therefore what follows, seems likewise misplaced in this
Copy, concerning the Receiving and Baptizing of this King Anlaf, which it makes
to be the effect of the Victory now obtained; for Anlaf was not baptized till
the year following; as will by and by appear.

But this is more certain which comes after; viz. That this year the Town of
Bebanburgh (i.e. Banborow in Northumberland) was destroyed by the Danes, and a
great Prey there taken; after which the Danes came up the River Humber, and did
much mischief as well to those of Lindsige, as the Northumbers: Then were
mustered together a great number of Soldiers, but when they were going to give
them Battle, they fled, the first Encouragers of their flight being their own
Captains, Fraena, Godwin, and Frithegist; (all Three of the Danish Race.)

This year also (according to the same Copy) King Ethelred commanded the Eyes
of Ealfric the Ealdorman's Son, to be put out: But it does not tell us for
what: But William of Malmesbury is more express, and says it was a Punishment
for his Father's Perfidiousness; which if done now, was not only very unjust,
to punish the Son for the Father's faults, but also ill timed, to do it so long
after the Crime had been committed: But he further tells us, that he not only
revolted once, but again; and so perhaps it was for this last Rebellion, that
the King inflicted this cruel Punishment upon his Son; for had the Father been
in his power, it is most likely he would have made him to have suffered
himself: But this being so much in the dark, I shall leave it to the Reader to
make what he please on it.

There having been for some time great Enmity between Richard Duke of Normandy,
which it seems had broke out into open War, Pope John sent Leo Bishop of Treve,
as his Nuncio, first to the King of England; who having received the Pope's
Letters, called a Council of all the Great and Wise Men of the Nation; who
agreed, Anno Dom. Dccccxciii.
That upon the Pope's Admonition, Ambassadors should be sent to the Marquess of
Normandy, (for so he called) to treat of a Peace; and when they were there, the
said Marquess agreed to a lasting Peace, upon the Pope's Admonition; so that
none for the future should receive each other's Enemies: All which appears in
the Epistle of the said Pope John concerning this affair; which is recited at
large in William of Malmesbury, in his Reign of this King, to which I refer the
Reader.

About this time, according to the Welsh Chronicles, Sweyn, the Son of Harold
the Dane, having destroyed the Isle of Man, entered North Wales, and slew Edwal
ap Meyric in Battle: This Prince left behind him one Son, an Infant, who at
last came to be Prince of Wales: So that it seems there was an Anarchy in North
Wales for some time; unless Owen, formerly expelled, now recovered his
Principality; which my Author does not mention.

This year Sigeric (or Syric) Archbishop of Canterbury, deceased, Anno Dom.
Dccccxciv.
and Aelfric Bishop of Winchester was elected in his stead, on Easter Day, at
Ambresbyrig, by King Ethelred and all his Wise Men. This same year also, Anlaf
and Sweyn came to London, on the Nativity of St. Mary, with Ninety four Ships,
and assaulted the City very sharply, endeavoring to burn it; but here they
received much more damage than they believed it to be in the power of the
Citizens ever to have done them; for the Holy Mother of God out of her great
mercy took care of the Citizens, and delivered them from their Enemies: Or, as
William of Malmesbury more plainly tells us, the Besiegers despairing of taking
the City, (because the Citizens made so vigorous a defense) were forced to
march away.

But as they went off, they did as much mischief as any Army ever did, by
burning and wasting the whole Country thereabouts, and killing all the
Inhabitants in Essex, Kent, and Sussex, as also in Hampshire: And, as Florence
relates, sparing neither Man, Woman, nor Child.

But at last they provided themselves with Horses, and riding wherever they
pleased, did unspeakable Mischiefs: Whereupon it was ordained by the King and
his Wise Men, That Messengers should be sent to them, promising them both
Tribute and Provisions, if they would desist from their Spoil and Rapine: To
which request they consented; and so the whole Army came to Hamtune, and there
took up their Winter Quarters; and in the mean time the West Saxon Kingdom was
forced to maintain them; and Sixteen thousand Pounds were given to them,
besides their maintenance.

Then the King sent Bishop Elfeage to King Anlaf, as also Aethelward the
Ealdorman; and leaving Hostages at the Ships, they brought Anlaf with great
Honor to the King to Andefer, (that is, Andover in Hampshire); then King
Aethelred received him at his Confirmation, from the Bishop's hand; whereupon
Anlaf promised him (which he also performed) that he would never again infest
the English Nation. And as Florence farther adds, he now returned into his own
Country.

So it seems the Kingdom was rid of Anlaf; but what became of Sweyen or Sweyn,
the Annals do not tell us; for we hear no more of him till Anno 1004, as you
will find by and by: So that whether he went away with Anlaf, or commanded
those who infested the Kingdom the next year, Anno Dom. Dcccclxciv.
is uncertain. But perhaps we may to this time refer that which Adam of Bremen
relates of this King Sweyn, who having made War upon his Father Harwold the
Great, whom he outed of his Kingdom and Life together, was afterward himself
overcome, and expelled his Kingdom by Aerick King of Sweden; thus justly
rewarded for his horrid Crimes, he wandered up and down without relief. Thrucco
the Son of Haco, then Prince of the Normans, rejected him as a Pagan; and
Ethelred the Son of Edgar (he calls him Adalred) remembering what mischiefs the
Danes had brought on England, with scorn repelled him: So that at length he was
entertained by the King of the Scots, who taking compassion on him, gave him
free Quarter for Fourteen years together. But so enraged was he at the repulse
given him by the King of England, that ever after he studied all he could how
to plague and afflict that Country, one while by his own particular Forces,
and another by the assistance of others.

How true this Story is, we cannot affirm; the Affairs of the Northern Nations,
as to those Times, being involved in so great an obscurity: However, we thought
it not amiss to give it you, as suiting with the Fortunes and Inclinations of
this man, which proved so great a Plague to this our Country, that he seems to
have been acted by some extraordinary Passion, whether of Ambition or Revenge,
or both together. But to return to our Annals.

This year also Richard the Elder (Duke of Normandy) died; and Richard his Son
succeeded him, and reigned One and thirty years.

'This year appeared a Comet. Also the same year, as Simeon of Durham relates,
Anno Dom. Dccccxcv.
Aldune Bishop of Lindisfarne, removed the Body of St. Cuthbert, which had for
above an Hundred years remained at Cunecaeaster, that is, Chester, in the
Bishopric of Durham, to the place where the City of Durham was afterward
built, it being then altogether uninhabited. Here Bishop Aldune built a small
Church of Stone, dedicating it to St. Cuthbert; and a Town being here shortly
after built, it was called Durham.

'The Kingdom had rest this year, as also the next; but

The Danes sailed round about Devonshire, to the mouth of the River Severne,
Anno Dom. Dccccxcvii.
and there took much Plunder, as well among the North Welsh, as in Cornwall and
Devonshire.

Yet here it seems that North Wales was mis-put in these Annals, instead of the
South; for no part of the Severn Sea borders upon North Wales.

But after this, the Danes going up as far as Wecedport, (or Watchet) they did
much hurt, both by burning the Houses, and killing the Inhabitants wherever
they came. After this they sailed round Penwithsteort, (i. e. the Point called
the Land's-End) toward the South Coast, and sailing up the River Thames, went
with their Ships as far as Hildaford (now Lideford) burning and killing
whatever they met, as they passed along: They also burnt the Monastery of
Ordulph, which had been lately built by him at Aetesingstoce (now Tavistock in
Devonshire) and carried a very great deal of Plunder along with them to their
Ships. This year also Aelfric the Archbishop went to Rome to obtain his Pall.

Then the Danes turned toward the East up the mouth of the River From, and
there marched as far as they would into Dorseta, Anno Dom. Dccccxcviii.
(i. e. Dorsetshire) where an Army got together against them; but as often as
the English fought with them, so often were they by some misfortune or other
put to flight; so that the Danes still obtained the Victory: After this they
quartered in the Isle of Wight, but fetched their Provisions from Hamptunseire
and Southseax.

Also this year, according to Caradoc's Chronicle, the Danes landing again in
South Wales, destroyed St. David's, and slew Vrgeney Bishop of that See: And now
Meredyth ap Owen, Prince of North Wales, deceased, leaving one only Daughter,
who was married to Lewelyn ap Sitsylt, afterward in her Right Prince of
North Wales: But after the death of this Prince Owen, Edwin his Nephew,
abovementioned (as the Manuscript Chronicle relates) possessed himself of
South Wales, and reigned there some years.

This year the Danes sailed up the River Thames, Anno Dom. Dccccxcix.
and from thence went into the Medway to Rofceaster, where the Kentish Forces
met them, and there was a very sharp Dispute; but alas! they presently gave
place to their Enemies, and fled, because they had not assistance enough; so
that the Danes kept the field; and then getting Horses, rode wherever they
pleased, spoiling and laying waste all the Western part of Kent: Then it was
ordained by the King and his Wise Men, that an Army should be forthwith raised
against them both by Sea and Land; but when the Ships were ready, they delayed
the time from day to day, oppressing the poor people that served on board; and
if at any time the Fleet was ready to sail, it was still put off from one time
to another, so that they suffered the Enemies Forces to increase; and when the
Danes retired from the Seacoast, then our Fleet was wont to go out; so that at
the last these Naval Forces served for no other end, but to harass the People,
spend their Money, and provoke the Enemy.

This year (as Simeon of Durham relates) Malcolm King of the Scots with a great
Army wasted the Province of the Northumbers, and besieged Durham: At that time
Waltheof Earl of the Northumbers, being very old, and unable to fight with the
Enemies, enclosed himself in Bebbanburgh; whilst Vthred his Son, a Valiant
Young Man, assembling an Army out of Northumberland and Yorkshire, fought with
the Scots, and destroyed in a manner their whole Army, insomuch that the King
himself very hardly escaped: After this he made choice of a certain number of
slain Scotchmen's Heads, the best adorned with Hair he could get, and gave them
to an Old Woman to wash, allowing her for each Head a Cow for her pains; these
Heads when washed, he set upon high Poles round about the Walls of Durham.

King Ethelred being informed of this Action, sent for the Young Man, and as a
Reward for his Valor, not only gave him his Father's Country, but added to it
that of Yorkshire: Upon this Vthred returning home, dismissed his Wife the
Daughter of Aeldhure Bishop of Durham; but because he cast her off contrary to
his Promise, he surrendered up to her Six Manors which the Bishop her Father
had given him with her. Then Vthred married Siga, the Daughter of Styre, the
Son of Vlfelme.

Anno Dom. M.
The King marched into Cumerland, (i. e. Cumberland) and laid it almost waste;
but neither our Annals, nor any other Author, tell us wherefore he made this
War, nor upon whom it was made; but John Fordon in his Scotch History gives us
this Account of it; That King Ethelred having paid great Tributes to the Danes,
sent to Malcolm then Prince of Cumberland, under Gryme King of the Scots,
commanding him that he should make his Subjects of Cumberland pay part of this
Tribute, as well as the rest of the People of England; which he denying, sent
the King word, That neither he nor his Subjects ought to pay any Tribute, but
only were obliged to be ready at the King's Command, to make War, together with
the rest of the Kingdom, whenever he pleased; for he said it was much better to
fight manfully, than only to buy Liberty with Money: For this cause, as well as
for that the King affirmed that the Prince of Cumberland favored the Danes,
King Ethelred invaded that Country, and carried away great spoils from thence;
but presently after, the two Princes being reconciled, they entered into a firm
Peace for ever after.

But to proceed with our Annals: After the King had thus wasted Cumberland, he
commanded his Ships to sail round by Legceaster (i. e. Chester) to meet him
there; but they could not do it, by reason of the contrary Winds; so they
wasted the Island Manige (now called Anglesey); for the Danish Fleet was turned
this Summer upon the Dukedom of Normandy. But the next year,

Anno Dom. MI.
Their Fleet being now returned into England, there arose great Troubles in
this Island, by reason of this Fleet, which every where spoiled the Countries,
and burnt the Towns; and landing, they marched in one day as far as Aetheling
gadene (which is supposed to be Alton in Hampshire); but there the Forces of
that County marched against, and fought with them; and there Aethelweard the
King's High Sheriff, and Leofric, Gerif of Whitcircan, (i. e. Whitchurch in
Hampshire) and Leofwin the King's High Sheriff, and Wulfer the Bishop's Thane,
and Godwin the Gerif, were all slain at Weorthige, (the place is now unknown);
as also Aelfsige the Bishop's God-son, and of all sorts of men, Eighty one; yet
many more of the Danes were slain there, though indeed they kept the Field of
Battle: But from thence their Fleet sailed toward the West, until they came to
Devonshire, where met him Pallig with what Ships he could gather together: He
had revolted from King Ethelred diverse times* notwithstanding his Faith
plighted to him, and though the King had largely rewarded him both with Lands
and Money. Then they burnt Tengton (i. e. Taunton) and many other good Towns,
more than we can now name; which being done, there was a League clapped up with
them: After this they went to Exanmuthan (i. e. Exmouth) from whence they
marched in one day to Peanhoe (now Pen in Somersetshire), where Cola the
King's High Sheriff, and Eadsig the King's Gerif, met them with what Forces
they could; but they were put to flight, and many of them slain, and the Danes
kept the Field; so the next morning they burnt the Towns of Peanho, and
Clistune, (or Clifton) and several other good Towns. Then the Danes returned to
the Isle of Wight, and there one morning burnt the Town of Weltham, with diverse
other Villages; and presently after a League was made with them, and they
hearkened to Terms of Peace.

But the Laudean and Cottonian Copies differ very much from that of Cambridge,
in the telling of this story; Anno Dom. MI.
for they make the Danes to have first sailed up the River Exe, as far as
Eaxcester, and to have besieged the City, but not being able to take it, they
raised the Siege, and then marched all over the Country, killing and
destroying whatever they met with; and that then a strong Army of the
Devonshire and Somersetshire men fought with them at Peanho, with the success
abovementioned. The rest differs but little from the Printed Copy; but this
last relation seems most likely to be true.

The year following it was decreed by the King and his Wise Men, That a Tribute
should be paid to the Danish Fleet, Anno Dom. MII.
and Peace should be concluded with them, upon condition that they would cease
from doing mischief: Then the King sent Leofsig the Ealdorman to the Fleet, who
treated with them on the behalf of the King and his Council of Wise Men,
proposing that they would be content with Provisions and Money, which they
agreed to: Then, not long after, they paid them Four and twenty thousand
Pounds. In the mean time Leofsig the Ealdorman killed Aelfric the King's High
Sheriff; upon which the King banished the other the Kingdom. And the Lent
afterward came hither Aelgiva, Daughter of Richard Duke of Normandy, to be
married to the King.

The same Summer Eadulf Archbishop of York deceased: And this year also the
King commanded all the Danes in England to be slain at the Feast of St. Brice,
because it was told the King that they endeavored to deprive him and all his
Great and Wise Men of their lives, and to seize the Kingdom to themselves
without any opposition.

Matthew of Westminster casts the Odium of this Action from the King, and lays
it upon one of his Evil Counselors, whom he calls Huena, General of the King's
Forces, ^o manage the chief Affairs of the Kingdom: He seeing the Insolences
of the Danes, and that after the late Agreement they were grown insupportable
to the Kingdom; for they violated the Wives and Daughters of Persons of
Quality, and committed diverse other Injuries not to be endured: Thereupon he
came in great seeming trouble to the King, making most dismal Complaints of
these unspeakable Outrages; at which the King was so incensed, that by the
Counsel of the said Huena he sent private Letters into all parts of the
Kingdom, commanding all his Subjects without exception, That upon a certain Day
they should every where privily set upon the Danes, and without mercy cut them
off. In these Letters was also signified, that the Danes had a design to
deprive him of his Life and Kingdom, and to destroy all the Nobility, in order
to bring the whole Island under their subjection. And thus the Danes, who a
little before by a League solemnly sworn on both sides, had been admitted
quietly to inhabit among the English, were most treacherously and barbarously
murdered, not many of them escaping; even the very Women were put to death,
and their Children's Brains dashed out against the Walls; particularly at
London, when this Bloody Decree was to be executed, many of the Danes fled into
a certain Church of that City, but for all that it proved no Sanctuary to them,
for they were all there cruelly murdered even at the very Altar.

H. Huntington moreover adds, That he himself being a Child, had heard it from
certain Old Men, that by the King's Command Letters were privately dispatched
all over England, Anno Dom. MII.
to make away the Danes in one Night.

But so much Innocent Blood being thus perfidiously shed, cried aloud to Heaven
for Vengeance, and the Clamours of it likewise quickly reached as far as
Denmark: And Walsingham has given us in his History a particular Account of
the manner of it; for on the day when this barbarous Decree was executed at
London, certain young men of the Danish Nation being too nimble for their
Pursuers, got into a small Vessel then in the Thames, and by that means escaped
and fled to Denmark; where they certified King Sweyn of what had passed in
England; who being moved with indignation at this treatment, thereupon called a
great Council of all the Chief Men of his Kingdom, and declaring to them this
Cruel Massacre, desired their Advice what was best to be done: and they being
inflamed with Rage and Grief for the loss of so many of their Friends and
Kindred, decreed with one consent, That they ought to revenge it with all the
Forces of their Nation: Upon which, great Preparations were made in the several
Provinces, and Messengers sent to other Nations, to desire their Alliance with
him, promising them their share in the Spoils of that Country which they were
going to conquer: So King Sweyn having got ready a vast Fleet of above Three
hundred Sail, arrived in England: But as Bromton's Chronicle relates,

Anno Dom. MIII.
The year following, Sweyn King of Denmark, hearing of the Death of his
Subjects, sailed with a mighty Fleet to the Coast of Cornwall, where he landed,
and marched up to Eaxceaster, which, (as our Annals tell us) by the Carelessness
or Cowardice of a certain Norman, one Count Hugh, whom the Queen had made
Governor there, the Pagans took, and quite destroyed the City, and carried
thence a great Booty. Then a Numerous Army was raised from Wiltshire and
Hampshire, and being very unanimous, they all marched briskly against the
Danes; but Aelfric the Ealdorman, who commanded in chief, here showed his
wonted tricks; for as soon as both Armies were in sight of each other, he
feigned himself sick, and began to vomit, pretending he had got some violent
Distemper, and by that means betrayed those whom he ought to have led to
Victory; according to the Proverb, If the General's heart fails, the Army
flies.

But though this was very ill done of Aelfrick thus to betray his trust, yet
certainly the King was no less to be blamed himself, for trusting a man that
had so often betrayed him, and whom he had already sufficiently provoked, by
putting out the Eyes of his Son, as you have already heard.

But to return to our Annals: Sweyn now finding the Cowardice or Inconstancy of
the English, marched with his Forces to Wiltune, which Town he burnt; from
thence he marched to Syrbirig, (i. e. Old Sarum) which they also burnt; and
from thence to the Seaside to their Ships.

After the death of Edwal ap Meyric, and Meredyth ap Owen, Princes of
North Wales, as you have already heard, North Wales having for some years
continued under a sort of Anarchy, without any Prince, Meredyth leaving behind
him no Issue Male, and Edwal but one Son an Infant, it gave occasion (as the
Welsh Chronicles relate) to great disturbances; for one Aedan ap Blegored (or
Bledhemeyd, as the Cottonian Copy of the Welsh Annals call him) tho an absolute
stranger to the British Blood Royal, Anno Dom. MIII.
about this time possessed himself of the Principality of North Wales, and held
it about twelve years; but whether he came in by Election, or Force, is not
said; only that one Conan ap Howel, who fought with this Aedan for the
Dominion, was this year slain in Battle: So that Aedan for a time held that
Country peaceably, since we do not read of any other Wars he had, till the
last year of his Reign.

This year Sweyn came with his Fleet to Northwick, i. e. Norwich, Anno Dom. MIV.
(the River it seems being navigable up to it in those days) and wholly
destroyed and burnt that City; then Vlfkytel the Ealdorman consulted with the
Wise and Great Men of East-England, and by them it was judged most expedient to
buy Peace of the Danish Army, to prevent their doing any more mischief; for the
Danes had taken them unprovided, before they had time to draw their Forces
together: But these Danes not valuing the Peace which they had newly made,
stole away with all their Ships, and sailed to Theatford; which as soon as
Vlfkytel had learnt, he sent a Messenger with Commands to break or burn all
their Ships (which notwithstanding, the English neglected to do), whilst he in
the mean time tried to get together his Forces with what speed he could: But
the Danes coming to Theodford three Weeks after the destruction of Norwich,
stayed within the Town of Theodford only one night, and then burnt and laid it
in ashes: But the next morning as they returned to their Ships, Vlkytel met
with them, and there began a very sharp Fight, which ended in a very great
slaughter on both sides, and abundance of the English Nobility were there
killed; but if all the English Forces had been there, the Danes had never
reached their Ships.

But notwithstanding these cruel Wars in the Eastern and Southern Parts of
England, Wulfric Spot, Vid. Monast. Angl.
an Officer in the Court of King Ethelred, now built the Monastery of Burton in
Staffordshire, and endowed it with all his Paternal Inheritance, which was very
great, and gave that King Three hundred Mancuses of Gold, to purchase his
Confirmation of what he had done. This Monastery, though its Rents at the
Dissolution were somewhat below the Value of Five hundred Pounds per Annum, yet
being an Abbey of great Note in those Parts, and also rendered more famous from
its Annals published at Oxford, I thought good to take particular notice of it.

This year Aelfric Archbishop of Canterbury deceased; and Aelfeag (Bishop of
Winchester) was made Archbishop. Anno Dom. MV.
] But the Laudean and Cottonian Copies place this under the next year.

So cruel a Famine also raged here, as England never suffered a worse.]
Florence relates the Famine to be so great, that England was not able to
subsist.

The same year also King Sweyn with the Danish Fleet sailed into Denmark; but
in a short time returned hither again.

This year Aelfeage was now consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury, and
Brightwald took the Bishopric of Wiltonshire; Anno Dom. MVI.
as also Wulfgeat was deprived of all his Honors, and Wulfeath had his Eyes
put out. (These were Noblemen who suffered under the King's displeasure; but
what the cause of it was, I find not.) And this year Bishop Kenwulph deceased:
Then after Midsummer, the Danish Fleet came to Sandwic, Anno Dom. MVI.
and did as they used to do, killing, wasting, and plundering whatever they met
with: Therefore the King commanded all the West Saxon and Mercian Nations to be
assembled, who kept watch all the Autumn by Companies, against the Danes; but
all this signified no more than what they had done often before; for the Danes
made no less Incursions, but went wherever they pleased; and this Expedition
did the people more damage than any Army could do.

Winter coming on, the English Forces returned home, and the Danes about
Martinmass retired to their old Sanctuary, the Isle of Wight, whither they
carried whatever they had need of; and afterward about Christmas they marched
out to seek for fresh Provisions in Hamptunshire and Berrocseire, as far as
Reading; and havocking according to their usual custom, burnt the Beacons
wherever they found them; and from thence they marched to Wealingaford, (i. e.
Wallingford) which Town they wholly destroyed: Then marching to Aescesdune,
(now Aston, near Wallingford) they came to Cwicchelmeslaw, (now Cuckamsley-hill
in Berkshire) without ever touching near the Sea; and at last returned home
another way.

About the same time an English Army was mustered at Cynet, (i. e. Kennet in
Wiltshire) where a Battle was fought, but the English Troops were immediately
worsted; after which the Danes carried off all their Booty to the Seaside.
There might one have seen the Wiltshire men (like a Cowardly sort of people)
suffer the Danes to return to the Seaside, even just by their doors, with
their Provisions and Spoils. In the mean time the King marched over Thames into
Scrobbesbyrigscire, (i. e. Shropshire) and there kept his Christmas. At that
time the Danes struck so great a Terror into the English Nation, that no man
could devise how to get them out of the Kingdom, nor how well to maintain it
against them, because they had destroyed all the Countries of the West Saxons
with Burnings and Devastations. Then the King often consulted with his Wise Men
about what was best to be done in this case, whereby they might save the
Country before it was quite ruined; and after mature deliberation, it was at
length decreed by them all, for the Common Good of the Nation, (though much
against their wills) That Tribute should be again paid to the Danes. Then the
King sent to their Army, to let them know, that he was contented to enter into
a Peace with them, and to pay them Tribute, and also find them Provisions
during their stay: To which Terms all the Danes assented: So it seems the whole
English Nation was forced to maintain them. And the beginning of the year
following,

Anno Dom. MVII.
This Tribute was again paid to them; to wit, Thirty thousand Pounds. Also the
same year Aedric was made Ealdorman over all the Kingdom of Mercia.

This Aedric, though he had married the King's Daughter, is characterized by
all our Historians, for a Proud, False, and Unconstant Man; and who by his
Treachery proved the Ruin of his Country, as well as of many particular
Persons of great Worth: For not long before, (as Florence relates) he made away
Athelme that Noble Ealdorman at Shrewsbury, inviting him to a Feast, and
afterward carrying him out a hunting, where he hired the City-Hangman to set
his Dog upon him, called Porthund, which tore him to pieces: And not long after
his two Sons Walfheage and Vflgeat had their Eyes put out by the King's Order
at Cotham, where he then resided.

But we may hence observe, Anno Dom. MVII.
to how sad a state the Nation was reduced under a Voluptuous and Cowardly
King, and a Degenerate Nobility: And the reason why the Annals say, That the
People's being kept in Arms all the Winter, did them as much harm as the Enemy;
was, because having then no standing Forces, the Country Militia were fain to
be kept upon Duty at their own Charges, whilst their Families were ready to
starve at home: So impossible a thing it is to maintain any long War either at
home or abroad, without a Standing Army.

But now the King having too late perceived his Error, viz. That the greatest
Cause of his Ruin proceeded from the want of a good Fleet,

He then commanded Ships to be built all over England; Anno Dom. MVIII.
(to wit) to every Hundred and ten Hides of Lands, one Ship; and of every Eight
Hides a Helmet and Breast Plate: And so by the next year,

His Ships were all finished, Anno Dom. MIX.
and they were both so many and withal so good, that (as our Histories affirm)
England never saw the like before: Then after they were all well manned and
victual'd, they were brought to Sandwic, and there remained, in order to defend
the Kingdom against the Invasion of Strangers; yet notwithstanding all those
Preparatives, the English Nation was so unhappy, that this great Fleet met with
no better success than often before; for it happened about this time, or a
little sooner, that Brightric (a false and ambitious man) the Brother of Aedric
above mentioned, accused Wulfnoth a Thane of the South Saxons, (and Father of
Earl Godwin) to the King; upon which Wulfnoth saving himself by flight, got
together twenty Ships, and with them turning Pyrate, took Prizes all round the
Southern Coast, and did a world of mischief; but as soon as it was told the
King's Fleet, that they might easily surprise him if they would but cruise
about that place, Brightric upon this taking Eighty Sail along with him, had
mighty hopes by seizing of him either alive or dead, to make himself signally
famous; but as he was sailing thither, so great a Tempest arose, as never had
been in the memory of man, by which all his Fleet was shipwrack'd, or stranded
on the shore; and Wulfnoth coming thither presently after, burnt all the rest
that were left. Now when this News came to that part of the Fleet where the
King was in Person, the whole Action seemed to be undertaken very
precipitately, without any good Advice at all. And thereupon the King with all
his Ealdormen and Great Men returned home, leaving both the Ships and Men to
shift for themselves: But those that were in them, carried them up to London.
And thus did all the Labor and Expense of the whole Nation come to nothing,
without in the least diminishing the Power of their Enemies as the people hoped
they would have done.

When all these Naval Preparations were thus defeated, there arrived presently
after Harvest a mighty Fleet of Danes at Sandwic; and after they were landed
they immediately marched to Canterbury, which City they would forthwith have
destroyed, had they not humbly besought a Peace of them: Upon which all the
East Kentish men came and clapped up a Peace with the Danes, and purchased it at
the Price of Three thousand Pounds: But these Heathens presently afterward
sailed round again, till they came to Wihtland, (i. e. the Isle of Wight) and
there, as also in Southseax, Hamtunscire, and Bearruscire, they plundered and
burnt Towns as they used to do: Hereupon the King commanded the whole Nation to
be summoned, Anno Dom. MIX.
that every Province should defend it self against them: But for all this, they
still marched wherever they pleased, without any body's disturbing them: But
one time when the King had hemmed them in with his whole Army, as they were
going to their Ships, and all his Forces were just ready to fall upon them,
Aedric the Ealdorman hindered them, as he always did.

For, as R. Hoveden relates, he over persuaded the King by his cunning and
plausible reasons, not to run the hazard of a Battle, but to let them go off if
they would; and so they returned to their Ships with a great deal of joy that
they had so well got themselves out of that Toil.

Then after Martinmass they returned again into Kent, and took up their
Winter Quarters near the Thames, fetching their Provisions from Essex, and
those Provinces that lay nearest, on each side the River; and they frequently
threatened the City of London, but (thanks be to God it had hitherto kept it
self safe), there they met with always but an ill reception.

After Christmas they made an excursion through Cyltern, (that is, the
Chiltern, or Woody Country of Bucks, and Oxfordshire) and so to Oxnaford, and
burnt that City, and having plundered on both sides the Thames, they returned
to their ships; but when they heard that an Army was prepared ready against
them at London, they again passed over the River at Stanes, and thus rambled
about the Country all this Winter; yet about Spring they came again into Kent,
and there refitted their ships.

Anno Dom. MX.
But presently after Easter the Danish Army marched out against the English,
and going on shore at Gypeswic (i. e. Ipswich) went directly thither, where
they knew Earl Vlfkitel was encamped with his Forces; this happened on
Ascension day in the morning; so the East-English presently fled, and there
were on the spot slain Ethelstan the King's Son-in-Law, as also Oswi and his
Son, and Wulfric the Son of Leofwin, with many other Noble Thanes, and common
Soldiers not to be numbered: One Thurkytel, surnamed Myranheafod, (that is, in
our present Language, Ant's-head) first began to fly, whereby the Danes kept
the field; and having provided themselves with Horses, they subdued all
East-England, spoiling and burning for three Months together, where they went;
then marching into the Fens, they there destroyed both Men and Cattle, and
burnt the Towns of Theodford and Grantabyrig, (i. e. Cambridge): Then turning
Southward toward the Thames, they rode on Horseback to their ships; and
presently coming out of them again, they marched toward the West into
Oxnafordscire, and from thence into Buckinghamscire, and so along the River
Owse, till they got as far as Bedanford; and thence to Temesanford (now
Temsford), burning all the Towns in their way.

Then again they returned to their ships with all their Plunder, and there
divided it amongst them. But as for the King's Forces, when they should have
stopped their passage, they even returned home; and when the Danes were in the
East, they were taken up in the West; and whilst they were in the South, the
others were in the North.

And Florence farther adds, That in this Expedition into Oxfordshire, the Danes
not only took, but burnt the City of Oxford.

All which Destructions must needs have proceeded from hence, Anno Dom. MX.
that the Danes making War by Sea as well as by Land, could upon the approach
of the King's Army sail away to any other part of the Kingdom, and from thence
march off again before the King's Army could ever come at them; which proves
how absolutely necessary it is for an Island to maintain a powerful Fleet, if
ever they mean to be safe. But to return to our Annals.

At last all the Wise Men of the Kingdom were again summoned by the King, to
consult how they might better defend the Kingdom; but, it seems, whatsover was
there resolved on, did not continue a month without alteration, till at last
there were no Commanders that would raise any Forces, but every one fled away
as fast as they could, neither would any one Shire help its Neighbors:
Insomuch that before the Feast of St. Andrew, the Danish Army came to Hamtune,
which Sea-Town they burnt, and took what Plunder they pleased in the
Neighborhood, and from thence again passed over the Thames into West-Seax, and
thence into the Marshes of Kent, all which they wholly burnt and destroyed: And
when they had thus marched wherever they would, about Midsummer they returned
again to their Ships.

Oxford and Cambridge being both burnt this year by the Danes, all Studies
ceased at each of these Places, till long after, as Thomas Rudburn relates, one
Robert Bolean began to read his Lectures on the Scriptures, Anno 1133. From
which time (says he) the Scholars have still continued both at Oxford and
Cambridge.

But no wonder that things succeeded no better, if what Caxton in his Chronicle
relates, were true concerning those Times; That when the Nobles met in the
Great Council of the Kingdom, instead of consulting for the good of it, they
fell to impeaching one another, and spent their whole time in their own private
Quarrels; the Churchmen standing upon their Privileges, refused to assist the
King, or to contribute any thing considerable to the Public Necessities: To
all which mischiefs were likewise added Robberies, and Scarcity of Bread; which
still encouraged the Danes, as they perceived the Kingdom grow weaker and
weaker, to demand greater Tribute to buy their Peace; till at last the Kingdom
was quite exhausted of all its Treasure.

This year the King and his Wise Men sent again to the Danish Army with desires
of Peace, promising them both Provisions and Money; Anno Dom. MXI.
for they had then subjected to them all East-England, East-Seax, Middle-Seax,
Oxnaford, Grantebiryge, Heortford, Buckingaham, Bedanford, and Huntandun
Scyres, and on the South Side of Thames; and all the Kentish-men, and
South Saxons, with the Town of Haestings; and besides all these, Suthrig, (i.
e. Surrey) Bearruc, and Hamtune Scires, and great part of Wiltunscire; all
which miseries happened to us through evil Council, because the Tribute was not
paid them time enough, and not till they had done all the mischiefs they could.
Then was a Peace clapped up with them: Yet nevertheless this League being soon
broken, they marched about every where in Troops, carrying off a world of Booty
with them, either taking these poor people Prisoners, or else slaying them
outright.

Also this year, between the Nativity of the Virgin Mary and Michaelmas, they
besieged Canterbury, and took it by Treachery; for one Aelmer (an Archdeacon)
whose Life Archbishop Aelfeage had formerly saved, Anno Dom. MXI.
betrayed it to them (after twenty days Siege); then they took Prisoners
Archbishop Aelfeage, and Aelfwold the King's Sheriff, and Leofwin the Abbot,
and Godwin the Bishop of Rochester; but Aelmer, Abbot of St. Augustine's they
let go.

They likewise took all in Holy Orders, both Men and Women; nor can it be told
how many these were; after which they remained in the City as long as they
pleased: But as soon as they had plundered it, they went back again to their
Ships, carrying the Archbishop along with them; and he was now become a
Captive, who but a little before was the Spiritual Head of the English Nation:
One might there have seen Misery at its full stretch, where used to be Joy and
Prosperity; even in that City from whence was first brought to us the joyful
Tidings of the Gospel: But they detained the Archbishop Prisoner (near Seven
Months) till such time as they martyred him.

Osbern in his Life of St. Elfeage, relates, That this Archbishop sent to the
Danes when they came before the Town, desiring them to spare so many innocent
Christians lives; but they despising his request, fell to battering the Walls,
and so throwing Firebrands into the City, set it on fire; so that whilst the
Citizens ran to save their Houses, Aelmeric the Archdeacon let the Danes into
the City.

Florence here adds, That the Monks and Laity were decimated after a strange
manner; so that out of every Ten Persons, only the Tenth was to be kept alive;
and that only Four Monks and about Eight hundred Laymen remained after this
Decimation: And that not long after, above Two thousand Danes perished by
diverse inward Torments; and the rest were admonished to make satisfaction to
the Bishop, but yet they obstinately refused it.

Florence of Worcester, and R. Hoveden also relate, That the Danes destroyed
many of the Prisoners they had taken, with cruel Torments, and various Deaths.

This year Eadric the Ealdorman (surnamed Streon), and all the Wise and Chief
Men, Anno Dom. MXII.
both Clerks and Laics of the English Nation, came to London before Easter
(which fell out then the day before the Ides of April) and there stayed until
such time as the abovementioned Tribute could be paid, which was not done till
after Easter, and was then Eight thousand Pounds: In the mean time (being about
Six Months after) upon a Saturday the Danish Army being highly incensed against
Archbishop Aelfeage, because he would neither promise them Money himself, nor
yet would suffer any body else to give them any thing for his Ransom; for
which, as Osbern in his Life relates, they demanded no less than Three thousand
Pounds in Silver, (a vast Sum in those days); which being denied them, and many
of them being got drunk, they laid hold on the Archbishop, and led him to their
Council on the Saturday after Easter, and there knocked him on the head (as the
Annals relate) with Stones and Cows Horns, till at last one of them striking
him with an Axe on the Head, he fell down dead with the Blow.

Florence says, that this was done by one Thrum a Dane, whom he had the day
before confirmed, being thereunto moved by an Impious Piety. But John of
Tinmouth in his Manuscript History of Saints, called Historia Aurea now in the
Library at Lambeth, relates that when Archbishop Elfeage was thus killed, the
Danes threw his Body into the River, Anno Dom. MXII.
which was soon taken out again by those whom he had converted.

But our Annals here farther, That the Bishops Eadnoth and Aelfhune, (the
former of Lincoln, and the latter of London) took away his sacred Body early
the next morning, and buried it in St. Paul's Minster, (where God now shows the
power of this Holy Martyr.) But as soon as the Tribute was paid, and the Peace
confirmed by Oath, the Danish Army was loosely dispersed abroad, being before
closely compacted together; then Five and forty of their Ships submitted to the
King, and promised him to defend the Kingdom, provided he would allow them
Victuals and Apparel.

The year after Archbishop Aelfeage was thus martyred, Anno Dom. MXIII.
the King made one Lifing Archbishop of Canterbury: Also the same year, before
the Month of August, King Sweyn came with his Fleet to Sandwich, and soon after
sailing about East-England, arrived in the Mouth of Humber; and from thence up
the River Trent, till they came to Gegnesburgh (now Gainsborough in
Lincolnshire).

Which mischief, according to William of Malmesbury, proceeded from Turkil a
Dane, who was the great Inciter of the Death of the Archbishop, and who had
then the East-English subjected to his will. This man sent Messengers into his
own Country to King Sweyn, letting him know, that he should come again into
England; for the King was given so much to Wine and Women, that he minded
nothing else; wherefore he was hated by his Subjects, and contemned by
Strangers; that his Commanders were Cowards, the Natives weak, and who would
run away at the first sound of his Trumpets. Though this seems not very
probable, for Earl Turkil was then of King Ethelred's side, as you will see by
and by.

King Sweyn being prone enough to slaughter, needed no great Entreaties to
bring him over; he had been here eight years before, and why he stayed away so
long, I wish our Authors would have told us: But William of Malmesbury further
adds, That one chief end of his coming over, was to revenge the death of his
Sister Gunhildis, who being a Beautiful Young Lady, had come over into England
with Palling her Husband, a powerful Danish Earl, and receiving the Christian
Religion, became her self a Hostage of the Peace that had been formerly
concluded: But tho the unhappy Fury of Edric had commanded her to be beheaded
together with some other of her Countrymen, yet she bore her Death with an
undaunted Spirit, having seen her Husband, and a Son, a Youth of great and
promising hopes, slain before her face. But to come again to our Annals:

So soon as King Sweyn arrived in the North, Earl Vhtred and all the Country
of the Northumbers, with all the people in Lindesige, and the people of the
five Burghs or Towns (but what these were we now know not) lying on the other
side Waetlingastreet, submitted themselves to him. There were also Hostages
given him out of every Shire; but when he found that all the people were now
become subject to him, he commanded them to provide his Forces both with Horses
and Provisions, whilst he in the mean time marched toward the South with great
expedition; committing the Ships and Hostages to Knute his Son: And after he
had passed Waetlingastreet, they did as much mischief as any Army could do:
Then they turned to Oxnaford, whose Citizens presently submitted themselves to
him; Anno Dom. MXIII.
from thence he went to Wincester, where the Inhabitants did the same; and from
thence they marched Eastward toward London, near which many of his men were
drowned in the Thames, because they would not stay to find a Bridge; but when
they came thither, the Citizens would not submit, but sallying out, had a sharp
Engagement with them, because King Ethelred was there, and Earl Turkil with
him: Wherefore King Sweyn departed thence to Wealingaford, and then over Thames
Westward to Bathe, and there sat down with his whole Army, whither came to him
Aethelmar the Ealdorman of Devonshire, with all the Western Thanes, who all
submitted themselves to him, and gave him Hostages.

When he had subdued all these places, he marched Northwards to his Ships, and
then almost the whole Nation received and acknowledged him for their real King:
And after this the Citizens of London became subject to him, and gave him
Hostages, because otherwise they feared they should be utterly destroyed; for
Sweyn demanded that they should give full Pay and Victuals to his Army; and
that Winter Thurkil demanded the same for King Ethelred's Forces, which lay at
Grenawic, (i. e. Greenwich). But both the Armies refrained not a jot the less
from plundering where they pleased; so that the Nation both as well in the
North as in the South, was no longer able bear it.

After this the King stayed some time with his Fleet which lay then in the
Thames, whilst the Queen retired beyond Sea to her Brother Earl Richard (in
Normandy); and Elsige Abbot of Burgh went along with her; the King also sent
thither the Princes Eadward and Aelfred, with Bishop Aelfune to be their
Governor. Then the King went with his Fleet about Christmas into Wihtland, and
there kept the Festival; and afterward passed over to Earl Richard, and there
stayed with him till Sweyn died.

There is in the Peterburgh Copy of these Annals, this following Relation; That
whilst the Queen thus remained beyond Sea, Elsige Abbot of Burgh, who was then
with her, went to the Monastery called Boneval, where the Body of Saint
Florentine lay buried: This place he found almost wholly deserted, and the poor
Abbot and Monks in a miserable condition, having been robbed of all they had;
then he bought of the Abbot and Monks the whole Body, except the Head, for Five
thousand Pounds, In the Saxon it is 500 l.
and at his return into England dedicated it to Christ and St. Peter, that is,
he placed it in the Church of Peterburgh, of which he was then Abbot.

This was a vast Sum of Money in those days, to be given for the Bones of one
dead Carcass, and not entire neither; but such was the Superstition of that Age.

This year King Sweyn ended his Life about Candlemas: Then all the Danish Fleet
and Army chose Cnute his Son to be their King: Anno Dom. MXIV.
But all the Wise or Chief Men of the English Nation, as well of the Clergy as
Laity, sent to King Aethelred, to let him know that there was no Prince dearer
to them than their own Natural Lord, provided he would govern them better than
he had hitherto done. Upon this the King sent Prince Edward his Son, and
several others, Attendants, into this Kingdom, with Orders to recommend him to
the whole Nation in his Name, promising them to be a faithful and kind Lord to
them; and that he would redress whatever Grievances they had suffered, and
would also pardon whatsoever had been done against him either by Words or
Deeds, provided they would all sincerely return to their Allegiance. Anno Dom.
MXIV.


Then a full and firm Amity being concluded on both by Words and Deeds, and
Hostages being given on both sides, they decreed the Danish King for ever
banished England: After which King Ethelred returned about Lent into his own
Country, and was cheerfully received by all men.

The Bodleian Copy of Florence here adds, That Queen Elfgiva (or Emma) with the
Two Young Princes her Sons, remained still in Normandy, until she was (after
the Death of her Husband) sent for over by King Cnute, and the Common Council
of the Kingdom, and being married to him, was solemnly crowned at Westminster,
in the presence of all the Bishops and Great Men of England.

After Sweyn was dead, Cnute his Son staid with his Army at Gegnesburgh until
Easter, and there agreed with the people of Lindesige, that they should provide
his Army with Horses, and then that all of them should march out together to
plunder; but King Ethelred came thither with a strong Army before they were
ready to execute their Design, and spoiled and burnt all places, killing all
the men they could meet with; therefore King Cnute departed thence with his
Fleet, leaving the poor miserable people to shift for themselves, and sailed
Southward till he came to Sandwic, and there put the Hostages on shore which
had been given to his Father, having first cut off their Hands and Noses. But
for an addition to all these Calamities, the King commanded Twenty one thousand
Pounds to be paid to the Army that then lay at Grenawic.

Also this year on the Vigil of St. Michael, happened a great Inundation of the
Sea all along this Coast, insomuch that it spread further than ever it had yet
done, so that it drowned many Towns, and an innumerable company of men.

We have nothing further to add under this year, more than to observe the
various Relations of our Monkish Writers concerning the sudden death of King
Sweyn, which they will needs have to be a Judgment upon him for wasting the
Lands belonging to the Monastery of Badricesworth, and for giving opprobrious
language against the Memory of St. Edmund, who was then enshrined. But because
their Relation of this matter is very remarkable, I shall give you both
Florence of Worcester, and Simeon of Durham, their Account of it; which is
thus, That King Sweyn lying then at Gainsborough, there held a General Assembly
of his Great Officers; and when it grew toward evening, being encircled with
his Armed Men, he cast out Threats, that he would send and spoil that
Monastery; whereupon he presently thought he saw St. Edmund coming all Armed
toward him, which made him cry out vehemently, Help, help, Fellow Soldiers,
look here, King Edmund comes to kill me; and as he uttered these words, he
received a Mortal Blow by the Saint's hands, and so fell from his Horse, and
lying till the dusk of the evening in great torment, he expired on the second
of February, and was carried to York, and there buried: So these Writers report
from the Legend of St. Edmund: Yet John of Tinmouth makes St. Edmund's Ghost to
have stabbed him with his Dagger as he sat in his Chair. But William of
Malmesbury tells us, That St. Edmund appeared to him in his sleep, and smote
him whilst he was in bed, because he answered him rudely: Anno Dom. MXIV.
But they all agree that he died of the Blow which St. Edmund had given him:
But I do believe that there may be so much Truth in this story, that King Sweyn
being mortally wounded by some unknown hand, who had the good fortune to make
his escape, gave occasion to the Monks of St. Edmundsbury to invent this Legend
for the Honor of their Saint, and also to deter others from daring to violate
that place, which was then accounted sacred.

But is seems King Ethelred was not much bettered by Affliction, nor did he
long observe his Promise of governing according to Law; for the next year,

A Mycel Gemot (or Great Council) being now held at Oxnaford, Earl Eadr^c there
betrayed Sigeferth and Morcar, Anno Dom. MXV.
two (Danish) Thanes, of the Seafenburghs (that is the Seven Towns, but where
they lay, we know not) and inviting them all into his Chamber, they were there
treacherously slain: Then the King seized upon all their Goods, and commanded
the Widow of Sigeferth to be secured, and carried to Meadelnesbyrig, (i. e.
Malmesbury): But some short time after, Edmund Aetheling coming thither,
married this Woman against his Father's will: For the Prince going (as William
of Malmesbury relates) to see her, upon the great fame of her Beauty and
Virtue, having seen her, and presently falling in Love with her, he there
married her. Florence, and Mat. Westminster, do also farther relate, that not
only these two Noblemen, but also diverse of the Nobility appeared there, who
though they were of Danish Blood, yet stood firm to King Ethelred's Interest;
the chief of these were Sigefert and Morchar, (abovementioned) men of great
Riches and Power in the Northern Parts, and that perfidious Earl Edric, who
gaping after their Estates, accused them secretly of Treason to King Ethelred,
by whose Order the Earl invited them all with great show of kindness to a
Feast, where he caused them to be treacherously murdered. But their
Dependants, who went about to revenge their Lords death, were repulsed, and
forced to fly into the Tower of St. Frideswide's Church in Oxford, from whence,
when they could not easily be driven, the Tower was set on fire, and they
consumed with it: But presently after, the King repenting of his Cruelty,
caused the Church to be cleansed and repaired.

This year also Lhewelyn ap Sitsylt, who was married to Angharat, only Daughter
to Meredyth Prince of Wales, (as you have already heard) raised great Forces
against Aedan ap Blegored, the usurping Prince of North Wales, and fighting a
bloody Battle with him, there slew him with his four Sons; but the place is not
mentioned where this Fight was: After which, Lhewelyn took upon him the
Principality of North Wales (for one Kynan, or Conan, then held South Wales);
but though this Lhewelyn was descended by his Mother's side from Howel Dha, yet
notwithstanding he was not the Lawful Heir of North Wales, but Jago Son to
Prince Edwal abovementioned, who after the death of this Lhewelyn succeeded
him, as you will hear in due time.

After this, about the Feast of the Nativity of the Virgin Mary, Edmund
Aetheling marched toward the Five Burghs (places in the North of England to us
unknown) and presently invading the Lands of the said Sigeferth and Morchar,
subdued all that Country. About the same time King Cnute arrived at Sandwic,
and forthwith sailed round about Kent, to the West Saxons, till he came to the
mouth of the River From, and there landing, plundered all about Wiltshire,
Dorsetscire, and Sumersetscire. At the same time King Ethelred lay sick at
Cosham (in Wiltshire) and then Earl Eadric got together an Army, and Edmund
Aetheling another in the Northern parts; but when they came near one another,
the Ealdorman lay in wait to entrap Prince Edward, and cut him off, but was not
able to effect it, (for his Design was discovered); whereupon they shiered off
without fighting at all, and by that means yielded the field to their Enemies.
Then Eadric having first gained over to him Forty of the King's Royal Navy,
submitted to Cnute, as did also the West Saxons, and gave him Hostages, and
provided Horses for his Army, and there he stayed among them till Christmas.

This year King Cnute came with his Fleet of a Hundred and sixty Sail, and with
him Eadric the Ealdorman, Anno Dom. MXVI.
over the Thames into Mercia, as far as Crecilade (on the North-side of
Wiltshire); and then toward Christmas they turned about to Waeringscire, (i.
e. Warwickshire), where they plundered without mercy, burning Towns, and
killing all that came in their way. Upon this Aedmund Aetheling began to raise
an Army against them; but when his Forces were got together, they were but of
little service to him, because that neither the King was present there, nor did
the Citizens of London come up to his assistance; so that Expedition was
utterly lost, and every man went home again about his own business.

But after the Holidays were over, another Expedition was appointed, under a
great Penalty upon every one that should not appear at the Muster, though he
lived never so far off: And a Messenger was sent to the King at London, humbly
beseeching him to come and meet the Prince's Army with all the Forces he could
raise; but (it seems) when they were all got together, they signified no more
than what they had often done formerly; for it was told the King that some in
the Army conspired against him, whereupon he dismissed his Forces, and so
returned to London.

So that whoever reads this History, may perceive that this King through his
own Cowardice or Ill Fortune, was constantly attended with ill success where
ever he went.

Then Prince Edmund rode down to the Northumbers to Earl Vhtred, and all men
thought they were about to raise another Army against King Cnute, but they went
into Staeford, and Scrobbesbyrig, and Legacesterscires, plundering in all
places where they came; whilst Cnute did the like in his Quarters, marching
through Buckingahamshire, and from thence into Bedafordshire, and so through
Huntingtonshire over the Fens to Stanford, and from thence into Lincolnescire,
and afterward into Nottinghamshire, and so into Northumberland, toward
Eoforwic (i.e. York); which when Vhtred had heard, he desisted from spoiling
the Northern Parts; and so being compelled through necessity, submitted
himself, together with all the Northumbers; and tho he gave Hostages, yet he
was shortly after slain (by King Cnute's Orders), as was also Thurkytel the Son
of Nafan (as Florence relates) by Thorebrand a certain Noble Dane; but,
according to Malmesbury, it was done at the Command of Cnute himself.

After this, Cnute appointed Yric to be Earl of the Northumbers, instead of
Vhtred, and then returned Southward another way by the Western Coasts, so that
his whole Army arrived at their Ships before Easter; Anno Dom. MXVI.
but Edmund Aetheling returned to London to his Father. After the Holidays King
Cnute with all his Ships sailed toward London; but it happened that before the
Danish Fleet arrived there, King Ethelred deceased on the Feast of St. George,
after he had suffered many Afflictions and Miseries in this life.] And was
buried at St. Paul's in London.

This Prince has the Ill Character from William of Malmesbury, and the rest of
our Historians, of being given to Wine and Women; and that neglecting the
Company of the Queen his Wife, he debased the Royal Majesty by frequenting
Mistresses of mean Quality, which very much alienated his Consort's Affections
from him; though she had two Children by him, viz. Elfred and Edward. He is
also said to have been Tyrannical to his own Subjects, taking away their Lives
and Estates only for pretended Crimes. That he was also both Cowardly and
Cruel, appears by that Barbarous Massacre of the Danes in time of Peace. But
William of Malmesbury says it was a wretched and miserable time; for every one
was obliged to give up or murder his dearest Guests; nay, those whom a nearer
Relation had yet rendered dearer to him. That this King was likewise Timorous
and Unfortunate in all his Undertakings, appears through the whole course of
his Reign; from whence he has the Title among our English Historians, of
Ethelred the Unready, because his Preparations were always either ill-timed or
unsuccessful; but as he was a mean-spirited Prince succeeding a Magnanimous
Father, so Prince Edmund his Son and Successor equaled his Grandfather King
Edgar in Courage, tho not in good Fortune.

But though King Ethelred was no Great or Worthy Prince in his own Person, yet
with the Assistance of his Wites or Wise Men of his Great Council, he made
diverse excellent Laws and Constitutions. There are in Bromton's Chronicle four
several Bodies of these Laws, made at as many several times, and in diverse
places, whereof there are only two extant among the Saxon Laws published by Mr.
Lambard.

The Laws comprised in the first Division are Six, there said to have been made
at Woodstock in Mercia, for the restoration of Peace according to the Law of
England.

The first is, That every Freeman shall find Sureties to be bound for him, that
he shall do right in case he be accused.

The second I shall omit, since it has been already mentioned in the Laws of
King Edgar; only the latter end of it is very remarkable; to wit, The Lord
shall answer for his whole Family, and be Surety for the appearance of every
Person in it. And if any of his Servants after they are accused, run away, the
Lord or Master shall pay his man's Were to the King: And if the Master be
accused as the Adviser to, or Promoter of his Escape, he shall purge himself by
five Thanes; and if he do it not, he shall pay to the King his Were, and his
man shall be an Outlaw.

The Third ordains, That a Bondsman being cast by the Ordeal, shall be marked
with a Hot Iron for the first Offense; and being cast in the same manner the
second time, shall be put to Death. Which Law bears some resemblance to our
present Law or Custom, whereby Clergy is allowed for the first Crime committed.

By the fifth the King's Reeve or Officer is obliged to require Sureties for
the good behavior of such as are of ill fame amongst all men; which if such a
one obstinately refuses to give, he is to be put to death, Anno Dom. MXVI.
and to be buried in an unhallowed place with Malefactors: And if any use force
in his behalf to further his Escape, he is to undergo the same Punishment.

As for the next Set of Laws, they are said to have been made at Veneting, or
Wanating (now Wantage in Berkshire), and for the increase of common Peace and
Happiness by King Ethelred and his Wise Men.

The first of them is concerning the keeping of the King's Peace, as it was in
the days of his Predecessors, and for the punishment of the breach of it, in
case of Manslaughter: If it were in a Gemot or Assembly of five Boroughs, with
the forfeiture of five Pounds weight in Silver: If in an Assembly of a Borough
or Town, by a Mulct of Seven hundred (Shillings). [But how much this was, is
not known; for we have not now any true account of the Standard of Money at
that time.] If in a Wapentake, by One hundred; and if in an Alehouse a man be
killed, with six half Marks; if he be not killed, with twelve Oars; for the
Value of which, Vid. Sir Hen. Spelman's Gloss.

From hence (but especially from the Laws of King Ina) we may observe, how
Ancient the Liquor of Ale, and Alehouses, have been in England, as also (what
commonly follows it) quarrelling, and breaking of the Peace in such places.

The fourth commands, That Public Meetings be observed in every Hundred or
Wapentake; and that Twelve Thanes, (says Bromton) or Twelve Men of free
condition, (as Lambard reads it) being Elderly Men, together with their
Praepositus (or Chief) shall swear upon the Gospels or Holy Relics, That they
will neither condemn an Innocent Person, nor acquit a Guilty One.

From whence we may observe the Antiquity of Trials by a Grand Inquest of more
than Twelve Men, even in the English Saxon times, and was not introduced by
William the Conqueror, as Polydore Virgil, an Italian, not much skilled in the
Antiquities of this Island, has delivered in his History.

And to confirm what we have here said, the Third Chapter of the League betwixt
King Alfred, and Guthrun the Dane, very much makes out, which orders, That if
the King's Thane or Servant be accused of Homicide, he shall purge himself (if
he dare) by twelve other Thanes: Which you may see at large in those Laws
themselves; and besides these the Reader throughout the whole Collection of
Saxon Laws may observe, there is frequent mention made of clearing and purging
by so many men summoned for that purpose, as sometimes by twelve, sometimes by
fewer, and sometimes by more.

As for the Trial by Ordeal, it grew more in request in the Reign of King
Cnute, and his Successors, being indeed originally a Danish Custom.

The rest of the Laws of King Ethelred made at Wantage, having many of them
relation to this way of Trial by Ordeal, and containing many obscure terms, I
omit. But since several of them may very well be referred to other former Laws,
I shall only select from amongst them, such as are most worthy to be taken
notice of here.

The twenty third appoints what Custom should be paid by Ships and Vessels of
all sorts that unladed at Billinggesgate; from whence it appears that this was
the Ancient Port of London, Wines and all other Commodities being here unladed.

Anno Dom. MXVI.
The twenty sixth imposes the same Punishment upon such as wittingly receive, as
well as on those that make Bad Money.

Whereby we may observe, That though the Coining of Bad Money was not as yet
made Treason, yet it was punishable at the King's discretion, either by Fine or
Death, as you will see in the following Law.

The twenty eighth puts it into the King's power, whether to fine or put to
death such Merchants as import Counterfeit Money: And further imposes upon all
Port-reeves that shall be accessory, the same Punishment as upon those that
coin false Money, except the King think fit to pardon them.

There are also other Laws which we cannot certainly affirm to have been made
in his time, though the general Conjecture is that they were. These are
comprised in an Agreement or Act which the Wise Men of England and the
Counselors of Wales made, concerning the Inhabitants of the Mountains of that
Country: But as for the particular Laws made in this Common Council of both
Nations, since they only concern Cattle or other Goods taken away on either
side, or else the manner of giving Testimony both by Welsh and English
Witnesses in such cases, I refer the Reader to the Laws themselves; and shall
only desire him to take notice, That Justice was to be equally administered by
Twelve Judges, Six Welsh and Six English men, much after the same manner as the
Commission for the Borders of England and Scotland is now executed.

But that we may see how great a distance there was then between these two
Nations (which, God be thanked, are now united into one) the sixth Article of
these Laws expressly forbids the Welsh to come into England, or the English to
enter Wales, except received at either Bank by the Borderers, who shall take
care for their safe conduct and return: And in case any Borderer be accused of
false dealing herein, and cannot by witness disprove it, he should be fined.

King EDMUND, surnamed Ironside.
AFter the Death of King Ethelred, Anno Dom. MXVI.
all the Wise and Great Men who were then at London, together with the Citizens
of that place, elected Eadmund the Eldest Son of that King to reign over them,
who held it but a short time, and that with great difficulty. William of
Malmesbury says he was born of a Woman whose name he did not know; but De
Genealog: Reg. Ang.
Ethelred Abbot de Rievallis, says she was the only Daughter of Toret a Noble
Earl, whom the Chronicle of John of Wallingford calls Ethelred's first Wife:
But Mat. Westminster relates otherwise, that he was not born of Queen Emma, who
was his only Wife, but of a certain Ignoble Woman; yet besides the Obscurity of
his Birth, he was a Man without all exception, both for Strength of Body and
Mind, and therefore called by the English, Ironside. He would have made amends
both for his Father's Cowardice, and his Mother's want of Birth, had he been
but allowed some longer time to have lived. So that it appears by these
Authors, that this King Edmund was born of a Concubine.

But to come to our History: When King Edmund was thus declared King at London
(as Simeon of Durham tells us) with great Acclamations of Joy, he also relates,
That many of the Bishops, Abbots, and Noblemen of England coming to
Southampton, abjuring the Progeny of King Ethelred, at the same time chose
Cnute for their King; who (according to our Annals) immediately came with his
Fleet to Grenawic, about Lent, and within a short time after marched up to
London, Anno Dom. MXVI.
where they dug a great Trench on the South Side of the River, and drew their
Ships to the West Side of the Bridge, and besieged the City, insomuch that none
could go in or out, making such frequent Assaults upon it; yet the Citizens
resisted them vigorously: But King Eadmund was marched out before into
West-Saxony, where all that Nation willingly submitted themselves to him. Not
long after, he fought with the Danes at Peonnan (now Pen) near Gillingam (in
Somersetshire.)

But Cnute not being there, they do not tell us who commanded in his stead, for
he was then with his Fleet at the Siege of London.

'After Midsummer King Eadmund fought another Battle at Sceorstan (which place
is supposed to be a Stone that now parts the four Counties of Oxfordshire,
Gloucestershire, Worcestershire, and Warwickshire): But our Annals do not
mention who had the Victory; only, That there were many killed on both sides,
and that the two Armies marched off from each other of their own accord; for
Eadric the Ealdorman, and Aelmer, then joined with the Danes against King
Edmund.

But as William of Malmesbury tells us, Eadric the Traitor was the cause of the
King's Soldiers running away; for holding up his Sword dipped in the Blood of
some mean person, (or as Simeon says, his Head, which was very like King
Edmund's) whom he had newly killed, he cried out to the English, to fly, for
their King was dead: Yet R. Hoveden adds, That the Fight was very bloody, and
both Parties were forced to leave off, being quite tired.

Anno Dom. MXVI.
Our Annals do then thus proceed, That King Edmund having gathered an Army the
third time, marched to London, and raised the Siege, driving the Danes to their
Ships, and within two days after the King passed over at Brentford, and there
fought the Danes, and put them to flight; but many of the English were drrown'd
by their own negligence, as they ran before the Army, being greedy of spoil.

After this the King marched down toward the West Saxons, and there reinforced
his Army; whilst in the mean time the Danish Forces returned to London, and
besieged that City, assaulting it both by Land and Water, but God at that time
also delivered it; whereupon the Danes departed from London with their Ships
into Arwan, and there landing marched up into Mercia, killing and burning all
they met with, according to their old custom, and there furnished themselves
with Provisions, and then drew all their Ships with their Spoil up the Medway.

But where this Arwan abovementioned lay, is very uncertain; That it could not
be the River Arrow in Warwickshire (as some fancy) is plain, that being no
where Navigable: Therefore the Ingenious Editor of these Annals, in the
explication of the Proper Names of Places at the end of the Book, does very
probably guess, that this River was either that which we now call Orwell, which
divides Essex from Suffolk; or else that there is an Error in the Saxon Copy,
and instead of into Arwan, it should be read to Waran, that is, they went up
the River Lee as far as Ware: But this I leave to the Reader's Judgment, and
shall again return to the Annals themselves.

Then King Eadmund assembled the whole English Nation a fourth time, and passed
the Thames again at Brentford, and from thence went into Kent, and there put
the Danish Horse to flight in Seapige, and killed as many of them as they could
meet with: But Eadric the Ealdorman by his subtle Artifices persuaded the King
to stay at Aeglesford, which was the most perfidious advice that could be given
him.

Florence of Worcester, and William of Malmesbury are more particular in this
Transaction; and say, That the Traitorous Earl abovementioned so
over-persuaded the King by his plausible Insinuations, that he did not pursue
the Danes, when almost routed, or else he might have obtained an absolute
Victory.

Then (according to our Annals) the Danes turned against the West Saxons, and
marched into Mercia, killing all before them; but when the King understood that
the Danes were gone thither, he drew all the English Forces together the fifth
time, and following them himself in the Rear, overtook them near a Hill called
Assandun (now Ashdown in Essex), where they had a very sharp Engagement; but
there Eadric the Ealdorman playing his old pranks, first of all began the
flight with the Magesaetons, by Cambden supposed to be the Radnorshire men; and
so once more deceived his Natural Lord, and the whole Nation.

But here, though I cannot but admire the wonderful Courage and Constancy of
this Brave Prince, yet can I not commed his Prudence, who could thus trust a
known Traitor, that had not only betrayed himself, but his Father before him:
But I need make no long reflections upon this, since we find few Princes guilty
of the like Easiness in later Ages.

But this is certain from our Annals, Anno Dom. MXVI.
That Cnute now obtained the Victory against the greatest part of the English
Nation; and there were slain on the spot Eadnoth the Bishop, and Wilfsige the
Abbot, Aelfric and Godwin the Ealdormen, and Wulfkytel Earl of East-England,
and most of the English Nobility.

William of Malmesbury highly commends this Wulfkytel, and says that he
deserved perpetual Honor, because he was the first in the time of Sweyn, who
set upon the Danish Pirates, and gave some hopes that they might be conquered.
But as for Eadnoth Bishop of Lincoln, and the Abbot abovementioned, they came
not to fight, but as Simeon says, to pray to God for those that did; so that
the English Nation never yet received a greater Blow.

But King Edmund being left almost alone, got to Gloucester, and there rallied
and recruited his shattered Troops; but thither (according to our Annals) King
Cnute with all his Army pursued him: Then Eadric the Ealdorman, and all the
Great Men on both sides advised the Two Kings to come to Terms of Peace:
Whereupon they both met together at Olanege (an Island in the River Severn, now
called the Eighth) and there concluded a League between them (Hostages and
Oaths being mutually exchanged) and agreed, That the Danish Army should be paid.

A Peace being thus concluded, the two Kings parted from each other, Eadmund
going into West-Saxony, and Cnute to the Mercians.

But since other Authors have more particularly related the Cause and Manner of
making this Peace, I shall give you a larger account of it from Simeon of
Durham, and R. Hoveden; the first of whom says, That the Traitor Edric and some
others, when King Edmund would have fought again with Cnute, would by no means
suffer him to do it; but advised him rather to make a Peace, and divide the
Kingdom with him; to whose Persuasions the King at last (though unwillingly)
consented; and Messengers passing between them, and Hostages being
interchanged, the two Kings (or rather, their Commissioners, as Bromton's
Chronicle relates it) met at a place called Deorhurst, on the Severne, and
there concluded a Truce. Then King Edmund with his men being on the West side
Severne, and Cnute with his Followers sitting down on the East side thereof,
they passed over in Ferry-boats to the Island abovementioned, where they met,
and agreed upon the Terms of Peace.

But Ethelred Abbot of Rieval, tells the Story somewhat different, viz. That
both Armies growing weary of the War at last, compelled the Great Men on each
side to come to a Conference, where one of the most Elderly among them is
brought in making a long Speech, (I suppose to show the Wit of those Authors);
and therein he very pathetically represents the Mischiefs the Soldiers lay
under, in thus exposing their Lives and Fortunes for Two Princes of equal
Courage; and so advised them before it was too late, That since King Edmund
could not endure a Superior, nor Cnute an Equal, they should leave it to them
two to fight by themselves for that Crown which they both so much desired to
wear; left by this desperate way of fighting, the Soldiers should be all
killed, and then there would be none left to defend the Nation against Foreign
Invaders. Which Speech being highly approved of by all there present, both
Armies cried out with one voice, Let them either Fight, Anno Dom. MXVI.
or Agree: This Sentence of the Chief Commanders and Soldiers being brought to
both the Kings, pleased them so well, that they met in the Island
abovementioned, and there fought singly in the sight of both Armies; where
having broken their Spears, and then drawn their Swords, there follows in these
Authors a long and Tragical Relation of this mighty Combat, which yet it seems
happened without any Wounds on either side; but Cnute beginning at last to be
out of breath, and fearing the greater Strength and Youth of King Edmund,
proposed a Peace to be made by division of the Kingdom between them; and they
give us also the fine Speech made by King Cnute upon this Subject; which
Proposal being willingly received by King Edmund, they kissed and embraced each
other, both Armies wondering and weeping for joy at this so happy and
unexpected agreement. So mutually changing both their Arms and Apparel in
token of Friendship, they each returned to their own men, and there drew up the
Conditions of the League; viz. That King Edmund should enjoy West-Saxony, and
Cnute the Kingdom of Mercia; but what was to become of the rest of England,
they do not speak one word.

But tho so many of our Writers seem pleased with this Romantic Story, yet I
rather assent to the Testimony of our Annals, and the Encomium Emmae, as also
William of Malmesbury, Florence of Worcester, and several Manuscript Authors in
the Cottonian Library, who all agree this Peace to have been made at the place
aforesaid, without any Combat at all between the two Kings: Only William of
Malmesbury relates, that when King Edmund had challenged Cnute to fight with
him single, to save the further Effusion of their Subjects Blood, this
Challenge being carried to King Cnute, he utterly declined it, saying, Though
he had as great a Courage as his Antagonist, yet he would not venture his own
small Body against a man of so great Strength and Stature; but since both their
Fathers had enjoyed a share of the Kingdom, it was more agreeable to prudence
to divide it between them: Which Proposal being joyfully received by both
Armies, as a thing most just and equal in it self, and which most tended to the
good of both Nations, now harassed out by long and cruel Wars, King Edmund
accepted of, and agreed (though with some reluctance) to a Peace, upon the
terms abovementioned. Thus we find what a great uncertainty there is in most
of the Relations of those times. But to proceed with our Annals:

The Danes as soon as this Peace was concluded, went to their Ships with all
the Plunder they had taken, and from thence failed to London, and there took up
their Winter Quarters.

For that City, as being part of the Mercian Kingdom, had now submitted it self
to them.

Not long after this, viz. at the Feast of St. Andrew, King Eadmund departed
this life, and was buried with his Grandfather King Eadgar at Glaestingabyrig.
The same year also deceased Wulfgar in Abbandune, whereof he was Abbot, and
Aethelsige succeeded him.

But since our Annals tell us only of the sudden Death of this Prince, without
relating the manner of it, we shall give it you more at large from other
Authors, who almost generally agree, that he was murdered by that Traitor
Edric, though they differ somewhat in the Actors or Instruments by whom it was
committed; some will have him to be taken off by Poison; others, with an Arrow
shot by an Image made on purpose, which discharged it self upon the King as
soon as he touched it; Anno Dom. MXVI.
but this is too improbable to beget any credit: And therefore what William of
Malmesbury, and Bromton, relate, is most likely to be true, viz. That this
Aedric abovementioned suborned two of this King's Servants to lie under the
House-of-Office, and to thrust up a sharp piece of Iron into his Fundament, as
one night he sat down to ease himself. Tho the Chronicle last-mentioned says
this Murder was committed at Oxford by one of Edric's Sons, who at the command
of his Father stabbed him in the Hinder Parts with a long sharp Knife, and left
the Weapon sticking in his Body. But H. Huntington, and Alred Abbot of
Rievalle, say that Edric was the first who saluted Cnute Sole King of all
England; to whom when he had told all the matter, the King answered Well, for
so great a Good Turn, I will advance thy Head above all the Lords in England;
and thereupon commanding him to be beheaded, ordered his Head to be set upon
the Tower of London: But this being related by no other Author besides Mat.
Westminster, is not probable; for all others make him to have been alive some
time after this. But Simeon of Durham and R. Hoveden, do with greater certainty
relate, That as soon as he received the News of Edmund's Death, he ordered all
the Bishops, Ealdormen, and Chief Men throughout England, to be summoned to
London, and when they appeared before him, he cunningly asked them, If they
were Witnesses of the Agreement which had been made between him and King
Edmund, concerning the Division of the Kingdom; and whether there was any
Condition inserted, That either his Sons or his Brethren should succeed him in
the Kingdom of the West Saxons? Then they all began with one accord to say,
They did not know that King Edmund had left any part of the Kingdom to his
Brethren, either living or dying; but as for his Sons, they knew very well that
Edmund would have left him to be the Protector of his Children, till they
should come of fitting age to reign: But they likewise add, that they bore
false witness, and lied grossly, because they hoped to make King Cnute the more
favorable to them, and should thereby receive the greater Rewards for their
pains: But some of them had a just Recompense for their Perjury, by being not
long after put to death. Hereupon King Cnute after he had thus taken their
Testimonies, received the Oaths of Fidelity from the said Great Men and
Bishops, who all swore that they would choose him for their King, and willingly
raise Taxes to pay his Army; and at the same time also they renounced the Sons
of King Edmund, (Edward and Edmund) from ever being Kings of this Nation.

But King Cnute growing jealous of these Young Princes, sent them to the King
of Sweden, that they might by him be made away; which he out of compassion not
only refused, but generously sent them to Solomon King of Hungary, to be
educated; and being there kindly received for some time, Edmund the elder of
them died, but Edward the younger marrying Agatha the Queen's Sister, had by
her Edgar, surnamed Aetheling, Christina a Nun, and Margaret, afterward
married to Malcolme King of Scotland; of whom we shall have occasion to speak
further, before we come to the end of this Book.

King CNUTE.
Anno Dom. MXVII.
THis year (according to our Annals) Cnute King of Denmark began to reign over
all England, which he divided into four Parts or Governments, reserving West
Saxony to himself, committing East-England to Earl Thurkyl, Mercia to Eadric,
and the Northumbers to Yric; but not long after, the said Eadric the Ealdorman
was killed: The manner of which Bromton's Chronicle thus relates, That at
Christmas the King being at London, in a certain upper room on the other side
of the Thames, it happened that the Traitor Eadric upbraided the King with his
services, How that for his sake he had betrayed King Ethelred, and also made
away Edmund his own King, and yet he had received no very extraordinary
advantage or benefit thereby, according to his Merits, (to be sure, as he
himself thought); at which Cnute being highly enraged, answered, Out of thy own
mouth shall thou be judged, who plainly confessest thy self a Traitor against
both thy former Kings, therefore thou shall certainly dye: So he immediately
commanded him to be tied hand and foot, and flung out of the Window into the
River; though some other Authors relate that he was first strangled: But we
cannot find for certain which way it was done; for William of Malmesbury and R.
Hoveden only say this, That the King commanded Eadric, surnamed Streon, to be
slain in the Palace, because he was afraid of being circumvented by his
Treacheries; and ordered likewise his Body to be flung over the Wall of the
City, and there to lie unburied.

The Annals do here further add, That Northman Son to Earl Leofwin, and
Aethelward Son to Aethelmaer the Great, and Brihtric Son to Aelfger Earl of
Defenanscire, were also put to death; but their Crimes are not set down:
Therefore R. Hoveden supposes them to have been only the King's Jealousy of
their too great Power, being all English Noblemen, though I suspect they were
guilty of somewhat more than what we find related.

The same year also the King banished Eadwig Aetheling, called Ceorles Cyng,
(i.e. King of the Clowns) Brother to King Eadmund. But the Annals seem to make
this Eadwig two persons, though for what reason I know not; but however he was
not immediately banished after Cnute came to the Crown, as some Writers
suppose; neither yet was he put to death, as Simeon of Durham, and Bromton,
relate; for the latter tells us this Story of him, That Cnute not thinking
himself safe so long as Edwig was alive, consulted with Earl Eadric how to have
him dispatched out of the way; by whose advice the King sent for one Ethelward,
and tempted him privately with large Rewards; but he abhorring in his heart so
foul a deed, however promised to do it as soon as he found a fitting
opportunity, and by this means still deferred it. But then the same Author
adds, That having by the said Eadric's Counsel banished Prince Edwin, the year
following, under a feigned Reconciliation, he was by King Cnute's Order made
away; which is contrary to what William of Malmesbury relates; for he says that
this Prince, Anno Dom. MXVII.
having been long tossed about both by Sea and Land, and being broken as well
in Body as in Mind, secretly returned into England, and lay concealed till he
died, and then was buried at Tavistock.

But the Annals further say, That before the Kal. of August, the King commanded
Queen Emma, Widow of the late King, his Predecessor, to be brought over to him,
and some time after took her for his Consort.

This he did to gain the Friendship of the Duke of Normandy her Father; but she
is highly censured for marrying the sworn Enemy of her Husband and her
Children: Though this only let us see that it is no new thing for Princes to
prefer the wearing of a Crown even before their own Honor.

Now again (according to our Annals) was paid that Tax or Tribute called
Danegelt, throughout all the English Nation, to wit, Anno Dom. MXVIII.
Seventy two thousand Pounds; besides that which the Citizens of London paid,
viz. Eleven thousand Pounds more. Which Tax being raised when there seemed to
be no more fear of the Danes, it looks as if King Cnute (...) took upon him to
govern as a Conqueror. From which also you may observe the flourishing Trade
and Wealth of that City in those days, since it could even at that time pay
above a Seventh of this excessive Taxation.

Then also a great part of the Danish Army returned into Denmark, and only
forty Ships remained with King Cnute; the Danes and English were likewise now
reconciled and united at Oxnaford: Bromton says it was done at a Great Council
or Parliament at Oxford, where King Cnute ordained the Laws of King Edgar (i.
e. of England) to be observed.

The same year also Aethelsige, Abbot of Abbandune deceased, and Aethelwin
succeeded him.

This year King Cnute returned into Denmark, Anno Dom. MXIX.
and there stayed all the Winter. Bromton's Chronicle says he went over to
subdue the Vandals, who then made War against him, and carried along with him
an Army both of English and Danes; the former being commanded by Earl Godwin,
set upon the Enemies by surprise, and put them to flight; after which the King
had the English in as much as esteem as his own Danish Subjects. But the year
following,

He returned into England, and then held a Mycel Gemot, Anno Dom. MXX.
or Great Council at Cyrencester, where Ethelward the Earldorman was outlawed.
The same year also King Cnute went to Assandune (the place where he had before
fought the great Battle with King Edmund) and there caused a Church to be built
of Lime and Stone for the souls of those men that had been slain there: Which
being (as R. Hoveden relates) consecrated in the King's presence by Wulstan
Archbishop of York, and diverse other Bishops, was committed to the care of his
Chaplain, whose Name was Stigand.

Also Archbishop Living deceased, and Ethelnoth a Monk and Dean of Canterbury,
was consecrated Bishop by Wulstan Archbishop of York.

But before we proceed farther, I will give you some account of the Affairs of
Wales in these times: Where after the death of Kynan, or Conan, the Usurping
Prince of South Wales abovementioned, Lewelyn Prince of North Wales had,
according to Caradoc's Chronicle, possessed himself of South Wales, Anno Dom.
MXX.
and had for some years governed both those Countries with great Peace and
Prosperity, so that from the North to the South Sea, there was not a Beggar in
the whole Country, but every man had sufficient to live of his own, insomuch
that the Country grew daily more and more populous.

But this year produced a notable Impostor: for a certain Scot of mean Birth
came now into South Wales, and called him self Run, or Reyn, (as the Manuscript
Copies have it) the Son of Meredyth ap Owen, late Prince of Wales, as you have
already heard: Upon which the Nobility of that Country, who loved not Lewelyn,
set up this Run, or Reyn, to be their Prince; But Lewelyn hearing of it,
assembled all the Forces of North Wales, and marched against this Run, who had
now also got all the strength of South Wales together; and going as far as
Abergwily (i. e. the mouth of the River Gwily) there waited the coming of
Lewelyn; but when he arrived, and both Armies were ready to join Battle, Run,
full of outward confidence, encouraged his men to fight; yet no sooner was the
Battle begun, but this Impostor soon discovered what he was, by withdrawing
himself p^^^ly out of the fight; whereas on the contrary, Lewelyn like a
Courageous Prince standing in the Head of his Army, called out aloud for this
base Scot, Run, who durst so belie the Blood of the British Princes: Both
Armies then meeting, fought for a while with great Courage, and Malice to each
other; but it seems the South Wales men being not so resolute in the Quarrel of
this Impostor, as those of North Wales were to defend the Right of their Lawful
Prince* the latter being also encouraged by the Speeches and Prowess of their
Prince, put the former to the Rout, and pursued this Run so closely, that he
had much ado to escape; Prince Lewelyn having got thus a great deal of Spoil,
returned home, and for a short time governed these Countries in Peace. But to
return to our Annals;

Anno Dom. MXXI.
This year, about Martinmass, King Cnute outlawed ( i. e. banished) Earl
Thurkyl:] But they tell us not the Crime. Yet William of Malmesbury makes it a
Judgment, for being the principal Promoter of the Murder of Archbishop
Aelfeage; and that as soon as he returned into Denmark, he was killed by some
Noblemen of that Nation.

This year also, according to an Old Manuscript belonging to St. Edmundsbury,
and cited by the Lord Chief Justice Coke, in the Preface to the 9th Book of his
Reports, King Cnute held a Parliament at Winchester, wherein were present the
two Archbishops, and all the other Bishops, as also many Ealdormen and Earls,
with diverse Abbots, together with a great many Knights, and a vast multitude of
People; and there, in pursuance of the King's desires, it was decreed, That the
Monastery of St. Edmund the King should be free and for ever exempt from all
Jurisdiction of the Bishops and Earls of that Country.

But Sir H. Spelman here very well observes, that this Manuscript could be no
Ancienter than the Reign of Henry the Third, because the word Parliament was
not in use before that time.

Though thus much is certain, That King Cnute the year before founded this
Monastery, afterward called St. Edmundsbury, (but then known to the Saxons by
the name of Beadrichesworth) where there had been a Church built before; and
King Edward the Elder, in the year 942, had also given several Lands to it, and
upon which Foundation King Cnute had lately built and endowed the said Abbey,
which was one of the Largest and Richest in all England.

Lewelyn ap Sitsylt, Prince of Wales, Anno Dom. MXXI.
but a short time enjoyed the fruits of his late Victory; for this year the
Welsh Chronicles tell us, he was slain by Howel and Meredyth, the Sons of
Prince Edwin, or Owen, abovementioned, who yet did not succeed in the
Principality; for J^go, Son to Edwal late Prince of Wales, was now advanced to
the Throne as Lawful Heir, having been long debarred of his Right: But it seems
he could not do the like in South Wales, which one Rytheric ap Justin seized
upon, and held by force.

This year King Cnute sailed with his Fleet to the Isle of Wight; Anno Dom.
MXXII.
but upon what account, our Annals do not show us: Also Archbishop Aethelnoth
went to Rome, and was there received by Pope Benedict with great Honor, who
put on his Pall with his own hands, and being so habited, celebrated Mass, as
the Pope commanded him; and then after he had dined with him, returned home
with his Benediction.

Also Leofwin the Abbot, who had been unjustly expelled from the Monastery of
Elig, was his Companion, and there cleared himself of those Crimes of which he
had been accused, before the Pope: the Archbishop and all the Company that were
there present, testifying on his behalf.

Wulstan Archbishop of York deceased, and Aelfric succeeded, Anno Dom. MXXIII.
Edelnoth the Archbishop consecrating him at Canterbury. Also this year the
same Archbishop translated the Relics of St. Aelfeage (his Predecessor) from
London to Canterbury.

The King himself, as William of Malmesbury tells us, removed them with his own
hands, paying them all due Veneration; and further adds, that his Body remained
as incorrupt as if he had been but lately killed.

Richard the Second, Duke of Normandy died, Anno Dom. MXXIV.
and Richard his Son ruled after him one year; and then Rodbert his Brother
succeeded him, and ruled eight years.

This year King Cnute sailed with his Fleet into Denmark, Anno Dom. MXXV.
to a Plain near the Holy River, but where that was, I know not; and there came
against him Wulf and Eglaf, with a very powerful Army out of Sweden both by
Land and Sea; and many on King Cnute's side were there killed, both Danes and
English, the Swedes keeping the field of Battle. After which Cnute returning
into England, I find no mention made of any Action here in any Author, for the
two succeeding years. But then,

King Cnute sailed with fifty Ships of English Thanes into Norway, Anno Dom.
MXXVIII.
and drove King Olaf out of that Country, and conquered it for himself.

Bromton's Chronicle relates, That this Olaf being a Soft and Easy Prince, was
already in a manner driven out by his own Subjects; and so Cnute only went as
it were to receive the Kingdom from the Nobility and People, who submitted
themselves presently to him.

'King Cnute came back into England. Anno Dom. MXXIX.
] And (as R. Hoveden adds) upon his Return banished Hacun a Danish Earl, that
had married his Niece Gunhilda, who was his Sister's Daughter, sending him away
under pretense of an Embassy; for the King was afraid lest otherwise he might
deprive him both of his Kingdom and Life.

Anno Dom. MXXX.
King Olaf returned again into Norway, to regain his Right; but the People
rising up against him, he was there slain.

This is he who was afterward canonized under the Title of King Olaf the
Martyr.

About this time (as Guil. Gemeticensis, and John of Walingford, do both
relate) Robert Duke of Normandy pitying the long Exile of his Nephews Edward
and Alfred, sent Ambassadors to King Cnute, requiring him to restore them to
their Right; but he not at all valuing his threatening, sent the Ambassadors
back with a Repulse; whereat the Duke conceiving great indignation, assembled
his Nobles, and by their Advice caused a great Navy to be prepared, which in a
short time came to Anchor at Fescam; then the Duke with his Army put to Sea,
but by Tempest was driven into the Isle of Guernsey, and so shattered, that he
was forced to return home, where they were detained a long time by contrary
Winds, which was an extreme mortification to him.

But not long after, Ambassadors came over to him from King Cnute, signifying,
That he was contented to resign to the Young Princes half the Kingdom, which
they should peaceably enjoy during his life, (and that was not like to be long)
for he then labored under a languishing Distemper: Wherefore the Duke thought
good for some time to defer his Expedition till he should be come back from
Jerusalem, whither he had vowed to undertake a Pilgrimage. And when he had
recommended to Robert Archbishop of Rouen, and other Nobles, his Son William,
then a Child of Seven Years old, and received from them Assurances of their
Fidelity to him, he began the said Voyage; and having performed it; as he was
returning homewards the next year, he fell sick, and died about the Alps. But
of this William his Son, by Harlotte his Concubine, (...) not only succeeded
his Father, but was also afterward King of England; as you shall hear when we
come to his Reign.

Anno Dom. MXXXI.
This year, as soon as King Cnute returned into England, he gave the Port of
Sandwic to Christ's Church in Canterbury, with all the Issues and Profits
arising from thence on both sides the Haven, according to an Extract from his
Charter (preserved among the Vid. X. Script. col. 2225.
Evidences of that Church); and that as far as, when the Tide of Flood was
highest, and a Ship lying near the Shore, a man could from thence cast a little
Axe on land, so far the Christ-Church Officers should receive all Rights and
Dues.

This year also, according to Tom. I. p. 282.
Monast. Angl. King Cnute founded another Monastery for Benedictines in
Norfolk, which from its being seated in a Woody Place, was called by St.
Bennet's in Holme; the Lands and Site of which Abbey being by King Henry the
VIIIth, after the Dissolution of the Monasteries, exchanged with the Bishop of
Norwich for other Lands; he is the only Bishop of England who has still the
Title of an Abbot.

Also under this year I find a Charter in the Manuscript Copy of Florence of
Worcester, in the Bodleian Library, made to the Monastery of St. Edmundsbury,
granting and confirming all its Lands and Privileges; the beginning of which
Charter being somewhat remarkable, I shall here recite: Cnute, Rex Totius
Albionis Insulae, aliarumque Nationum adjacentium, in Cathedra Regali promotus,
cum Consilio and Decreto Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, Abbatum, Comitum,
omniumque meorum Fidelium elegi sanciendum, and perpetuo stabilimento ab
omnibus confirmandum, Anno Dom. MXXXI.
quod Monasterium, quod Badriceswerde nuncupatur, etc. which is also printed
from the Original, at the end of Mr. Petyts Treatise of the Rights of the
Commons, etc.

King Cnute having performed these great Deeds of Charity and Devotion, not
long after (in the same year, as our Annals inform us) 'began his Journey to
Rome.

But since our Annals do not tell us what he did there, I shall give it you in
short from his own Letter, as I find it in William of Malmesbury, which upon
his return from Rome, he wrote and sent into England, by Living Abbot of
Tavistock; and begins thus:

Cnute, King of Denmark, Norway, and all Swedeland, to Ailnoth (or Egelnoth,
the Metropolitan), and to Alfric of York, with all the Bishops and Primates,
and to the whole English Nation, as well Noblemen as Plebeians, Health: Wherein
he gives an account of his Journey, as also the reason of his undertaking it;
then how honorably he was received at Rome, and what he had there negotiated
for the benefit of his Subjects: Then he gives Directions and Commands to his
Officers to do all Justice and Right to the People in his Absence, a thing to
which he resolved on (as he says) long before, but never could till now
accomplish what he had designed for the Pardon of his Sins and the Safety of
all his Subjects; he further signifies, that he was received by all the
Princes, who at that time were with Pope John; solemnizing the Feast of Easter,
with extraordinary Respect and Honor, but especially by Conrade the German
Emperor; that he had dealt with them all about the concernments of his people
both English and Danes, that their Passage to Rome might be more free and open;
and had obtained, that as well Merchants as others should with all safety pass
and repass without any Toll or Imposition: He had also complained to the Pope,
that his Archbishops paid vast Sums of Money before they could obtain their
Palls, which Grievance was by the Pope's Decree taken off. All these Immunities
procured from the Pope, the Emperor, Rodolph King of France, and all other
Princes throughout whose Territories he traveled, were confirmed by Oath,
under the Testimonies of Four Archbishops, and Twenty Bishops, with an
innumerable Company of Dukes and other Noblemen there present. Then follows a
Thanksgiving to Almighty God, for giving him such Success in what he had
undertaken. After this, he desires it might be published to all the world, that
having devoted his Life to God^s service, he resolved to govern the People
subject to him in all Piety, Justice, and Equity; And in case any thing
blameworthy had been done by him in his Youth, by the help of God he was now
ready to make full amends for it. Therefore he charges all his Ministers
whatsoever, as well Sheriffs as others, That for fear of him they should not
pervert Justice, because there was no necessity that Money should be raised by
any unjust exactions. And at last, after great Asseverations how much he
studied the Profit and Convenience of his People, he adjures all his Ministers
before he arrived in England, that they should procure all Dues to be paid
according to the ancient Custom; as the Alms of the Plow, the Tithes of all
Cattle brought forth in the same year, Peter Pence in August, with the Tithes
of Corn, and at Martinmass the First fruits of the same, called Curcescot, or
Cyrescot (i.e. Money given to the Church); Anno Dom. MXXXI.
in case this was not paid before his Return, he threatens severely to
animadvert upon every one according to the Laws.

William of Malmesbury further adds, That at his Return he was as good as his
word; for he commanded all the Laws which had been made by former English
Kings, and chiefly by Ethelred his Predecessor, to be observed under great
Penalties; for the true observation whereof, our Kings (says he) are at this
very day sworn under the name of the Good Laws of King Edward; not that he only
ordained them, but because he observed them.

So that from hence we may take notice, That Kings who have the least of
Hereditary Title, if they mean to reign happily, ought in Policy, as well as
Conscience, to observe the Laws of that Kingdom to which they have been
advanced without any Right of Blood.

But to return again to our Annals; they further tell us, That upon the King's
return from Rome (where it seems he staid not long after) he marched into
Scotland, and there King Malcolm became subject to him, with two other Kings
(of the Isles) called Maelbaerth and Jehmarc.

The same year also Robert Earl of Normandy went to Jerusalem, and there died;
and William who was afterward King of England, began to reign, being an
Infant.

From whence we may plainly see, that the Cottonian Copy of these Annals was
wrote in the form we have them, after the Conquest; and though the other Copies
do not expressly call him King of England, yet they give him the Title of King
William, which is all one.

About this time (as the Welsh Chronicles relate) the Irish Scots invaded
South Wales, by the means of Howel and Meredyth, the Sons of Edwin
abovementioned, who hired them against Rythaerch ap Jestyn, the Usurping
Prince of that Country, whom by the assistance of these Scots they slew in
Battle, and by that means got the Government of South Wales, which they ruled
jointly, but with small quiet; for the Sons of Rythaerch gathered together a
great number of their Father's Friends, to revenge his death; with whom Prince
Howel and Meredyth meeting at Hyarthwy, after a long Fight routed them, and
made them fly; but the year following Prince Meredyth himself was slain by the
Sons of Conan ap Sitsylt, Brother to Prince Lewelyn, to revenge their Father's
death, whom Meredyth and his Brother Howel had slain.

Anno Dom. MXXXII.
This year appeared a strange kind of Wildfire, such as no man ever remembered,
and did a great deal of mischief in diverse places. The same year also deceased
Aelfsige Bishop of Winchester, and Aelfwin the King's Chaplain succeeded in
that See.

Anno Dom. MXXXIII.
Merehwit Bishop of Somersetshire (i. e. Wells) deceased, and was buried at
Glastingabyrig.)

Anno Dom. MXXXIV.
' Aetheric the Bishop died (the Annals tell us not of what See): But Simeon of
Durham, and R. Hoveden add, That Malcolm King of Scots died this year, to whom
succeeded Mactade.

Anno Dom. MXXXV.
The same Authors farther tell us, That King Cnute before his Death appointed
Swane his Eldest Son to be King of Norway; and Hardecnute, his Son by Queen
Aemma, to be King of Denmark; and Harold, his Son by Aelgiva, a Hampshire Lady,
to be King of England after himself.

This year King Cnute deceased at Scaeftesbyrig, Anno Dom. MXXXVI.
and was buried at the new Monastery at Winchester, having been King of England
almost twenty years.

There is no King that can deserve a more various Character than this; since
none who came in so roughly, after governed more mildly: He was naturally
Cruel, and very Ambitious, and stuck not at any thing to gain a Kingdom, as
appears by his dealing with his Predecessor's Children, and Brothers; but more
particularly with Olaf King of Norway, whom Simeon of Durham relates to have
been turned out of it by the secret Practices and Bribes which he liberally
bestowed upon the Great and Factious men of that Kingdom; but however, toward
his latter end he reigned both prudently and moderately; and we may say of him
what a Roman Author does of one of his Emperors, That it had been well for this
Kingdom if he had never reigned at all, or else had continued longer; none of
his Sons resembling him either in Valor or Wisdom.

But to let you see that this King was really sensible before his death, of the
Vanity of Worldly Empire, I shall, to divert the Reader, give you this story of
him, out of H. Huntington, who thus relates it, viz. That King Cnute being once
at Southampton, caused his Royal Seat to be placed on the shore, while the Tide
was coming in; and with a Majestic Air said thus, Thou Sea belongest to me,
and the Land whereon I sit is mine; nor has any one unpunished resisted my
Commands; I charge thee therefore come no further upon my Land, neither presume
to wet the Feet of thy Sovereign Lord. But the Sea, as before, came rolling on,
and without any Reverence at all not only wet but dashed him; whereupon the
King quickly rising up, bade those that were about him to consider the weak and
bounded Power of Kings; and how none indeed deserved that Title, but He whose
Eternal Laws both Heaven, and Earth, and Seas obey. A Truth so evident of it
self, M.
that were it not to shame his Court-Flatterers, (who would not else be
convinced) Cnute needed not to have gone wet-shod home. From thenceforth he
would never afterward wear his Crown, but commanded it to be put upon the Head
of the Crucifix at Winchester.

From whose Example, as Petrus Pictaviensis relates, arose that custom of
hanging up the Armor of Great Men in Churches, as Offerings made to God, by
whose assistance they had attained any Honor to themselves, or Benefit to
their Country, either by Victory, or an Honorable Death.

I shall conclude his Reign with his Laws, which since we have not the time
when they were made, I have reserved to this place: They begin thus:

This is the Law (or Decree) which Cnute King of all England, Denmark, and
Norway, has ordained with the Consent of his Wise Men at London, as well for
the Maintenance of his own Royal Dignity, as for the Benefit of his People, and
were made at Winchester in Midwinter, (i.e. at Christmas) which, you must note,
was one of the stated times when all the Great Men of the Kingdom, both Clergy
and Laity, used of course to attend upon the King, whether he summoned them, or
not.

But since these Laws are very long, and contain a Repetition and Confirmation
of diverse Laws formerly made by his Predecessors, I shall only here extract
some of them, and refer the Reader to Mr. Lambard for the rest.

Anno Dom. MXXXVI.
The first of Civil Concernment commands Justice to be faithfully and
indifferently administered both to Poor and Rich, and abolishes all unjust Laws.

The second requires Mercy to be used, and that no man be put to death for a
small offense.

The eighth ordains, that all people keep the Peace; and orders one and the
same good Money to be current, and no man to refuse it. If any one embase the
Coin, his hands shall be cut off without any Redemption: And if a Reeve or
Magistrate be accused that it was done by his consent, he shall purge himself
by a treble Purgation; and if he be cast, incur the same Punishment with the
Offender.

The twelfth is remarkable, since it comprizes all those Forfeitures which the
King challenges as due to himself, in the Counties of West-Saxony, except he
please to confer them upon any other; (viz.) the Penalties incurred for the
breach of the Peace, for breaking into a House, stopping up a Passage, and
forsaking a man's Colors. If also for any Crime a man be outlawed, the
Restitution of him to his former state belongs to the King. He also that
possesses Bocland (i. e. Land convey^d by Deed) forfeits to the King, let his
Lord be who he will; as also whoever relieves or Harbors a Fugitive.

The fourteenth Law appoints Mulcts for diverse Offenses, and particulary, That
if any Judge have out of Hatred or Lucre perverted Justice, by the Law of the
English he is to pay to the King the value of his Head; and also to be removed
from his Place, or redeem it as the King shall please, except he plead that
what he did was from Ignorance, and then he must confirm this Assertion by
Oath: And by the Law of the Danes he is to incur the Mulct of the breach of
that Law, except he can plead Ignorance.

The Nineteenth renews the former Laws of King Alfred, commanding every one of
free condition to enter himself into some Hundred or Tything; that being in a
condition to purge himself, he may also be in a capacity to claim from another
the value of his Head, otherwise none that exceeds twelve years of age, in case
he receive any wrong, shall be capable of enjoying the same privilege with a
Freeman; and be he a Master of a Family, or a Retainer, he must be entered into
some Hundred or other, and must find Pledges or Sureties for his appearance, in
case he be accused of a Crime. Some Great Men (says the King) if they can do
it, will protect their Servants, giving out sometimes that they are Free, other
times that they are Slaves; but we not enduring any such unjust practices,
enjoin, That every one of twelve years of age shall give Security by Oath, that
he will neither steal himself, nor be accessory to the Theft of any other.

Thus does he revive what King Alfred had before ordained, That no Freeman
should be out of Tything, or live at random, without this most efficacious Tie
of Suretyship; and to what was enacted before, adds this caution of twelve
years, beyond which, for the Public Peace and Security, none were to live
without being admitted and received into some Hundred and Tything.

The twentieth Law of King Cnute so far indulges a man unblameable and of good
Repute, who never brake his Oath in the Hundred, nor was cast by the Ordeal,
that his single Purgation shall be accepted. But a man of the contrary
Reputation, shall either be compelled to take his single Oath in three
Hundreds, or a threefold one, Anno Dom. MXXXVI.
according to the custom of that Court, or be put to the Ordeal; but a single
Purgation is to be made with a threefold preparatory Oath.

By virtue of the fifty fourth Law, whosoever conspires against the King, or
his Lord, shall forfeit Life and Fortunes, except he purge himself by the
threefold Ordeal.

The sixty first declares breaking down or burning Houses, as also Theft,
manifest Murders, and betraying of ones Lord, according to Human Laws, to be
Crimes for which there is no Bote or Satisfaction to be made, by way of Mulct
or Compensation: Which is alteration of the former Laws, by which all these
Crimes were redeemable by Money.

The next wills, That Mercy be shown, as much as may be, to such as truly and
unfeignedly amend their ways.

And by that which follows, the King declares he will put a differrence betwixt
Small and Great, Rich and Poor, Young and Old, Infirm and Healthful; forasmuch
as some men may offend out of a kind of necessity; and that a distinction is to
be made betwixt a forced and a voluntary act: Therefore he promises to succor
where there is most need of his help.

The sixty seventh contains an Act of Grace of the King to his Subjects,
whereby he relieves such as were formerly oppressed: He also enjoins all his
Officers, that they make provision for his House out of his own Lands and
Tillage, and that they compel no man to furnish him with any Provisions in this
kind, upon pain of paying the value of their heads, if they impose any Mulct
upon Refusers.

The sixty eighth ordains, That in case any man by neglect, or sudden Death,
depart this world intestate, his Lord shall take nothing of his Goods, except
what is due to him as an Herriot; but all is to be distributed by his Judgment
to the Wife, Children, and next Kindred; justly, according to their several
Rights.

The sixty ninth settles the rates of all Herriots to the King, ordering that
the Herriot of every one be according to his dignity; as first, That of an Earl
eight Horses, whereof four with Furniture, and four without; four Helmets, as
many Corslets, eight Spears, and as many Shields; four Swords, and two hundred
Mancuses of Gold. That of the King's chief Thane four Horses, whereof two with
Furniture, and two without; two Swords, four Spears, and as many Shields; one
Helmet, one Corslet, and fifty Mancuses of Gold. The Herriot of an inferior
Thane, an Horse with Furniture and Arms; or amongst the West Saxons the Sum of
Money that is paid, called Halfange; in Mercia and East-England, two Pounds:
But amongst the Danes the Herriot of a King's Thane, who has free
Jurisdiction, is four Pounds; and if he be nearer to the King, his Herriot is
two Horses, whereof the one with Furniture, and the other without; a Sword, two
Spears, as many Targets, and fifty Mancuses of Gold. But the Herriot of a Thane
of the lowest condition, is two Pounds.

This word Herriot, (or as the true Saxon word is written) Heregeate, signifies
Furniture for War, given by the Vassal to his Lord, probably at first designed
for the driving away Thieves and Robbers, which abounded when the Danish or
Northern Nations so frequently invaded the Land: For though the word Here does
in the Saxon Language signify an Army, Anno Dom. MXXXVI.
yet it is in our Saxon Authors (when without composition) generally taken in
the worst sense, for Invaders and Spoilers: A Lawful Army collected by the King
for the defense of the Nation being called by the name of Fyrd.

The seventy first requires Widows to continue in Widowhood for the space of
Twelve Months, and then permits them to marry: If a Woman marry before her
Twelve Months be out, she shall lose her Dower, with all that her Husband left
her, which is to come in such case to the next of kin; and he that marries her,
shall pay the value of his Head to the King, or to whomsoever he assigns it.

The seventy fifth Law deprives him of Life and Estate, who either in an
Expedition by Land or Sea deserts his Lord, or his Fellow-Soldier; and in such
case the Lord is to have back the Land he gave him; or if it was Bocland, it
goes to the King. But in case any one dye in Fight in the presence of his Lord,
either at home or abroad, his Herriot shall be remitted, and his Children shall
succeed both to his Goods and Lands, and equally divide them.

The seventy sixth gives him liberty that has defended his Land, and cleared
it from all doubts and encumbrances in the Sciregemote, or County Court, to
possess it quietly whilst he lives, and to leave it to whom he pleases when he
dies.

From whence we may observe, that before the Conquest men might bequeath their
Lands by their Last Will.

The seventy seventh gives liberty to every man to hunt in his own Grounds, but
forbids all men under a Penalty to meddle with the King's Game, especially in
those places which he had fenced by Privilege.

By those places thus privileged, he means those which afterward the Normans
called Forests, being Ground Desert and Woody, lying open to the King's Deer,
not fenced about with any Hedge or Wall, but circumscribed and privileged, or
(as here he words it) fenced with certain Bounds, Laws, and Immunities, under
Magistrates, Judges, Officers, etc. Concerning these Forests, the King
published certain Constitutions (Thirty four in number), which you may see at
large in Sir Hen. Spelman's Glossary, tit. Foresta. But because he mentions
them not in this nor any other of his Laws, they seem to have been made
afterward: But the Thirtieth Article is therein almost the very same with this
Law, forbidding all men to meddle with his Game; and yet permitting them to
hunt in their own Grounds, sine Chasea; but what that signifies, unless it be
following their Game out of their own Grounds, I will not take upon me to
determine.

King HAROLD, surnamed Harefoot.
NOT long after the Death of King Cnate, our Annals relate, Anno Dom. MXXXVI.
That there was a great Witena Gemot, or Council of the Wise Men, held at
Oxnaford, where Earl Leofric, and almost all the Thanes on the East part of
Thames, with the Seamen of London, chose Harold for King of all England, whilst
his Brother Hardecnute was in Denmark: But Earl Godwin and all the Great Men of
the West Saxons, withstood it as much as they could, though they were not able
to prevail against them. Then was it also decreed, That Elgiva (or Emma) the
Mother of Hardecnute, should reside at Winchester, with the Domes^ick Servants
of the late King, and should possess all West-Saxony, where Earl Godwin was
Governor, or Lord Lieutenant. It is said also by some concerning this King
Harold, that he was the Son of King Cnute, and of Aelgiva the Daughter of
Aelfhelm the Ealdorman; but that seems scarce probable to many, however, he was
full (or Real) King of all England.

That which gave cause to this suspicion, was (as Florence of Worcester and
Radulph de Diceto relate) That this Aelgiva not being able to have Children by
King Cnute, commanded the Son of a certain Shoemaker, then newly born, to be
brought to her, and feigning a formal Lying in, to have imposed upon the
credulous King her Husband, that she was really brought to bed of a Son; which,
if true, shows that it is no new or strange thing for a Queen of England to
impose a supposititious Birth upon the King her Husband, and the whole Nation.

But this Contention about the Election of Harold, gives us great reason to
doubt the Truth of the Relation in Simeon of Durham, and other Authors, of this
Harold's being appointed by his Father's Will to succeed in the Kingdom of
England; such a Nomination or Recommendation seldom or never failing to be
observed by the States of the Kingdom without any dispute, at the Election of a
New King: And besides, Queen Aemma his Mother, who had then the greatest power
with King Cnute, would sure much rather have had her own Son Hardecnute to have
succeeded him in the Kingdom of England, than Harold, at best supposed to be
her Husband's Son by another Woman: So that if Harold was now chosen King, it
is most likely that it was not in pursuance of King Cnute's Will, but purely
from the prevailing Faction of the Danes and Londoners; who, as William of
Malmesbury tells us, were by their long conversation with them, become wholly
Danish in their Inclinations.

But if Ingulph may be believed (who lived as well before as after the
Conquest), there was then so great a Dispute about the Election of a King, that
many fearing a Civil War would ensue, it caused multitudes of people to quit
their Habitations, and betake themselves into Waterish and Fenny Places, where
they thought the Enemy could not, or would no easily pursue them; and
particularly to the Monastery of Croyland, where they caused such a
disturbance, that the Monks of that place could neither meet in the Church nor
in the Refectory: Anno Dom. MXXXVI.
When at last, to avoid the Effusion of Christian Blood, it was agreed at the
aforesaid Council at Oxnaford, That the Kingdom should be divided between the
two Brothers, Harold and Hardecnute, so that the former should have all the
Countries lying Northward from the Thames, together with the City of London,
and Hardecnute enjoy all the Southern Provinces. But Hardecnute having received
his share of the Kingdom, went into Denmark, where making unnecessary delays,
Harold seized the whole Kingdom to himself. Which is in part confirmed by an
Ancient Manuscript Chronicle in the Otho, D. 7.
Cottonian Library; which relates, That Harold King of the Northumbrians and
Mercians, was elected King of all England; and Hardecnute, because he staid in
Denmark, was cast off. To which may be added certain old Julius, D. 4.
Manuscript Annals, now in the same Library (part of which is supposed to be
written by Henry of Huntington), That Harold was elected by the Chief Men of
the East Angles (i. e. the Danes of that Country) together with the Londoners;
so that he usurped the Kingdom of his Brother Hardecnute, being then in
Denmark. And Simeon of Durham relates, That by the Consent of the Great Men of
England, Harold began to reign as true and just Heir, but not so indisputably
as King Cnute his Father had done; because Hardecnute, who was a truer Heir
than he, was then expected; yet that in a short time the Kingdom became divided
after the same manner as Ingulph has related. But it seems very unlikely, that
Hardecnute, if he had been chosen King of any part of England, would have left
it, and gone over into Denmark, before he was well settled at home. It is
therefore more likely (what Florence of Worcester asserts), That Harold was at
first elected King only of the Mercians and Northumbers, Hardecnute being to
enjoy all the rest; but that not coming out of Denmark in due time, Harold got
himself chosen King of the whole Kingdom the year following.

But leaving this matter concerning Hardecnute's Succession, which must be
confessed is much in the dark, the Author last mentioned does say, That Harold
after he had obtained the Royal Dignity, sent his Guards speedily to
Winchester, and there tyrannically seized on the greater part of the Treasures
of the King his Father, which had been bequeathed by Cnute to the Queen his
Mother-in-Law.

But I cannot omit taking notice of the most Cruel and Bloody Treatment of
Prince Alfred (Brother to King Edward) and his Followers; which because many of
our Best and most Ancient Historians, as well Printed as Manuscript, refer to
this year, and that too not long after King Harold's coming to the Crown, I
shall here set down, since it seems most likely to have happened now, rather
than at any other time: For though our Authors differ much about it, yet seeing
most of the Ancient Manuscript Annals in the Cottonian Library, (as also that
old Treatise called Encomium Emmae, being a Panegyric wrote on that Queen by a
Monk of her own time) agree in relating the Circumstances of this horrid
Action, I shall from thence transcribe this following Account of it; viz.

That King Harold seeking by Treachery how to get those two young Princes,
(Sons to the late King Ethelred) into his power, forged a Letter in the Name of
Queen Emma their Mother, inviting them into England; wherein, personating her,
she seemed to chide them gently for their delay, in not coming over to look
after their own concerns; Anno Dom. MXXXVI.
seeing they could not but know that it procured the daily confirming of the
Usurper in his power, who omitted no arts or means whatsoever, to gain the
chief Nobility over to his Party; yet also assures them, that the English
Nation had much rather have one of them to be their King; and in conclusion,
desires they would come as speedily and as privately as they could, to consult
with her, what course was best to be taken.

This Letter was sent to the Princes, then in Normandy, by an express
Messenger, with Presents also, as from their Mother; which they joyfully
receiving, returned word by the same hand, That one of them would be with her
shortly, naming both the Time and Place. Note, Some other Historians make him
the Elder.
Alfred who was the younger (for so it was thought best) at the appointed time,
with a few Ships, and some small number of Normans about him, appeared on the
Coast, and no sooner came ashore, but fell into the Snare that Earl Godwin had
laid for him, being sent on purpose to betray him; and being cajoll'd into a
belief that he was sent for by the King then at London, he was in the way met
at Guilford by Earl Godwin, who with all seeming Friendship at first kindly
entertained him, but in the night surprised the Prince, and made him Prisoner,
with all his Company, most of whom (in all about Six hundred men) were put to
various kinds of cruel deaths, and being twice decimated, every Tenth man
suffered without mercy. The Prince was brought to London; and by the King sent
bound to Ely, and had his eyes put out as soon as he landed there; and being
delivered to the Monks to be kept, died soon after in their Custody; but
whether of the Pain, or Grief, or some other Indisposition, is left uncertain.

Yet though this Author makes no mention of Prince Edward his Brother's coming
over with him; but rather asserting the contrary, that he never came at all;
however, several other Historians will have this Prince to have either come
over then, or some time before; and that being with his Mother when his Brother
was thus treated, she immediately sent him back into Normandy; which I must
confess seems very improbable, since Harold had it then in his power to destroy
them both.

But though it is certain that this unfortunate Prince was made away, yet since
our Annals are wholly silent in it, there is nothing about which our Historians
so much vary, as concerning the time when it was done. William of Malmesbury
and Bromton place it after the death of Harold; and before the coming over of
Hardecnute; when they say that Prince Alfred arrived, with some expectations of
the Kingdom; but the former plainly confesses, that he related this story only
upon common fame; yet because the Chronicles (i. e. the Saxon Annals) are
silent, he will not affirm it for truth; so it seems he had never seen the
abovementioned Encomium Emmae. But that Prince Alfred was made away by the
means of Earl Godwin, we shall further make out when we come to the Reign of
King Edward the Confessor.

And the reason that some of our Historians give for Godwin's cruel usage of
Prince Alfred, whilst he let his Brother escape, is, that Godwin was afraid of
the High Spirit and Wit of this young Prince; because he knew that if ever he
came to be King, he would never be governed by him, nor marry his Daughter;
both which he hoped for from Edward, in case he should be chosen King by his
means (as afterward happened). This, whether true or not, I will not
determine; yet it suits well enough with the Interest of that Politic Earl. I
shall say no more of this, only we cannot but hence observe the great
Uncertainty of Traditional Accounts, though of no long standing, since this
Story, transacted not many years before the Conquest, is told so many several
ways.

This year (according to our Annals) Aelgiva the Widow of King Cnute, Anno Dom.
MXXXVII.
and Mother of King Hardecnute and King Edward, was banished; but going over to
Baldwin Earl of Flanders, he assigned her Bricge (i. e. Bruges) for her
Retirement, where he protected her, and provided for her as long as she staid
there.

But the Reader is to take notice, that this Queen, who is here called Aelgiva
in the English-Saxon, is the same with Emma in the Norman-French Dialect, and
who was now banished England by King Harold, as all Writers agree. But the
reason why this Queen did not retire into Normandy, her own Country, was, that
her Father and Brother were both dead; and though William her Nephew then
succeeded in the Dukedom, yet he was but an Infant, under the Tutelage of the
King of France.

This year also produced a great Revolution in Wales; for Griffyth ap Lewelyn
ap Sitsylt, sometimes Prince of Wales, raised a great Army against Prince Jago,
who now enjoyed the Principality of North Wales (as you have already heard);
and Jago also provided for himself as well as he could; but the greater part,
and the better Soldiers were of Griffyth's side, for the love they bore to his
Father, as plainly appeared when it came to a trial; for after the Battle was
joined, Jago, his Soldiers deserting him, was soon overthrown and slain; and
then Griffyth reigned in his stead. From whence we may observe the strange
fickleness of the Welsh Nation in those times, who notwithstanding their
seeming Affection to this Prince the Right Heir, yet left him as soon as ever
they met with one of the same Race whom they liked better. From which evil
custom these Countries were never long without Civil Wars, till the total
Conquest of them by the English.

But Griffyth ap Lewelyn, after he had thus slain Prince Jago, governed
North Wales very well, following his Father's steps; and in the very first year
of his Government he fought with the Englishmen and Danes at Crosford upon
Severne; and from thence he led his Army to Lhanpadarn vawr in Caerdiganshire,
and destroyed that place; and thence passing into South Wales, totally subdued
it; Howel ap Edwin, at that time Prince thereof, being forced to fly his
Country; and when he had thus reduced South Wales, he returned home again with
Honor. But the next year,

Anno Dom. MXXXVIII.
Howel Prince of South Wales (as the English as well as Welsh Chronicles
relate) having now procured Edwin the Brother of Leofric Earl of Mercia to
assist him, marched with a great Army of English and Danes against Prince
Griffyth, who meeting them in the field, overcame them, and slew Edwin at
Pencadair, and pursued Howel so closely, that though he escaped himself, yet
his Wife was taken Prisoner; whom Griffyth like so well, that he kept her for
his Mistress.

But though Howel after this made several Attempts to regain his Country, yet
he could never succeed, for that Prince Griffyth held it all his time. But the
Cottonian Chronicle relates, that fighting afterward with Griffyth at a place
called Paldiwach, he obtained the Victory, and again made himself Prince of
South Wales: But this I leave to the Reader's Judgment. To return again to our
Annals:

Ethelnoth Archbishop of Canterbury deceased, Anno Dom. MXXXVIII.
and a little after Ethelric Bishop of the South Saxons; and also a little
before Christmas Bryteh Bishop of Worcester; and a little after, Aelfric Bishop
of the East Angles: Then Aeadsige was made Archbishop, and Grymkytel Bishop of
the South Saxons; and Living succeeded in the Bishoprics of Worcester and
Gloucester.

This year King Harold deceased at Oxnaford, 16. Kal. April, Anno Dom. MXXXIX.
and was buried at Westminster. He governed England Four Years, and Sixteen
Weeks.] But there is certainly an Error in this Copy of the Annals; for either
he deceased not till the next year, as the Cambridge Copy and Mat. Westminster
place it; or else he could reign but Three Years, and perhaps so many odd Weeks
as these Annals mention.

In his time was again paid a great Tax for the setting out Sixteen Sail; to
wit, Eight Marks to every Rower (which shows it consisted of only Galleys, and
not Ships); and as Florence also adds, Twelve Marks more to every Master, which
he ordered to be raised through all England; as was before done in the Reign of
King Cnute.

But it seems every Port was bound to pay such a proportion, to set out these
Sixteen Sail (as H. Huntington relates) whereby nevertheless he so much
incensed the minds of the English against him, that the Welsh perceiving it, or
else for some other reason, began to be very unruly; insomuch that some
Insurrections happened thereupon, wherein many of the English Nobility were
slain; as Edwin, Brother to Earl Leofric; Turketil and Algeat, the Sons of
Effi, both of them Great Persons; and several others.

And to this time (I suppose) we may refer what Caradoc in his Welsh Chronicle
relates, That Griffyth ap Lewelyn, Prince of North Wales, in the first year of
his Reign, fought with the English and Danes at Crossford upon Severne, and put
them to flight; and from thence he led his Army to Lhanpadan vawr in
Caerdiganshire, and destroyed the place utterly; and from thence passed all
over South Wales, receiving the people into his subjection, for Howel ap Edwin
their King fled before him, and forsook the Land.

As for the Character of this King Harold, and the reason why he was called
Harefoot, they are very uncertain: H. Knighton in his Chronicle writes very
oddly, That he had a Body like a Hare, sure he means hairy like that Creature,
and from thence was called Harefoot; which is very improbable. But others with
more appearance of truth, derive it from his Swiftness of Foot. Bromton gives
him this Character, That in all respects he degenerated from the Worth of his
Father King Cnute (insomuch that diverse suspected him not to have been his
Son), for he was altogether careless both as to matters of War and Peace; only
he would pursue his own Will and Pleasure, and what was very unbecoming his
Royal Estate, choosing rather to go on foot, than ride; whence, for the
lightness and swiftness of his Feet, he seems to have been called Harefoot.

As for his Laws, we have only this one mentioned by Mr. Seldom in his Janus
Anglorum, which was, That whatever Welshman, coming into England without leave,
was taken on this side Offa's Ditch, should have his Right Hand cut off by the
King's Officers.

King HARDECNUTE.
Anno Dom. MXXXIX.
KING Harold dying thus suddenly, the Chief Men of England, with whom also the
Londoners now joined, sent Messengers to Hardecnute (who was then at Bruges
with his Mother) entreating him to come and receive the Crown; whereupon he
hasted into Denmark, there to settle his Affairs; which when he had done, with
Forty (or as some say, Sixty) Ships, well manned with Danish Soldiers,
according to our Annals, he arrived at Sandwich seven days before Midsummer,
being joyfully received both by the Danes and English; (and as H. Huntington
relates, was by both of them elected King); though afterward the Great Men
that did it, paid dearly for it; for not long after, it was decreed, That a Tax
of Eight Marks should be again paid to the Rowers in Sixty two Sail of Ships.
The same year also a S^ster (i. e. a Horse-load) of Wheat was sold for Fifty
five Pence, and more.

This year Eadsige the Archbishop went to Rome; and also another Military Tax
was paid, Anno Dom. MXL.
of Twenty nine thousand twenty nine pounds: And after this, was paid Eleven
thousand forty eight pounds for two and thirty Sail of Ships.

But whether these Taxes were raised by Authority of the Great Council of the
Kingdom, our Authors do not mention; but I believe not; for this Danegelt was
now by constant usage become a Prerogative.

The same year came Eadward the Son of King Aethelred into this Kingdom from
Wealand (by which our Annals mean Normandy): After which time Prince Edward
returned no more thither, but staid in England till his Brother died.

But the same year, not long after his Coronation, he sent Alfric Archbishop of
York, and Earl Godwin, and diverse Great Men of his Court to London, attended by
the Hangman, and out of Hatred to his Brother Harold, and Revenge of the
Injuries done to his Mother (as he pretended) commanded his Body to be dug up,
and the Head to be cut off and flung into the Thames; but some Fishermen
afterward pulling it up with their Nets, buried it again in St. Clement's
Churchyard, being then the Burying-place of the Danes.

The same year also (according to Bromton's Chronicle) King Hardecnute sent
over his Sister Gunhilda to the Emperor Henry, to whom she had been in her
Father's lifetime betrothed: But before she went, the King kept the Nuptial
Feast with that Magnificence in Clothes, Equipage, and Feasting, that as Mat.
Westminster relates, it was remembered in his time, and sung by Musicians at all
great Entertainments. But this Lady was received and treated by the Emperor her
Husband with great kindness for some time; till being accused of Adultery, she
could find, it seems, no beter a Champion to vindicate her Honor, than a
certain little Page she had brought out of England with her, who undertaking
her defense, fought in a single Combat against a man of a vast Stature, named
Rodingar, Anno Dom. MXL.
and by cutting his Hamstrings with his Sword, and falling down, he obtained
the Victory, and so cleared his Lady's Honor; of which she yet received so
little satisfaction, that she forsook her Husband, and retired into a
Monastery, where she ended her days.

About this time also (as Simeon of Durham, Bromton's Chronicle, and other
Authors inform us) King Hardecnute was highly incensed against Living Bishop of
Worcester, and Earl Godwin, for the death of his Half Brother Alfred, Son to
King Ethelred; Alfric Archbishop of York accusing them both of having persuaded
King Harold to use him so cruelly as you have already heard: The Bishop and
Earl being thus accused before King Hardecnute, the former was deprived of his
Bishopric, and the latter was also in very great danger. But not long after,
the King being appeased with Money, the Bishop was again restored; and as for
Earl Godwin, he had also incurred some heavy Punishment, had he not been so
cunning as to buy his peace (as these Authors relate) by presenting the King
with a Galley most magnificently equipped, having a gilded Stern, and furnished
with all Conveniences both for War and Pleasure, and manned with Eighty choice
Soldiers, every one of whom had upon each Arm a Golden Bracelet weighing
sixteen Ounces, with Helmet and Corslet all gilt, as were also the Hilts of
their Swords; having a Danish Battel-Axe adorned with Silver and Gold, hung on
his Left Shoulder, whilst in his Left Hand he held a Shield, the Boss and Nails
of which were also gilded, and in his Right a Lance, in the English-Saxon
Tongue called a Tegar: But all this would not serve his turn, without an Oath,
That Prince Alfred had not his eyes put out by his Advice, but he therein
merely obeyed Harold's Commands, being at that time his King and Master.

This year (according to Simeon of Durham) King Hardecnute sent his Huisceorles
(i. e. his Domestic Servants, Anno Dom. MXLI.
or Guards) to exact the Tax which he had lately imposed: But the Citizens of
Worcester, and the Worcestershire men rising, slew two of them, called Feadar
and Turstan, having fled into a Tower belonging to a Monastery of that City.
Thereupon Hardecnute being exceedingly provoked to hear of their deaths, sent
to revenge it, Leofric Ealdorman of the Mercians, Godwin of the West Saxons,
Siward of the Northumbrians, and others, with great Forces, and orders to kill
all the men, plunder and burn the City, and waste the Country round about. On
the evening preceding the thirteenth of November, they began to put his
Commands in execution, and continued both wasting and spoiling the City and
Country for four days together; but few of the Inhabitants themselves could be
laid hold of, the Contrymen shifting for themselves every man as well as
they could, and the Citizens betaking themselves to a little Island in the
Severne, called Beverege, which they fortified, and vigorously stood upon their
Defense, till their Opposers being tired out and spent, were forced to make
Peace with them, and so suffered them to return quietly home. This was not done
till the fifth day, when the City being burnt, the Army retreated, loaded with
the Plunder they had got.

Simeon next after this cruel Expedition, places the coming over of Prince
Edward; but our Annals with greater probability put his Return under the year
before.

Anno Dom. MXLI.
This year also King Hardecnute deceased at Lambeth (6. Id. Junii). He was King
of England two years, wanting seven days, and was buried in the New Monastery
(of Winchester); his Mother giving the Head of St. Valentine to pray for his
Soul.

But since our Annals are very short in the Relation of his Death, we must take
it from other Authors; who all agree, That the King being invited to a Wedding
at the place abovementioned, which with great Pomp and Luxury was solemnized
betwixt Tovy, surnamed Prudan, a Danish Nobleman, and Githa the Daughter of
Osgod Clappa, a great Lord also of that Nation; as he was very jolly and merry,
carousing it with the Bridegroom and some of the Company, he fell down
speechless, and died in the Flower of his Age.

He is to be commended for his Piety, and Good Nature to his Mother, and
Brother Prince Edward: But the great Faults laid to this Prince's charge, are
Cruelty, Gluttony, and Drunkenness: For the first of these you have had a late
Example; and for the latter, take what H. Huntington relates, That Four Meals a
day he allowed his Court; and it must be then supposed he loved eating well
himself; though this Author attributes it to his Bounty; and how he rather
desired that the Meat should be taken away untouched from such as were invited,
than that those who were not invited, should complain for want of Victuals;
whereas, says he, the custom of our time is (either out of Covetousness, or,
as they pretend, because their people cannot eat) for Great Men to allow their
Followers but one Meal a day; which shows, that the custom of Set Suppers has
had diverse Vicissitude^, being not commonly used in England in Great Men's
Families at the time when H. Huntington wrote, and therefore is an English
Custom prevailing since that time; the Norman Fashions being then most used.

John Rouse also, in his Manuscript Treatise de Regibus Ang. already cited,
relates, That the day of King Hard^cnute's Death was in his time kept by the
English as an Holiday, being called Hock-Wednesday; on which they danced, and
drew Cords cross the way, as they do in several Parishes in England even at
this day, to stop people till they will pay them some Money.

King Edward (called) the Confessor.
BEfore King Hardecnute was buried, Anno Dom. MXLI.
all the People chose Edward Aeth^ling King at London; who reigned as long as
God permitted him.

But William of Malmesbury with greater probability says, That this King did
not come to the Crown without some difficulty; for when he had received the
News of his Brother Hardecnute's Death, he was in great perplexity what was
most advisable for him to do; at last, after mature deliberation, he thought it
the safest course to trust his Fortune to Earl Godwin's Advice; who being sent
for to a friendly Conference, for some time he was considering whether he
should come to him or not; but at length he agreed to speak with him; and upon
the Enterview Edward was about to lay himself at his Feet, but that he would by
no means suffer; Then the Prince earnestly desired he would assist him in his
safe return to Normandy; when immediately Godwin gave him this unexpected
answer, That he had better live gloriously King of England, than dye
ignominiously in Exile: That the Crown did of Right belong to him as Son of
Ethelred, and Grandchild of Edgar: That he was one of mature Age, inured to
Labor, and who had learnt by experience how to order Public Affairs with
Justice; and had been taught by his own late Afflictions how to remove and
prevent the Miseries of the People: That to bring this about, there would be no
great Obstacle; for if he would but trust himself to him, he should find that
his Interest was very powerful in the Nation, and that Fortune would be
favorable to his just Pretensions; and if he would accept of the Royal
Dignity, he was confident there would be none to oppose it; but on condition
that he would establish a firm Friendship with him and his Family, by promising
to prefer his Sons, and marry his Daughter, that then he should soon find
himself a King.

Edward's case at this time was such, as not to reject so fair Proposals, but
rather agree to any Conditions, and comply with the present state of Affairs;
whatsoever therefore Godwin required, he promised and swore to perform. Now the
Earl was a Man fitted by Nature for managing such an Intrigue, having a very
smooth and plausible Tongue, so Eloquent, that he could move and charm the
Affections of the People, insinuate into them whatsoever he pleased, and bring
them entirely over to his Interest and Service. Upon this he procures a Great
Council to be summoned at Gillingham (some Copies have it, at London); and
there he influenced some by his own Authority, gained over others by his
Promises; and those who were inclined before to Prince Edward's Cause, he fully
settled and confirmed to his Party; the rest, that made opposition, being
overpowered, were first of all turned out of their Places, and then banished
the Land.

The Annals of the Abbey of Winchester (printed in the Monast. Ang. from the
Manuscript in the Cottonian Library) not only agree with William of Malmesbury
in this Relation, but are also much more particular; viz. That Prince Edward
coming to Godwin one morning in disguise to London, Anno Dom. MXLI.
fell at his Feet, begging him to preserve his Life; but the Earl taking him
up, promised to use him like his Son; and also gave him farther Encouragements
and Assurance; so that Edward returning again to Winchester to his Mother,
Godwin shortly after summoned all the Great Men of the Kingdom to meet there,
to consult about making a New King. Then these Annals proceed to relate the
manner of this Election; Viz. That Earl Godwin raising the Prince from the
place where he sat at his feet (being then incognito, having his Hood over his
Face), said thus, Behold your King: This is Prince Edward, the Son of King
Ethelred and Queen Emma: This is He whom I Elect, etc.; and so first did him
Homage: Then after some Debates among themselves, they all at last consented to
his Election; so that if it displeased any there, they durst not show their
Discontent, since Earl Godwin would have it so; and Edward being thus Elected,
was, not long after, crowned at Westminster.

Which is also confirmed by an Ancient Chronicle Otho, D. 7.
in the Cottonian Library (already cited), ending with this Prince, which
says, That Hardecnute being dead, Eadward was advanced to the Crown by the
endeavors chiefly of Earl Godwin, and Living Bishop of Worcester.

Bromton's Chronicle farther adds, That at this Grand Council all the Great Men
of England agreed and swore with one consent, That no Danes should reign over
them any more, because of the great Affronts and Contempts they had received
from that Nation: For they held the English in such servile subjection, That if
an Englishman had met a Dane upon a Bridge, he was obliged to stand still till
the other had passed by; and if he had not bowed to the Dane, he was sure to be
well basted for his neglect; so that as soon as King Hardecnute was dead, the
English drove all the Danes out of the Kingdom.

But notwithstanding the great happiness the English now received by having a
King of their own Nation; yet it seems, This year was unfortunate for the
Intemperance of the Season, which (as our Annals relate) destroyed the Fruits
of the Earth; so that a great number of Cattle died. Also about this time Aelf
--, Abbot of Burgh deceased, and Arnwi a Monk was chosen Abbot, being a mild
and good man.

About the same time also, according to the Welsh Chronicle, Prince Conan the
Son of Jago, who had fled into Ireland to save his life, and coming now over
from thence, being assisted with the Forces of Alfred the Danish King of
Dublin, entered North Wales by surprise, took Prince Griffyth Prisoner, and was
carrying him away to his Ships: But the people of the Country hearing of it,
they immediately rose and pursued the Irishmen, and at last overtaking them,
rescued their Prince, and made a great flaughter among them, the rest with much
difficulty got to their Ships, and returned with Conan into Ireland.

Anno Dom. MXLII.
But notwithstanding K. Edward had been elected King ever since the last
Summer, yet was he not Anointed or Crowned till this year, when (as our Annals
relate) that Ceremony was performed on Easter Day with great Solemnity, by
Eadsige the Archbishop, who also preached before the people, and instructed
them for the King's good, as well as their own advantage.

This is the first Discourse or Sermon that we can find was ever made of this
nature at any King's Coronation.

The same year also Stig and the Priest was consecrated Bishop of the
East Angles; Anno Dom. MXLII.
and presently after the King ordered all the Lands his Mother held from him to
be surveyed, taking from her whatsoever Gold and Silver she had, with many
other things, because she had been too severe to him, as well before he was
King, as after; and as Roger Hoveden observes, had given him less than he
expected from her.

So that in this Undutifulness to his Mother, he does not show himself so great
a Saint as the Monks represent him: But they say for his excuse, that he did it
by the Advice of the Earls Leofric, Godwin, and Syward, by whom this Weak and
Easy Prince was chiefly managed.

This year also, according to the Welsh Chronicles, Howel ap Edwin late Prince
of South Wales, with all the Forces he could raise of his own Contrymen, and
the English, entered South Wales, and began to spoil and havoc it; of which
when Prince Griffyth was informed, he gathered his People together in
North Wales, and came courageously to meet his Enemies (whom he had twice
before discomfited), and overcame and chased them the third time, as far as the
Spring of the River Towy; where after a long and dangerous Battle, Howel was
slain, and his Army routed, and was so closely pursued, that few or none
escaped alive: After whose Death Rytherch and Rees, the Sons of Rythaerch ap
Jestyn, aspiring again to the Rule and Government of South Wales, which their
Father had once before acquired, gathered a great Army as well of strangers, as
out of Guentland and Glamorgan, and meeting with Griffyth Prince of Wales, he
courageously animated his men with the remembrance of their former Victories
under his Standard, and joined Battle with his Enemies, whom he found disposed
to try if they could regain the Honor which before they had lost: Wherefore
when they were come up to engage, the Fight was so bloody and desperate, that
it continued till night parted both Armies, and then being quite spent, they
retreated. But still each being fearful of one another, they thought it their
best way to return to their own Countries to raise fresh Recruits.

About this time was founded a Noble Monastery near Coventry in Warwickshire,
by Leofric Earl of the Mercians, Vid. Cambden's Britan. Warwickshire.
and the Lady Godiva his Wife, who was not only one of the most Beautiful, but
most Pious Women of that Age; they also enriched this Monastery with great
Presents both of Gold and Silver.

By reason of which Monastery the Town adjoining became much more flourishing,
and took the name of Coventry from this Convent: And we farther read in
Bromton's Chronicle, That this worthy Lady Godiva being desirous to exempt the
said Town from the grievous Taxes and Tolls imposed on it, she earnestly and
frequently solicited her Husband to take them off, but yet was still denied:
However, she ceasing not to renew her request, he told her jestingly at last,
That if she would be content to ride naked through the Town, he would grant her
Petition; which she readily undertook to do, and so commanding all people at
that time to keep within doors, she covered her Body with her own Hair, of
which she had so great a quantity, that it served instead of a Mantle.

Thus did she generously free the Citizens from those heavy Exactions which
they then lay under, though by the no-very-decent exposing of her self; and
afterward gave them a Charter of Exemptions, affixing her Husband's and her
own Seal to it. Anno Dom. MXLII.
Now how the Episcopal See came afterward to be removed hither from Litchfield
and Chester, we shall in its due place declare.

The Charter of the Foundation of this Monastery, dedicated to our Blessed
Lady, St. Peter, and all the Saints, is printed in Vol. I.
Monast. Angl. though without any date; wherein are named all the Manors given
by the said Munificent Founder; and the same is ratified by the Charter of King
Edward, and a Bull of Pope Alexander, bearing date Anno Dom. 1042. Neither did
the Piety of these Liberal Persons rest here, for Earl Leofric, with the Assent
of his Lady Godiva, repaired also the Monasteries of Leon (or Lemster) near
Hereford; of Wenlock; of St. Wereburga in Chester; of St. John in Worcester;
and lastly, that of Evesham.

Anno Dom. MXLIII.
This year Archbishop Eadsige resigned his Archbishopric, by reason of great
Bodily Infirmities; and by the King's leave, and the advice of Earl Godwin, he
consecrated Syward Abbot of Abbandune to succeed him; which thing was known but
to few, till it was actually done, because the Archbishop was afraid lest some
other, less Learned and Able, would either by Money or Interest obtain that
See, if so be it was once divulged before it was done.

But of this Syward, De Pontif. Lib. I.
William of Malmesbury tells us, That though he was thus consecrated
Archbishop, yet notwithstanding he was soon after deposed for his Ingratitude
to his Predecessor, in that he defrauded the weak Old Man of his necessary
maintenance: But however to make this Syward some amends, he was translated to
the Bishopric of Rochester; which was a great Fall indeed from the Sea of an
Archbishop, to that of his principal Chaplain; but it seems he was resolved to
be a Bishop, though a mean one, comparatively.

The Annals also relate, That this year there was so great a Famine in England,
that a Sester of Wheat (which, as Roger Hoveden tells us, was then a
Horse-load) was sold for Sixty Pence and more.

Which was then a great deal of Money, considering the scarcity of Silver in
those times, and that every Penny then weighed Four Pence of our Money.

Also the same year the King sailed to Sandwic with Five and thirty Ships.] And
as R. Hoveden informs us, it was to meet Magnus King of Norway, then designing
to invade England; but a War breaking out with Sweyn King of Denmark, it put an
end to that Expedition.

Also Aethelstan the Oeconomus, or Steward of the Abbey of Abbingdon, was made
Abbot; and Stigand again received his Bishopric of the East-Angles]; from
which, it seems, by the cunning and Simoniacal practices of Bishop Grymkytel,
he had been before deprived.

The same year King Edward married the Daughter of Earl Godwin, whose Name was
Edgitha, or Editha.] A Woman (as William of Malmesbury says) not only of great
Beauty and Piety, but also Learned above what Women usually were in that Age
wherein he lived; insomuch that Ingulph tells us, when he was but a Boy, and
lived at Court with his Father, she was wont to meet him as he came from
School, and took delight to pose him in Verses; and would also, passing from
Grammar, argue with him in Logic, in which she was well skilled; and when she
had done, would order her Waiting Woman to give him some Money.

But as King Edward had till now deferred the performance of his Promise in
marrying this Lady ever since he came to the Crown, Anno Dom. MXLIII.
so it had been no great matter whether he had married her or not, because he
never enjoyed her.

But notwithstanding the temptation of so fair a Lady, he not only kept his own
Virginity inviolable, but also persuaded her to do the like; and this, Vid. X.
Script.
(as the Abbot of Rieval in his Life relates) he did not do out of any hatred
to her Father, (as is commonly reported by several of our other Historians) but
because the English Nobility, being desirous that one from his Loins should
succeed him, had importuned him to marry, which he could not well refuse (for
then the secret Resolution of his dying a Virgin, would have been disclosed);
therefore he wedded her, both to secure himself against her Father, as also to
make the Virtue of his Continence appear more conspicuous; which, as this
Author tells us, was no Secret, being then divulged, and believed all over
England; and diverse Censures passed concerning the motives why he did so.

The same year Brightwulf Bishop of Scirebone deceased, who had held that
Bishopric Thirty eight years; and Hereman the King's Chaplain succeeded to
that Bishopric.

Also Wulfric was consecrated Abbot of St. Austin's at Christmas, with the
King's good Consent, because of the great Bodily Infirmity of Aelfstan (the
former Abbot.)

This year deceased Living Bishop of Devonshire (i.e. of Exeter), Anno Dom.
MXLIV.
and Leofric the King's Chaplain succeeded thereunto. The same year Aelfstan
Abbot of St. Augustin's in Canterbury deceased; and also Osgot Glappa, the
Danish Earl, was expelled England.

The same year likewise, (according to Simeon of Durham, and William of
Malmesbury) Alwold Bishop of London, who had been before Abbot of Evesham,
being by reason of his great weakness unable to perform his Episcopal Function,
would have retired to his old Monastery; but the Monks not permitting it, he
resented it so ill at their hands, that taking away all the Books and other
Ornaments which he had conferred upon them, and retiring to the Abbey of Ramsey,
he bestowed them all upon them, and there within a short time after ended his
days; and then King Edward made one Robert, a Norman Monk, Bishop of London.

Also the same year the Noble Matron Gunhilda, Niece to King Cnute, was
banished England, together with her two Sons.

This year likewise, in a great Council held at London, (as Florence relates)
Wulmar a Religious Monk of Evesham was chosen Abbot of that Monastery, and was
ordained the 4th of the Ides of August following.

About this time, according to the Welsh Chronicles, Prince Griff^th having
ruled in Peace ever since the last great Battle abovementioned, till now, the
Gentlemen of Ystrad Towy did by Treachery kill a Hundred and forty of his best
Soldiers; so that to revenge their deaths, the Prince destroyed all those
Countries.

Grymkitel Bishop of the South Saxons (i. e. Selsey) deceased; Anno Dom. MXLV.
as did also the same year, Aelfwin Bishop of Winchester, and Stigand, who was
before Bishop in the North-East parts (i. e. of Helmham) succeeded in that See:
And Earl Sweyn the Son of Godwin, went over to Baldwin Earl of Flanders to
Brycge, and staid there all Winter, and at Summer departed; (being it seems at
that time in disgrace at Court for deflow'ring an Abbess whom he loved).

Anno Dom. MXLVI.
This year Aethelstan Abbot of Abbandune deceased; to whom succeeded
Sparhafock, a Monk of St. Edmundsbury. Whence you may observe, that the Abbots
were at that time seldom chosen out of Monks of the same Abbey.

Also this year Bishop Syward deceased; and then Archbishop Eadsige retook that
Bishopric.] Which is contrary to what William of Malmesbury has already
related.

The same year likewise Lothen and Yrling, Danes, came to Sandwic with Twenty
five Ships, and there landing, committed great havoc, and carried away
abundance of Booty, as well of Gold as Silver; so that no man can tell how
great it was: From whence they sailed about Thanet, and attempting there to
commit the like Outrages, the people of that Country vigorously resisted them,
and hindered their landing, and so made them to direct their course toward
Essex, where they committed the like Barbarities, carrying away all the men
they could lay hold on; and then passing over into the Territories of Earl
Baldwin, and there selling all their Plunder, they sailed toward the East,
from whence they came.

Also the same year (according to Simeon of Durham) Harold, surnamed Hairfax,
Brother to the late King Olaf, having put Sweyn King of Denmark to flight,
subdued that Kingdom. King Sweyn being thus driven out of his Country, sent
Ambassadors to King Edward, desiring his Assistance with his Fleet against the
King of Norway; which Earl Godwin much approved of, but the rest of the Great
Men dissuading him from it, nothing was done; but the King of Norway dying soon
after, Sweyn recovered his Kingdom. But Florence of Worcester places this
Transaction two years later; but which of them is in the right, I will not
dispute.

Also this year (according to our Annals, as well as other Authors) was the
great Battle of Vallesdune in Normandy, between Henry King of France, and the
Nobility of that Dukedom, because they refused to receive William the Bastard
for their Duke: But when he afterward got them into his power, he beheaded
some of them, and others he banished.

I have mentioned this, to let you see with how great difficulty this young
Duke (who was afterward King of England) was settled in that Duchy, which he
could never have obtained without the Protection and Assistance of the King of
France.

About this time also the Welsh Chronicles tell us South Wales was so infested
by the Danish Pirates, that the Seacoasts were almost quite deserted.

The same year, or else in 1048 (as it is in the Cottonian Copy of the Annals)
was held the great Synod or Council at St. Remy, where were present Pope Leo,
and the Archbishop of Burgundy (i. e. of Besanson, tho they are here mentioned
as two several Archbishopricks) as also the Archbishop of Treves, and Remes,
with many other Wise Men both of the Clergy and Laity; and thither King Edward
sent Bishop Dudoce, and Wulfric Abbot of St. Augustine's, with Abbot Aelfwin,
that they might acquaint the King what was there decreed concerning the
Christian Faith.

This year King Edward sailed to Sandwic with a great Fleet, Anno Dom. MXLVI.
and there met Earl Sweyn, who came with seven Ships at Bosenham (i.e. Bosham
in Sussex) where he made a League with the King, and received a Promise from
him to be restored to all his possessions; but Earl Harold his Brother, and
Beorne, very much opposed him, saying, He was utterly unworthy of those Favors
the King had promised him; so he had only four days allowed him to go back
again to his Ships.

In the mean time a Report was brought to the King, That a Fleet of Enemies
were landed on the Coast of the East Angles, and there taking of Prey: Then
Earl Godwin sailed about toward the East with two of the King's Ships, one of
which his Son Harold commanded, and the other Earl Totsige his Brother, and
also Two and forty Sail of the people of the Country: Then was Earl Harold
with the King's Ships driven by a Storm into Pevensee, and there detained by
contrary Winds; but within two days after, Earl Sweyn came thither, and had
Conference with his Father, Earl Godwin, and Earl Beorne, whom he entreated to
accompany him to the King at Sandwic, and there use their interest to make his
Reconciliation with him; but whilst they were on their way, Sweyne begged of
Beorne (his Cousin) that he would go back along with him to his Ships, saying,
He feared lest his men would desert him, unless he speedily returned; whereupon
complying with him, they went back to the place where the Ships rode, and there
Sweyn was very importunate with him to go on Shipboard; but he utterly refusing
that, the Mariners bound him, and then put him into a Pinnace, and so carried
him on board by force; then hoisting up Sail, they steered Eastward to
Axamutha, and there kept him till they had made him away.

Then they took his Body, and buried it in a certain Church; but afterward his
Relations and the Mariners of London came, and digging up his Body, carried it
with them to the old Church of Winchester, where they buried it near his Uncle
King Cnute: Then Sweyn sailing Eastward toward Flanders, staid there a whole
Winter in Brycge, with Earl Baldwin's good leave. The same year deceased
Eadnoth; Bishop in the North parts; and one Vlf was consecrated Bishop in his
stead.

This year was a great Council held at London in Midlent, and there were sent
out Nine Ships well manned with Seamen, Anno Dom. MXLVII.
Five only being left in Port; also this very year Earl Sweyn returned into
England.

For Aldred Bishop of Worcester had by his Intercession made his Peace with the
King.

The same year was a Great Synod assembled at Rome, whither King Eadward sent
the Bishops Hereman and Aldred, who arrived there on Easter-Eve; after which
the Pope held a Synod at Vercelle, whither was sent Bishop Vlf, who was
afterward like to be deprived, because he could not perform his Function as he
ought, had he not paid a good round Sum of Money. This year also deceased
Eadsige the Archbishop, (4o Kal. November.)

King Edward now appointed Rodbyrd Bishop of London, to be Archbishop of
Canterbury in Lent, Anno Dom. MXLVIII.
who immediately went to Rome to obtain his Pall: Then the King bestowed the
Bishopric of London on Sparhafoc Abbot of Abbandune, and gave that Abbey to
Bishop Rothulf his Kinsman.

Anno Dom. MXLVIII.
About the same time the Archbishop, returning from Rome the day before the
Vigil of St. Peter, was Installed in the Episcopal Throne at Christ-Church, on
St. Peter's Day: Then came to him Sparhafoc with the King's Letters and Seal,
commanding that he should consecrate him Bishop of London; but the Archbishop
refusing it, said, The Pope had forbad him to do it: After which, the Abbot
returned to the Archbishop, and desired his Episcopal Orders, but he
peremptorily denied them, saying, The Pope had strictly charged him not to do
it. Then the Abbot went to London, and held the Bishopric nothwithstanding all
that Summer, and the Autumn following.

Then Eustatius (Earl of Boloigne, the King's Brother-in-Law) came from beyond
the Seas, and having been with the King, and told him his Business, he returned
homewards; and when he came to Canterbury, he refreshed himself and his
Company, and so went on to Dofra (i. e. Dover), but when he was within a Mile
of this side thereof, he and his Retinue put on their Breast-plates, and so
entered the Town: As soon as they were come thither, they took up their Quarters
in what Houses they liked best; but one of his Followers resolving to quarter
in the House of an Inhabitant there whether he would or no, because he told him
he should not, he wounded him; whereupon the Master killed him: At which News
Earl Eustatius being very much incensed, mounted to Horse, with all his
Followers, and setting upon the Good Man of the House, killed him even within
his own doors; and then going into the Town, they killed partly within, and
partly without, more than Twenty men. But the Townsmen (to be even with them)
killed Nineteen of their men, and wounded many more.

Upon this Earl Eustatius making his Escape with a few Followers, went to the
King, and told him what had happened, so much as made to his purpose; at which
the King being highly provoked with the Townsmen, sent Earl Godwin, and
commanded him to march to Dofra in a Hostile manner; for Eustatius had only
insinuated to the King, as if what had happened had been wholly through the
Townsmens fault, though indeed it was quite otherwise: But the Earl was very
unwilling to go into Kent, because he looked on it as an odious thing for him
to destroy his own people.

For as William of Malmesbury farther relates, he plainly saw the King was
imposed on, and had passed sentence upon them, when he had only heard one side:
And indeed the Earl was much concerned to see Strangers find greater favor
with the King, than his own Subjects; for Eustatius had got a Friend near the
King, who had very much exasperated him against them; therefore though the King
continually pressed Earl Godwin to go into Kent with an Army, to be revenged of
the men of Dofra, yet he still declined it, which much displeased the King; yet
nevertheless the Earl's Proposal seemed but just and reasonable, That the
Officers of the Castle (who it seems had a hand in this business) should be
first summoned to answer in the King's Curia or Court, concerning this
Sedition; and that if they could clear themselves there, they might be
discharged; but if not, that they might make satisfaction to the King and the
Earl with their Bodies and Estates; for Earl Godwin told the King, that it
would seem very unjust to condemn those unheard, whom he ought chiefly to
protect and defend.

And so far no doubt the Earl was in the right, Anno Dom. MXLVIII.
and behaved himself like a true Englishman, in thus declining to execute the
King's unjust Commands; though not in what he did afterward. But to return
again to our Annals.

The King hereupon summoned all his Chief and Wise Men to appear at Gloucester,
a little after the Feast of St. Mary; for the Welshmen had in the mean time
built a Castle in Herefordshire, upon the Lands of Earl Sweyn, and had done a
great deal of mischief to the King's Liege-People in the Neighborhood: Then
Earl Godwin (with Sweyn and Harold, his Sons) met at Byferstane (i. e.
Beverston in Gloucestershire) together with a great many in their Retinue, to
attend on the King their Natural Lord, and all the Chief and Wise Men that
waited on him, whereby they might have the King's Consent and Assistance, as
also that of his Great Council, to revenge the Affront and Dishonor which had
been lately done to the King and the whole Nation: But the Welshmen getting
first to the King, highly accused the Earls, insomuch that they durst not
appear in his presence, for they said they only came thither to betray him: But
then there came to the King the Earls Syward and Leofric, with many others from
the North parts, being (as William of Malmesbury relates) almost all the
Nobility of England, who had been summoned by the King to come thither: But
whilst (according to our Annals) it was told Earl Godwin and his Sons, that the
King and those that were with him were taking Counsel against them, they on the
other side stood resolutely on their own defense; though it seemed an hard
thing for them to act any thing against their Natural Lord.

But William of Malmesbury adds farther, That Earl Godwin commanded those of
his Party not to fight against the King; yet if they were set upon, that they
should defend themselves; so that there had then like to have happened a Cruel
Civil War, if calmer Counsels had not prevailed.

By this you may see the great Power of Earl Godwin and his Sons, who could
thus withstand the King, and all the Nobility that were with him. But to
proceed with our Annals:

Then it was agreed by the chief men on both sides, that they should desist
from any further violence; and thereupon the King gave them God's Peace, and
his own Word.

After this, the King and his Great Men about him resolved a second time to
summon a Witena Gemot, or Great Council at London, at the beginning of
September: He also commanded an Army to be raised, as great as ever had been
seen in England, both from the North and South side of Thames. When this
Council met, Earl Sweyn was declared outlawed, and Earl Godwin and Earl Harold
were cited to appear at the Council with all speed. As soon as they were come
there, they desired Peace (i. e. Security) and also Pledges to be given them,
whereby they might have safe ingress and regress to and from the Council: But
the King required all the Earl's Servants to deliver them up into his hands;
after which the King sent to them, commanding them to come with Twelve men to
the Great Council; but the Earl again demanded Securities and Pledges to be
given him, and then he promised to clear himself from all Crimes laid to his
charge: But the Pledges were still denied him, and there was only granted him a
five days Peace (or Truce) in which he might depart the Land: Anno Dom. MXLVIII.
Then Earl Godwin, and Earl Sweyn his Son, went to Bosenham (in Sussex) and
their Ships being brought out of the Harbor, they sailed beyond the Seas, and
sought the Protection of Earl Baldwin, staying with him all that Winter; but
Earl Harold sailed Eastward into Ireland, and there took up his Residence,
under that King's Protection: Soon after this the King sent away his Wife, who
had been crowned Queen, and suffered all her Money, Lands, and Goods, to be
taken from her, and then committed her to the Custody of his Sister, at the
Nunnery of Werwell.

But note, that Florence of Worcester places this Quarrel with Earl Godwin and
his Sons, three years later, viz. under Anno 1051; and farther adds, That the
reason why Earl Godwin fled thus privately away, was, that his Army had forsook
him, so that he durst not plead the matter with the King, but fled away the
night following with his five Sons, carrying away all their Treasure with them
into Flanders.

This is the Relation which Florence and the Printed Copy of these Annals give
us of this great difference between the King and Earl Godwin and his two Sons;
in the carriage of which both Parties are to be blamed; the King in yielding so
easy an ear to the false Accusations brought against them, and they in refusing
to stand to the Determination of the Great Council of the Kingdom, without
Pledges first given them by the King, which is more than any Subject ought to
require from his Prince: But certainly the King showed himself a very Weak Man,
in being persuaded to deal thus severely with his Innocent Queen, for the
Faults of her Father and Brothers, which it was not in her power to help.

But to conclude the Affairs of this unhappy year; our Annals proceed to tell
us, That

About the same time the Abbot Sparhafoc was deposed from the Bishopric of
London, and William the King's Chaplain ordained to that See. Also Earl Odda
was appointed Governor of Defenascire, Somersetscire, and Dorsetscire, and of
all the Welsh; and the Earldom which Earl Harold lately held, was given to
Aelfgar the Son of Earl Leofric.

Anno Dom. MXLIX.
About this time the Bishopric of Credington in Cornwall, was (as we find in the
Vol. 2 p. 222.
Monasticon) at the Request of Pope Leo removed from thence to Exeter, where
the Monastery of St. Peter and St. Paul was made a Bishop's See, the Monks
being removed from thence to Westminster, and Secular Chanons placed in their
stead: Which shows that the humor of Monkery did not so much prevail now, as
in the days of King Edgar. And this year Leofric Bishop of that Diocese was
enthroned at Exeter, after a solemn Procession, where the Bishop walked to
Church between King Edward, and Queen Editha his Wife.

Anno Dom. MLI.
This year, according to Florence of Worcester, the King released the Nation
from that cruel Burden of Danegelt, under which it had for so many years
groaned: but I will not pass my word for the truth of the occasion why he did
it, though related by Ingulph; viz. That King Edward going into his Treasury,
where this Tax had been laid up, saw the Devil capering and dancing upon the
Money-bags (which it seems no body else could see but himself); at which he was
so concerned, that he ordered all the Money to be restored to the right Owners,
and forbad its being gathered any more.

Not long after, according to the same Author, Anno Dom. MLI.
William Duke of Normandy, the King's Cousin, coming over into England, was
honorably received here, and had Noble Presents made him; and as some relate
too, that King Edward promised to make him his Successor in the Kingdom.

This year also, according to Florence of Worcester, Alfric Archbishop of York
deceased, and Kinsing the King's Chaplain succeeded him.

This year deceased Aelgiva (alias Ymma) the Mother of King Eadward and King
Hardecnute. Anno Dom. MLII.


She has a various Character given her by our Historians; William of
Malmesbury represents her to be very Covetous, and Unkind to her first Husbands
Children; which seems to have been true enough: But then she was very Devout,
and had a great Respect for the Bishops and Monks, from whom she was sure to
have their good word; yet however she did not escape Scandal, for she had
several Enemies that incensed the King against her, but especially Archbishop
Robert the Norman, who had accused her some years before her death, of being
too familiar with Alwin Bishop of Winchester: Whereupon she was sent to the
Abbey of Werewell, having first of all her Goods taken from her, whilst the
Bishop was committed to Prison, Archbishop Robert crying out, That such Villainy
ought not to go unpunished, for fear it should be an encouragement for others
to do the like; but she not being kept very strictly, wrote to all the Bishops
of England whom she knew to be her Friends, professing that she was more
troubled at the Disgrace offered to the Bishop, than that which was done to her
self; and that she was ready to clear his Innocence by the Fire Ordeal.

Upon this the Bishops met, and had easily prevailed with the King to put up
the business, had not Archbishop Robert stiffly opposed them, demanding of his
Brethren, How they could have the confidence to take upon them the Defense of
that Beast rather than Woman, (meaning the Queen Mother) who had so detracted
from the King her Son, and yet had called her Paramour, The Anointed of the
Lord? But (said he) this Woman will purge the Bishop, but who shall purge her
that consented to the Death of her Son Alfred, and prepared Poison for his
Brother (now King) Edward? But if she desires to be acquitted, let her accept
of her own Proposal, and walk barefoot over Nine Red-hot Plowshares, four for
her self, and five for the Bishop, and then if she escape untouched, let her
pass for Innocent.

Upon this the Day for Trial was appointed, and she having the night before at
his Shrine earnestly invoked the Assistance of St. Swithin, she came to the
place, where the King and all the Bishops (except Robert) were present; and
there passed unhurt over all the Red-hot Plowshares, to the great Joy and
Wonder both of her self and all the Spectators, especially of the King her Son,
that she had so well cleared her self; then he was very sorry that he had been
so credulous as to admit those Calumnies against his own Mother, whose Pardon
he now begged, as also the Bishops; and (as diverse of the Monkish Writers
relate) received Penance from them on his bare back.

Queen Emma for this signal Deliverance gave to St. Swithin Nine Manors, and
the Bishop of Winchester as many, the Innocence of them both being hereby
absolutely cleared. Moreover the King is said to have bestowed on the Church of
Winchester the whole Isle of Portland* and other Possessions.

Anno Dom. MLII.
The substance of this Story is both delivered by John Bromton and Henry de
Knighton; but Dr. Harpesfield has embellished it with diverse other trivial
Circumstances, whilst our more Ancient Authors, as Malmesbury and others, say
nothing of it. But methinks that which follows spoils all the rest, viz. That
Archbishop Robert (whom some will have Bishop, and others Archbishop at this
time) thereupon fled out of the Land; whereas indeed he continued here much
longer, and fled out of England upon another occasion, as we shall show
hereafter. But to return again to our Annals:

The same year it was also decreed by the King and his Chief Men, That Ships
should be sent to Sandwich, and that Earl Rolfe and Earl Odda should command
them; in the mean time Earl Godwin departed from Brycge with his Ships to Ysera
(a place we know not), and then landing the next day but one to Midsummer-Eve,
he came to the Head or Point lying on the South side of Rumenea (now Rumney in
Kent) which when it was told the Earls at Sandwic, they immediately sailed out
in pursuit of him, and also commanded the Landforces to be in a readiness to
join them: But is seems Earl Godwin had timely notice of it, and so he fell
back to Pevensea (i. e. Pensey in Sussex); and then so violent a Tempest arose,
that the Earls could not inform themselves which way Godwin was gone; but
afterward he returned and came to Brycge, and the King's Ships went to
Sandwic, and from thence they were ordered back to London, and other Captains
to command them; but the matter was so long delayed, that all the Seamen left
their Ships, and returned to their own homes.

As soon as Earl Godwin heard this, he set out his Fleet again to Sea, and
sailed directly Westward to the Isle of Wight, where his men going ashore,
plundered so long till at last the people would give them what Contributions
soever they demanded. Then they sailed further Westward till they came to the
Isle of Portland, and there going again on shore they did all the damage they
could to the Inhabitants. In the mean time Harold returned from Ireland with
Nine Ships, and landed at Portloc Bay (in Somersetshire) where much people were
got together against him; but he not being at all afraid of them, marched out
to seek Provisions, and there killed all before him, taking Men, Cattle, and
Money, whatsoever he met with. From thence he sailed Eastward toward his
Father, whom having met, they went together to the Isle of Wight, and there
plundered whatsoever was left; and thence coasted to Pevensea, where they took
all the Ships that were in that Harbor; afterward they went to the Naesse
Point, and carried away all the Ships that were in Rumenea, Hythe, and
Folcestane, (now Folcston in Kent). Thence they sailed Eastward again to Dofra,
and going on shore, took there as many Ships and Hostages as they could; and
then went to Sandwic, where also they did the like; so that they had Hostages
and Provisions given them where ever they came, as much as they required; then
again they sailed to Northmuthe (supposed to be that which we call now the Buoy
in the Nore) and thence up toward London; they also sent some Ships to
Scepige, and there did a great deal of mischief; then they turned to
Middle-tune, a Town of the King's (in Essex) and burnt it down to the ground;
and afterward the Earls went toward London, but when they came thither, they
found the King with all his Great Men ready to receive them with Fifty Sail.
Then the outlawed Earls sent to the King, beseeching him, Anno Dom. MLII.
that they might be restored to their Estates, of which they had been unjustly
deprived; but for a long time the King would not hearken to them by any means,
till at last the men who were with the Earl were so enraged against him and his
people, that the Earl had much a-do to appease them.

Then were assembled by God's assistance Bishop Stigand and other Prudent Men,
as well within the City as without, and there they agreed upon a Peace to be
made, Hostages being first given on both sides; which when Archbishop Rodbert
and the other Frenchmen understood, they took Horse, and fled some Westward to
Pentecost's Castle, (but where it was we do not now know) and others Northward
to a Castle of Archbishop Rodbert's, who together with Bishop Vlf and all their
Party, going out at the East Gate (I suppose of London) killed and wounded many
young men (who I suppose went about to seize them); thence they went directly
to Ealdulphe's- Naese (now the Nesse-Point in Essex) where the Archbishop going
on board a small Vessel, left his Pall and Bishopric behind him (as God would
have it) since he had attained that Honor without God's Approbation.

From all which Transactions we may draw these Observations, That all this
Contest between the King and Earl Godwin, seems to have been chiefly from the
two great Factions, that of the Normans whom the King brought over with him,
and that of his English Subjects; and which happening under a Weak and Easy
King, that had neither the Prudence nor Courage to keep the Balance even, it
produced this Pyratical War, made by Earl Godwin and his Sons, to force the
King to restore them to their Estates. All which not only shows the great Power
of this Earl and his Partisans, but also that those who have the Command at
Sea, may force a King of England to what Terms they please. It is also evident,
that these Annals were wrote by some Monk of the English Party, who was wholly
of Earl Godwin's side. But to return again to them.

Then was appointed a Great Council without London, where all the Earls and
Chief Men then in England were present; and there Earl Godwin pleaded for
himself, and was acquitted before the King and the whole Nation; and affirmed
that he and Harold his Son, with the rest of his Children, were innocent of the
Crimes whereof they stood accused: Whereupon the King received the Earl and his
Sons, with all those of his Party, into his full Grace and Favor, restoring
him to his Earldom, and whatsoever else he before enjoyed, as likewise to every
one his own again. And then too the King restored to the Queen his Wife (who
had been before sent away) whatsoever she had been possessed of; but Archbishop
Rodbert and all the Frenchmen were outlawed and banished, because they were
those who had been the chief Incendiaries of this Quarrel between the King and
the Earl; and Bishop Stigand was then made Archbishop of Canterbury.

Though our Annals are in the Relation of what passed at this Great Council
much more particular than most of our Historians, yet in the Account of this
War between the King and Earl Godwin, there are some things to be further taken
notice of; as what Simeon of Durham relates, That Earl Harold when he came out
of Ireland, first entered the Mouth of Severne, and there spoiled the Coast of
Somersetshire, plundering both the Towns and Country round about; Anno Dom.
MLII.
and then coming back to his Ships laden with Prey, he presently sailed round
Penwithst^ot (i. e. the Land's-End) and met his Father, as you have heard
before; and when it was told King Edward that Earl Godwin was come to Sandwic,
he commanded all those who had not revolted from him, to make haste to his
Assistance; but they delayed so long their coming up, that in the mean while
Godwin with his Fleet sailed up the River Thames as far as Southweork, and
there lay till the Tide, but yet not without sending Messengers to some of the
chief Citizens of London, whom he had before drawn over to his Party by fair
Promises, and so far prevailed with them, that they absolutely engaged
themselves to be at his service, and do whatever he would command them: Then
all things being thus prepared, the next Tide they weighed Anchor, and sailed
Southward up the Stream, no body opposing them on the Bridge. From whence we
may observe, that those Ships he had, were only small Galleys, with Masts to be
taken up and down at pleasure, much like our Huoys at this day.

Then came the Earl's Land-Army, and flanking themselves all along the side of
the River, made a very thick and terrible Body, insomuch that he turned his
Fleet toward the Northern Shore, as if he were resolved to have encompassed
that of the King's (which it seems then lay above-Bridge, over against London):
And though He had at that time both a Fleet, and a Numerous Land-Army of
Foot-Soldiers, yet they being all English, abhorred to fight against their own
Kinsfolks and Countrymen; and therefore the wiser sort of both sides laid hold
on this Opportunity, and became such powerful Mediators between the King and
the Earl, as made them mutually to strike up a Peace, and so dismiss their
Armies.

The next day the King held a Great Council, and restored Earl Godwin and his
Sons to their former Honors and Estates, except Sweyn; who, being pricked in
Conscience for the Murder of his Cousin Beorn, was gone from Flanders barefoot
as far as Jerusalem, and in his return homeward died in Lycia of a Disease
contracted through extreme Cold.

A firm Concord and Peace being thus concluded, both the King and the Earl
promised right Law (i. e. Justice) to all people, and banished all those
Normans that had introduced unjust Laws, and given false Judgments, and
committed many Outrages upon the English; though some of them were permitted to
stay, as Robert the Deacon, and Richard Fitzscrob, his Son-in-Law, as also
Alred the Yeoman of the King's Stirrup, Anfred surnamed Cocksfoot, and some
others who had been the King's greatest Favorites, and always faithful to him
and the People; all the rest were sent away, and amongst them was also William
Bishop of London; but he being a good honest man, was called back again in a
short time: Osbern, surnamed Pentecost, (from whom the Castle abovementioned
was so called) and his Companion Hugh, surrendered their Castles; and by the
License of Earl Leofric, passing through his Earldom of Mercia, went into
Scotland, and were there kindly received by King Macbeth.

Mr. Seldom in his P. 525.
Titles of Honor refers that Relation in Bromton's Chronicle, to this Great
Council held this very year; in which the manner of King Edward's
Reconciliation with Earl Godwin is more particularly set down; Anno Dom. MLII.
viz. That the King having summoned a Great Council, as soon as he there beheld
Earl Godwin, immediately accused him before them all, of having betrayed and
murdered his Brother Prince Alfred, in these words; Thou Traitor Godwin, I
accuse thee of the Death of Alfred my Brother, whom thou have traitorously
murdered; and for the Proof of this, I refer my self to the Judgment of Curiae
Vestrae, (i. e. your Court.) Then the King proceeded thus, 'You, most Noble
Lords, the Earls and Barons of the Kingdom (where note, That by Barons are to
be understood Thanes, for they were one and the same before the Conquest) You
who are my Liege-men, being here assembled, have heard my Appeal, as also the
Answer of Earl Godwin; I will that you now give a Right Sentence between us in
this my Appeal, and afford due Justice therein. Then the Earls and Barons
having maturely debated this matter among themselves, some were for giving
Judgment for the King; but others differed from them, saying, That Earl Godwin
had never been obliged to the King by either Homage, Service, or Fealty, and
therefore could be no Traitor to him; and besides, that he had not killed the
Prince with his own hands. But others replied, That no Earl, Baron, nor any
other Subject of the King, could by Law wage Battle against him in his Appeal,
but ought upon the whole matter to submit himself to the King's Mercy, and
offer him reasonable Amends. Then Leofric Earl of Chester, who was an upright
and sincere man both with respect to God and the world, spoke thus: Earl
Godwin, who next to the King is indeed a Person of the best Quality in England,
cannot deny but that by his Counsel Alfred the King's Brother was killed; and
therefore my opinion is, That both he himself and his Sons, and Twelve of us
Earls that are his Friends and Kinsmen, should appear humbly before the King,
each of us carrying as much Gold and Silver as he can bold in his Arms, and
offering it to him, most humbly supplicate for his Pardon; and then the King
should remit to the Earl all Rancor and Anger whatsoever against him, and
having received his Homage and Fealty, peacebly restore him to all his Lands.
To this the Assembly agreed; and those that were appointed, loading themselves
with Treasure after the manner aforesaid, went unto the King, showing him the
order and manner of their Judgment, which he being unwilling to contradict,
complied with, and so ratified whatever they had before decreed.

This, tho written a long time after the Conquest, as appears by the Words
there used, viz. Parliament, Baron, Homage and Fealty; yet it might be true in
the main, as being transcribed out of some Ancient Records of the Great
Councils of those times, which are now lost; and if so, would be a Notable
Precedent of the large Authority of the Witena Gemot, or Great Council of the
Nation, not only in assenting to new Laws, but also of their Judicial Authority
in giving Judgment upon all Suits or Complaints brought before them, as well in
Appeals between Subject and Subject, as also where the King himself was a
Party; and if Authentic, would also show, not only that this Tenure of the
King by Homage and Fealty was in use before the Conquest, but also (according
to the Judgment of this Great Council) that there was no Allegiance due by
Birth, nor until a man had actually performed his Homage, or sworn Fealty to
the King; and lastly, that a satisfaction made by Money, was looked upon as
sufficient for the Death even of the King's own Brother. Anno Dom. MLII.
Yet to deal ingenuously with the Reader, notwithstanding this fair story,
Bromton himself seems to doubt the truth of it; for after he has there told us
from some nameless Author, that Earl Godwin (out of fear of some of the English
Nobility, who had sworn to be revenged of him for the murder of Prince Alfred)
retired into Denmark, during the Reign of King Hardecnute; but returning in the
beginning of King Edward's Reign, he appeared at a Parliament at London, where
the King impeached him of the Death of his Brother in the manner as you have
already heard; and if so, this could not fall out as Mr. Seldom supposes in
this Great Council, after this last return of Earl Godwin, which happened not
in the beginning, but the middle of this King's Reign. With which Relation also
agree two Ancient Chronicles in French, written in the time of Edward the
Third, and are both in the Cottonian Library.

And Bromton himself acknowledges, that according to most Authors Earl Godwin
never went into Denmark at all, nor left England during the Reign of King
Hardecnute; so that this Transaction (if it ever happened at all) seems most
likely to have fell out in the Reign of King Hardecnute, when that King charged
Earl Godwin with his Brother's Death, and made him redeem it with a great
Present, as we have above told you.

But to conclude this year; From the Peterburgh Copy of these Annals, it
appears that about this time Arnwy Abbot of Burgh resigned his Dignity, by
reason of his bad Health, and conferred it with the King's License, and the
Consent of the Monks, upon Leofri^ a Monk of that Abbey: But Abbot Arnwy lived
eight years after: During which time Abbot Leofric so adorned that Monastery
with rich Guildings, that it was called the Golden Burgh; he also endowed it
very much with Lands, as well as other Treasures.

This year, according to Florence of Worcester, Griffyn Prince of Wales entering
England, spoiled great part of H^refordshire; against whom many Inhabitants of
that County marched, together with the Norman Garrison of Hereford Castle; but
Prince Griffyn meeting with them, killed a great many, and putting the rest to
flight, carried away a great deal of Booty.

Anno Dom. MLIII.
This year Earl Godwin deceased (17th Kal. of May) and was buried in the Old
Monastery of Winchester.

Of the manner of whose Death, though our Annals are silent, yet I shall here
set down what I find concerning it by almost all our Historians, and it is
thus; That King Edward celebrating the Feast of Easter at Winchester (or at
Windsor, as some will have it) Earl Godwin, as his Custom was, sitting at Table
with him, was suddenly seized with so violent a Distemper, that it struck him
speechless, and made him fall off from the Chair on which he sat; and his
Three Sons Harold, Tosti, and Gyrth, being present, they immediately removed
him into the King's Chamber, hoping it was but a sudden Fit, and would be
speedily over; but he lay in that languishing condition four days, and died on
the fifth. This is the account of his Death; to which the Norman Monks, and
such as write in favor of them, add other Circumstances, which show either his
Guilt, or their Malice; since they relate, That mention being made by somebody
at the King's Table, of Alfred his late Brother, he thereupon looked very
angrily at Earl Godwin, when he to vindicate himself told King Edward, Anno
Dom. MLIII.
He perceived that upon the least mentioning of that Prince, he cast a frowning
Countenance upon him; But (says he) let not God suffer me to swallow this
Morsel, if I am guilty of any thing done either toward the taking away his
Life, or against your Interest: After which words, being presently choked with
the Bit he had just before put into his Mouth, he sunk immediately down, and
never recovered more. But let the manner of his death be as it will, he was a
Man of an Active and Turbulent Spirit, not over-nicely conscientious either in
getting or keeping what he could; not to be excused for his too much forcing
his Sovereign to whatever he listed: But had he not been so great a Lover of
his Country, and an Enemy to Strangers, those that wrote in the Norman times
(and who durst not write any thing but what they knew would please their
Masters) would have passed him over without this Story, and have given him a
fairer Character.

His first Wife was the Sister of King Cnute, by whom he had a Son; but in his
Infancy happening to mount an unruly Horse that was presented him by his
Grandfather, he was run away with into the Thames, and there drowned. His
Mother was killed by Thunder, which (as then was believed) fell upon her as a
Judgment, on the account of her great Cruelty; for she made a Trade of selling
handsome English Boys and Girls into Denmark.

After her Death Earl Godwin married another Wife, and by her had Six Sons,
viz. Harold, Sweyn, Wined, Tosti, Gyrth, and Leofwin: His Earldom of West-Sea^
was given to his Son Harold; and the Earldom that Harold had before, viz.
Essex, was conferred on Alfgar the Son of Leofric, Earl of Mercia; which is
also confirmed by our Annals.

And the same year, according to Simeon of Durham, Rees the Brother of Griffyn
King of South Wales, being taken Prisoner, for the many Insolences he had
committed against the English, was by the Command of King Edward put to death
at a place called Bulendun, and his Head sent to the King then lying at
Gloucester, on the Vigil of Epiphany: But this is omitted in the Welsh
Chronicles, as commonly every thing is that makes to the disadvantage of their
own Nation.

This year Leo, that Holy Pope of Rome, deceased, Anno Dom. MLIV.
and Victor was elected in his stead. And there was also so great a Murrain of
all sorts of Cattle in England, that none could ever remember the like.

And now, according to the Welsh Chronicles, Griffyth the Son of Ratherch ap
Justin, raised a great Army both of Strangers and others, against Griffyth
Prince of North Wales, who delaying no time, but getting all the Forces of that
Country together, and meeting the other, Griffyth fought with him and slew him
on the place, though none of these Chronicles have told us where that was. This
was the last Rebellion or Welsh Civil War that happened in this Prince's Reign.

The same year (according to Simeon of Durham, and Roger Hoveden) Siward, that
Valiant Earl of Northumberland, at the Command of King Edward, being attended
with a powerful Army and a strong Fleet, marched into Scotland, to restore
Malcolm the Right Heir to the Crown of that Kingdom, where joining Battle with
Macbeth, the then Usurping King of Scots, many both of that Nation, and of the
Normans who took their part, were slain, and the Earl put the Usurper to
flight. But in this Battle the Earl's Son, and several of the English and Danes
were slain.

Anno Dom. MLIV.
H. Huntington further adds, That when the News was brought to the Earl, of the
Death of his Son, he presently asked, Whether he had received the Wound behind
or before? And being told it was before, he only replied, I am glad to hear
that, for so it became my Son to dye. He says also, That this Son of his (whom
he does not name) had been sent into Scotland before his Father, and was there
killed; and that Earl Siward did not subdue Macbeth till the second Expedition;
in which he differs from all the rest of the English and Scottish Historians.

Buchanan indeed acknowledges, that this Prince Malcolm having taken Refuge in
the Court of England, obtained of King Edward the Assistance of Ten thousand
men under the Conduct of Earl Siward, and that the rest were raised for him by
Macduf and others of his Party that took Arms on his behalf. But John Fordun in
his History writes much more improbably; and though he allows that King Edward
offered Malcolm an Army sufficient to place him on the Throne, yet that he
refused it with Thanks, and only took Earl Siward of all the English Lords
along with him; as if this Earl's single Might, though he was a Man of great
Strength and Stature, signified any thing against the Forces of Macbeth, unless
he had also brought a powerful Army along with him.

Mat. Westminster also adds, That Scotland being thus conquered by the Forces
of King Edward, he bestowed it upon King Malcolm, to be held of himself: But
since this is not found in any of our Ancient Historians, and this Author does
not acquaint us from whence he had it, I do not look upon it as worthy of any
great Credit.

About this time (according to Simeon) Aldred Bishop of Worcester was sent
Ambassador to the Emperor with Noble Presents; and being received with great
Honor by him, as likewise by Herman Archbishop of Cologne, he staid in Germany
a whole year, to prevail with the Emperor on the King's behalf to send
Ambassadors into Hungary, to bring back Prince Edward the King's Cousin, Son of
King Edmund Ironside, into England.

The same year also, according to the Latin Copy of the Annals, 'Was a Battle
at Mortimer in Normandy.] But though they do not tell us by whom it was fought,
yet from others we learn it was between William Duke of Normandy, and the King
of France; where the former obtained a most signal Victory.

Anno Dom. MLV.
This year Siward Earl of Northumberland deceased; and the King gave that
Earldom to Tostig, Son of Earl Godwin.

Of this Siward's death, our Historians give us diverse remarkable
Circumstances; That being near his End by a Bloody Flux, he said, He was
ashamed to dye thus like a Beast; so causing himself to be completely Armed,
and taking his Sword in his hand (as if he would have fought even Death it
self) he in this Posture expired, as he supposed, like a Man of Honor.

King Edward not long after this summoned a Witena Gemot (or Great Council)
seven days before Midlent, wherein Earl Aelfgar was outlawed upon a Charge of
being a Traitor to the King and the whole Nation; and of this he was convicted
before all there assembled. Then Earl Aelfgar went to the Castle of Prince
Griffyn in North Wales; and the same year they both together burnt the City of
Hereford, with the Monastery of St. Aethelbert, (once King of the East Angles,
whose Bones were here enshrined.)

This Earl had the greater reason to do what he did, Anno Dom. MLV.
having been unjustly banished, as most of our Historians write. Simeon of
Durham is somewhat larger in his account of this Affair; and says, That this
Earl Aelfgar first went to Ireland, and there procuring Eighteen Pyrate-Ships,
sailed with them into Wales to assist Prince Griffyn against King Edward, where
joining with the Welshmen, they laid waste the Country about Hereford with
Fire and Sword; against whom was sent that Cowardly Earl Rodolph, King Edward's
Sister's Son; who gathering an Army, and meeting with the Welshmen about two
miles from that City, he commanded the Englishmen (contrary to their custom) to
fight on Horseback; but so soon as they were ready to join Battle, Rodulph with
all his Frenchmen ran away; which the English seeing, quickly followed: By
which you may see, that it is no new thing for a Cowardly General to make
Cowardly Soldiers.

The Victory being thus easily obtained, the Prince and the Earl entered
Hereford, and having killed seven of the Chanons that defended the doors of the
Church, they burnt it, together with the Monastery abovementioned, with all
the Relics of St. Aethelbert, and the Rich Ornaments that were in it; and so
having slain diverse of the Citizens, and carried away great Numbers of them
Prisoners, they returned home laden with Booty: But as soon as the King was
acquainted with it, he presently commanded an Army to be raised through all
England; which being mustered at Gloucester, He appointed the Valiant Earl
Harold to be Commander in chief; who obeying the King's Orders, immediately
pursued Prince Griffyn and Earl Aelfgar, and entering the Borders of Wales,
pitched his Camp beyond Straetdale, as far as Snowdon; but they who knew him to
be a Brave and Warlike Commander, not daring to engage him, fled into
South Wales; which Harold perceiving, left there the greater part of his men,
with Orders to fight the Enemy if they could come at them; and with the rest he
returned to Hereford, which he fortified by drawing a new Trench about it. But
whilst he was thus employed, the two Captains on the contrary side thinking it
best for them to make Peace, sent Messengers to him, and at last procuring a
Meeting at a place called Byligeseage, a firm Peace and Friendship was there
concluded; in pursuance whereof Earl Aelfgar sent his Ships to Chester till
they could be paid off, and he himself went up to the King, from whom he
received his former Earldom.

Henry Emperor of the Germans now died; Anno Dom. MLVI.
and Henry his Son succeeded him.] This is only mentioned in the Latin Copy of
these Annals.

But the same year (according to Simeon of Durham, and R. Hoveden) Leofgar, who
was lately ordained Bishop of Hereford in the room of Bishop Athelstan,
deceased, being together with his Clerks and the Sheriff Agelnoth set upon by
Griffyn Prince of Wales, at a place called Glastbyrig, and was there slain with
all his followers; after which Aldred Bishop of Worcester (to whom the King had
committed the Bishopric of Hereford), as also the Earls Leofric and Harold,
mediated a Peace between King Edward and the said Griffyn.

This year Edward Aetheling, Son to King Edmund, Anno. Dom. MLVII.
returned into this Kingdom (together with his Children) and shortly after
deceased, whose Body lies buried in St. Paul's Church at London. Also Pope
Victor now dying, Stephanus Abbot of Mountcassin was consecrated in his stead.
Anno Dom. MLVII.
] But the Cottonian Copy of these Annals, as also Florence of Worcester, place
the death of this Pope under the year preceding. Earl Leofric also deceased,
and Aelfgar his Son received the Earldom which his Father enjoyed.

This is that Leofric Earl of Mercia, who together with his Wife Godiva built
the rich and stately Monastery of Coventry (as has been already related) in
which Church he was buried: He died this year in a good Old Age; whose Wisdom
and Counsel was often profitable to England.

Anno Dom. MLVIII.
This year Pope Stephanus deceased, and Benedict was consecrated in his stead:
This Pope sent the Pall to Archbishop Stigand.

Upon whom William of Malmesbury is here very sharp, saying, That Stigand was
so intolerably Covetous, that he held both the Bishopric of Winchester and
that of Canterbury at the same time; but could never obtain the Pall from the
Apostolic See, until this Benedict, an Intruder, (as he calls him) sent it to
him, either as first being bribed by Money, or else because (as is observed)
evil men love to favor one another.

The same year also (according to the Annals) deceased Heacca Bishop of the
South Saxons, (i. e. of Chichester) and Archbishop Stigand consecrated Aegelric
a Monk of Christ-Church, Bishop of that See; as also Syward the Abbot, Bishop
of Rochester.

Also this year, according to Simeon of Durham, and Florence of Worcester, Earl
Aelfgar was the second time banished by King Edward, but by the help of Griffyn
Prince of Wales, and of a Norwegian Fleet which came to his assistance, he was
soon restored to his Earldom again, though it was by force.

In so deplorable a condition was this poor King Edward, that those of his
Nobility who were strong enough to make any Resistance, were sure to be
pardoned.

The same year also (according to the abovementioned Authors) Aldred Bishop of
Worcester, having newly rebuilt the Church of St. Peter in Gloucester, went on
Pilgrimage through Hungary to Jerusalem, (as says Simeon of Durham); which no
English Archbishop or Bishop was ever known to have done before.

Anno Dom. MLIX.
This year Nicholaus Bishop of Florence was made Pope; and Benedict was
expelled, who was Pope before him.

Anno Dom. MLX.
Kynsige Archbishop of York deceased, the xi. Kal. Jan. and Bishop Ealdred
succeeded in that See: (This was that Aldred Bishop of Worcester, who had been
lately at Rome.) Also Walter was now made Bishop of Hereford.] And in the Latin
Copy of the Annals it is related, That Henry King of France now dying, Philip
his Son succeeded him.

Anno Dom. MLXI.
This year also deceased Duduc Bishop of Somersetshire (i. e. Wells) and Gisa
was his Successor. The same year also deceased Bishop Godwin at St. Martins
(vii Id. Martii.) Also Wulfrick Abbot of St. Augustine's in Canterbury,
deceased in the Easter Week (xiv. Kal. Maii.) Which News being brought to the
King, he appointed Aethelsige a Monk of the old Church at Winchester, to be
Abbot, who was consecrated by Archbishop Stigand at Windlesore (i. e. Windsor)
at the Feast of St. Augustine.

And this year (according to Simeon of Durham) Aldred Archbishop of York went
with Earl Tostige to Rome, and there received his Pall from Pope Nicholaus: But
in the mean time Malcolm King of Scots entered Northumberland, and depopulated
the Earldom of Tostige, formerly his sworn Brother.

This year (according to the Latin Copy of our Annals) the City of Man was
taken by William Duke of Normandy. Anno Dom. MLXII.


Also about this time Earl Harold, afterward King of England, founded the Abbey
of the Holy Cross at Waltham (in Essex), so called from a certain Crucifix said
to be found (by a Vision to a Carpenter) at a place called Montacute; which
Crucifix being brought to Waltham, and many Miraculous Stories told there of
it, one Tovi the Stallere, or Chief Standard Bearer to King Cnute, built here a
Church for two Priests to keep it; which place coming into the hands of Earl
Harold, he built this Church anew, together with a Noble Monastery for a Dean
and Twelve Secular Chanons (which in the time of Henry the Second were turned
to Chanons Regular): This Abbey being richly endowed, the Foundation was
confirmed by King Edward; as may be seen by his Charter, bearing date Anno
1062. All which appears from an Ancient Manuscript History of the Foundation of
this Abbey, now in the Julius, D 6.
Cottonian Library.

This year (according to our Annals) Earl Harold, Anno Dom. MLXIII.
and Earl Tostige his Brother, marched with a great Army both by Land and Sea
into Brytland (i. e. Wales) and subdued that Country; so that the Inhabitants
giving them Hostages, became subject [to King Edward.] Afterward marching
farther, they slew King Griffyth, and brought his Head to Harold, who placed
another King there.

All this, though done in the two following years, is here related all at once:
But Simeon of Durham, and Florence of Worcester, are much more large in their
Account of these Welsh Affairs, which they give us under the following year,
viz.

Griffyn Prince of Wales having by his frequent Inroads highly exasperated King
Edward, being then at Gloucester, Anno Dom. MLXIV.
he after the Christmas Holidays from thence dispatched Earl Harold against him
with a strong Party of Horse, if possible, to surprise him; yet he got timely
notice of his coming, and by that means made a shift to escape; but left behind
him most of his Ships, which the Earl taking, commanded to be burnt, and so
returned into England: But about Rogation Week, Harold having got a Fleet in
readiness, he set sail from Bristol, and compassing the greatest part of Wales,
joined himself to the Horse, with which his Brother Tostige met him, and did so
much mischief in Wales, that tho Prince Griffyn had mustered up an Army to
oppose them, yet the Welshmen being thus hard put to it, at last yielded
themselves to Earl Harold, delivering up Hostages, and consented to pay him
Tribute, and absolutely renounced Griffyth their Prince. So that not long
after, Prince Griffyth being betrayed by his own People, was by them murdered;
and his Head being cut off, was sent to Earl Harold, together with the Gilded
Stern of his Ship; all which the Earl immediately caused to be carried to the
King.

Thus fell Griffyth ap Lhewelyn, to whom the Welsh Chronicles give a Noble
Character, of a Valiant and Generous Prince, who had been hitherto for the most
part victorious in all his Undertakings, till now he perished by the Treachery
of his own Servants.

Anno Dom. MLXIV.
After this, King Edward (as Simeon of Durham relates) made Blechen and
Rithwalla (whom the Welsh Chronicles call Blethyn and Rithwallen) Joint-Princes
of North Wales, being Half-Brethren to Griffyth the last Prince on the Mother's
side, as being Sons to Angharat Daughter to Meredyth Prince of Wales.

Florence of Worcester also adds, That these Welsh Princes abovementioned,
when they received from the King this Grant of North Wales, swore Fealty not
only to Him, but also to Earl Harold, who it seems delivered it to them;
swearing to perform their Commands both by Sea and Land, and to pay those
Tributes which had been formerly paid to King Edward's Predecessors. Which, if
true, shows that Earl Harold was already adopted and declared Heir of the
Crown. But this being not found in our Annals, nor in any other Historian, I
cannot pass my word for the Truth of it.

This year also (according to the Annals) the Northumbers took Arms against
Tostige their Earl, and slew as many of his Servants as they could lay hold on,
as well English as Danes; they also seized upon all his Arms that were in York,
and his Treasure where ever they could find it, and then sent for Earl Morchar,
the Son of Earl Aelfgar, and chose him for their Earl; who then marched
Southward with all that Province, as also all the men of Snotingaham, Deorbie,
and Lincolnascires, till they came even to Northamtune, where his Brother
Eadwin with all his Company met him.

But there Earl Harold came against them, to whom they sent a Message, which
they desired might be conveyed to the King, as also the Messengers, by whom
they besought to let them have Morchar for their Earl: The King hereupon
granting their Request, afterward sent Earl Harold to them to Hamtune, at the
Feast of St. Simon and Jude, farther assuring them of it; and he also at their
request confirmed and renewed the Laws of King Cnute. But the Northern men had
done much damage to the Country about Hamtune, whilst their Message was thus
transacting; for they slew their Men, and burnt the Houses and Corn, and took
away several Thousand Head of Cattle, together with some Hundreds of Men, whom
they carried Captives into the North-Parts; so that this Country; and the
others adjacent, felt the damage for many years after. But Earl Tostige, with
his Wife and as many as were of their Party, went over to Earl Baldwin, where
they tarried all that Winter.

The occasion of which Insurrection (as Florence and Simeon of Durham inform
us) was this; There was one Gospatrick a great Officer in Northumberland, with
whom Earl Tostige having a Quarrel, his Sister Queen Edgitha caused him to be
murdered at Court the Christmas before; though this seems very unsuitable to
the Meek and Pious Temper of this good Queen: Yet however, so much is certain,
That this Gospatrick being slain, the Earl also killed in his own Lodgings two
of his Friends, viz. Gammel the Son of Orne, and Vlf the Son of Dolphin, having
treacherously drawn them thither; and had besides laid intolerable Impositions
on the People; all which so incensed them against him, that three or four of
the principal Thanes of that Country, viz. Gammelbearne, Dimstan the Son of
Agelnoth, and Gloincorn the Son of Eardulf, with Four hundred (Florence says
Twenty thousand) men in Arms, entered York a little after Michaelmass, and there
first slew two of the Earl's Huisceorles (i. e. Domestic Servants) Amund and
Ravensheart, though fled out of the City; Anno Dom. MLXIV.
and the day following above Two hundred more of his men, on the North-side of
the River Humber: Tostige hereupon made loud Complaints to the King, and at his
Request Harold his Brother and others were appointed to take up the business;
but as they were going down into the North for this purpose, the whole Country
in a manner rose, and met them at Northampton, where (as also afterward at
Oxford) they strenuously refused to receive Earl Tostige, and by no means would
admit of a Reconciliation: And so violent were they, and resolute, that after
the Feast of All Saints, they caused both him and his Adherents to be banished
the Land.

William of Malmesbury also adds the reason which the Northumbers gave to
justify this their Rising, viz. That they were Freemen born, and as freely
educated; and that they would not endure the Insolence of an Earl; for they had
learned from their Ancestors to choose either Liberty or Death. In short, if the
King meant to have them still his Subjects; he should set Earl Morchar over
them, and then he should soon find they could, if kindly used, willingly submit.

This was the most probable occasion of Tostige's Banishment: Tho H. Huntington
(who lived after the Conquest, and had heard many Tales of the Hatred which
Earl Godwin's Sons bore to each other) tells us another story of this matter;
viz. That as the King sat at Dinner at Windsor, he commanded Earl Harold to
serve him with the Cup: Tostige his Brother being present, and not able to
endure that his younger Brother should be preferred before himself, in the
King's very presence flew in his face, and catching him by the hair, flung him
on the ground: The Scuffle being ended, the King foretold that their
Destruction was nigh, and that the Wrath of God would not much longer be
deferred: For, says this Author, they were come to that height of Barbarism and
Cruelty, that if they but liked the House or Possessions of any one, they would
by night procure the Owner to be murdered, with all his Children, to get his
Estate; and these were at that time the chief Justiciaries of the Kingdom. But
this seems to have been a story invented long since out of hatred to the Memory
of Harold, afterward King, for he has the Character of a Valiant and Worthy
Prince; and who (as William of Malmesbury relates) in this Quarrel with the
Northumbers, preferred the Peace of his Country to his Brother's private
Interests.

But Tostige in a great Rage leaving the Court, went to a House at Hereford,
where at that time he heard his Brother Harold had ordered mighty Preparations
for the Entertainment of the King, and there made a most terrible havoc of his
Servants; diverse of whom being killed, he flung their mangled Members into all
the Vessels of Wine, Mead, Ale, and other Liquors, and then sent word to his
Brother, That he need take no care for Pickled Meats, but as for all other
sorts he might bring them down along with him: And it was therefore for this
most horrid Villainy, that the King commanded him to be banished; which the
Northumbers understanding, for this as well as several other Murders he had
committed, they expelled him their Country, as has been already shown. But
this does not well agree with what Simeon of Durham has already with more
probability related of him; for if Earl Tostige had been found guilty of so
great an Insolence, and that he was thereupon banished the Kingdom, Anno Dom.
MLXIV.
it had certainly been very needless for the Northumbers to have rose up
against him, and to have driven him out of the Country, or at least to have
desired another Earl in his room; since the King would have appointed them a
new one, without giving them so just an Occasion for a Rebellion against him.

To this year also we may refer Earl Harold's going over into Normandy, which
some of our Historians place a year or two sooner; but they differ much more
about the manner and occasion of it, some making it to be a mere Casualty,
others saying it was on purpose: But William of Malmesbury's account of it is
thus; That Harold being at his House at Bosenham in Sussex, near the Seaside,
he for his Recreation with some of his Retinue, took a Fisher-boat, meaning
only to row up and down; but sailing a little further to Sea than they were
aware, a Tempest rose and carried them cross the Channel to the French Coast,
where (glad to be safe any where) they were forced to land in the Territories
of the Earl of Ponthieu; the men of that Country (according to their custom,
and that barbarous practice which is in use in most places, to make a Prey of
the distressed and shipwrack'd) presently fell upon them, and being many and
well armed, they easily seized upon Earl Harold and his Followers, who were
without Weapons; so that they not only took them Prisoners, but also fettered
them. Then Harold considering with himself what was to be done, hired a
Messenger to go to Duke William, and acquaint him how he was sent over by the
King of England, by his Word and Presence to confirm what other lesser Envoys
had only whispered; but that he was kept Prisoner, and hindered from the
discharge of his Message by Gwido Earl of Ponthieu; and that it would become a
man of so great Honor as himself, not to suffer a Villainy so derogatory to his
Authority, to go unpunished, since he had appealed to his Justice: But if his
Liberty was to be purchased with Money, he would willingly pay the Price to
Earl William, but not to such a mean-spirited man as Gwido. Upon this Harold by
the Command of Duke William was soon set at liberty, and sent to Court; where
being honorably received, he was also invited to an Expedition into
Little-Britain, where at that time the Norman Duke made War: But by his Wit and
Valor he so well approved himself to the Duke, that he was very much taken
with him; to whom, that he might also the more endear himself, he promised by
Oath, That in case King Edward died, he would deliver up to him the Castle of
Dover, which was then under his Command, and procure him to succeed in the
Kingdom of England: Hereupon the Duke's Daughter, as yet too young for
Marriage, was betrothed to him; and so he was sent home with very rich Presents.

This is William of Malmesbury's, and diverse other Historians Relation of it;
but Bromton's Chronicle, as he is singular in many things, so he is in this,
and relates the Cause of Harold's Voyage into Normandy thus; viz. That he had
asked leave of King Edward to go over to Duke William, to procure him to set
his Brother Wulnoth, and his Nephew Hacune free, who were there detained as
Hostages; whereupon the King told him he might go with his Leave, but not by
his Advice; for (said he) I foresee that nothing but Damage and Ruin can happen
to England thereby; for I know Earl William will not be so ignorant and
impolitick as to grant their Delivery, unless it shall tend to his own
advantage: So Harold going on Shipboard, and intending for Normandy, Anno Dom.
MLXIV.
was driven by a Tempest on the Coast of Picardy, and there seized by the Earl
of Ponthieu, and by him at last was sent to Duke William, as has been already
related. The rest of the Story is much the same with the former, and needs no
Repetition; only this is added, That Earl Harold at his Return home, having
told the King all that had happened to him in France, the King is said to reply
thus, Did not I tell thee that this Voyage would prove neither for thy Profit,
nor that of the Kingdom. But one may plainly perceive this Story to have been
feigned by one of the later Monks, to prove that King Edward had the Spirit of
Prophecy, and would not have been omitted by William of Malmesbury, if he had
known it, or thought it to have been true.

This year also, as Florence of Worcester tells us, Anno Dom. MLXV.
Harold Earl of West-Saxony, having built a House in South Wales, at a place
called Portascith, and made great Preparations for the King's Entertainment,
who was to come thither a hunting; when Caradoc, or Cradoc, Son to Griffyn
Prince of South Wales (whom Griffyn Prince of North Wales had slain some years
before) came to this place about St. Bartholomew-day, and there not only slew
all the Workmen and Servants, but carried away all the Goods that had been
brought thither.

This year was consecrated the Monastery of Westminster, Anno Dom. MLXVI.
on the Feast of the Holy Innocents.

This Church, as the Abbot of Rievalle (in his Life of King Edward) informs us,
had been begun some years before, in performance of a Vow the King had formerly
made, to go to Rome; but being dissuaded from it by the Chief Men of his
Kingdom, he sent thither Aldred Archbishop of York, and Herman Bishop of
Winchester, to obtain Pope Leo's Dispensation from that Journey, who by the
said Bishops returned it him upon these terms, That he should bestow the Money
he would have spent in that Voyage, in building a Stately Church and Monastery
in Honor of St. Peter: Whereupon the King chose out a place near his own
Palace, where had anciently stood a Church and Monastery, built by Sebert King
of the West Saxons, and Mellitus Bishop of London, but it being destroyed by
the Danes, had ever since lain in Ruins.

But an Ancient Epitome of English Chronicles, written by a Monk of
Westminster, and now in the Otho, D. 7.
Cottonian Library, relates, That Archbishop Dunstan had here before erected a
small Monastery for Twelve Monks, which was vastly augmented by King Edward:
Though whether this were so or no, is as uncertain, as it is incredible what
these Monkish Writers tell us, of its being anciently consecrated by St. Peter
himself; which not being mentioned by Bid, looks like a Fable invented only to
gain a greater Veneration for that Place.

Here also, in the Author abovementioned, follows the King's Letter to Pope
Nicholaus, That he would please not only to confirm what his Predecessor had
done, but also grant him new Privileges for the said Monastery; and then comes
the Pope's Bull or Privilege for that purpose, in which is recited this Legend
of that Church's having been anciently consecrated by St. Peter.

But though Simeon of Durham places the Consecration of this Church on the day
abovementioned, yet he refers it to the end of the year 1065, and perhaps with
more Exactness; since the English-Saxon year began then not at Lady Day, Anno
Dom. MLXVI.
as it does now, but New-years-tide: And after this Author farther adds, That
upon Christmass-day preceding, the King held his Curia, or Great Council, at
Westminster; where were present King Edward, and his Queen Edgitha, and Stigand
the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Aldred Archbishop of York, with the other
Bishops and Abbots of England, together with the King's Chaplains, Earls,
Thanes, and Knights: Which Council ( Vid. 1 Vol. Council. sub hoc Anno.
as Sir. H. Spelman informs us) was summoned to confirm the King's Charter of
Endowment of the said Monastery; but though it be there imperfect, yet you may
find it at large in Monast. Anglican.; wherein, after the Recital of the Bull
of Pope Leo, follows this Clause, viz. That the King, for the Expiation of his
own Vow, and also for the Souls of the Kings his Predecessors, as well as
Successors, had granted to that place (viz. Westminster) all manner of Liberty,
as far as Earthly Power could reach; and that for the Love of God, by whose
Mercy he was placed in the Royal Throne, and now by the Counsel and Decree of
the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, and other of his Great Men, and for the
Benefit and Advantage of the said Church, and all those that should belong to
it, he had granted these Privileges following, not only in present but for
future times: Then follows an Exemption from all Episcopal Jurisdiction; as
also another Clause, whereby he grants it the Privilege of Sanctuary; so that
any one, of whatsoever condition he be, for whatsoever cause, that shall fly
unto that Holy Place, or the Precincts thereof, shall be free, and obtain full
Liberty. And at last concludes thus, I have commanded this Charter to be
written and sealed, and have also signed it with my hand, with the Sign of the
Cross, and have ordered fit Witnesses to subscribe it for its greater
Corroboration: Then immediately follows the King's Subscription, in these
words, Ego Edwardus, Deo largiente, Anglorum Rex, signum venerandae Crucis
impressi. Then follows the Subscription of Queen Editha, with those of the two
Archbishops seven of the Bishops, and as many Abbots; and so comes on the
Subscriptions of the Laity, viz. of Raynbald the Chancellor, and of the Earls
Harold and Edwin, who write themselves Duces, and six Thanes, besides other of
inferior Order. This Charter bears date on St. Innocents day, Anno Dom. 1066.
which how it could be so dated four days before New-years-day, when the year
then began, I do not understand.

Here also follows a Third Charter, which is much the same with the former,
only it contains the King's Letter to Pope Nicholaus, and his Bull, reciting
the Privileges granted to the said Church; all which are there at large
inserted. Then follows the Subscriptions of the King, Queen, Archbishops,
Bishops, Earls, etc. almost in the same order as the former; only Osbald and
another of the King's Chaplains do here subscribe before any of the
Lay-Nobility; and besides the Thanes, there are several who subscribed with the
Title of Milites added to their Names.

I have been the larger upon this Foundation, not only because it was the
Greatest and Noblest of any in England, but also for that it still continues,
though under another Title, to be a Collegiate Church for a Dean and Eight
Prebends, with an excellent School belonging to it, which has hitherto
furnished both the Church and State with as great a number of Learned and
Considerable Persons, as any in the whole Nation.

But to return again to our History (as it is related by the aforesaid Abbot of
Riev^lle)* Anno Dom. MLXVI.
King Edward having at this Great Assembly of the Estates of his Kingdom
appeared solemnly with his Crown on his Head according to custom, was a day or
two before Christmas in the nightime, taken with a Fever, which very much
damped the Jollity of that Festival; yet he concealed it as much as he could
for two or three days, still sitting down at Meals with his Bishops and
Noblemen, till the third day perceiving the time of his Dissolution drew near,
he commanded all things to be got ready for the Consecration of his New Church,
which he resolved should be solemnized the next day, being the Feast of the
Holy Innocents; whereat all the Bishops and Great Men of the Kingdom assisted,
and the King as far as his Health would permit; but presently after, the King
growing worse and worse, he was forced to take his Bed: the Queen, Bishops, and
the Nobility, standing weeping about him; and whilst he lay speechless, and
almost without life for two days, and the third awakening as if it were from a
Trance, both William of Malmesbury and the Abbot abovementioned relate, That
after a devout Prayer he told them, That in a Vision he had lately seen two
holy Monks, whom he had in his youth known in Normandy to be men of meek and
pious Conversation, and whom he therefore had very much loved, and now appeared
to him as sent from God, to tell him what should happen to England after his
decease, showing him, That the Iniquity of the English being now full, had
provoked the Divine Vengeance; for that the Priests despising God's Law,
treated Holy Things with corrupt hearts and polluted hands; and not being true
Pastors, but Mercenaries, exposed the Sheep to the Wolves, seeking the Wool and
the Milk more than the Sheep themselves: That the Chief Men of the Land were
Infidels, Companions of the Thieves and Robbers of their Country; who neither
feared God, nor honored his Law; to whom Truth was a Burden, Justice a
Maygame, and Cruelty a Delight: And that therefore since neither the Rulers
observed Justice, nor the Ruled Discipline, the Lord had drawn his Sword, and
bent his Bow, and made it ready, for that he would show this People his Wrath
and Indignation, by sending Evil Angels to punish them for a year and a day,
with Fire and Sword. But when the King replied to them, That he would admonish
his People to repent them of the evil of their ways and doings, and then he
hoped God would not bring these dreadful Judgments upon them, but would again
receive them into his Mercy: To this they answered, That now it could not be,
because the hearts of this people were hardened, and their eyes blinded, and
their ears stopped, so that they would neither hear those that would instruct
them, nor be advised by those that should admonish them, being neither to be
terrified by his Threatenings, nor melted by his Benefits. And the King asking
them when there would be an end of all these Judgments, and what comfort they
might be like to receive under all these great afflictions? those holy men only
answered him in a Parable of a certain Green Tree, that should be cut down, and
removed from the Root about the distance of Three Acres; and when without any
human hand the Tree should be restored to its Ancient Root, and flourish and
bear Fruit, then, and not till then, was there any Comfort to be hoped for.

Anno Dom. MLXVI.
But this Author's application of the Tree that was to be cut down, to the
English-Saxon Royal Family's being for a time destroyed; and its Separation to
the distance of three Acres, to Harold and the two first Norman Kings; and its
Restitution again, to King Henry the first, by his marrying of Queen Mathildis,
and its flourishing again in the Empress her Daughter; and then its bearing
Fruit, to the Succession of Henry the second; do sufficiently show that great
part of this Vision was made and accommodated for the Reigns of these Princes.
William of Malmesbury indeed recites the same Vision, though in fewer words,
but without any Interpretation of the Parable. But be this Vision true or
false, I think we may have reason to pray to God that neither our Clergy nor
Laity, by falling into the like wicked and deplorable state above described,
may ever bring the like Judgments upon this Nation.

But when the Queen, Robert the Lord Chamberlain, and Earl Harold, who are said
to have been present at the Relation of this Vision, seemed very much
concerned, Archbishop Stigand received it with a Smile, saying, That the good
Old Man was only delirous by reason of his Distemper; But (says Malmesbury) we
have too dearly tried the Truth of this Vision, England being now made the
Habitation of Strangers, and groaning under the Dominion of Foreigners; there
being (says he) at this day (i. e. at the time when he wrote) no Englishman
either an Earl, a Bishop, or an Abbot; but Strangers devour the Riches, and
gnaw even the very Bowels of England; neither is there a prospect of having any
End of these Miseries.

This, it seems, was written in the beginning of the Reign of Henry the First,
and before he had seen the more Happy Times that succeeded in that of Henry the
Second; when the Abbot abovementioned tells us, That England had then a King
of the Ancient Blood Royal, as also Bishops and Abbots of the same Nation, with
many Earls, Barons, and Knights, who as being descended both from the French
and English Blood, were an Honor to the One, and a Comfort to the Other.

But to come to the Death and Last Words of this most Pious King: The Abbot
abovementioned gives us an Excellent Discourse which he made before his Death,
recommending the Queen to her Brother, and the Nobility there present, and
highly extolling her Chastity and Obedience; who though she appeared publicly
his Wife, yet was privately rather like a Sister or Daughter; desiring of them,
That whatsoever he had left her for her Jointure, should never be taken from
her. He also recommended to them his Servants who had followed him out of
Normandy, and that they should have their free choice either of returning home
to their own Country, or staying here. After which he appointed his Body to be
buried in St. Peter's Church at Westminster, which he had so newly dedicated;
and so having received the Blessed Eucharist, and recommended his Soul to God,
he quietly departed this Life, having reigned Three and twenty Years, Six
Months, and Seven and twenty Days.

It is very observable, That this Abbot does not tell us that he said any thing
concerning who should be his Successor; whereas many of the Monks of those
Times make him to have bequeathed the Crown at his Death to his Cousin William
Duke of Normandy; and Ingulph further says, That King Edward ^^me years before
his Death had sent Robert Archbishop of Canterbury as an Ambassador to him, to
let him know that he had designed him his Successor, both because he was of his
Blood, Anno Dom. MLXVI.
and also Eminent for his Virtue.

What Pretenses the Duke might have to the Crown by the latter, I know not, but
it is certain the former could give him no Title to it, since all the Relation
that was between King Edward and Duke William, was by Queen Emma, who was
Mother to the King, and Aunt to the Duke; so that it is evident on the score of
this Relation, that Duke William could have no pretense by Blood to the Crown
of England.

But it is very suspicious, that this Story of Archbishop Robert's being sent
into Normandy upon this Errand, was but a Fiction, since he sat but three
years in that See before his Expulsion, and that happened near ten years
before; after which King Edward sent over for his Cousin Edward, surnamed The
Outlaw, to make him his Heir.

King Edward being dead, they made great haste to bury him, for his Funerals
were performed the next day with as great Solemnity as the shortness of that
time would admit of; but it was sufficient that all the Bishops and Nobility of
the Kingdom attended his Body to the Grave in the Church aforesaid, where his
Tomb is at this day to be seen behind the Altar; and his Body was afterward
preserved in a Rich Shrine of Gold and Silver, till the Reign of Henry the
Eighth.

As for the Character which the Writers of the following Age give this Prince,
it is such as they thought was due to One whom they took to be a Saint, yet
they give him the Title of Confessor, which had been in the Primitive Times
bestowed only on those who suffered for Christ, though not unto death: but how
he could claim that Title upon this Account I know not, unless his resisting
the ordinary motions of the Flesh, may be looked upon as such a kind of
suffering; having been (as is already related) so chaste, that he never knew
his own Wife, though a very Beautiful Lady; for which, as well as his other
Virtues, and particularly his Charity to the Poor, he is commonly styled St.
Edward the Confessor.

But he was indeed but a Weak and Easy Prince, and so the more liable to be
drawn away by the false suggestions of those about him; as may be observed in
his severe proceedings against his Mother and his Wife: though that very
Weakness and Easiness of Nature is in him reckoned for a Virtue, as you may see
by this Story, which is related by Abbot Ailred; (viz.) That this King Edward
being one Afternoon laid down upon his Bed to repose himself, and no body left
in the Chamber with him, and the Curtains close drawn round about him, there
came in by chance a Boy that was employed in the meaner Offices of the House,
who seeing no body in the room, and finding there a certain Chest open, in
which the Chamberlain kept the Money for the King's ordinary Expenses, and
which had been through negligence forgot to be locked, the Boy ran hastily to
it, and filling his Pockets, went away with the Money; But the King perceiving
him through the Curtains, said nothing, but let him go. The Boy finding he had
sped so well, resolved to go again to make the best of his time, and having
laid by the Money he had stolen, came again to fetch more; whereupon the King
thinking him then a little too bold, called out to him, saying, Sirrah, you had
best be contented with what you have got, for if Hugolin come (for so was the
Chamberlain called) he will not only whip you soundly, but likewise take away
all you have purloined already. The Boy hearing a Voice, but seeing no body,
ran away in a great fright, Anno Dom. MLXVI.
and the King concerned himself no further about it; but Hugolin coming in not
long after, and finding both the Chest open, and a good deal of Money taken out
of it, was in a great Passion; which the King taking notice of* bid him rest
contented; For, said he, the Poor Rogue that has it, wants it more than we do.

So that, upon the whole, I think we may safely rely upon William of
Malmesbury's Character of this Prince* That if you consider his Simplicity, he
seemed very unfit for Government; yet by reason of his Virtue, and Piety
toward God, he was so directed by him, that the most Politic and Courageous
Kings have scarce ruled more happily: For during his Reign the Kingdom was
never i^vaded by Foreign Enemies; nor were there any Civil Disturbances, but
what were immediately suppressed.

But though the Abbot of Rievalle, who has wrote his Life, has also given us
a long Bed-roll of his Miracles, which I shall not take upon me to relate, yet
cannot but take notice of one or two of them; how it is said, that he cured
some blind People, by only washing their Eyes with fair Water, in which his own
Fingers had been first dipped; and that he also healed a Woman who had been
grievously overrun with those Swellings we now call the King's Evil, by his
bare washing the Sores with his own hands; and from whose Blessing, or Example
(I will not dispute) the Touch of our Kings of England have ever since been
thought very effectual for curing the King's Evil. But among these Miracles,
this seems not the least, That this Author makes him to have been Elected King
by his Father's Command, and that in a Great Council, whilst he was yet in his
Mother's Belly.

As for his private Recreations, he loved Hawking and Hunting above all the
rest; and would be in a Passion, if he had been crossed in his Game: For a
Country Clown once spoiling his Sport, the King riding up to him, as if he
would have beat him, only said, By God's-Mother, I would be even with you if I
could. He is said not to be excessive at his private Meals, nor at solemn
Festivals was he at all elated with the Costly Robes he wore, which his Queen
curiously embroidered for him with Silk and Gold. And being thus Mild,
Charitable, and Beneficent to all his People, it was no wonder if his Death was
so deeply lamented by all his Subjects. But this they grant to be his Fault,
that he brought too many Normans over with him into England; and they having
great Offices and Preferments bestowed upon them, soon corrupted the then
English Simplicity by their Norman Customs: So that as Ingulph well observes,
the English Nobility growing as it were ashamed of their own, began to imitate
the French Manners; the generality of the Noblemen speaking the French Tongue
in their Houses, (as being then most modish) and made their Charters and other
Writings after the French way; and this humor still more and more prevailed,
till at length they became as it were Slaves and Vassals to those they before
so extremely admired. So true a Maxim is it, generally speaking, that where a
Foreign Tongue prevails, it is reckoned half a Conquest.

As for this King's Person, he is described to be Tall and Comely, of a very
Fair and Ruddy Complexion; and in his latter years Venerable for his long and
white Beard, as you may see in his Seals and Pictures: And which is most
remarkable, he was the first English King whose Seals we can find affixed to
his Charters, as you may see in Mr. Speed: Yet perhaps other Kings might have
Seals to their Charters before him, Anno Dom. MLXVI.
however they are now defaced.

But though this King made many excellent Laws, which being wrote in the Saxon
Tongue, are now almost quite lost; yet since some Heads or Extracts of them are
to be found in R. Hoveden, and Mr. Lambard's Collections, I shall give you such
of them as are necessary for the clearing of our Ancient Constitution, and for
showing what liberty the English Subjects enjoyed before the Conquest; which
Laws were also confirmed by King William the First, in the Fourth Year of his
Reign; but they not specifying any time when they were made, I have referred
them to this place.

The first of these Laws establishes the Goods and Possessions of all Clerks
and Scholars.

The second appoints the times and days of the King's Peace; making it more
Penal to violate it from the Advent of our Lord, to the Octaves of the
Epiphany; and in like manner from Lent to the Octaves of Easter, (i. e. eight
days after that Feast); and from our Lord's Ascension, to the Octaves of
Pentacost; and also on all Saturdays, from Nine a Clock, to the Monday morning
following; likewise on the Vigils of all Holidays, as well as on the Holidays
themselves; as also in Parishes, when the Feast of the Saint (to whom the
Church is dedicated) is kept; so that if any one come devoutly to the
Celebration thereof, he was to have security in going, staying, and returning
home; and besides in many other cases, too long here to set down.

From whence we may observe the Antiquity of those Parish Feasts, called in
several parts of England, Wakes.

The fourth appoints, That where ever the King's Justice, or any other Person
shall hold Civil Pleas, if the King's Deputy or Attorney comes thither to open
any Cause concerning Holy Church, that shall be first determined; for it is
just God be served before all others.

The fifth ordains, That whosoever holds any thing of the Church, or has his
Mansion on the Church's Land, he or they shall not be compelled to plead out of
the Ecclesiastical Courts, for Contumacy or otherwise (nay, though he forfeit)
unless Justice be wanting in those Courts, which (says the Law) God forbid.

By which all the Tenants of the Church were exempted from pleading or
appearing at the King's Courts; which though a strange and unreasonable
Privilege, yet (it seems) it continued in the time of William the First.

The sixth confirms the Laws of Sanctuaries, ordaining, That no man shall be
taken out of any Church to which he has fled for any offense, unless it be by
the Bishop or his Officers: The like Privilege is also allowed to the Priest's
House, provided it stand upon the Ground of the Church; but if a Thief went out
of the Sanctuary to rob, he was to forfeit that Privilege.

The seventh leaves those to the Justice of the Bishop who violate the Peace of
Holy Church; and if any Offender shall despise his Sentence, either by flying
or contemning it, and Complaint thereof be made to the King after forty days,
he shall give Pledges to reconcile himself to God, the King, and the Church;
and if he cannot be found, he shall be outlawed; and if then he be found, and
can be laid hold on, Anno Dom. MLXVI.
he shall be delivered up to the King; if he defends himself, he shall be
slain: For from the day of his Outlawry he is said in English to have
Wulfsheofod (i.e. a Wolfs-head), or as we now commonly say in Latin, gerere
Caput Lupinum: This is the common Law of all Outlaws.

The eighth and ninth appoint what things small Tithes should be paid out of;
and recites, that they had been granted long before, a Rege, Baronibus, and
Pop^lo, that is, by the King, the Barons, and the People: And though the word
Barons was not commonly used till the time of King William the First, when
these Laws were drawn up in the form we now have them, upon an Inquisition
granted to the Ancient and Wise Men of all the Counties in England, as Rog.
Hoveden informs us; yet is this but a Recital of the Ancient Law of Tithes in
the Dialect of those times, when the word Baron came to be used instead of
Thane.

The tenth appoints after what manner the Ordeal, or Judgment by Fire or Water,
should be executed by the Bishop's Officer, and the King's Justice, upon those
that deserved it.

From which you may observe, that this Law of Ordeal was in force some time
after the coming in of the Normans. This Law also ordains in what Cases, and
over what Persons, the Courts Baron should have Jurisdiction; but it being
somewhat large, I refer you to it.

The Eleventh again reinforces the payment of Romescot, or Peter Pence, which
i^ denied, the King's Justice shall compel the payment, because it is the
King's Alms.

From whence we may observe, how much those Romish Writers are mistaken, who
will needs make these Peter Pence to have been a Tribute from the Kings of
England to the Pope.

The twelfth shows what Danegelt was, and on what occasion it was first
imposed: That the payment of Danegelt was first ordained because of the
frequent Invasions of the Danish Pirates; to repress which, there was
Twelvepence imposed upon every Hide of Land throughout England, to be paid
yearly: Which also shows us about what time these Laws were collected into the
form we now have them by this Clause, viz. That the Church was excused from
this payment until the time of William Rufus, who (as is here recited) asking
an Aid of his Barons for the obtaining Normandy from his Brother then going to
Jerusalem, there was granted to him (not by any standing Law, but only for the
present necessity.) Four Shillings upon every Hide of Land, the Church not
excepted.

The thirteenth sets forth, That the Peace of the King is manifold, as
sometimes it is given by his own hand, which the English call Cyninges hand
sealde gryth.

This Protection was granted not only to Persons, but Places also, by way of
Privilege, as likewise to Churches or Churhmen within their own Walls, as
appears by the League betwixt King Edward and Guthrum, in which it is termed
Cyninges hand gryth.

Another sort of Peace was on the Coronation-day, which lasted eight days; that
at Christmas, which held also eight days; and so on the Feast of Easter and
Whitsuntide. Another sort was given by his Brief or Letters; and another there
was belonging to the Four great Highways, viz. Watlingstreet, Fosse,
Hickenildstreet, and Ermingstreet; whereof two are extended to the Length, and
two to the Breadth of the Kingdom. Another still there was belonging to the
Rivers of Note, Anno Dom. MLXVI.
which conveyed Provisions to Towns and Cities.

From whence it appears, that this Peace of the King was a Pri^ilege or
Exemption granted to Persons, not to be sued or answer at Law, in any Action*
^rought against them, during certain solemn, and stated Times, and in certain
of the most famous and frequented Highways of the Kingdom.

The fourteenth declares, That all Treasure prove should be the King's, unless
it were found in a Church or Churchyard; in which case, if it were Gold, it
was all the King's; but if Silver, one half was to go to him, and another to
the Church.

The fifteenth treats of Murder, and declares if any one was murdered, the
Murderer should be enquired after in the Village or Town where the Body was
found; and if he was discovered, to be delivered up to the King's Justice
within eight days after the Fact committed; and in case he could not be found,
a month and a day was allowed for search after him; within which term, if he
could not be seized on, forty six Marks were to be collected out of that Town;
and if it was not able to pay so much, then the Hundred was liable to make it
good: And forasmuch as this Payment could not be made in the Towns, and great
inconveniences arose; the Barons (i.e. the Freeholders of the County) took care
that six and forty Marks should be paid out of the Hundred; which being sealed
up with the Seal of some one Baron of the County, they were to be sent to the
Treasurer, and by him so kept sealed up for a year and a day; within which time
if the Murderer was found out, upon his being delivered to the King's Justice,
they were to be repaid; but in case within that time he could not be
discovered, then were the Kindred of the Murdered Party to have six of the
said Marks, and the King the other forty; if he had no Kindred, his Lord was to
receive it; and if he had no Lord, then his sworn Friend and Companion; but if
there were none of these, then the King should have the whole Sum to himself.

The sixteenth Article shows us, how this way of discovering Murder, and
punishing the Hundred, came to be in use where the Murderer could not be
found; viz. That King Cnute, when he had gotten England, and settled it in
Peace, and at the request of the English Barons had sent back his Army into
Denmark, those Barons became Sureties, that all the Danes that staid behind
with him, should in all things enjoy perfect Peace; so that in case an
Englishman killed any of them, if he could not clear himself by the Judgment of
God, (that is, by Water or Iron, meaning the Ordeal) Justice was to be executed
upon him; and in case he ran away, Payment was to be made as is aforesaid.

This Law, to prevent the killing of the Normans, was likewise continued by
King William the Conqueror; for in case a man were found slain, he was to be
taken for a Norman, and his Death to be more grievously punished than that of
an Englishman, unless the Englescherie of him that was killed could be made out
before the King's Justices; that is, that he was an Englishman, as Bracton has
particularly shown us. But I shall reserve the speaking further of this Law to
the next Volume.

Anno Dom. MLXVI.
The seventeenth declares the Office of a King in these words; The King, who is
the Vicegerent of the Supreme King, is appointed to this very end, That he may
Govern and Defend his Earthly Kingdom, and the People of the Lord, and above
all things should reverence his Holy Church, and extirpate evil doers out of
it; which unless he shall do, not so much as the Name of a King shall remain to
him, but he shall utterly lose it, as Pope John witnesses.

Then follows the occasion of this opinion of Pope John's, viz. His having
given it in answer to the Letter which Pepin and Charles his Son wrote,
concerning a foolish King of France, whether they should still continue him on
the Throne, or not; which being no material part of the Law, I omit.

And then there is somewhat concerning Barons, which have Courts and Customs of
their own, in these words, The Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, and all
those who have Sac, Soc, Thol, Team, and Infang^heof, shall have their Knights,
Servants, and all other sorts of Dependants under their Friburg; that is,
should either have them forth- coming (or else should answer for them), that if
they shall forfeit to any one, and a Complaint be made by the Neighbors
against them, they must bring them forth to have Justice done them in their own
Court.

The eighteenth, nineteenth, twentieth, and one and twentieth, are explanations
of the Saxon terms in the abovementioned Law; which being explained already in
the Introduction, I thither refer you.

The two and twentieth declares all Jews that were in the Kingdom to be under
the Protection of the King, so that none of them could put himself in the
service of any great man without the King's leave; for that the Jews and all
that are there, are the King's.

By the three and twentieth King Edward forbad all Usurers to continue in his
Kingdom; and if any one were convicted that he exacted Usury, he should forfeit
his Goods, and be looked upon as outlawed.

After which follows in Mr. Lambard's Copy another Law, declaring the King's
Power by Virtue of his Royal Dignity, to pardon Life and loss of Member, but
with this Proviso, That the Male-factor make satisfaction to such as he has
injured, according to his power; and besides, find Sureties for his good
Behavior, which if he did not, he was to be banished.

From whence you may observe, That this Prerogative of pardoning in the King,
was not to extend to the prejudice of the Party injured, or his Kindred, to
whom an Appeal was hereby reserved.

Concerning which, The nineteenth in like manner declares his Royal Prerogative
to be such, that the King may set at liberty any Captive or Prisoner, whenever
he comes in any City, Borough, Castle, etc. or if he meet him in the way, by
his mere Word or Command. Yet was he that was thus set at liberty, bound to
make satisfaction to the injured Party: But a Murderer, Traitor, or one guilty
of such like Crimes, although the King should pardon him as to Life and Member,
according to Law, he shall in no wise stay in the Country, but shall swear
that he will depart to the Seacoast within a stated time set him by the
Justice, and pass over as soon as he can get opportunity of a Ship and Wind;
and in case any such prove perjured, and shall stay in the Land beyond the
time, any one that meets them, Anno Dom. MLXVI.
may do Justice upon them, i. e. take away their lives.

From whence you may observe the Antiquity of the Law for abjuring the Realm
for such great Offenses to which the King's Pardon did not then absolutely
extend. The rest of this Law, which only recites the Penalties for the
harboring or favoring such Malefactors, I omit.

The twenty seventh Article gives leave to harbor a Stranger or Foreigner
(whom in English they termed Couth, or Uncouth, that is, known or unknown) as a
Guest for two nights; in which space if he transgress, he that harbored him
shall not be answerable for him; but if any one be injured, and complaint is
made, that it was by the Counsel and Advice of him that lodged him, he shall
with two honest Neighbors by Oath purge himself as to the Advice and Fact, or
otherwise shall make satisfaction.

The reason whereof was, because after the third night the Law then was such,
that this stranger was to be looked upon as one of the Family, and the Master
of it was to answer for him if he transgressed.

The twenty eighth appoints how Money or Cattle brought into a Town (and said
by him who brought them, that they were found) shall be disposed of, and who
shall have the Custody of them.

The thirtieth enjoins, That those who have the King's Peace either by his Hand
or Letters, shall take care not to injure others, under a double Penalty.

The thirty first declares the particular Mulcts or Penalties of those who
shall violate the King's Peace abovementioned, and especially that of the
eight days of his Coronation, or of any of the Feasts aforesaid, and who should
have the Forfeitures arising from thence; how much the King, and how much the
Earl, and how much the Dean or the Bishop in whose Deanery the Peace was broken.

The thirty sixth Article directs, how that after a man is killed as a Thief or
a Robber, if any Complaint be made by his nearest Relation, to the Justice,
that the man was wrongfully put to death, and lies buried among Thieves, and
that such Relations offer to make it good, in such case they shall first give
security for so doing; and then it follows in what manner the Party slain may
be cleared in his Reputation, and what satisfaction shall be made to his
Friends for it, in case it appears he was killed unjustly.

These are the Laws which bear the Name of Edward the Confessor, though they
are not properly so, because many of them were made long before his time, and
there are so many things in the Latin Original which are rather Explanations of
Laws, than Laws themselves, that they more truly seem to have been collected
and written by some ignorant Sciolist, or pretender, about Henry the First's
time: For though Roger Hoveden has given us this Collection of those Laws
which we now have, yet it is plain that there was no Original of them extant at
the time when Hoveden wrote, nor long before; or else he need not have told us
that King William the Conqueror in the fourth year of his Reign summoned so
many Noble and Wise Men of the English Nation, only to enquire into, and
acquaint him what those Laws were. But Bromton's Chronicle gives us a short
History of the several Laws that had been used in England; and tells us of
three sorts of Laws then in use, viz Merchenlage, West-Saxonlage, and Danelage;
and that King Edward made one Common Law out of them all, Anno Dom. MLXVI.
which are called the Laws of King Edward to this day; yet of these he gives us
no more than the bare Explanation of some Words or Terms frequently used in
them, but without setting down any of the Laws themselves; which whether he did
out of ignorance, or on purpose, I will not determine; though the former is
most likely, seeing he had before given us all the Laws he could meet with of
the precedent English-Saxon Kings. So that when the Reader hears the Laws of
St. Edward, so much talked of, and so much contended for after the Conquest, he
must not understand these here set down to have been the only Laws
abovementioned; For those are but some parts of them recited and commented
upon by after-Writers. And indeed these Laws were first said to be the Laws of
Edward the Confessor, after the Normans coming over, not because King Edward
made them, but renewed the observance of them; as William of Malmesbury
expressly tells us of one of those that King Cnute also revived, being in
substance the same with that formerly ordained by King Alfred; Commanding every
one above Twelve years old, to be entered into some Decenary, Tything, or
Hundred: But Bracton also ascribes it to King Edward: So likewise this
Interpolator or Noter himself tells you, That those Laws of St. Edward so much
desired, and at length obtained from William the Conqueror, were ordained in
the time of King Edgar his Grandfather, but after his death were laid aside for
sixty eight years; but because they were just and honest, King Edward revived
them, and delivered them to be observed as his own.

By these and other circumstances we may gather, That the whole Body of these
Laws we have now recited, were such as were approved and confirmed by King
Edward, who was a Prince of great Mercy and Indulgence to his People; so that
such written Laws as were in force in his time, and such Customs as had been
all along observed in the Saxon times, and had been still kept on foot in his
days, were after the Norman Conquest (when both the People of the Norman as
well as English Extraction so earnestly contended for their Liberties) called
by the name of the Laws of St. Edward, thereby being indeed meant the
English-Saxon Laws, which then received Denomination from him, being in effect
the last King of that Race, and one whose Memory the People reverenced in an
especial manner for the high Reputation he had gained for his great Sanctity
and Clemency to his Subjects.

King HAROLD.
KING Edward's Funerals being over, Anno Dom. MLXVI.
our Annals proceed to tell us, how that Earl Harold succeeded in the Kingdom,
as King Edward had appointed, and that the People elected him to that Dignity;
as also that he was anointed King on the Feast of Epiphany; but he held the
Kingdom only forty weeks and one day.

Thus the Laudean or Peterburgh Copy relates it; being written by some Monk
that favored King Harold's Title to the Crown.

But R. Hoveden, with other of the English Writers, tell us expressly; That King
Edward being buried, Earl Harold, whom the King had before his decease declared
his Successor, being by all the Chief Men of England elected to the Throne, was
the same day anointed King by Aldred Archbishop of York: Which is also
confirmed by the Manuscript Chronicle of one Henry de Silgrave, who wrote about
the Reign of King Edward the First, and is now in the Cleopatr^, A. 12.
Cottonian Library. And the relation of this Affair being found no where else,
I shall here recite, leaving the Credit thereof to the Reader's Judgment; which
is thus: That King Edward lying on his Deathbed, Earl Harold came to him, and
desired him to appoint him for his Successor; to which the King replied, That
he had already made Duke William his Heir: But the Earl and his Friends still
persisting in their Request, the King turning his Face to the Wall, replied
thus, When I am dead, let the English make either the Duke or the Earl their
King: Which, if true, shows that it was but a Consent in part, and was also
extorted from him. But this Relation being found in no other Author, I shall
not pass my word for the Truth of it.

But William of Malmesbury, and such Writers as prefer the Title of King
William, tell another story, and say, That King Harold on the very day of the
King's Funeral having extorted an Oath of Fidelity from the Chief Men, snatched
up the Crown of his own accord; although the English say it was bequeathed him
by King Edward; which yet he says he believes to be rather asserted by them out
of partiality, than by any true judgment or knowledge of the thing.

H. Huntington does not mention any such Election of Harold, but says on the
contrary, that diverse of the English would have advanced Edgar Aetheling to be
King. But Ingulph is more cautious, and does not determine one way or other of
this matter; only says in general, That the day after the King's Funeral,
Harold wickedly forgetting his Oath which he had formerly made to Duke William,
intruded himself into the Throne, and was solemnly Crowned by Alred Archbishop
of York.

As for Edgar Aetheling, the only surviving Male of the Ancient Royal Family,
he was but Young, and being a Stranger born, had neither Friends nor Interest
sufficient to oppose so great a Party as Harold had amongst the Lay-Nobility,
and especially among the Bishops, who were all to a man for him.

Anno Dom. MLXVI.
And that which made more against Prince Edgar, was, That he wanted the
Nomination of King Edward to recommend him to the Election of the Wittena
Gemot, or Great Council of the Kingdom, which either Duke William or Harold
certainly had, and perhaps both of them, though at different times, according
as they had the opportunity of making their Interest with that Easy King, who
certainly was very much to blame, not to have better ascertained that great
Point of the Succession to the Crown in his own lifetime; for had he declared
either Duke William or Edgar his Heir, and procured the Estates of the Kingdom
to confirm it in his lifetime, he might have prevented that Calamity which
afterward fell upon the English Nation from Duke William, when he came to be
King.

But to return to our History; Harold being thus advanced to the Throne, took
that course which all Wise Princes who can claim no Right by Blood, but only by
Election of the People, have always taken; and that was The abolishing of all
unjust Laws, and the making good ones in their stead; the seizing upon and
punishing all Thieves, Robbers, and Disturbers of the Public Peace, and indeed
wholly made it his business to defend the Kingdom from Foreign Invaders both by
Sea and Land; and that he might become truly popular, he was a great Patron of
the Churches and Monasteries, yielding much Reverence to the Bishops and
Abbots, showing himself humble and affable to all that were virtuous and good,
as he was severe to all others of a contrary Character.

On the 24th day of April, after his Coronation (as Simeon of Durham tells us)
appeared a Dreadful Comet, which was visible in all these parts of the world;
not long after which, followed the Invasion of Tostige, who having been
banished chiefly by his Brother's procurement, and now no longer able to digest
the Preferment of his Younger Brother to the Royal Dignity, in exclusion to
him, was moved with so much Envy and Indignation as to endeavor all ways
possible to dethrone him; for which purpose he sailed to Duke William, and
thence out of Flanders with some Ships to the Isle of Wight, where after he had
forced Money from the Inhabitants, he departed, and played the Pyrate upon the
Coasts till he came to Sandwich.

King Harold being then at London, upon notice thereof got in readiness both a
strong Fleet and a good Party of Horse, with which he resolved in Person to go
to Sandwich and fight him: But Tostige having intelligence of it, took along
with him all the Seamen he could find, and went to the Coast of Lindisse, where
he burnt several Villages, and killed a world of men: But Edwin Earl of Mercia,
and his Brother Morcar Earl of Northumberland, hastening to those parts with an
Army, soon forced him to quit that Country. And, as Florence relates, not
being able to return into Normandy by reason of contrary Winds, he sailed into
Norway, and there joined his Fleet with that which King Harold Harfager was now
preparing for the Invasion of England.

In the mean time King Harold lay at Sandwich, expecting his Fleet, which when
it was got together, he sailed to the Isle of Wight; and because William Duke
of Normandy was now expected to invade England with an Army, he waited his
coming over all that Summer and the Autumn following, lining all the Seacoasts
with Landforces, in order the better to receive him. This seems indeed more
probable, than what William of Malmesbury relates, Anno Dom. MLXVI.
That King Harold did not believe Duke William would undertake so hazardous an
Expedition, being at that time engaged in Wars with his Neighboring Princes,
and had now wholly given himself up to his Ease and Pleasure; so that had it
not been for his hearing that the King of Norway likewise threatened an
Invasion, he would never have raised any Army at all; which seems a very
improbable story, since he was (as you have already heard from Simeon of
Durham) forced to get out his Fleet and raise an Army, to prevent the
Incursions of his Brother Tostige.

But it is fit we now give you some account of the Reasons of these great
Preparations made by Duke William to invade England; for Ingulph and the Author
last mentioned both assure us, That so soon as he had heard of King Harold's
taking upon him the Crown of England, contrary to the Oath he had given him,
and that he was actually crowned, he sent over Ambassadors to put him in mind
of the breach of his word; threatening to force him to perform it, if he would
not do it by fair means, and that before the year came about.

Harold's Answer to these Ambassadors (as William of Malmesbury relates it) was
very plausible, being to this effect, That what he had promised concerning
marrying the Duke's Daughter, she being dead, it could not now be performed;
but that if he had promised him any thing concerning the Kingdom, it was very
rashly done of him, to have given away that which was not his own, without the
General Consent and Decree of the Great Council of that Kingdom; therefore that
a rash Oath was to be broken; for if the Oath or Vow of a Virgin, made without
the consent of her Parents, was by the Law of God declared void, how much more
ought that Oath to be accounted so, which he being then under the Authority of
his King (but compelled necessity) had made concerning the Kingdom, who was at
that time wholly ignorant of what had been transacted? And that the Duke was
very unjust in requiring him to resign that Crown which he had so lately
received by the General Favor and Consent of the People.

Bromton's Chronicle further adds, That Duke William sent another Message to
King Harold, whereby he acquainted him, That although he had not observed his
Faith in other things, yet if he would marry his Daughter, he would pass by all
the rest; or otherwise would vindicate his Succession by force of Arms. All
which is very improbable, since most Historians relate the young Lady to be
then dead; and it is very unlikely, that a Man of King William's Ambition would
quit his Pretentions to the Kingdom, for so slight a satisfaction as the
Marriage of his Daughter.

But this Author does with more probability reduce the Duke's Quarrel against
Harold, to these Three Heads.

First, To revenge the death of Prince Alfred his Cousin, who had been long
since murdered by Earl Godwin the Father of Harold.

Secondly, To restore Archbishop Robert, Earl Odo, and the rest of the Normans,
who had been unjustly banished in the late King's lifetime.

Thirdly, Because Harold had contrary to his Oath possessed himself of the
Kingdom, which as well by the Right of Consanguinity, as by that of a Double
Promise, ought to be his.

Anno Dom. MLXVI.
But the Ambassadors of Duke William being returned without any satisfactory
Answer from King Harold, the Duke employed the rest of the year in preparing
all things necessary for his Expedition, hiring Soldiers out of his own
Country with large Pay, and inviting Strangers from abroad with greater
Allowances; so that upon the Muster of his Forces he found that they did not
only excel in strength of Body, and height of Stature, but also the chief
Commanders and Captains of them were as remarkable for their Valor as for
their Experience and Conduct: Also his Bishops and Abbots strove with the
Nobility, who should by their liberal Contributions most advance this
Enterprise. But that the Duke might not prejudice the Equity of his Cause by
precipitation, he sent Ambassadors to Pope Alexander, who did with great
Eloquence set forth the Justice of the War which their Prince was going to
undertake; and that Harold not only had broken his Oath with him, but refused
to give him any Satisfaction, either because that now he was a Crowned Head, or
else that he distrusted his Cause: Whereupon the Pope taking into his serious
consideration this weighty matter, approved of the Enterprise, and sent the
Duke a Consecrated Banner, as an Omen of Victory; which when the Duke had
received, he called a Great Council of his Nobility at Lillebone, to ask all
their Opinions in this great Affair; and when they had all encouraged his
Undertaking by great Promises of Assistance, he appointed an Assessment for his
Fleet and Army, according to their several respective Estates; and so they
departed home, till the time appointed for a General Rendezvous.

Vid. Introduct. ad Britan.
But Mr. Cambden, from the Authority of some Ancient Norman Writers I have not
yet met with, makes this Enterprise much more difficult than our Historians
commonly do; as, that though he found his Chief Officers, to whom he
communicated his Design, very cheerful and resolute to follow him, yet all the
Skill lay how to bear the Charge of so great a War; for when in an Assembly of
all the States of Normandy a Subsidy was propounded; their Answer was, That in
the late War against the French, their Wealth was so much exhausted, that if a
new War should happen, they should scarce be able to hold and defend their own;
and therefore that they were more obliged to look after the Defense of their
own, than to think of Invading the Territories of others: That this intended
War, though never so just, yet did not seem so necessary at that time, as it
was apparently hazardous; and that besides, the Normans were not by their
Allegiance bound to Military Service in Foreign Parts: Neither could they by
any means be brought to grant a General Tax, although William Fitzosbern, a man
in high favor with the Duke, and as gracious among the People, endeavored
what he could to effect it; and to draw in others by his own example, promised
to set out forty Ships at his own proper Charges. Duke William then perceiving
he could not bring this about in a Public Meeting, went another way to work;
and therefore sends for the wealthiest men of his Duchy severally one by one,
to come to him; then he speaks them fair, and desires them to contribute
somewhat toward this War: Whereupon, as if they had strove who should most
largely assist their Prince, they promised him liberally; and he causing to be
presently registered whatsoever they had promised, it amounted to a vast Sum,
more than most men could reasonably ever have believed. This Affair being thus
dispatched, he next craves Aid of the Princes his Neighbors; to wit, of the
Earls of Anjou, Poictou, Anno Dom. MLXVI.
Maine, and Bretaigne; unto these he promised large Tracks of Land, and great
Possessions in England.

But how much each of these Princes contributed to this Expedition, is not
known; tho as for Alan Earl of Bretaigne, he certainly was so great an
Assistant to Duke William, that he was after this Conquest of King Harold, made
Earl of Richmond, and had great part of the Country thereabouts given him by
William when he came to be King, to be held by Knights Service.

And for the rest of the Princes abovementioned, it is certain that they
permitted Duke William to raise great store of men in their Territories, who
being headed by diverse Noble Volunteers of those Countries at their own
Charges, afterward enjoyed great Possessions in England as a Reward of their
Services.

Duke William also made his Addresses to Philip King of France, and went in
Person to solicit his Assistance in this intended War against Harold,
voluntarily offering that King, that in case he would assist him, and that he
thereby became victorious, to hold England of him as his Vassal; which King
Philip refused to accept, thinking it against the interest of France to make
the Duke of Normandy greater than he was already, who now began not to be so
pliant to his Interests, as he thought the many Obligations which Duke William
owed the King his Father, required: Therefore as the growing Greatness of a
Neighboring Prince was then, is, and will ever be suspected by him who is his
Rival in Power and Empire; so King Philip was so far from giving the Duke any
Assistance, that he wholly dissuaded him from this Enterprise, which
nevertheless he vigorously pursued, notwithstanding this discouragement.

But leaving Duke William to his Warlike Preparations, we will return into
England, where our Annals tell us, That Earl Tostige had been met upon the
Northern Coast with three hundred Norwegian Ships (commanded by Harold King of
Norway); to whom when he had joined those he had with them, they all sailed up
the Humber till they came as far as York; where the Earls (Brothers) Morcar and
Eadwin met and fought them; but it seems the King of Norway gained the Victory.
Ingulph is more express in this affair, and says that Harold King of Norway
sailed up the River Ouse as far as York, where the Fleet being left under a
strong Guard, they landed, and stormed York, and soon plundered it, and slew
many of the poor Inhabitants: But the two Earls abovementioned having gotten
together a small Recruit of ill-arm'd Countrymen, were easily routed; and
(according to our Annals) when King Harold heard of it, he immediately marched
against the King of Norway, and meeting him at Staenford-bri^ge in Yorkshire,
there fought, and slew that King, with Earl Tostige, his own Brother. Ingulph
adds, That the Norwegians made a very stout resistance, great multitudes of
them being slain, together with their Chief Commanders; so that King Harold
obtained an entire Victory; only Prince Olave, Son to Harold King of Norway,
and Paul Earl of Orcades, were permitted quietly to return home with twenty
Ships.

But before I dismiss this Relation, I cannot omit a remarkable Example of one
single Norwegian, who standing upon the Bridge abovementioned, killed more
than forty Englishmen with his Battel-Axe* making good his Post against the
whole Army, Anno Dom. MLXVI.
till three a Clock in the Afternoon, and then one going in a Boat under the
Bridge, wounded him to death in the lower parts through a hole that it seems he
found there.

But King Harold returning to York, had no long time to enjoy his Victory; for
immediately after the News being brought him that Duke William was landed at
Pevensey near Hastings upon Michaelmas day, he made all the haste he could to
march toward him, leaving the Earls Edwin and Morchar behind him with great
part of the Forces. But since our Annals are very short in the relation of all
these Affairs between the Duke and King Harold, I shall give you a larger
account of it from William of Malmesbury and other Authors, who tell us, That
Duke William with all his Nobility being met in August at St. Walleries (a
Port-Town in Normandy) lay there a long while waiting for a Wind, but that
continuing contrary for several days, the Soldiers at last began thus to murmur
in their Camp, (as it is ordinary for such men when they lie long still and
have nothing to do), saying among themselves, That the man was mad who would go
to take away another man's Territories against God's Will, which it was plain
this was, since he had now so long withheld the Wind. This being spread abroad,
one would have thought it had been enough to have discouraged any one less
valiant than the Duke; who thereupon consulting with his Chief Officers what
was best to be done, the wisest of them advised him to bring forth the Body of
St. Wallerie, to try if by that means they could obtain a fair Wind; however,
perhaps it might put some stop to his Soldiers Discontents. What effect the
Saint's Body wrought, I cannot tell; but so much is certain, that not long
after a fresh Gale offering, the Duke immediately set sail for England; and his
Ship being first got out to Sea, casting Anchor, lay there till the rest of his
Fleet could come up to him, who all following the King's Ship (which then rid
Admiral) they in the Afternoon with an easy and gentle Breeze reached Hastings,
near which the Duke going on Shore, his foot by accident slipping he fell down,
which a Soldier standing by immediately turned into a good Omen, saying, Sir,
you have only taken Seisin of that Land of which you will shortly be King.

As soon as ever his Army had landed, he strictly charged them to commit no
Outrages, nor plunder, saying, They ought to spare those things which would
shortly be their own: So the Duke lying still for fifteen days, and having
strongly fortified his Camp with certain Palisadoes which he had brought over
along with him, seemed to mind nothing less than War.

But King Harold, precipitated by his own bad Fortune, marched against the Duke
with but part of his Forces; for besides those that had been killed in the late
Engagement, a great many of his best Soldiers had already deserted him, being
discontented that they had been denied their share of the Norwegian Plunder;
yet those Forces which still remained with him, he thought sufficient, because
he heard the Duke was landed but with a small Army; so that notwithstanding the
strongest and most valiant of his Army were either slain in the late Battle
with the Norwegians, or else gone from him, he yet resolved to fight.

King Harold being now arrived near Hastings, Anno Dom. MLXVI.
pitched his Camp upon a Hill about Nine Miles from that place, and immediately
sent out Spies, to give him what Account they could of the Number and Forces of
the Enemy; some of whom being taken within Duke William's Camp, though he might
have executed them by the Laws of War, yet he only commanded them to be led
round about it, and then having well fed them, he ordered them to be sent back
to their Lord; and being returned, King Harold asked them, What news they could
tell him? They hereupon having set forth the generous Behavior of the Enemies
General, seriously added, That all their Army seemed to be Priests, because
they had all their Faces with both their Lips close shaven, for the English
then wore long Beards: But the King laughing at their simplicity, said, He too
well knew those they had seen were no Priests, but brave Soldiers; then Gyrth
his youngest Brother (being a very young man, but of an Understanding and
Courage far above his years) taking the words out of the King's mouth, said
thus; Sir, if you can so far allow the Valor of the Norman Duke, I think it is
then indiscreet for you to enter the Field against him, lest you should be
found inferior to him either in Strength or Justice of your Cause; for you can
no ways deny but that voluntarily or involuntarily you have sworn to him:
Therefore in my opinion you would do more prudently to withdraw your self from
the present Danger, and leave to us the Decision of the Day; who being free
from all Oaths and Promises, can with a safe Conscience draw our Swords in
defense of our Country; for it is to be feared, that if you your self should
engage, either your Death or more shameful Flight may ensue; whereas if we
alone engage with him, your Cause will be every where safe, for you may either
assist us if we should be put to fly, or else bury us if we should happen to be
slain.

But the King's immoderate Pride and Rashness made him deaf to the wholesome
Advice of his Brother; and he thought it Inglorious, and a Dishonor to his
past Life, to seem afraid of any Danger: Therefore being pushed on by his
unlucky Fate, he hastily sent away the Monk that was newly before come from
Duke William to him with these Proposals, viz. That either he should quit the
Throne; or hold it, and reign under him; or else try the Justice of his Cause
by their two single Swords in the sight of both Armies; or in case Harold
should refuse all these, that he was ready to submit it to the Judgment of the
Apostolic See: I say, he hastily sent him away with only this short Answer,
That he would leave it to God to determine the matter between them.

So that the Monk being returned with this Answer, it added fresh Courage to
the Normans; whereupon the Generals on both sides immediately drew up their
Armies, in order to a Battle, each according to his Country fashion: The
English had spent the night in drinking and roaring; and being thus heated,
marched early out the next morning against the Enemy: The Pikes and Bill-men,
mingled with a strong Detachment of Targetiers, made up the Front and Main Body
of the English Army, and by their close Order rendered it so impenetrable, that
nothing but their being outwitted by the Norman Duke could ever have broke it,
as you will see by and by: But King Harold, together with his Brethren, being
all on foot, placed themselves near the Royal Standard, Anno Dom. MLXVI.
that by thus being all of them in equal danger with the meanest Soldier, no
man should so much as think of Flight.

Whilst in the mean time the Normans had spent the night in Prayers and
Confessions, and having also received the Eucharist, were now drawn out against
the English; the Foot being armed with Gleaves, Bows, and Arrows, made up the
Main Body of their Army; and the Horse being placed a little more backward in
two Divisions made the Wings: But (as Will. Pictaviensis relates) the Pope's
Consecrated Banner was placed in the Front of the Army, as well to encourage
the Normans, as to dishearten the English.

Then the Duke mounting on Horseback, with an unconcerned Countenance and loud
Voice encouraged his men, and openly declared, He doubted not but that God
would favor the Justice of his Cause. And Bromton's Chronicle here brings him
in making a long Speech to his Army; which because not suiting with the Genius
of those blunt times, and being also omitted by all other Authors, I shall pass
by.

Then the Duke calling for his Armor, and either through haste or incogitancy
his Esquire having put on his Breast Plate behind instead of before, he turned
off that seeming Ill Omen with a Jest, saying, His Dukedom would shortly be
changed into a Kingdom: And then the old Ballad of Roland being begun by the
Army, that his Martial Example might excite their Courage, and the Divine
Assistance being also implored, the Battle begun, which was valiantly fought on
both sides, neither Party giving ground, tho it continued till it was late;
which when Duke William perceiving, and that the English Ranks were not
otherwise to be broken, he gave immediate Orders to his men to feign a Retreat,
and make as if they fled out of the Field, by which Stratagem the Main Body of
the English Foot being broken in pursuing the Enemy, (whom they thought to be
really now put to flight,) it turned to their own destruction; for the Normans
rallying, and falling upon the English when they were dispersed, quite routed
them; and thus being outwitted, though they lost their Lives valiantly in
fighting for their Country, yet were they not wanting in their Revenge, for
often turning again, they slew whole heaps of their Pursuers; and the Foot
gaining a Rising Ground, drove back the Normans into the adjoining Valley, and
throwing great store of Darts and Stones down upon them, put them to flight,
and passing over a certain steep Trench, left there so many Carcasses of their
Enemies, that they levelled the inequality of the ground with heaps of dead
bodies. Thus for a while sometimes the English and sometimes the Normans
prevailed, neither side having much the better, so long as King Harold
continued alive; but when at last he fell by an Arrow shot into his Brains, the
English presently fled, till night parted them: Insomuch that the Valor of
both Generals was very remarkable; for Harold was not contented only with
performing the office of a General, but he did also act the part of a common
Soldier, killing all those that came in his way, that none could approach him
without great hazard of being slain, till such time as that Unfortunate Shot
abovementioned put an end to his Life; and a Soldier afterward giving his
dead Body a Wound in the Thigh, he was for that base cowardly Action discarded
by Duke William, who never ceased encouraging his Men both by his Voice and
Presence, marching foremost against the thickest Ranks; so that whilst he thus
showed his Valor, he had no less than three brave Horses slain under him, Anno
Dom. MLXVI.
the Duke all the while remaining with an undaunted Courage in the greatest
dangers, though he was often gently admonished by those who had the guard of
his Person, not to be so forward.

Thus he continued till the Night coming on left him at last entirely
Victorious; and without doubt the Divine Hand did that day protect him, for he
was not so much as wounded, though aimed at by so many Darts and Arrows.

This is the Account which William of Malmesbury gives us of this Fight; to
which there needs little to be added out of other Authors, several of them
writing from him, and only repeating his Relation in other words. But I cannot
omit taking notice of some Passages which Radulph de Diceto gives us of this
Battle; viz. That it was fought upon a Saturday, (being St. Calixtus's day) the
2d of the Ides, that is, the 14th of October; That the English being drawn up
in a narrow place, many of them withdrew themselves from the Battle, as having
not room to fight, so that but few remained with the King: That Duke William
marched against the Enemy in the Head of Five Regiments of Horse, which being
all drawn up, a certain Norman called Tailefer came forth before both Armies,
and there brandished his Sword in the face of the English, and whilst they
stood gazing at him, he slew an English Ensign, who (it seems) came out to
fight with him, and did the like to another who engaged him, but in the third
Encounter with a fresh man was slain himself.

Then began the Fight with a thick Shower of Arrows on the Norman's side, which
Duke William commanded them not to shoot directly at the Enemy, but rather
upward, that so they might fall upon the Heads of the English; which Stratagem
proved fatal to them; for by one of these Arrows King Harold himself was slain:
There were about twenty Valiant Norman Horsemen, who had engaged to each other,
that breaking the English Army, they would seize upon the King's Standard; in
compassing which, tho many of them perished, yet the rest pressing on with
their Swords, at last carried it off. This Standard, after the Victory, Duke
William sent to the Pope, wherein the Figure of an Armed Combatant was
curiously embroidered with Gold and Precious Stones.

But concerning the Battle, a Manuscript Chronicle called Brutus, in the
Archbishop's Library at Lambeth, farther relates, That Earl William (for so he
styles him) having made a fresh Assault upon the English with a Detachment of
about a Thousand Horse, tried once more to break their Ranks, which not
succeeding, the Earl immediately commanded that feigned Retreat
abovementioned; by which the Order of the Main Body of the English being
broken, the Normans thereupon rallying again, presently charged through the
English Army, and gave them an entire Defeat.

Some Writers also mention, That the Normans in their feigned Flight fell into
a deep Trench which the English had made and covered over on purpose; tho this
seems not at all likely; for how could they tell that they should put the
Normans to flight, and make them fall into that Trench? But Mr. Holingshed from
a Manuscript Chronicle of Battle-Abby, which he had seen, gives us a much more
probable account of this Circumstance; viz. That the Normans too earnestly
pursuing the Chase when the English began to retreat, Anno Dom. MLXVI.
many of the Norman Horse fell by chance into a certain deep Ditch, overgrown
with Reeds, where most of them being pressed to death or stifled, perished.

This is the best Account I can give you of this Great and Decisive Battle,
which yet is very imperfect, since no Historians that I know of either English
or Normans, have given us the Number of the Armies on both sides, or how many
were slain; perhaps, because both had a mind to conceal what they thought did
not make for their Credit: Only it is acknowledged on all hands, that they were
so many on the Normans side as well as the English, that nothing but the
overruling Providence of God by the Death of their King, could have given it
away from them to their Enemies.

In this Battle King Harold and his two Brothers, Gyrth and Leofwin, with most
of the English Nobility, were slain; and an Ancient Manuscript in the Julius,
D. 6.
Cottonian Library farther relates, That the King's Body was hard to be
certainly known by reason of its being so much disfigured by Wounds, yet was at
last discovered by one who had been formerly his Mistress, and that by the
means of certain private Marks known only to her self; and being taken up and
washed by two of the Chanons of Waltham (which Monastery he had founded) was
ordered by Duke William to be delivered to his Mother, and that without any
Ransom, though she would have given a considerable Sum for it; but it was not
long after buried in the Abby-Church of Waltham.

Yet notwithstanding, Henry de Knyghton from Giraldus Cambrensis, gives a quite
different account what became of this Prince; for he says that he was not slain
in this Battle, but retiring privately out of it, lived and died an Anchoret in
a Cell near St. John's Church in Chester, as was owned by himself at his last
Confession, when he lay a dying; and farther, that in memory thereof they
showed his Tomb when that Author wrote. But the concurrent Testimony of so many
English Writers concerning his being slain, and buried at Waltham, is certainly
to be preferred before one single Evidence; not but that it might be true, that
somebody might thus personate Harold, and have his Tomb afterward shown as his.

But where or however he died, he was certainly a Prince of a Noble Presence,
and of as Great a Mind; and had he not by a preposterous Ambition of gaining a
Kingdom to which he had no Right, as well as by a Notorious Violation of his
Solemn Oath, given Duke William a just Occasion of making War upon him, wherein
he not only lost his own Life, but also was the occasion of the Ruin of so many
of his Countrymen, he might have had as great a Character in History, as any
Prince of his time.

He had two Wives, the first he buried long before he was King; but none of our
Writers mention her Name. His second was Algithe, Widow of Griffyth ap
Lhewelyn, King of North Wales, Sister of Edwi and Morchar, Earls of Yorkshire
and Chester.

By the former it is recorded that he had Children then of such an Age, that
they waged War against K. William in the second year of his Reign.

The first was Godwin, who with his Brother Edmund after his Father's Death and
Overthrow, fled into Ireland; but returning again into Somersetshire, slew
Ednoth (one of his Father's Ealdormen) who encountered him, and then making
great spoil in Devonshire and Cornwall, departed. The next year fighting with
Beorne an Ealdorman of Cornwall, he afterward returned into Ireland, Anno Dom.
MLXVI.
and from thence went to Denmark to King Sweyn, where he continued the Residue
of his Life.

The second was Edmund, who engaged with him in all his abovesaid Brother's
Invasions and Wars, depending absolutely upon him whilst he lived and died (as
he did) in Denmark.

Magnus his third Son went with his two Brothers into Ireland, and came back
with them the first time into England; but we find nothing of him after this,
unless he was that Magnus who afterward became an Anchoret.

Wolf his fourth Son seems to be born of Queen Algithe, and probably at King
William's Entrance here, he was but an Infant; yet after his Death he is named
among his Prisoners; but by William Rufus was released, and by him honored
with the Order of Knighthood.

Gunhilde, a Daughter of Harold's, is mentioned by John Capgrave in the Life of
Wolstan Bishop of Worcester, and that she was a Nun, but where, is not
mentioned; and being in most men's opinion's wholly blind, this Wolstan (if you
will believe it from Capgrave) by a Miracle restored her absolutely to her
Eyesight.

Another Daughter of Harold's is mentioned by Saxo Grammaticus, in his Danish
History, to have been well received by her Kinsman King Sweyn the younger, and
afterward married to Waldemar King of the Russians, and to have had a Daughter
by him, who was the Mother of Waldemar the first King of Denmark of that Name,
from whom all the Danish Kings for many Ages after succeeded. This Account I
have borrowed from Mr. Speed, who is very exact in the Pedigrees of our
English-Saxon Kings.

We find no Laws made in this King's time, only this, mentioned by Ingulph,
viz. That King Harold made a Law, that whatever Welshman were found without
leave on this side Offa's Ditch, he should have his Right Hand cut off by the
King's Officers: Which Law, I suppose, was made to restrain the pilfering
Incursions of the Welsh, who were wont to come in small Companies into the
English Borders, to rob, and carry away Cattle.

But as for the Earls, Syward of Mercia, and Morchar of Northumberland,
Brothers, it is said they withdrew themselves out of the Battle, with their
Followers, almost as soon as it began, either because they liked not the
streightness of the Place where they were drawn up, or else were discontented
with the King's Conduct; so marching immediately up to London, they there met
with Aldred Archbishop of York, and Edgar Atheling, with diverse other Noblemen
and Bishops, and consulted whom they should make King; diverse of them were for
Edgar Atheling, as the only remaining Branch of the Saxon Blood Royal, under
whom they resolved to renew the War; but he being young and unexperienced, and
the Major Part of the Bishops being against it, nothing was done. William of
Malmesbury relates, That the two Earls abovementioned solicited the Londoners
to make one of them King, which when they found they could not prevail upon
them so to do, taking their Sister, the Widow of King Harold along with them,
and leaving her for security at Chester, they retired into Northumberland,
supposing that Duke William would never march so far that Winter.

But how much they were mistaken, and how they were forced to submit themselves
to him, when the City of London and all the rest of the Kingdom had
acknowledged him, Anno Dom. MLXVI.
must be reserved for the next Volume.

In the mean time the Nobility and Clergy being thus divided in their
sentiments, all their designs came to nothing: Thus (as the same Author well
observes) that as the English, if they had been all of one mind, might have
prevented the Ruin of their Country; so since they could not agree to have one
of their own Nation to reign over them, they were thereby brought under the
subjection of Strangers.

Indeed Guilel. Gemeticensis and Ordoricus Vitalis relate, That the Noblemen
and Bishops who had retired to London, actually chose Edgar Atheling King; but
this seems not at all probable, since none of our own Writers mention it; and
had Edgar been once elected, it is not likely that King William would have been
so easily reconciled to him, and have not only given him his Liberty, but
preferred him.

Having from our Historians of best Credit given you this Account of our
English Monarchs, most of whom mixing Piety with Civil Prudence reigned
gloriously for many Generations, it will not be amiss for a Conclusion, to let
the Reader see how, not long before this sad Catastrophe, all sorts and degrees
of men were now much degenerated from the Simplicity and Sobriety of their
Ancestors: And first, as for the state of Religion in this Island, for some
Ages before the coming in of the Normans, William of Malmesbury observes, that
Piety and all good Literature were commonly grown so much out of fashion even
amongst the Clergy, that resting content with a very small share of Devotion as
well as Learning, they could scarce read Divine Service; nay, the very Monks
were clad in fine Stuffs, and made no difference of Days and Meat; which tho
perhaps no fault in it self, yet to them who were under other Principles, it
was certainly much otherwise.

Also, that the Great Men being given up to Gluttony and a dissolute Life,
oppressed and made a Prey of the Common People, debauching their Daughters whom
they had in their Service, and then turning them off to the Stews.

Whilst the meaner sort sat tippling night and day, and spent all they had in
Rioting and Drunkenness, and those attended with other Vices which effeminate
men's minds: Therefore it came to pass through the just Judgment of God, that
King Harold and those of his Party being carried away with Rashness and Fury,
rather than any True Valor or Military Experience, gave Duke William this
great Advantage over them, as has been but now set forth. Not (says he) but
that some few of the Clergy as well as Laity were much better; yet for the most
part they were, as has been here described.

But as the long-suffering of God often permits the Bad as well as the Good to
enjoy the like Prosperity; so likewise his Justice in punishing oft-times does
not exempt even Good Men from partaking in the common Calamities of their
Country. Therefore I shall conclude this Volume with the like Admonition as
Mr. Milton does his Saxon History; viz. That if these were (in all probability)
the Causes of God's heavy Judgments on our Ancestors, surely every man ought in
this corrupt Age to take care to avoid them, lest in the height of a seeming
Security, their long continuance in a course of Vice and Luxury should without
a speedy Amendment meet with as severe, if not much worse Punishment.

FINIS.
A TABLE of the Succession of the remaining English-Saxon Kings in this last
Period. The Northumbrian Kings being supplied from Simeon of Durham, and the
Chronicles of Mailrosse; and the Welsh Princes are taken from Caradoc's
Chronicle, and the old Annals at the end of the lesser Volume of Domes-day
Book. Tab. 3.
Anno Dom. Kings of Kent. Anno Dom. Kings of England. Anno Dom. Kings of
Northumberland. Anno Dom. Kings of the East Angles. Anno Dom. Kings of the
Mercians. Anno Dom. Kings of Wales. Cuthred eight Years. 802 Ecgbert reigned 36
Years. Eardulf was expelled his Kingdom, Anno Dom. 806. then succeeded 859 St.
Edmund reigned 11 Years, who being martyred by the Danes, that Kingdom remained
without a King, until Kenwulf 22 Years. Caradoc King of North Wales. 819 Kenelm
(a Child) his Son, murdered by his Aunt Quendrida: then 806 Conan Tyndaethwy
King of South Wales, and afterward King of North Wales. 805 Baldred eighteen
Years. He being the last King of Kent, was expelled his Kingdom by King Egbert.
837 Ethelwolf his Son 18 Years and an half. 806 Aelfwold, who reigned two
Years, then 808 Eanred, Son of Eardulph, reigned 32 Years. 857 Ethelbald his
Son two Years and an half. 840 Ethelred his Son reigned 9 Years. 870 817
Mervyn-wrych, and Esylht his Wife the Daughter of Conan. 849 Osbert 13 Years,
whom was driven out by 820 Ceolwulf his Uncle reigned one Year. 860 Ethelbert
his Brother, reigned five Years and an half. 862 Aella, an Usurper; but both
these Kings being slain by the Danes, they seized upon that Kingdom, and made
843 Rodoric the Great, Son, or Grandson, to Mervyn last mentioned. 821
Beornwulf 3 Years. 824 Ludican one Year and an half. 877 Anarawd, Son of
Rodoric Prince of North Wales. 866 Ethered his Brother, five Years. 866 Egbert
King, who was soon expelled by them, and then they made 878 Guthrum the Dane
was made King by the Concession of K. Alfred, and reigned 12 Years. 825 Wiglaf
14 Years. 913 Edwal Voel Son to Anarawd. 838 Athelstan, natural Son to K.
Ethelwolf, made K. of Kent, Eastsex and Surry by his Father; he died without
Issue, after which it was again united to the rest of King Ethelwolf's
Dominions. 871 Alfred his Brother reigned 29 Years and an half. Ricsig a Dane
their King who reigned 10 Years; then 839 Bertwulf 13 Years. These four last
Kings were all of them tributary to the Kings of the West Saxons, as was also
940 Howel-Dha King of South Wales, and after the Death of Edwal he took upon
him the Government of all Wales. 872 Another Egbert was by them made King, who
dying, the Danes and Northumbers remained without any King, till 901 Edward his
Son, surnamed the Elder, 24 Years. 883 Guthred, a poor Slave, was chosen King;
he reigned over Yorkshire about 11 Years, then 948 Jevaf and Jago Sons of Edwal
Voel, Princes of North Wales whilst the Sons of Howel-Dha ruled South Wales at
the same time. 925 Athelstan his Son 16 Years. 852 Burhed, who reigned 22
Years, and being expelled his Kingdom by the Danes, they then gave it to one
894 King Alfred seized his share of that Kingdom, whilst in the more Northern
Parts reigned at the same tim^ Osbert a Dane who was expelled his ^ingdom. 890
Eoric the Dane was by Guthrum made his Successor; after whose Decease K. Edward
the Elder subduing the Danes, added that Kingdom to his own. 941 Edmund his
Brother five Years. 973 Howel ap Jevaf. 946 Edred his Brother 9 Years. 984
Cadwalhon ap Jevaf, Brother to Howel. 902 Ricsig another Danish King, who being
slain, was succeeded by 955 Edwi Son to Edmond, two Years. 874 Ceolmulf, who
held it but a short time, the Danes taking it again; and being driven out by
King Edward the Elder, he committed the Government of it to Ethered, under the
Title of Earl; who having married Ethelfleda that King's Sister, she also
governed it after his Death, but King Edward seizing it after her Decease,
added it to the rest of his Dominions. 986 Meridith ap Owen, Grandson to
Howel-Dha. 903 Reginald and Niel both D^^es, who reigned at once, they having
after King Alfred's Death taken the whol^ Kingdom: but Niel being slain by 957
Edgar his Brother 16 Years. 992 Edwal ap Meryc. 1003 Aedan ap Blegored, not of
the Blood of the Welsh Princes. 973 Edward his Son, surnamed the Martyr,
reigned 5 Years. 914 Sihtric his Brother, he reigned in his stead. 1015
Lhewelyn ap Sits-sylht in right of Angerat his Wife (the Daughter of Prince
Merydith). 919 Inguald another Danish King, reigned about the same time, as did
als^ 978 Ethelred his Brother 38 Years. 926 Guthfert Son to Sihtric; h^ was
expelled by K. Athelstan, after which Anlaf King of Norway seized this Kingdom
for a time, but being expelled by the Northumbers, Jago ap Edwal. 1016 Edmund,
sir-named Iron-side, reigned 9 Months. 1022 Gryffith ap Lhewelyn, whilst Howel
ap Edwin reigned in South Wales at the same time. 1017 Cnute King of Denmark,
reigned 19 Years. Another Anlaf Son to Siht^ic, was by them made King: He was
also expelled by King Edmund, and restored f^r two Years, but then was again
driven ^ut by K. Edred; yet after this the North^mbers made Eoric of Danish
Race their King, but he being again deserted by the^, they returned to K.
Edred's Allegiance* who thereupon added that Kingdom to his own. 1064 Blethyn
and Rywalhon, Sons of Convin, and half Brothers to the former Prince, were made
by King Edward the Confessor Princes of Wales, after Gryffith their Brother was
slain. 944 1036 Harold his Son three Years. 945 947 920 1039 Hardecnute his
Brother, two Years and an half. 948 956 Edgar Brother to K. Edwi, chosen King
of Mercia and Northumberland, reigned there one Year before his Brother's
Decease. 1042 Edward the Confessor reigned 24 Years. 952 From which time the
Ki^gs of Northumberland failing, it was ever after governed by Earls, 1066
Harold Son to Earl Godwin, reigned 9 Months. 953 Oswulf being by K. Edre^ made
the first Earl; but King Edgar ^^vided it into two Earldoms.

Having hitherto omitted the Genealogies of the English-Saxon Kings (as they
(...) be found in the Annals) I thought it best to refer them to this Table,
where you may view them altogether, as they are derived from GEAT, who is
supposed to have been (...) ^ommon Ancestor of the Getae, or Goths: and I
could have carried it very much higher, but that before this Geat they are so
extremely uncertain. Note, These are extracted not (...) from the Annals, but
from three choice Manuscript Copies of Florence of Worcester, compared with
that Pedigree in the Textus Roffensis, published by the Reverend Dr. Gale, at
(...) and of his last Volume; but it must be acknowledged, that the Genealogies
in Florence differ from those in the Textus Roffensis in many Particulars.
GEAT, Godwulf, Fin, Deest in Text. Roffensi.
Fritholwulf, Fretholaf, or Frealaf. Woden, The common Ancestor of all the
English-Saxon Kings. Wehta, In Roffensi.
Waegdaeg, Withgils, Witta, Hengest, First King of Kent.




Casar, Tytimon, Trigils, Rothmund, Rippan, or Hrip. Guithelm, or Withelm, In
Roffensi.
Webha, Vffa, First King of the East Angles.







Aeaxneat, or Seaxnet. Gesecg. Ansecg. Sweppa, Sigefuget, Bedca, Offa,
Aescwine, or Erkenwine, First King (...) the East Saxons.







Waegdeg. Sigear, or Siggar. Swebdeg. Sigeat, or Wiggeat. Saebald. Deest in
Roffensi.
Sweort. Seafugel. Seomnel. Westerwacna. Wilgils. Vscfrea. Yffe. Aella, From
whom descended the Kings of Deira.












Beldeg, Deest in Roffensi.
Brand, Freothgar, or Freodegar. Freawine. Wig. Gewis. Esla. Elesa, Cerdic,
First King of the West Saxons, and from whom they were all descended.






Beorne, or Beornic. Waegbrand. Ingebrand. Elusa, or Aloc. Angelgeot, or
Angenwit. Aethelbert. Eosa. Eoppa. Ida, First King of Bernicia.










Wythelgeat, or Weodgeat. Deest in Roffensi.
Waga. Wihtlaeg. Waeremund. Offa. Ingeltheot. Eomar. Icel. Kwebba. Cynewald.
Cryda, or Creoda, First King of the Mercians.

















The rest that follow you may see in the former Tables of the Kings.

That the Succession of the West Saxon Kings may be the better understood, as
being those from whom all the Kings of England (both before and since the
Conquest) are descended, I have here added their Pedigree down as low as King
Edward the Consessor; which I have taken from the Saxon Annals, Florence of
Worcester, and other Authentic Authors. Tab. Vlt.
Note, That R. signifies Rex, and the Number following is in what Order that
King reigned.

Note, That C in the Saxon Tongue is pronounced like K.
Cerdic I. King of the West Saxons. Cynr^c R. II. 3 Cutha 1 Ceol, or Ceola,
Cynegils R. VI. 1 Cwichelm R. VII. Cuthred
2 Cenwalh R. VIII.-Sexburga Reg. to whom her Husband left the Crown.

2 Ceolwulf R. V.
2 Cuthwulf Ceolric R. IV.
1 Ceawling, or In Textu Roffensi.
Celm, R. III. 2 Cuthwine In Textu Roffensi.
Cutha, or Cuthwulf, Ceolwald Cenred 1 Ina R. XI. These Five Kings, as far as
Brihtric, not being descended from each other, their Pedigrees are not known,
more than that they were all descended from Cerdic.
Aethelheard R. XII. Cuthred R. XIII. Sigebert R. XIV. Cynewulf R. XV. Brihtric
R. XVI.




2 Ingild Eoppa Eafa Ealhmund Egbert R. XVII. Ethelwulf R. XVIII. 4 Aelfred R.
XXII. 1 Ethelwerd 2 Edward the Elder R. XXIII. 6 Edred R. XXVI. 5 Aelfred 4
Edmund R. XXV. Ethelfleda-2 Edgar R. XXVIII.-Elfreda, supposed to be a
Concubine. Emma-2 Ethelred R. XXX-Elgiva Note, I have not put down all the
Wives, nor any of the Daughters of these Kings, because they are not all
recorded; nor would there have been room for all those that are.
2 Edward the Confessor R. XXXII. 1 Edmund Ironside R. XXXI. 1 Edmund; died
without Issue. 2 Edward, surnamed the Outlaw, Edgar Etheling. Margaret, married
to Malcolm King of Scots; from whom all the Kings of England since King Henry
I. are descended. Christina a Nun at Wilton.


1 Edward the Martyr R. XXIX.
1 Edwie R. XXVII.
3 Edwin 2 Athelstan, Illegitimate, R. XXIV. Kings of the Danish Race, who
reigned between King Edmund Ironside, and Edward the Confessor. Cnute, King of
England, Denmark, and Norway, 1 Harold, surnamed Harefoot, esteemed
Supposititious. Harold, Son of Earl Godwin, the XXXIIId and Last of the English
Saxon Kings.
2 Hardecnute succeeded his Brother Harold: He was Son to Queen Emma.


1 Aethelward, or Aelfweard,

3 Aethelred R. XXI. 1 Aelfred 2 Oswald
2 Aethelbert R. XX. 2 Athelm 1 Aethelwald
1 Aethelbald R. XIX.









1 Cutha Cada Cenbyrht 2 Mulla, or Moll. 1 Ceadwalla R. X.



4 Ceolwulf Cuthgils Cenferth Cenfus Aescwine R. IX.



5 Cwichelm


INDEX.
Note, The Numbers signify so many of the same Name.

A
ABbey Abbey-Lands Abbot Aberfraw Abingdon Abjuring Acca Achaius Adda Adelphius
Adian Admurum Adrian Adulf Adultery Aeadsige Aealmond Aealhstan Aedan Vradog
Aedan ap Blegored Aedric Aegelbyerth Aegelric Aelfeage Aelfer Aelfgar Aelfleda
Aelfred, or Alfred Aelfric 3. Aelfweard Aelfwinna Aelfwold Aelgiva 3. Aella 3.
Aelmer Aemilianus Aeneon Aescasdune Aescwin 2. Aesk Aestel Aethelbald 2.
Aethelbryht Aethelburga Aethelfleda Aethelgiva Aethelheard Aethelred
Aethelswithe Aethelwald 2. Aethelwulf Aetius Agatha Agatho Agelbert Agricola
Agrippina Aidan Ailesbury Ailmer Ailnoth Ailwin Akmanceaster Alan 2. Alaric St.
Alban Albania Albert Albinus (Chlodius) Alburge Alchluid Alchmuid Alchmund
Alcuin Aldhelm Aldred Aldune Alehouses Alemond Alfleda Alfred 5. Alfweard
Alfwin Alfwold Algithe Algiva Alhred 2. Alienation Alkuith Allectus Allegiance
Alms Alrich 2. Alstan Alton Alwin Alwold Alypius Ambresburg Ambrosius Amiens
Ammianus Marcellinus Anarawd Andate Andover Andragatius Andredswood Angild
Angles Anglesey Anglia Sacra Anlaff 2. Anna Annals (Saxon) Antenor Anwulf Aper
Appeals, and Vid. Pope Appledore Arbogastes Arcadius Archbishop Archenfield
Archigallo Arch-pyrate Arderydd Areans Ariminum Arles Armorica Armor Army
Arnulf Arnwy Arrian (Heresy) Arthur Arviragus Arwald Arwan Asaph Asclepiodotus
Ashdown Assault Asser Assize-Charges Asterius Ataulphus Athelgi^^ Athelm
Athelney Athelric Athelstan 3. Athelwald Athelward Athelwold Attacotti Atticus
Augusta Augustine Augustine's-Ake Augustus Caesar Avon Aurelian Aurelius,
Ambrosius Atticus Conan Marcus
Aust Axanminster.
B
BAchseg Badon-Hill Bakewell Balbinus (Clodius) Baldred Baldwin
Bamborough-Castle Banbury Bangor Banner Banuwelle Baptism Bardeney
Bardsey-Island Barnwood Barons St. Bartholomew St. Basile Basse Bassianus
Bassus Bastardy Bathan Bathe Beadricesworth Beamdune Beamfleet-Castle
Becancelde Bedanhealfde Bid Bedicanford Belinus Bells Benedict Benedictines
St. Bennet 's in Holme Bennington Beonna Beormond Beorne 4. Beornred Beornwulf
Berferth Berkshire Bernicia Bertha Bertulf Beverlie Bevorstone Billingsgate
Birds Birth Supposititious Birthwald Bishops Blecca Blood Boadicia Bocland
Bodotria Boethius (Hector) Bolanus Bonagratia de Villa Dei Bondland Bondsman
Bonosus Bosa Bosenham Boston Bottulf Bounds Bracelets Bradanford Brandanrelie
Breach of the Peace Brecklesey-Island Brecknock-Castle Bregowin Brennus
Bridgenorth Brigantes Brige Brightnoth Brihtric 2. Britain Great Britain
Britains Britains of Armorica British Church Brixstan Brockmaile Bromrige
Bruerne Brocard Brun-Albin Brute Bry^htwald Bryghtwulf Brythelme Buchanan
Budington Buloigne Buoy in the Nore Burford Burgh Burghmotes Burhred Byrinus
Byrnstan
C
CAdelh Cadocus Cadwallader Cadwallo 3. Cadwan Caedmon Caerialis (Petilius)
Caer-Leon Caesar Calais Calcuithe Caledonians Caligula Camalodunum Cambden
Cambria Cambridge Camelford Candida Casa Candidus Canterbury Caractacus Caradoc
Carausius Carehouse Careticus Carlisle Carron Carrum Cartismandua Carus
Cassibelan Cassiterides Castinus Castor Castra Exploratorum Cataract Cattle
Ceadda Ceadwalla Ceawlin 3. Cedda Cendrythe Cenered Cenwall Cenwulf 2. Ceolfus
Ceolnoth Ceolred 2. Ceolric Ceolwulf 5. Cerdic Cerdicsford Cerne Chacea St.
Chad Chanons Secular Charges at Assizes Charles 5. Charters Chastity Cherbury
Chertsey Chester Chichester Chiltern Chipnam Choisy Christianity Christ Church,
Cant. Chrysanthius Church Cimbric Chersonese Cimerii Cippenham Cirencester
Civilis Civil War Claudia Rufina Claudian Claudius 2. Clergy Clodius Balbinus
Chlorus Constantius Cloveshoe Cnobsbury Cnute Coelestine Cogidunus Coifi Coil
Coinage Colchester Coldingham Coleman Coludesburgh Columba Comets Commodus
Commons of England Compurgators Conan 5. Congal Constans Constantine 5.
Constantius 2. Corfesgeate Cornwall Coronation Corrodies Coventry Councils
Counties Countrymen County Court Coway-stakes Crayford Creed Creeklade Creoda,
or Crida Crimes Criminal Crown Croyland Chrysanthius Cuckamsley-hill Cumbran
Cuneglasus Curescot Cutha Cuthbert Cuthbryht Cuthred 3. Cuthwulf Cwichelme 2.
Cycle Cynebald Cynebryht Cynegils Cyneheard 2. Cynoth Cynric 2. Cynwulf.
D
DAgobert Dalliance Danegelt Danes Daniel 2. Darwent David St. David's Deadly
Feuds Death Decennary Decianus Decimation Decius Defamation Degradation
Degsa-stan Deira Demetae Denulph Deomed Deorham Deposition Deprivation Derawnde
Desertion Devils-Ditch Devise of Lands Deusdedit 2. Dicul Didius Difilina
Dinoth Diocesses Dioclesian Dionotus Domitian Dorinea Dover Dower Draganus
Drinking Druids Dublin Dubritius Duduc Dulcitius Dun Dunbritton Dunmoc St.
Dunstan Dunwallo Molmutius Dunwich Durham Duty to Parents.
E
EAdbald 2. Eadbert 2. Eadbryht Eadburga Eadesbyrig Eadfrid Eadhed Eadmund
Aetheling Eadred Eadsige Eadulf Eadwig Aetheling Eadwin Eagle Ealcher Ealchstan
Ealerd Ealfert Ealfric Ealswithe Eanbald Eanbryht Eanfrid Earcombert Earcongath
Eardulf Eardwulf Earnred Earnwulf East Angles Easter East Saxons Eatta Ebba 2.
Eborius Eclipses Eddobeccus Edelwalch Edgar Edgar Aetheling 2. Edgitha 2.
Edingburgh Editha Edmund the Martyr Edmund Son to Edward the Elder Edmund Son
of King Alfred Edmund Aetheling St. Edmundsbury Edred 2. Edric Edwal ap Meyric
Edwal Ugel Edwal Ywrch Edward the Elder Edward Aetheling Edward the Martyr
Edward the Confessor Edwi Edwin 3. Edwin Aetheling Edwold Egbert 7. Egelfleda
Egelnoth Egfrid Eglesburgh Egonesham Egric Egwin Egwinna Eighth Elbodius
Election of King, V. Kings, and Sparsim. Eleutherius Elfeage 2. Elfer Elfgar
Elfin Elfleda Elfric Elfwald Elfwinna Elgiva, V. Aelgiva Elidurus Ellendune
Ellwye Elutherius Ely-Monastery Emma Emperor Eneon England Englisherie
Englishmen English-Saxons Entail Eoppa Eoric Eorpenwald Eorpwald Eowils
Ercenbryht Eric Erkenwald Ermenred Esylht Ethelard Ethelbald 2. Ethelbert 4.
Ethelbryht Ethelburgh Etheldrethe Etheldrith Etheler Ethelfleda Ethelfred
Ethelfreda Ethelfrid Ethelgar Ethelheard 2. Ethelnoth Ethelred 8. Ethelwald 2.
Ethelward Ethelwerd Ethelwin Ethelwold 2. Ethelwulf Evesham Eugenius 2. Evil
Councils Europe Eustatius Eutherius Excommuication Exeter Exmouth.
F
FAith False News Famine Farrington Fealty Fee or Feuds Fee-tayl Estate
Feologild Fergus Fernham Festidus Fidelity Fighting Finan Fines Finkley Fire
First Fruits Five Burghs Flanders Flattery Fleet Foelix Folcmote Folcstone
Foreign Tongue Forests Forfeitures Formosus Fornication Framarius France
Frank-pledges Franks Freemen Freodguald Freothwulf Frethanleage Friburg
Friesland Frisians Frithestan Frithogithe Frithwald Fugitives Fullenham
Furseus.
G
GAcon Gaini Gainsborough Galgacus Galienus Gallio Game Gavelkind Gaul Gemote
General Gentlemen Geoffrey of Monmouth Gerent Germanus Gerontius Gessoriacum
Geta Gethic Gewisses Gildas Girwy Gisa Glan-morgan Glappa 2. Glass Glastenbury
Gleni Glewancester Glotta and Bodotria God Goda Godfathers Godfred Godiva
Godmundingham Godwin Gogmagog Gordianus Gormond Gospatrick Gospel Government
Graetanleage Grand Inquest. Vid. Inquest Gratian Gratianus Gregory Griffyn
Griffyth ap Llewelin ap Sitsylt Griffyth ap Madoc St. Grimbald Grime Grisons
Grymkytel Guarinus Gueld Guendelew Gueniver Guiderac Guild Guintelin Gunhilda
Gunhildis Gurgi Gurguint Guthfrith Guthlac Guthrun Guy Gwgan Gwido Gwyn, or
Gwyr Gwyneth Gyrth
H
HAcun Hadrian Haefe Halfdene Hamtune Hardecnute Harold 4. Harwood-Forest
Hastings Hatred Heacca Headda Heads Healfange Healfden Heathens Heavens Hedda
Heddi 2. Heliogabolus Helmestan Helmham Hemeida Hengest and Horsa Hengestdune
Henwald Heofenfield Heraclitus Herefrith Hereman Heresy Herethaland Heriots
Hethfield Hiberni Higbald Higbert Hilda Hinguar and Hubba Hlothe. Vid. Troops
Hock-Wednesday Holland Homage Honorius 3. Hooc Norton Horesti Horsa. Vid.
Hengest Horses Hostages Hostilianus Houses Religious. Vid. Monasteries Howel
Howel and Meredyth Hubba Hubblestones, or Hubblestow Huda Huena Hugh Hundred
Courts Hundreds Hunferth Hungus Hunting Huntington Hussa Hyde Hye
J
JAgo and Jevaf Jago ap Edwal Janbryht Japhet Iberi Icanho Iceni Ida Idel Idols
Jerne Jerusalem Jews Iffi Igmond Ilford Iltutus Images Impostor Ina Indian
Apostles Indians Ingerlingum Ingild Ingwar Inquest (Grand) Intestates
Inundation Invasion John of Beverlie John Scotus Jointures Joseph of Arimathea
Jovian Ipswich Ireland Island Ithamar Ithancester Ivor Judges Julia Julian
Julianus Jury Justice Justin the Elder Justus Jutes
K
KEawlin. Vid. Ceawlin Kemsford Kenbryht Kened 2. Kenelm Keneswith Kenet Kenred
Kent Kentigern Kentishmen Kentwyn Kenulf Kenwal. Vid. Cenwalch Kenwulf Kings
Kingsbury King's Evil King's Household Kingsige Knights Service Knute. Vid.
Cnute Kynan. Vid. Conan Kynobelin
L
LAncaster Land's End Langoemagog Lanthorns Lashlite Lawrence Laws League
Learning Lease Lee Leeds Legancester Legion (Roman) Legions Leicester Leighton
Lent Leo 2. Leof Leofgar Leofred Leofric 2. Leofwin Leotheta Lethard Levatriae
Leutherius Lewelin 2. Liblacum Licinius (Priscus) Lideford Lifing Lightning
Limene Lindisfarne Lindisse Lindissi Litchfield Living 2. London Lords
Lord's Day Lord's-Prayer Lothaire 2. Lothebroc Lots Lucius Lucullus (Saluftius)
Ludgate Ludican Lugeanburh Lupicinus Lupus Lupus (Virius)
M
MAccuse Macrinus Maelgwyn Magnentius Maildulf Maims and Wounds Malcolm Maldon
Malgo, or Malgoclunus Mallings Malmesbury Man, the City Man, the Isle
Manchester Mancuses Mandubratius Manslaughter. Vid. Murder Marcellus (Ulpius)
Marcus Aurelius. Vid. Aurelius Marcus Margaret Marriage Marinus Marius St.
Martin Martinus, a Prefect Martinus, the Pope Martyrdom Maserfield Maxentius
Maximinian Marcus Aurelius Maximinianus Maximinus (Julius) Maximus 3. Meanwari
Medcant Medeshamsted Melgas Mellitus Members Menai Menaevia Mercevenlage Mercia
Mercy Meredyth Meredyth and Howel Merehwit Meresige Merton Merwina Midletune
Militia Milred Milton Mints Miracles Modwina Mollo Mona Monarch Monasteries
Money Monks Morchar 2. Morgant Morindus. Vid. Morvidus Morini Mortality
Morvidus Moston Mould Mouric Mulcts Murrain. Vid. Plague Murder Myranheofod
N
NAitan Nation Nazaleod Nennius St. Neot Nero Nerva Nesse-Point Newenden Nice
Nicholaus Niger (Pescenius) Nightmare Nobility Normandy Normans Northalbingia
Northampton Northern People of Britain Northumbers Northumbrian Kingdoms
North Wales Norway Norwich Nothelm Numerianus Nunnery. Vid. Monastery Nunnichia
O
OAkly in Surrey Oath of Fidelity. Vid. Fealty Odo Offa 2. Offerings at the
Altar Olaff Olanaege Old Saxony Orcades Ordeal Order Ordgar 2. Ordination of a
Bishop Ordovices Orgiva Orkeney Orotius (Paulus) Osbald Osberge Osbert Osfrid
Oskytel Osmund Osred 2. Osric 3. Ostorius Scapula Oswald and Oswie Oswald
Aetheling Oswald 3. Oswestre Oswin Oswulf Oswy Otford Outlawry Oxford
P
PAenius Posthumus Pagan Rites Pagans. Vid. Heathens Palace-Royal Palladius St.
Pancrace Church Papinian Pardon. Vid. Prerogative Paris Parish-Feasts Parker
Parliament Paschalis Pasham Pattern Paulinus St. Paul's-Church Paulus Peace of
the King Peace, or League Peadda Pecuniary Fines. Vid. Punishment Pedidan, or
Pendrid-Mouth Pelagius Pen Penda Pentarchy Pentecost-Castle Penvahel Pepin
Perennis Perjury Pertinax Pestilence Peter Peterburgh Peter Pence Petroc Philip
Philippus (Marcus Julius) Philippus (Nonnius) Phoenicians Picts Pightwin, or
Pechtwin Pinchenhale, or Finkenhale Pius (Antoninus) Plague Plautius Pledge
Plegmund Plenty Polidore Virgil Polycletus Pope Port Portlock-Bay Portsmouth
Portus Ic^ius Posentesbyrig Praesidialis Prasutagus Prayer Praedur Prerogative
Priests Priscilla Probus (M. Aurel. Valor.) Prodigies Protection Provision for
the King's Household Punishments Purgation Pusa Putta
Q
QUarrel, or Deadly Feud Queen Quenburga Quendride Quendrith Quichelme
R
RAdnor Radnorshire Raven. Vid. Banner Reculf Redburge Redwald Rees Reginald
Regni Reiderch-hoel Religion Religious Houses. Vid. Monasteries Resignation of
Bishoprics Restitutus Revenge Rhine Richard the Elder of Normandy Richbert
Ricsige Ripendune Ripon Ritheric ap Justin Ritherch and Rees Robber Robert,
Duke of Normandy Robert, a Norman Monk Rodoric, or Rodri Rodri Maur Rofcaester
Rollo the Dane Roman Affairs Empire Language, etc.
Romans Romanus Rome Romescot Rowena Rufina (Claudia) Run, or Reyn Runick
Characters Runkhorne in Cheshire Rusticus Decimius Ryal in Rutlandshire
S
Sacrilege Salaries Sale of Goods, etc. Vid. Traffic Sampson Sanctuaries
Sandwich Saragosa in Spain Sardica Sarum (Old) Saturninus (Seius) Saxon Annals
Saxon (English) Saxony Saxulph Scapula. Vid. Ostorius Sceapige Sceorstan Sceva
School Scotch Historians Scotland Scots Scriptures Sea Seals Sebba. Vid. Siger
Sebbi Sebert Secington Security Selred Sempingaham Seneca Seolefeu Sermon
Serpents Servants Sester Severn Severus Severus (Alexander) Severus (Germanus)
Seward Sexburga Shaftsbury Shaving of Crowns Sheovesham, or Secvesham Shepholme
Sheriffs Sherwood Forest Ships Shireburne Shiremotes Shropshire Sicga Sigebert
2. Sigeferth Siger and Sebba Sigeric. Vid. Syric Sihtric Silures Simony Singin
Sithicundmon Slaves Snottingaham Soldier Somerton Southampton South Saxons
South-Sh^ebury Southumoers South Wales Sparafock Spot Wulfric Stamford Standing
Army Stanmore Stealing. Vid. Theft Stephanus Stigand Stilico Stone in
Staffordshire Stone-henge Straetcluyd Strangers Strathern Streanshale Strikers
in open Court Stufe and Withgar Succession to the Crown Suetonius (Paulinus)
Sunday. Vid. Lord's Day Supposititious Birth Suretyship Sutbury in Suffolk
Swale Swanwick in Hampshire Swebryht Sweden Sweeds Sweyn 4. Swidhelme Switheard
Swithred St. Swithune Sydeman Synod Syric, or Sigeric Syward 2.
T
TAcitus (M. Claudius) Taliesse^ Tamworth in Staffordshire Tatwin
Tavistock-Abbey Taunton Taxes Temples of Idols Tenantius. Vid. Theomantius
Testament Testudo Tetricus Thaelwalle in Cheshire Thanet Island Theft Theobald
Theodore Theodoric Theodosius 2. Theodwulf Theomantius Toulouse St. Thomas
Thunore Thurkyll Thyra Tiberius Tilabury Tinmouth Tiowulfingeeaster Titulus, or
Titillus Tobias Toceter Torswick Tostige Tower of London Tradition Traffic
Trajan Transmarine Nations Transportation Traitor Treasure-trove Trebellius
Maximus. Vid. Maximus Trekingham Triades Tribute Triers Trinobantes Triumphal
Honors and Ornaments T^oops Trumbrith, or Trumbert Trumwin Trutulensis Trials
Tuda Tudric Tudwall Gloff Turkytell Turne-Island Turpilianus (Petronius)
Twelf-hindman Twi-hindman Tyrants Tithes Tythings
V
VAcancy of the Throne Valentia Valentinian Valentinus Valerianus (Pub.
Licinius) Valuation Vectius Bolanus Venedoti Venutius Veranius Verulam
Vespatian (Flavius) (Titus)
Uffa Vice-Domini Victor Victorinus Vienne Villain Villains Virgilius Virgins
Vitalian Ulfkytel University Unust Vortigern Vortimer Vortipore Urbgen, or
Urien Urbicus (Lollius) Urgeney Urych Merwyn Uscfrea Usurers Uther Pendragon
Uthred Utrecht Vulgar
W
WAda Wakes Wales Wall Wallbrook Waltham-Abbey Wall-town Wanating Warewell
Warham Warwick Watchet in Somersetshire Wax-tapers Wectij, or Wicij Wedesbury
Weland Welsh Wenbury Werfryht West-burgh West-Chester. Vid. Chester Westminster
Church and Abbey West Saxons Westwude Whalie in Lancashire Wheat Whipping
Whitby in Yorkshire Whitchurch in Hampshire Whitsand Wibbendon Wiccon Widow
Wigbryht Wigheard Wight Wightred Wigmore Wilbrode Wilfreda St. Wilfrid Wilfrid
2. William Wills (Last) Vid. Testament Wilton Wiltshire Wina. Vid. Wini
Winandermere Winchelcomb Winchester Winchester-Measure Winfrid Win^ Wip^^, or
Wippa Wir Wiregild Wiremouth Witchcraft Wite Witena-Gemote Witerne St. Withburg
Wi^hgar Withlaff Withred Wittereden Woden Wodensbeorge Wolves Woodstock in
Mercia Worcester Wounds and Maims Wulfheard Wulfhelme Wulfher 2. Wulfnoth
Wulfric. Vid. Spo^ Wulstan 3.
Y
YArrow Year Year and Day York Yric Yrling Ywrch (Edwal)
Z
ZEal.
Directions to the BINDER.
PLace the Table, beginning Least the Names, etc. between P. 150, and 151.

Place Table 2. between P. 244, and 245.

Place Table 3. at the End of the Sixth Book.

Place the Two Pedegrees of Kings immediately after it, and just before this
Index. Viz. That first, beginning with Geat.

AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE OF THE Principal Matters contained in this History.
A
ABbey. Vid. Monastery. Abbey-Lands; the form of leasing them out; which
required the Solemnity of the Common Council of the Kingdom to confirm it, Lib.
5. Page 261, 262. Abbot. The Bishop of Norwich, notwithstanding the Dissolution
of Monasteries, retains still the Title of an Abbot, l. 6. p. 54. An Abbot of
Evesham was chosen in a Great Council held at London; Id. p. 73. Seldom chosen
out of Monks of the same Abbey, Id. p. 74.
Aberfraw, now a small Village in the Isle of Anglesey, but anciently the chief
Seat of the Princes of Gwyneth, or North Wales, l. 5. p. 279. Tribute due from
the King hereof to the King of London, l. 6. p. 3. Destroyed by the Irishmen
who landed in Anglesey, Id. p. 6.
Abingdon the Abbey, when and by whom founded; at first called Sheovesham, l.
4. p. 196. Or Secvesham, Id. p. 224. Burnt by the Danes, rebuilt by Ordgar, and
had great Endowments, Ibid. Anciently a Royal Seat of the Kings of Mercia, l.
4. p. 224.
Abjuring the Realm; the Antiquity of this Law for such great Offenses to which
the King's Pardon did not, in Edward the Confessor's time, absolutely extend,
l. 6. p. 103. Acca succeeds Wilfrid in the Bishopric of Hagulstade, l. 4. p.
215. Is driven out, as supposed, by the King of Northumberland, Id. p. 221. His
Death. Had in great Reverence both before and after it, for his Sanctity, etc.
l. 4. p. 223, 224.
Achaius, King of Scots, having aided Hungus King of the Picts with Ten
thousand men, against one Athelstan, he routed the English, and killed
Athelstan; but this is looked upon as a mere idle Monkish Fancy, l. 5. p. 250.
Adda, King of Bernicia, the Eldest Son of Ida, l. 3. p. 143. His Death. Id. p.
144. Vid. p. 147, 148.
Adelphius, Bishop of the City of Colchester, is sent to the Council of Arles
in Gallia; and for what, l. 2. p. 88. Adian, or Aedan, or Aegthan, coming
against Ethelfrid, is routed, l. 4. p. 159. Admurum, that is, Wall-Town, near
the Picts Wall, l. 4. p. 184. Adrian, the Abbot of Canterbury, l. 4. p. 165,
194. The Pope; when he departed this life, l. 4. p. 238. Vid. Hadrian.
Adulf, or Eadulf, Abbot of Medeshamstead, enriched that Monastery with diverse
Lands that he added to it, l. 6. p. 5. Succeeds Oswald in the Archbishopric of
York, Ibid. His Decease, l. 6. p. 29.
Adultery. King Withred's Law against it, under a Punishment; and what a
Military, what a Countryman was to pay, that was guilty of it, l. 4. p. 211.
Alfred's Law increased the Fine, according to the Estate or Quality of him
against whom the Offense was committed, l. 5. p. 293. Vid. Fornification.
Aeadsige, after the death of Ethelnoth, made Archbishop of Canterbury, l. 6.
p. 65. Went to Rome to obtain his Pall, Id. p. 66. Crowned Edward the
Confessor, and made the first Sermon that is to be found at any King's
Coronation, Id. p. 70. Resigned his Archbishopric by reason of his great
Infirmities, Id. p. 72. Resumes it, p. 74. His Death, p. 75.
Aealmond, Father of King Egbert; when he began to reign in Kent. The Annals
mistaken as to his ever being King thereof. l. 4. p. 233. Aealhstan, Bishop of
London, his decease, l. 5. p. 303. Vid. Alstan. Aedan Vradog, (i. e. the
Treacherous) a Prince of the North parts of Britain, l. 3. p. 146. Aedan ap
Blegored, or Bledhemeyd, an absolute Stranger to the British Blood Royal, got
the Principality of North Wales, and held it about twelve years; but whether it
was by Election or Force, uncertain, l. 6. p. 30, 31. Is killed with his four
Sons, in a bloody Fight by Lhewelyn ap ^itsylt, Id. p. 40.
Aedric made Ealdorman over all the Kingdom of Mercia. Married the King's
Daughter, His Treachery, l. 6. p. 32. By that he kept the King's Army from
falling (...) D^n^s, when it had h^mmed the^ in, and were just ready to give
them Battle, Id. p. 34. Si^named Streon, Id. p. 36. Treacherously in his own
Chamber caused to be stai^ (...) Danes, of great Riches and Power in the
Northern parts; and why, Id. p. 40. His going over to King Cnute with forty of
the Royal Navy, and submitting to him, l. 6. p. 41, 45. The many other
perfidious Tricks he plays, Id. p. 45, 46, 47. Traitorously murders his
Natural King and Lord, Edmund Ironside* and sal^ting Cnute first sole King of
all England, he met with a just reward, if true, Id. p. 48, 49. His death
occasioned by his upbraiding King Cnute with his Services, telling him how that
for his sake he had b^trayed one King, and made away another, Id. p. 50.
Aegelbyer^h, or Agebert, after Byrin^s, took upon him the Bishopric of the
West Saxons, l. 4. p. ^82, 192. Vid. Agelbert. Aegelric, a Monk of
Christ-Church, consecrated Bishop of Chichester, l. 6. p. 88. Aelfeage. Vid.
Elfeage. Aelfer. Vid. Elfer. Aelfgar. Vid. Elfgar. Aelfleda, Wife to King
Edmund the Elder, the Daughter of Earl Aethelune; her numerous Children, and
how educated and bestowed, l. 5. p. 324, 327. Aelfred. Vid. Alfred. Aelfric,
upon the death of his Father Aelfer, was Ealdorman of Mercia, and two years
after banished the Land, l. 6. p. 21. Vid. Ealfric. Aelfric, Bishop of
Winchester, elected Archbishop of Canterbury by King Ethelred and all his Wise
Men, l. 6. p. 25. Went to Rome to obtain his Pall, Id. p. 26. Deceased, and who
succeeded him, Id. p. 31.
Aelfric succeeds Wulstan in the Archbishopric, and by whom consecrated, l. 6.
p. 53. His accusing Bishop Living and Earl Godwin of persuading Harold to use
Prince Alfred so cruelly as he did, Id p. 67. His decease, Id. p. 79.
Aelfweard, Son of King Edward the Elder, died at Oxnaford not long after his
Father; who his Mother, and what his Character, l. 5. p. 324, 327. Aelfwinna.
Vid. Elfwinna. Aelfwold drove Eardulf out of the Kingdom of the Northumbers,
and reigned two years in his stead, l. 5. p. 249. His Death. But his Successor
somewhat doubtful. Ibid.
Aelgiva, Queen, brought to bed of Prince Edgar, and died the year after, l. 5.
p. 344. Aelgiva, married to King Ethelred, l. 6. p. 29. (...) forced to retire
beyond (...) her Brother of Normandy, for safety, Id. p. 38.
Aelgiva, a Hampshire Lady, Daughter of Aelfhelm the Ealdorman, one of Cnute's
Wives, bore him Harold, whom before his death his Father appointed to be King
of England after him, l. 6. ^ 56. But the Story seems a little improbable; for
it is said she was barren, and therefore ^^eten^ing a Big-Belly, imposed on the
credulous King a Supposititious Birth, viz. the Son of a Shoemaker, then newly
born, Id. p. 61. In the English-Saxon is the same with Emma in the
Norman-French Dialect; the Widow of King Cnute, who was banished England by
King Harold, Id. p. 64.
Aella, with his three Sons, slew a great many of the Britains, and possessed
themselves of all the Seacoast of Sussex, l. 3. p. 132. He and Ciffa receiving
fresh Supplies, besieged An^redesceaster, and ^ook it by force, and put all the
Britains to the Sword, Ibid. His Death, Id. p. 136. Is said to be the first
that ruled all over, Britain, l. 5. p. 254.
Aella, King of Deira, l. 3. p. 147. A general Name given to the Kings of
Deira, l. 4. p. 152. His Death, l. 3. p. 148.
Aella, a Tyrant and Usurper, made King of that Country by the Northumbers,
who had expelled Osbryht newly before, who was their lawful King, l. 5. p. 267.
Aelmer (an Archdeacon) betrays Canterbury to the Danes, l. 6. p. 35, 36.
Aemilianus, Emperor of Rome but three Months, l. 2. p. 81. Aeneon. Vid. Eneon.
Aescasdune, now called Aston, near Wallingford, l. 4. p. 182, 188. l. 5. p.
275. Aescwin reigns over the West Saxons, is supposed to be the next of the
Royal Line, l. 4. p. 194. Son of Cenwulf; the Battle he fought, and with whom.
His Death, Id. 195, 198.
Aescwin, Bishop of the East Saxons; his Death, and who succeeded him, l. 4. p.
196. Aesk (also called Oisk, and Osric), Hengest's Son, began his Reign when,
and how long he continued it, l. 3. p. 132. His Death, Id. p. 136.
Aestel, the signification of it, uncertain, l. 5. p. 304. Aethelbald, King of
the Mercians, held it forty years, l. 4. p. 217. His Pedigree, Ibid. Took
Somerton; and was that great and powerful King, as not to be ashamed of
committing Uncleanness even with Consecrated Nuns, Id. p. 221, 222. Made all
the rest of the Provinces of England, and their Kings, subject to him as far as
the Humber, l. 4. p. 222. Wasted the Country of Northumberland, and carried
away with him great Spoil, Id. p. 223. His War with Cuthred King of the
West Saxons, and the various success of it, Id. p. 224, 226. Slain at
Seccandune in Warwickshire, and buried in Ripendune Abbey, which he himself had
founded, Id. p. 227.
Aethelbald (Son of Ethelwulf King of the West Saxons) and his Father made a
greater slaughter of the Danes than ever was done before, l. 5. p. 261. Forms a
most wicked Conspiracy in the West of England against his Father, upon the
account of his new Wife, and so gets the Kingdom divided betwixt his Father and
him, which before was united, l. 5. p. 263, 264. Vid. Ethelbald.
Aethelbryght. Vid. Ethelbert. Aethelburga returns by Sea into Kent with
Paulinus the Archbishop, and is received with great Honor by King Eadbald, and
Archbishop Honorius, l. 4. p. 176. Destroys the Castle of Taunton-Dean in
Somersetshire, and for what reason, Id. p. 218.
Aethelfleda, King Alfred's Eldest Daughter, married to Eadred, or Ethelred,
King of the Mercians, l. 5. p. 311. Vid. Ethelfleda. Aethelgiva. Vid. Algiva.
Aethelheard the Bishop dies at York, l. 4. p. 232. Vid. Ethelheard. Aethelred.
Vid. Ethelred. Aethelswithe, Queen, Sister to King Alfred, and Widow of Burhred
King of Mercia, dies in her Journey to Rome, l. 5. p. 298. Aethelwald, Edward
the Elder's Cousin-German, rebels against him, and going over to the Danish
Army, they joyfully received him for their King. He takes a Nun out of the
Monastery of Winburn, and marries her; but going over to France to raise new
Recruits, King Edward seizes her, and brings her back again, l. 5. p. 312.
Returns from France, and with a mighty Army coming into Kent, gets much Plunder
there, and then ravages over other Countries, but at last is killed in fight,
Id. p. 313.
Aethelwald, Abbot, received the Bishopric of Winchester, and is consecrated.
His many good Works, and what Monasteries he repaired and built, l. 6. p. 4,
21. Was Father of the Monks. His Decease, Id. p. 21.
Aethelwulf. Vid. Ethelwulf. Aetius, somewhat recovered the Credit of the Roman
Empire in Gaul, l. 2. p. 106. Received doleful Latters from the Britains,
imploring Assistance, l. 3. p. 115. Expecting a War with Attila King of the
Huns, Ibid.
Agatha, the Queen of Hungary's Sister, is married to Prince Edward, Son to
Edmund Ironside, l. 6. p. 49. Agatho the Pope; his Bull to the Abbey of
Medeshamstead supposed to be forg^d long after by the Monks of Peterburgh, l.
4. p. 200. Agelbert, Bishop of Kent, but turned out, and wherefore, l. 4. p.
181, 182. Left King Cenwalch, and took the Bishopric of Paris, l. 4. p. 182,
188. Vid. Aegelbyerth.
Agricola; sent into Britain in Vespasian the Emperor's time, as his
Lieutenant. Almost cut's off the whole Nation of the Ordovices. Going with his
men to subdue Mona, the Island sues for Peace, and delivers ^t -self up to him.
Increases his Fame by his Successes and Moderation, l. 2. p. 55. His wise
Conduct both in his own Family, and in Britain, Id. p. 56. Brought here in
fashion the Roman Language, Garb, and Gown. No Castle of his ever taken by
force. Rewarded with Triumphal Ornaments. His farther Conquests. Places
Garrisons in that part of Britain that lay over against Ireland, Id. p. 57.
Carries on the War both by Sea and Land, and overcomes the Caledonians, Id. p.
58, 59. Which is confessed to be more owing to his own Conduct, than the
Courage of the Roman Soldiers, Id. p. 59. His Speech to his Soldiers; and after
what manner he ordered the Battle against Galgacus, Id. p. 61. Overthrows and
puts the Britains to flight. His Ruin secretly designed by his Prince, Id. p.
62, 63. How at his Return he is received at Rome. Accused to Domitian, but
acquitted, Oft^n near his Ruin as well by his own Virtues, as by the Vices of
others. The Proconsulship of Africa seemingly offered to him, void by the Death
of Civica, Id. p. 64. His Death, whether by Poison or otherwise, uncertain. He
carried the Roman Eagles to the utmost Bounds of Britain, Id. p. 65. He was the
Son of Severian, a Pelagian Bishop, Id. p. 107.
Agrippina, presiding over the Roman Ensigns, l. 2. p. 44. Aidan, a Scotch
Bishop, desires Edwin to remember his Vision and Promise, and become a
Christian, l. 4. p. 173. Is sent to Oswald (to ground his Subjects in the
Christian Faith) from the Mon^stery of the Isle of Hye, Id. 177, 178. His
Character; being an excellent Pattern for succeeding Bishops and Cl^rgymen to
follow, Id. p. 178. His Death, Id. p. 182, 183.
Ailesbury in Buckinghamshire, anciently called Eglesbyrig, l. 5. p. 321.
Ailmer, Earl of Cornwall, Founder of the Abbey of Cerne in Dorsetshir^, l. 6. p.
22. Ailnoth. Vid. Ethelnoth. Ailwin the Ealdorman, Founder of the Abbey of
Ramsey, l. 6. p. 6, 7. Akmanceaster, an Ancient City, called Bathan by the
Inhabitants, l. 6. p. 7. Alan, King of Armorica, receives Cadwallader, l. 4. p.
190. Alan, Earl of Britain, so great an Assistant to William Duke of Normandy,
that after his Conquest he made him Earl of Richmond, and had great part of the
Country thereabouts given him, l. 6. p. 109. Alaric, King of the Goths, takes
Rome, l. 2 p. 104. St. Alban, an Account of his Martyrdom, l. 2. p. 85, 86. The
Miracles thereat, Ibid. p. 107, 108. Is privately buried, that Age being
ignorant of the virtue of keeping Saints Relics, Id. p. 86. Offa is warned by
an Angel to remove his Relics to a more Noble Shrine: He builds a new Church
and Monastery in honor of him, who was after canonized, l. 4. p. 237. As he
was the first Martyr of England, so the Abbot thereof ought to be the first in
Dignity of all the Abbots in England, Ib. p. 238. Pope Honorius ratified the
Privileges formerly granted, and gave to this Abbot and his Successors
Episcopal Rights, together with the Habit, etc. Jd. Ib. St. Albans anciently
called Verulam, where a Great Council was held by King Offa, Id. p. 239.
Albania (now Scotland) Northwest of the Mountains of Braid-Albain, and its
extent, l. 2. p. 83, 98. Albert, ordained Archbishop of York, l. 4. p. 229.
Receives his Pall for the Archbishopric from Pope Adrian, Id. p. 230.
Albinus (Chlodius) made Lieutenant of Britain by Commodus the Emperor, who
would have created him Caesar, and permitted him in his presence to wear the
Purple Robe; but he refused them then, yet afterward assumed the Titles and
Honor, and died in asserting his Right to the Imperial Purple, l. 2. p. 71,
73. Is dismissed from the Government of Britain, but retained it under both
Pertinax and Didius Julianus. Takes upon him the Title of Caesar under Severus;
had Statues erected, and Money coined with his Image. Forced the Messengers
(sent by the Emperor to dispatch him) by Torture to confess the Design, Id. p.
72. But is obliged at last to run himself through with his own Sword, Id. p. 73.
Alburge, Sister to King Egbert, Foundress of a Benedictine Nunnery at Wilton,
l. 5. p. 248. Alcluid, now called Dunbritton in Scotland, l. 2. p. 101. Is
destroyed by the Danes, l. 5. p. 277.
Alchmuid (Son to Ethelred, King of Northumberland) being taken by the Guards
of King Eardulf, is slain by his Command, l. 4. p. 243. Alchmund, Bishop of
Hagulstade, his Decease, l. 4. p. 232. Alcuin (or Albinus) writes an Epistle,
wherein he proves Image Worship utterly unlawful, l. 4. p. 237. At his
Intercession the Northumbrian Kingdom is spared from Ruin, Id. p. 240. Goes
into France, and is much in favor with Charles the Great, whom he taught the
Liberal Arts, and by his means the University of Paris is erected. His Death,
and Character, Id. p. 244.
Aldhelm, made Bishop of Shireburn, and by whom, l. 4. p. 213. A Catalogue of
his Works given us by Bid, Id. p. 213, 214. His Death, and Character, Id. p.
214.
Aldred, Bishop of Worcester, by his Intercession makes Sweyn's Peace with
Edward the Confessor, and goes with Bishop Hereman to the great Synod assembled
at Rome, l. 6. p. 75. Is sent Ambassador to the Emperor with Noble Presents, to
prevail with him to send Ambassadors into Hungary to bring back Prince Edward,
the King's Cousin, Son of King Edmund Ironside, into England, Id. p. 86. His
rebuilding the Church of St. Peter in Gloucester, and going on Pilgrimage
through Hungary to Jerusalem, Id. p. 88. Is made Archbishop of York, and goes
with Earl Tostige to Rome, where he receives his Pall, Ibid. Crowns Harold,
King of England, Id. p. 105.
Aldune, Bishop of Lindisfarne, removes the Body of St. Cuthbert from Chester
(after a hundred years lying there) to Durham, and there builds a small Church,
dedicating it to him, l. 6. p. 26. Alehouses, how anciently these have been
here, with the Consequences thereof, viz. quarrelling, and breaking of the
Peace, l. 6. p. 43. Alemond, Father to Edmund the King and Martyr, whom he had
by his Wife Cywara, in old Saxony, l. 5. p. 265. Alfleda, Daughter to Ceolwulf
King of the Mercians, is married to Wimond, Son of Withlaff an Ealdorman there,
who is afterward made King by the Consent of the People, l. 5. p. 253. Alfred,
King of Northumberland, would not alter the Judgment against Bishop Wilfrid,
for any Letter from the Pope, l. 4. p. 207. Deceases at Driffield, and on his
Deathbed repents of what he had done toward the Bishop, Id. p. 212, 213.
Alfred, King of the West Saxons, was the fifth Son of King Aethelwulf, Id. p.
258. When born of Osberge his Mother at Wantige in Berkshire, l. 5. p. 261. Is
anointed King by the Pope, as a Prophetical Presage of his future Royal
Dignity, Id. p. 262, 265. Married to Alswitha, the Daughter of Aethelred the
Ealdorman of the Gaini, l. 5. p. 269. He with his Brother Ethelred made a great
slaughter of the Danes, Id. p. 275. By the general Consent of the whole Kingdom
is advanced to the Throne, Id. p. 276. Fights with the Danes, and the various
success of his Fortune, Ibid. Fights at Sea against seven of their Ships, and
takes one, the rest escaping, Id. p. 277. Is forced to make Peace with them,
and what Hostages they give him to depart the Kingdom; but upon breach of Oath
he puts them all to death. The Danes make another Peace with him, but did not
long observed it, Id. p. 278. Leads an uneasy Life upon their account, being
forced to hide, and lurk among the Woody parts of Somersetshire, Id. p. 280.
His excessive Charity to a poor man in the midst of his own Extremity, Id. p.
280, 281. Goes into the Danish Army in the habit of a Country Fiddler,
discovers their weakness, and by that means obtain a signal Victory over them,
Id. p. 282. Delivers the Kingdom of the East Angles up to Guthrune, and the
League made between them, setting out the Extent of each other's Territories,
Id. p. 283, 284. The Subjection or Dependence the Danes showed to this King, by
their consenting to the Laws made in a Common Council of the Kingdom, Id. p.
285. Fights against four Danish Pyrate-ships, takes two, the other two
surrender, Id. p. 285, 286. Pope Martinus sends some of the Wood of our Lord's
Cross to him; and in return he sends to Rome the Alms he had vowed, Id. p. 286.
Setting upon the Danish Pirates with his Fleet, takes them all with great
Spoils, and kills most of their men; but returning home, and meeting with
another Fleet of them, they prove too hard for him, Id. p. 286, 287. Takes the
City of London from the Danes, (who had kept it long in their Possession) and
repairs it; and all the English as well as the West Saxons come under his.
Subjection, Id. p. 288. His first founding of Schools at Oxford, and making it
an University, and the quarrel that happened upon it between the old Scholars
and Grimbald the Monk, Ib. p. 289. The Alms of this King and the West Saxons
sent to Rome by Ethelelm the Ealdorman, Id. p. 291. Repairs his Cities and
Castles, and builds others in the most necessary places of the Kingdom, and
minds the Political Affairs thereof, dividing England into Counties, and those
into Hundreds and Tythings, together with his Civil Economy of Judges and
Sheriffs, insomuch that no Robberies durst be committed on the Highways, Ibid.
His Laws Civil and Ecclesiastical, when made, and in what Great Council, l. 5.
p. 291, 292, 293, 294, 295, 296, 297. Builds two Monasteries, the one for men
at Athelney in Somersetshire, the other for Nuns at Shaftsbury, where Algiva
his Daughter was Abbess, Id. p. 298. Overcomes Hastings the Danish Commander,
who was forced to surrender, and accept of Conditions of Peace, Id. p. 299,
300. Fights the Danes near Fernham, etc. and puts them to flight, recovering
great Prey, Id. p. 300, 301. Builds diverse Galleys after a new Model, such as
he thought more advantageous, Id. p. 302. His Death, Burial, Character, and
Devotion, Id. p. 304, 305, 306, 307. His Translation of several Books into the
English-Saxon Tongue, Id. p. 304. Builds diverse Houses with great Magnificence.
His division of the Hours both by Night and day, before Clocks were known. The
first Inventer of Lanthorns in England, Id. p. 305. The Bishops and Priests who
assisted him in his Learning, and in founding the University of Oxford, Id. p.
306. The several Kings of Wales that sought his Protection, and submitted to
him. His wonderful Bounty, Generosity, and Justice to his People, Id. p. 306,
307, 308. His Last Will and Testament, Id. p. 308, 309, 310. His Issue, Id. p.
310, 311. To what place the Bones of this King were r^moved by his Son, King
Edward the Elder, Id. p. 312.
Alfred (Son to King Ethelred) supposed to be Grandfather to Ethelwerd, called
Quaestor the Historian, l. 5. p. 276. Alfred, some considerable Person, (with
the factious men of his Party) conspires against Athelstan's coming to the
Crown, whereby he forfeited his Lands, which the King confer^'d on the Church
of Malmesbury. He is sent to Rome to purge himself of this Treason, and dies
there, l. 5. p. 329, 331. Alfred, and Edward his Brother, (Sons to King
Ethelred) Cnute agreed with Robert Duke of Normandy, their Uncle, that, they
should peaceably enjoy one half of the Kingdom during his life; though they
never did, but continued still in Exile, l. 6. p. 54. The most treacherou^ and
cruel treatment of this Prince and his Followers by King Harold, (through
Godwin's Inst^gations), who caused his eyes to be put out, so that he died soon
after, Id. p. 62, 63. Earl Godwin accused by Edward the Confessor in the Great
Council, of being the cause of this Prince's Murder, Id. p. 83.
Alfweard, or Aelfweard, Son of King Edward the Elder, deceased at Oxnaford not
long after his Father. His Mother was Aelfleda the Daughter of Earl Aethelem.
His Character, l. 5. p. 324, 327. Alfwin, the Bishop, deceases at Sutbury in
Suffolk, and is buried at Dunwich, l. 4. p. 242. Alfwold, the Son of Oswulf,
takes the Kingdom of the Northumbers, Ethelred being expelled the Land, l. 4.
p. 231. Sends to Rome to demand the Pall for Eanbald, Archbishop of York, Id.
p. 232. Is slain by Sicga, one of his chief Noblemen, by treachery at
Cilceaster, near the Picts-Wall, and where buried. His Character, Id. 231, 236.
Algithe, King Harold's second Wife, Widow ^f Griffyth ap Lhewelyn, King of
Nort-Wales, l. 6. p. 114. Algiva, or Aethelgiva, King Alfred's Daughter, Abbess
of Shaftsbury, which Monastery her Father built, l. 5. p. 298, 307, 311.
Alhred, King of Northumberland, when he began (and how he came) to reign: He
was of the Offspring of Ida, l. 4. p. 299. Is expelled by the Northumbrians,
who chose Ethelred the Son of Moll for their King, Id. p. 230, 236.
Alred the Ealdorman, who slew King Ethelred, killed by one Thormond, l. 4. p.
242. Alienation of Lands by Bishops, etc. committed to their trust, in Fee, or
for longer than one Life, without the Consent of the House, forbidden by the
Seventh Canon of the Synod at Calcuith, l. 5. p. 251. Alkuith, a City in
Scotland, delivered up to Eadbert King of Northumberland, l. 4. p. 227, 228.
Allectus slays Carausius by Treachery in Britain, and for three years usurped
the Empire. Encountered by Asclepiodotus, was overcome and slain with little
loss to the Romans, l. 2. p. 84. Allegiance, if due by Birth in the Saxon
times, or not till a man had actually performed his Homage, or sworn Fealty to
the King, l. 6. p. 83. Alms, or Peter Pence of King Alfred, how rewarded, l. 5.
p. 281. Alfred sends the Alms he had vowed to Rome, and other Alms into India,
Id. p. 286, 291, 298.
Alrich, King of Kent; why neither He nor his Noblemen would be at the Council
of Calcuith, l. 4. p. 235. Son to Withred, reigned 34 years, dies and in him
the Race of Hengest ended, Id. p. 238.
Alric, the Son of Eadbert, slain in the Battle of Whalie in Lancashire, l. 4.
p. 241. Alstan, or Aealhstan, Bishop of Shireburne; by the Wisdom of this
Bishop, and St. Swithune Bishop of Winchester, Ethelwulf was enabled to support
the Calamities the Kingdom suffered by the frequent Irruptions of the Danes, l.
5. p. 266, 267. After he had held the Sea fifty years, died, and was buried in
the Town, l. 5. p. 268. Alswithe, King Alfred's Consort. Vid. Ealswithe.
Alton in Hampshire, anciently supposed to be called Aetheling-gadene, l. 6. p.
28. Alwin, Bishop of Winchester, reported to have been too familiar with Queen
Emma, and committed to Prison upon that Accusation, l. 6. p. 79. Alwold, Bishop
of London, (before Abbot of Evesham) being unable to perform his Episcopal
Function, would have retired to his old Monastery; but the Monks being against
it, he resented it so ill, that he goes to the Abbey of Ramsey, with all his
Books and other Ornaments, which he bestowed on that Abbey, though formerly
they had been conferred on the other, and soon after dies, l. 6. p. 73.
Alypius, a Heathen Lieutenant of Britain, l. 2. p. 90. Ambresburg, or
Ambresburi, a Town that had some relation to Ambrosius, l. 3. p. 131. A
Monastery in Wiltshire; to whom it was granted by King Alfred, l. 5. p. 307. A
great Synod or Council held there, l. 6. p. 17. A Nunnery there built by
Ethelfreda, Id. p. 20.
Ambrosius. Vid. Aurelius. Amiens in Picardy, anciently called Embenum, l. 5.
p. 286. Ammianus Marcellinus, the first Roman Author that mentions the Scots,
l. 2. p. 91. Anarawd, the Eldest Son of Rodoric the Great, when he began his
Reign over North Wales, l. 5. p. 280. Makes War upon his Brother Cadelh, Prince
of South Wales, and destroys his Countries, Id. p. 299. Submits himself and all
his Subjects to King Alfred's Dominion, Id. p. 306, 307. His Decease and Issue,
Id. p. 316. Pitying the distressed condition of the Northern Britains, gave
them great part of Cheshire to dwell in, if they could beat out the Saxons
thence, Id. p. 317. After a bloody Fight with the Saxons, obtains a complete
Victory over them, Ibid.
Andate, the Goddess of Victory among the Britains, l. 2. p. 48. Andover, a
Town not far from Winchester in Hampshire, l. 6. p. 10. Anciently called
Andefer, Id. p. 25. Andragatius, Maximus his General, kills the Emperor Gratian
near the Bridge of Singidunum, and establishes his Master in his usurped
Empire, l. 2. p. 95. And hearing of the ill news of Maximus, casts himself
headlong out of a Ship, being then at Sea, and so drowns himself, Id. p. 96.
Andredswood in Kent and Sussex, is in length from East to West at least One
hundred and twenty Miles, and in breadth Thirty, containing all that which is
called the Wild of Kent, l. 5. p. 299. St. Andrew's Church at Rochester built
by Ethelbert King of Kent, l. 4. p. 160. Angild, the Forfeiture of the whole
value of a man's Head, and that Hand which stole was to be cut off, unless
redeemed, l. 5. p. 297. Angles, supposed to be derived from the Ancient Cimbri,
l. 3. p. 123. Anglesey, anciently called Mona, l. 2. p. 46. and Manige, l. 6.
p. 28. The whole Isle subdued by Godfred the Son of Harold the Dane, Id. p. 7,
20. Destroyed by the Danes, Id. p. 23. And by King Ethelred's Fleet, Id. p. 28.
They cast off Meredyth, and receive Edwal ap Meyric for their Prince, Id. p. 24.
Anglia Sacra, published by the Learned Mr. Wharton, l. 4. p. 166. Anlaff, Son
of Syhtric, King of Northumberland, flies into Ireland, l. 5. p. 332. Supposed
the Son of Syhtric. His getting into Athelstan's Camp in the disguise of a
Musician, and the Observations he made there, Id. p. 335. His ravaging and
wasting the Countries wherever he came; the Battle he had with King Edmund,
and the Agreement between them both at last. His marrying Alditha, the Daughter
of Earl Orme, Id. p. 343. Called Olaf, a Dane and Norwegian by Extract, who had
been expelled (in the time of King Athelstan) the Kingdom of Northumberland;
but being some time after recalled by those Rebels, he was again expelled by
King Edmund, who added that Country to his own Dominions, Id. p. 343, 344.
Returns again in King Edred's time, and with joy is restored to his Kingdom by
the People; three years after they expel him a third time, and set up Eric for
their King, Id. p. 350. Another of this Name (Son to the King of Dublin) comes
with a great Fleet into Yorkshire or Lincolnshire, and lands; but he is
miserably beaten by King Athelstan, Id. p. 334, 335.
Anlaff (or Unlaff) King of Norway, the Ravages he commits, and where, l. 6. p.
24, 25. Is brought with great honor to King Ethelred. After Baptism he
returned into his own Country, Id. p. 25.
Anna, King of the East Angles, enriches Cnobsbury Monastery with Noble
Buildings and Revenues, l. 4. p. 180. Is slain in fight by King Penda, together
with his whole Army, Id. p. 185. His youngest Son Erkenwald was made Bishop of
London, Id. p. 196.
Annals Saxon, first collected and written in diverse Monasteries of England, l.
4. p. 151. The Cottonian Copy of them, in the Form we now have them, was wrote
after the Conquest, l. 6. p. 56.
Antenor with his Trojans joining Brute, their Expedition, and the Accidents
that befell them, l. 1. p. 9. Anwulf, Son of Baldwin, Earl of Flanders, sent
Ambassador from Hugh King of the French, to King Athelstan, to demand his
Sister in Marriage, l. 5. p. 339. Aper kills Numerianus, and is killed by
Dioclesian, l. 2. p. 83. Appeals, none to the King in Suits, unless Justice
cannot otherwise be had, l. 6. p. 13. Appledore, anciently called Apuldre, or
Apultre, in Kent, l. 5. p. 299, 300. Arbogastes, General to Eugenius, sets him
up in the Empire of the West against Valentinian the Second; but his Master
being overcome by Theodosius, and put to death, he soon after made himself
away, l. 2. p. 97. Arcadius, Emperor of the East, Eldest Son to Theodosius, Id.
ib. Archbishop, its Title not known here in the time of Lucius, l. 2. p. 69.
His ancient Power, as Governor of the Church of England, l. 2. p. 210. None but
Monks made Archbishops of Canterbury, l. 5. p. 333. Brythelme resigns at the
Command of the King and whole Nation, l. 6. p. 2. When the Churches of Wales
first owned the Archbishop of Canterbury's Superiority, l. 6. p. 21.
Archenfield in Herefordshire, anciently called Yrcingafield, l. 5. p. 319.
Archigallo, for his Tyranny is deposed by his Nobles, but restored to it by the
kind Artifice of his Brother, l. 1. p. 14. Arch-pyrate, anciently did not
signify a Robber, but one skilled in Sea-Affairs, or a Seaman; derived from
Pyra, which in the Attick Tongue was as much as Craft, or Art, l. 6. p. 9.
Arderydd, a Battle fought there, on the Borders of Scotland, l. 3. p. 146.
Areans, removed by Theodosius from their stations, but who these were is
unknown, l. 2. p. 93. Ariminum, the Council called there by Constantius, l. 2.
p. 89. Our Bishops sent to it, and what was done there, Id. p. 90.
Arles in Gallia, the Council there, when held, and what British Bishops were
sent to it, l. 2. p. 88. Is made the Imperial Seat of Constantine, and called
Constantia; it was besieged by Gerontius, but he was hindered from taking it,
l. 2. p. 103.
Armorica, now Britain in France, l. 1. p. 13. l. 5. p. 287. A Fleet prepared
for the Armorican War, l. 2. p. 25. The people there refuse to accept Charles
King of the Almans for their King, l. 5. p. 287.
Armor, whence arose the Custom of hanging up the Armor of Great Men in
Churches, as Offerings made to God for the Honor, they had gained to
themselves, or Benefit to their Country, through his Assistance and Blessing,
l. 6. p. 57. Army, a Lawful one raised by the King for the Defense of the
Nation, called anciently by the name of Fyrd, l. 6. p. 60. Arnulf the Emperor,
with the Assistance of the French, Saxon, and Bavarian Horse, put the Danish
Foot to flight, l. 5. p. 298. Arnwy, Abbot of Burgh, resigns his Dignity by
reason of his ill state of health, and with the King's License, and the Consent
of the Monks, confers it upon another Monk of that Abbey, l. 6. p. 84. Arrian
Heresy, when it first infested Britain, l. 2. p. 106. Arthur, what he was King
of, who was his Father; and the many considerable Victories he gained over the
Saxons; and when he carried the Picture of Christ's Cross, and of the Virgin
Mary, on his back, l. 3. p. 134, 135. He besieges Glastenbury, and for what
reason, Id. Ib. Commands in Person at the great Battle of Badon Hill, which is
said to be the twelfth Battle he had fought with them, Id. p. 136. He began his
Reign over the Britains in the tenth year of King Cerdic, Id. p. 137.
Objections against his ever being a King in Britain, answered. His Death, but
the manner uncertain; his Burial at Glastenbury. His Tomb found about the end
of the Reign of Henry the Second, and the many Fables the Britains invented of
him, Id. p. 136, 137, 138.
Arviragus, doubtful whether any such person; but if there was, he lived in the
Reign of Domitian, l. 2. p. 56. Under his Conduct the Britains receive fresh
Strength and Courage, Id. p. 65. Is supposed to have deceased toward the end
of Domitian's Reign, Id. p. 66.
Arwald, King of the Isle of Wight, his two Sons executed by the Order of
Ceadwalla, but were first made Christians by Baptism, by Abbot Reodford, l. 4.
p. 203. Arwan, a River, where uncertain; but several Conjectures about it, l.
6. p. 46. Asaph, Scholar to Kentigern, and his Successor in the Sea of Ellwye
in North Wales, now from him called St. Asaph, l. 3. p. 149. Asclepiodotus,
Prefect to Constantius, his Slaughter of the Franks, and Victory over London,
l. 2. p. 84, 85. Ashdown in Essex, called in the Saxon times Assandum, l. 6. p.
46, 47. Cnute builds a Church here, to pray for the Souls that were slain in
the Battle he had fought there with Edmund Ironside; he consecrates, and
bestows it, Id. p. 51.
Assault upon any one, the Punishment of it by King Alfred's Law, l. 5. p. 292,
295. Asser, Bishop of Shireburne, his Decease, l. 5. p. 286, 315.
Assize-charges, the Antiquity of them, l. 6. p. 13. Asterius, Bishop of Genova,
ordains Byrinus an Italian, l. 4. p. 179. Ataulphus takes Toulouse sometime
after the Death of Alaric, l. 2. p. 104. Athelgiva, Mistress or Wife to King
Edwi (for it is variously reported), the story of her, l. 5. p. 353. The
Revenge that was taken on her by Odo, Archbishop of Canterbury. Her being sent
into Ireland from the King; with her Return and Death, Id. p. 354.
Athelm, Archbishop of Canterbury, performed the Office of Athelstan's
Coronation: His Death, l. 5. p. 329. Athelney, in Somersetshire, anciently
called Aetheling-gaige, l. 5. p. 282, 298. That is, the Isle of Nobles, where
Alfred had lain concealed, Id. p. 298. A Monastery built there by King Alfred
for Monks of diverse Nations, Id. p. 298, 307.
Athelric, King of all Northumberland, reigned two years over Bernicia; married
Acca, Daughter to Aella King of Deira, l. 3. p. 148. Athelstan, slain in fight
by Hungus King of the Picts, with the assistance of Ten thousand Scots, sent
him by Achaius King of that Country; all an idle story, l. 5. p. 250. Who this
Athelstan was, it is supposed none knows, Ibid.
Athelstan, supposed to be Natural Son to King Ethelwulf, often mentioned in
this History, but our Writers are silent as to his Death, l. 5. p. 258. Fought
with the Danes at Sea, and routed them, taking nine Ships, and patting the rest
to flight, Id. p. 261.
Athelstan, Son to Edward the Elder, commanding one Division of his Father's
Army against Leofred a Dane, and Griffyth ap Madoc, the Success thereof, l. 5.
p. 321. (The Name signifies, The most Noble.) Appointed by his Father's
Testament to succeed him in the Kingdom; not born of the Queen, but of one
Egwinna, l. 5. p. 326, 327. His Election by the Mercians, and the manner of his
Coronation, Id. p. 329. Marries his Sister Edgitha to Sihtric a Danish King of
Northumberland; with an account of him and his Death, Id. p. 330. Adds the
Kingdom of Northumberland to his own, Id. Ib. 331. His seven years Penance on
the account of his Brother Edwin's being drowned, Id. p. 331, 332. The great
Victory he obtained over the Scots, and what was the occassion of his warring
with them. He demolishes the Castle the Danes had fortified at York, and taking
great Booty there, distributes it among his Soldiers. Drove the Welsh cut of
Exeter, and built new walls about it, Id. p. 332, 333. The great Victory he
gained over the Scotch, Irish, and Danes, Id. p. 334, 335, 336. Took Cumberland
and Westmorland from the Scots, and recovered Northumberland from the Danes.
Pawned his Knife at the Altar, as he went to make War against the Scots,
promising to redeem it at his return with Victory. Founded the Abbey of
Middleton in Dorsetshire, and upon what account. Reigned fourteen years and t^n
months, and then died at Gloucester, Id. p. 337. Is said to be the first that
reduced all England into one Monarchy, Imposes a Yearly Tribute upon
Constantine King of the Scots, and Howell King of the Britains, of 20 l. in
Gold, and 300 l. in Silver, and 25000 Head of Cattle, Id. p. 337, 338. The Rich
Presents were sent to him from diverse Kings, Id. p. 339. Made many good Laws,
and some of the most remarkable may be seen in p. 339, 340, 341. Buried in the
Abbey of Malmesbury; bred up under his Uncle Ethelred Earl of Mercia. His
Character, Id. p. 329, 338, 339.
Athelwald, King of the South Saxons, had the Isle of Wight given him by
Wulfher, l. 4. p. 188. Is slain by Ceadwalla, who seized on his Province, Id.
p. 203.
Athelward. Vid. Ethelward. Athelwold. Vid. Ethelwald. Attacotti, who these
were that Ammianus joins with the Scoti, has very much perplexed the Modern
Critics, l. 2. p. 91, 92. Atticus. Vid. Aurelius. Augusta, that ancient City,
now called London, l. 2. p. 92. Augustine, sent into Britain with many Monks to
preach the Gospel, l. 3. p. 148. His Arrival in Britain in the year 597. Id. p.
149. l. 4. p. 153. How he came to be sent, and the Accidents that happened to
him by the way; with his Landing in the Isle of Thanet, on the East part of
Kent, l. 4. p. 152, 153. Residence appointed by King Ethelbert's Order for him
and his Monks at Canterbury, which was the Metropolis of his Kingdom. How his
preaching to him and his Nobles there was received, Id. p. 154. Ordained
Archbishop of the British Nation, and by whom; as also his sending to the Pope,
to desire his Opinion about certain Questions: Wherein is seen the state of
Religion in the Western Church at his coming over, Id. p. 155. Rebuilt an old
Church, first erected by the Christian Romans, appointing it a See for himself
and his Successors, Id. 154, 157. Had an Archiepiscopal Pall sent him, with
power to ordain twelve Bishops, l. 4. p. 157, 158. His Legantine Authority over
all the Bishops of Britain, Id. p. 160. Summons a Synod at Augustine's Ache (or
Oak) in Worcestershire, Ib. and p. 161. His miraculous Cure of a Blind Man;
upon which the Britains believed his Doctrine to be true, Id. Ib. His Death,
and place of his Burial, Id. p. 162, 165. His Prediction on the Britains
fulfilled, Id. p. 164. Supposed to be of the Benedictine Order, Id. p. 167.
Augustine's Ache, situate on the Confines of the Wectii, l. 4. p. 160.
Augustus Caesar, his coming as far as Gallia twice, to reduce Britain under his
Obedience, l. 2. p. 36. Vid. Caesar. Avon, the River, anciently called Antona,
l. 2. p. 41. Aurelian, L. Domitius, the Emperor killed by Mnestheus; his
Secretary. The Ninth Persecution under him, l. a. p. 82. Aurelius Ambrosius,
his Success against the Saxons, when, l. 3. p. 127. Elected General of the
Britains, Vortigern being as then King, though only in name so, Id. p. 129,
130. His mighty victory over the Saxons, and his ordering the Churches to be
repaired, which the Saxons had destroyed, p. 130. Marches up to London, and
going about to repair that, He is crowned at Stonehenge, and not long after
buried there. At a solemn Council he appoints two Metropolitans for the Vacant
Sees, viz. York and Caer-Leon, Id. p. 131. A Rebellion raised against him in
the North, among the Britains, who were put to flight, Ibid. Chosen King of the
Britains, and reigned 19 years, Id. p. 132. Died, being poisoned by procurement
of Pascentius, Son to Vortigern, who before had rebelled against him, Id. p.
131, 133.
Aurelius Atticus, Commander in Chief of a Roman Cohort, slain by the Britains
in the Battle between Agricola and Galgacus, l. 2. p. 62. Aurelius Conan, King
of Powis-Land, or else some other Southern Province, l. 3. p. 139, 146.
Aurelius Marcus succeeds Antoninus Pius in the Empire; the Britains raise new
Commotion against him, but they lasted not long after Calphurnius Agricola's
Arrival, l. 2. p. 68. Aust (where is a Ferry to pass out of Somersetshire into
Wales) anciently called Austelin, l. 5. p. 328. Axanminster, now Axminster in
Devonshire, l. 4. p. 233.
B
BAchfeg, a Danish King (whom their History calls Ivor, the Son of Reynere) is
slain by King Aethelred, and Aelfred his Brother, in Battle near Reading, where
most of his Troops being cut off, the rest were forced to fly, l. 5. p. 275.
Badon-hill, supposed to be the same with Banesdown near Bathe, where the great
Battle was fought by Prince Arthur against the Saxons, l. 3. p. 136. Bakewell
in Derbyshire, anciently called Bedecanwell, l. 5. p. 324. Balbinus Clodius,
with Pupienus Maximus, elected Emperors by the Senate, but were soon after
slain by the Praetorian Bands, l. 2. p. 81. Baldred, King of Kent, forced to
fly from King Egbert's Army over the Thames into the Northern parts, l. 5. p.
253. Bestows the Manner of Mallings in Sussex, on Christ's Church at
Canterbury; which being afterward taken away for some reasons, was confirmed
to it by the Common Council of the whole Kingdom under King Egbert, Id. p. 257.
Baldwin, Earl of Flanders, assigns Aelgiva (whom Harold had banished England)
Bruges for her Retirement, and both protected, and provided for, her, as long
as she staid there, l. 6. p. 64. Bamborough Castle, in Northumberland,
anciently called Bebbanburgh, when built, and by whom, l. 3. p. 142, 143. l. 4.
p. 230. Assaulted and set on fire by King Penda's Orders, l. 4. p. 185. The
Town destroyed by the Danes, and the great Booty they got there, l. 6. p. 24.
Banbury, anciently called Berinbyrig, where Cynric and Ceawlin his Son fought
with the Britains, and routed them, l. 3. p. 143. Bangor, built by Malgoclunus,
near the River Menai, Id. Ib. One Dynoth the Abbot there, pretended he was
instructed (and by whom) how to know whether Augustine's Preaching was from
God, or not, l. 4. p. 161, 162. Is not far from the River Dee in Flintshire,
Id. p. 164. The Massacre of the Monks there, Ib. p. 165. Lands and Possesions
given to this Church by Prince Anarawd, l. 5. p. 317.
Banner, the famous one called Reafan (that is, The Raven), which was so
enchanted by Magic Art, that it would clap its Wings upon the prospect of good
Success, or let them fall at that of bad, as if it were alive, l. 5. p. 281,
282. Banuwelle Monastery, to whom granted by King Alfred, l. 5. p. 307.
Baptism, Priests obliged to explain this, and the Mass, l. 4. p. 225. To be
performed at the times appointed by the former Canons of the Church, Id. p. 233.
Bardeney in Lincolnshire, anciently called Bardenigge, l. 5. p. 315.
Bardsey-Island, where Archbishop Dubritius became an Anchoret, l. 3. p. 149.
Barnwood Forest, near Bury-hill in Bucks, where the Danes went out to plunder,
l. 5. p. 321. Barons; by this word Thanes are to be understood, l. 6. p. 83.
Edward the Confessor's Law about Tithes, made a Rege, Baronibus, and Populo,
Id. p. 100. The Law concerning those Barons, who have Courts and Customs of
their own, Id. p. 102.
St. Bartholomew, called an Indian Apostle, because of his Martyrdom there, l.
5. p. 286. St. Basile, the Monks of that Order were the same with the Monks of
Ireland; and those Monasteries founded in the Kingdom of Northumberland
followed this Rule, l. 4. p. 167. Basse, the Priest, builds the Monastery of
Reculver in Kent, l. 4. p. 192. Bassianus, Eldest Son of Severus the Emperor,
by his wicked Carriage gave him perpetual trouble; for as soon as he had Power,
he aimed to kill both his Brother and Father, l. 2. p. 77. Was not long after
his Father's Death, destroyed, Id. Ib. Cruelly murdered his Brother Geta in
his Mother's Arms, and would have had Papinian the great Civil Lawyer to have
wrote a Defense of it, Id. p. 79.
Bassus, a valiant Captain of King Edwin's, conducted Aethelburga, etc. into
Kent, from Cadwalla's Rage and Cruelty, l. 4. p. 176. Bastardy, the first
Decree found in this kind, That Bastards, and those begotten of Nuns, should
not inherit, l. 4. p. 234. Bathan, so called by the Inhabitants, the ancient
City of Akmancester, where King Edgar was crowned, l. 6. p. 7. Bathe, called
Caer-Baden, built by Bladud, who is said by his skill in Magic to have found
out there those Medicinal Waters, l. 1. p. 10. Called likewise Bathoncester, l.
3. p. 146. A Nunnery built here by Osric, and afterward it was turned to a
House of Secular Chanons, l. 4. p. 196.
Beadricesworth, (i. e. St. Edmundsbury) where King Cnute built a Noble
Monastery, l. 5. p. 323. King Edmund gave this Royal Town, and diverse other
Lands to build a Church and Monastery, in memory of St. Edmund the Martyr, l.
5. p. 345.
Beamdune, now Bindon in Dorsetshire, where a great Battle was fought between
the West Saxons and the Britains, and the latter were overcome, l. 4. p. 166.
Beamfleet Castle, or Fort, built by Hastings the Danish Pyrate, l. 5. p. 299.
Demolished, and his Army routed by King Alfred's Forces, Id. p. 300.
Becancelde, perhaps Beckenham near Surrey, but not certain, l. 4. p. 209. The
great Council held here under Withred King of Kent, Id. p. 209, 210. Another
held here under Kenwult King of the Mercians, Id. p. 241.
Bedanhealfde, supposed by some to be Bedwyn in Wiltshire, near Berkshire, l.
4. p. 195. Bid, the ancientest English-Saxon Historian, l. 3. p. 114. l. 4. p.
151. Lived and died a Monk in the Monastery of St. Paul at Girwy, now Yarrow,
l. 4. p. 194. Where born and bred; his course of Life and Writings, which gave
him the Title of Venerable, Id. p. 222. Owned himself beholding to Nothelm,
when a Presbyter of the Church of London, for diverse Ancient Monuments relating
to the English Church, Id. p. 223.
Bedicanford, now Bedford, where Cuthwulf fought against the Britains; and the
Towns he took from them, l. 3. p. 146. Surrendered to King Edward the Elder, l.
5. p. 320.
Belinus, Son of Dunwallo, said to make the four great Ways or Streets that run
cross the Kingdom, and not the Romans; built the Gate called Belin's gate, our
now Billingsgate; and said to be the first Founder of the Tower of London, l.
1. p. 13. Bells, The first Tuneable Ring of Bells in England was in
Croyland-Monastery, set up there by Abbot Turketule, l. 6. p. 12. Benedict, the
Father of all the Monks, in what year he died; but long before his death he
founded his Order in Italy, l. 4. p. 167. (Sirnam'd Biscop), made Abbot of the
Monastery of St. Peter in Canterbury, Id. p. 194. His Death; with some short
account of his Life, Id. p. 205. Consecrated Pope, upon the death of Stephanus;
expelled, and who made Pope in his room, l. 6. p. 88.
Benedictines, the Monks of that Order, l. 4. p. 167, 168. Placed in the
Nunnery at Bathe by King Edgar, Id. p. 196. Turn out the Sicular Chanons at
Worcester, Id. p. 200. The Abbey of Winchelcomb in Gloucestershire, by whom
founded, for 300 of these Monks, Id. p. 242. St. Dunstan made a Collection of
Rules for this Order, l. 6. p. 22. Vid. Monks, and Chanons Secular.
St. Bennet's in Holme, a Monastery founded by King Cnute in Norfolk, for
Benedictines, l. 6. p. 54. Bennington, now called Bensington, l. 3. p. 145. A
Battle fought there between Cynwulf and Offa, and who got the better, l. 4. p.
230.
Beonna, Abbot of Medeshamsted, leases Lands to Cuthbright upon Condition, Id.
Ib. Beormond, when consecrated Bishop of Rochester, l. 5. p. 248. Beorne, when
he was King over the East Angles, l. 4. p. 228. Beorne, the Ealdorman, burnt in
Seletune, by the Governors of Northumberland, l. 4. p. 231. Beorne, King
Edmund's Huntsman, murders Lothbroke, one of the Danish Royal Family, l. 5. p.
272, 273. Beorne, Earl, (Cousin to Earl Sweyn) how made away by him on
Shipboard, and where buried, l. 6. p. 75. Beornred, when he usurped the Kingdom
of the Mercians, l. 4. p. 227. Burnt the fair City of Cataract in Yorkshire,
and he himself is burnt the same year, Id. p. 229.
Beornwulf, or Bertwulf, or Beorthwulf, King of the Mercians, and Archbishop
Wilfrid, held two Synods at Clovesho. Fought with Egbert, and was beaten, and
afterward slain by the East Angles, l. 5. p. 253. Was routed with his whole
Army by the Danes, Id. p. 261. Held the Council of Kingsbury; who were present
at it, and what done there, Id. Ib. His Death, and who succeeded him, Id. p. 262.
Berferth, Son of Bertwulf, King of Mercia, wickedly slays his Cousin Wulstan,
l. 5. p. 261. Berkshire, anciently called Bearrockshire, l. 5. p. 274. l. 6. p.
32. Bernicia and Deira, two Kingdoms of Northumberland, united into one, l. 4.
p. 178. All the Low-Lands of Scotland, as far as the English-Saxon Tongue was
spoken, were anciently part of the Bernician Kingdom, l. 5. p. 249.
Bertha, the King of the Franks's Daughter, married to King Ethelbert, l. 3. p.
145. Brought a Bishop over with her to assist and strengthen her in the Faith,
l. 4. p. 153.
Bertulf, King of the Mercians, honorably receives Egbert King of the
Northumbers, and Wulfher Archbishop of York, whom the Northumbers had expelled,
l. 5. p. 277. Beverlie in Yorkshire, anciently called Derawnde, l. 4. p. 202.
Beverstone in Gloucestershire, anciently Byferstane, l. 6. p. 77. Billingsgate,
the ancient Port of London; and what Customs to be paid there upon unlading, l.
6. p. 43. Vid. Belinus. Birds. A great Fight and Slaughter of Birds in the Air;
l. 4. p. 192. Birth Supposititious. Vid. Harold the Son of Cnute. Birthwald,
Archbishop of Canterbury (who succeeded Theodore) was buried in the Church of
St. Peter and St. Paul, l. 4. p. 162. Formerly an Abbot of Raculf, now Reculver
in Kent, near the Isle of Thanet; but not consecrated Archbishop, till nigh
three years after his Election. His Character, Id. p. 205. He and King Alfred
held a Synod about Bishop Wilfrid, who was therein excommunicated, Id. p. 206.
Is reconciled to the Bishop, tho King Alfred is not so, Id. p. 207. His Death,
being worn out with Age and Infirmities, Id. p. 220.
Bishops, how to be ordained in the English Church, l. 4. p. 156. How to behave
themselves toward one another, and toward those that are not under their
Authority, Id. p. 157. Of London, to be chosen by his own Synod, but to receive
the Pall from the Pope, Id. p. 157, 158. When the Primitive Christian Temper
had not left the Bishops of the Roman Church, Id. p. 159. Two Bishops in one
Diocese; viz. One had his See at Dunmoc (now Dunwich) in Suffolk, and the other
at Helmham in Norfolk, l. 4. p. 193. By a Bishop's Son was meant his Spiritual,
not Conjugal Son, for they were not married in the Saxon times, Id. p. 209.
Ordered in the Synod of Clovesho to visit their Diocesses once a year, l. 4. p.
224. Five Bishops ordained in one day by Archbishop Plegmund, and over what
Sees; but it was by the Authority of the King and his Council, l. 5. p. 314.
Blecca, with all his Family, converted to the Christian Faith, builds a
Stone-Church of curious Workmanship in Lincoln, l. 4. p. 175. Blood. When it
rained Blood for three days together, l. 1. p. 12. l. 4. p. 202. Milk and
Butter turned into somewhat like Blood, l. 4. p. 202. The Moon appeared as it
were stained with Blood, for a whole hour, l. 4. p. 222.
Boadicia, the Wife of Prasutagus, a British Lady of a Royal Race, violated
with Stripes, and her Daughters ravished, l. 2. p. 47. Being left a Widow, she
raised an Army, and makes a gallant Speech to them, l. 2. p. 49, 50. But being
overcome, and her Army utterly routed, she poisons her self, Id. p. 50.
Bocland, King Alfred's Thirty seventh Law concerning it, l. 5. p. 295, 296.
Edward the Elder's second Law, of any one's denying another man his Right
therein, l. 5. p. 325. That is, Land conveyed to another by Deed, to whom it
was forfeitable, l. 6. p. 58, 60.
Bodotria. Vid. Glotta. Boethius Hector, his great Error concerning the last War
between the Romans and the Britains, l. 2. p. 101, 102. Bolanus. Vid. Vectius.
Bonagratia de Villa Dei, his Epistle to the Black Monks of England: Wherein is
shown the Antiquity of the University of Cambridge, l. 5. p. 318. Bondland,
that is, the Ground of Bondmen, or Villains, l. 4. p. 230. Bondsman, he that is
cast by the Ordeal, to be branded with a hot Iron for the first Offense, and
for the second to be put to death, l. 6. p. 42. Bonosus, a matchless Drinker,
made himself as Emperor for a time, but being vanquished by the Emperor Probus,
he hanged himself. (He was by Descent a Britain.) l. 2. p. 82. Bosa, Bishop of
Dunmoc (now Dunwich) in Suffolk, deprived by reason of his great Infirmities,
l. 4. p. 193. Governed the Province of Deira, having his Episcopal See at the
City of York, l. 4. p. 197.
Bosenham, (that is, Bosham) in Sussex, where Sweyne made a League with Edward
the Confessor, l. 6. p. 74. Boston in Lincolnshire, supposed anciently to be
called Icanho, l. 4. p. 185. Bottulf, when he began to build a Monastery at
Icanho, Id. Ib. Bounds. The old ones continued in the year 395. between the
Picts and the Britains, l. 2. p. 100. Bracelets. The Oath the Danes took to
King Alfred upon a Sacred Bracelet they had (which Oath they would never take
to any Nation before) immediately to depart the Kingdom, l. 5. p. 278. Of Gold;
if hung up at the parting of several Highways in Alfred's time, none would dare
to touch them, Justice was so strictly observed, Id. p. 291.
Bradanford in Wiltshire, now Bradford, l. 4. p. 183. Brandanrelie, supposed to
be a little Island (now called Shepholm) in the mouth of Severn, l. 5. p. 319.
Breach of the Peace, Alfred's Laws about it, l. 5. p. 292, 295, 297. What he
shall forfeit that sets upon a man in his own house, l. 5. p. 347. The
Punishment of this Offense in several Instances, l. 6. p. 43.
Brecklesey-Island, whither the Danes fled when they were beaten by King
Alfred, l. 5. p. 300. Brecknock-Castle, supposed by Brecenanmere, which
Aethelfleda took with her Army, l. 5. p. 319. In Wales, destroyed by Earl
Alfred, who joined with Howel the Son of Edwal, l. 6. p. 21.
Bregowin, consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury, but enjoyed that See not long,
for his Death happened about three years after, l. 4. p. 228. Brennus and
Belinus divided the Kingdom between them; and what happened afterward, l. 1.
p. 12, 13. Brigantes, supposed to be the Inhabitants of Yorkshire, Lancashire,
and the other Northern Countries, l. 2. p. 42. Their State attacked by Petilius
Caerialis, most of which he conquered, Id. p. 54. Under the Conduct of a Woman,
had almost quite destroyed the Romans, Id. p. 60. Breaking in upon Genoani, or
North Wales, were driven back by Lollius Urbicus, Id. p. 68. No mention of them
beyond the River Tweed, Id. p. 91.
Brige (now Bruges) in Flanders, where Earcongota, the Daughter of Earcombert,
a Virgin of great Piety, went to be a Nun in a Monastery built there by a Noble
Abbess, there being at that time not many Monasteries in Britain, l. 4. p. 180.
Bridgenorth, in Shropshire, anciently Bricge, and the Town is generally called
by the common people Brigge at this day, l. 5. p. 316. Brightnoth, a Monk, made
Abbot of Elig Monastery, where there had been Nuns before, l. 6. p. 4.
Brihtric, when he began to reign over the West Saxons; when he died, and where
he was buried, l. 4. p. 233, 242. Married Eadburghe, the Daughter of King Offa,
and for what reason of State, Id. p. 235, 243. A fuller Account of his Death,
and Character, Id. p. 243.
Brihtric accuses Wulfnoth to King Ethelred, and pursuing him by Sea, loses all
his part of the Fleet, and how, l. 6. p. 33. Britain, briefly described,
anciently called Albion, and whence its Name, l. 1. p. 1, 2. First discovered
by the Phoenicians; known to the Greeks, though Mr. Cambden seems to deny it.
Who the first Inhabitants, l. 1. p. 2, 3, 4, 6, 7. Generally speaking, no body
came hither besides Merchants, l. 2. p. 24. Was divided into many Petty States
or Principalities in the Romans time, and subject to diverse Kings, l. 1. p. 6.
Id. p. 33, 39. Invaded by the Emperor Claudius in the Reign of Togodumnus,
supposed to be the same with Guidar, or Guinder, Id. p. 38, 39. During the
Reigns of the succeeding Emperors to Domitian, as far as the Friths of
Dunbritton and Edinburgh, it was entirely redated into the Form of a Roman
Province, Id. p. 65.
Hadrian, though he restrained the Limits, yet by no means would part with this
Province, Id. p. 67. Is divided into two Governments by Severus the Emperor,
Id. p. 73. Continued a Roman Province in Opilius Macrinus his time, and had its
Propraetors, Id. p. 80. The Occasion of Porphyrius the Philosopher's saying,
That Britain was a Soil fruitful of Tyrants, Id. p. 81, 91. The Province wholly
recovered to the Roman Empire by Constantius and Asclepiodotus, after it had
been Ten Years in Rebellion, Id. p. 84. Great store of good Workmen and
excellent Builders, in those times of Public Disturbance, Id. p. 85. The
ancient Divisions of it altered by Constantine, Id. p. 88. Reduced to the last
Extremities in Valentinian's time, Id. p. 92. The Northern Province of it being
by Theodosius restored to its former condition, he ordered it for the future to
be called Valentia, in honor of Valentinian the Emperor, Id. p. 93. Its
History very obscure and uncertain, esp^cially as to the times when things were
done, from the Death of Maximus, to the coming in of the Saxons, Id. p. 99.
Owed its first Ruin to Maximus his carrying over so many Britains and Romans
into Gaul, Ibid. Bid ascribes the chief Causes of its Ruin to God's Vengeance
on the Inhabitants for their great Wickedness, and Corruption of Manners, l. 3.
p. 137. By what means she was brought to the Knowledge of Christ, l. 4. p. 152.
The present state of it when Bid wrote his History, l. 4. p. 221. Though
subdued to the Roman Empire, yet they used their Victory with moderation,
making the conquered partakers both of their Laws and Civility, l. 5. p. 246.
Great Britain: Edred was the first who styled himself King of Great Britain,
in a Charter to the Abbey of Croyland, l. 6. p. 351. Britains, had no Notion of
the Unalterable Right of Succession in the Eldest Brother over all the rest;
no, not after they became Christians, l. 1. p. 17. An Account of the
Inhabitants, their Religion, Customs, and Manner of living, l. 2. p. 21, 22,
23. Would not suffer their Kings, by becoming Tyrants, to make their people
Slaves, l. 1. p. 18, l. 2. p. 22. Not much different in several respects from
the naked Indians of some parts of America, l. 2. p. 23. Hindered the Romans
from landing, though with much difficulty; but being afterward worsted by
them, they desired Peace, which was granted, and Hostages sent; but they soon
again take up Arms, Id. p. 26, 27, 28. Treat of Peace, but now a double number
of Hostages being required, only two Estates of all Britain sent them, Id. p.
29. Their Engagement with Caesar and his Romans in his second Expedition, Id.
p. 33. Cassibelan is forced to make Peace with him: And after Caesar's
departure, till the time of Claudius, they were free from the Roman Yoke, Id.
p. 35, 36. They send Ambassadors into Gallia to Augustus, to beg Peace; and
begin to learn the Roman Arts of Flattery, etc. Id. p. 36, 37. Victory obtained
over them by Claudius; his Clemency toward them, for which they build him a
Temple, and adore him as a God, Id. p. 40. Their Victory over Catus Decianus
and the Romans, in the absence of Paulinus Suetonius; and Cruelty to the Roman
Wives and Virgins, Id. p. 48, 49. Learnt the Vices of the Romans; are overcome
by Agricola, Id. p. 51, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59. Would not own themselves beaten by
the Courage of the Roman Soldiers, but by the Conduct of their General, Id. p.
59. They get together Thirty thousand strong on the Grampion Hills, and are
resolved to fight him again, but are miserably beaten and put to flight, Id. p.
59, 60, 61, 62, 63. Recovering fresh Strength and Courage under the Conduct of
Arviragus, revolt against the Emperor Trajan, but are soon reduced again, l. 2.
p. 65, 66. Would have entirely rovolted from Hadrian, after Julius Severus his
departure, had not Hadrian in the second year of his Empire made a Journey
hither, and by force of Arms reduced them, Id. p. 67. The South-Britains within
Hadrian's Wall, enjoy the Privilege in Antoninus Pius his time, of being free
Citizens of Rome, Id. p. 67, 68. Raise new Commotions in Marcus Aurelius
Antoninus his time, who succeeds Antoninus Pius. From Lucius till the time of
Dioclesian they maintain the Christian Faith without disturbance, Id. p. 68.
Under the Power of the Romans in Lucius his time, or what remained unconquered,
were absolutely Heathen and Barbarous at the time of his supposed Conversion,
Id. p. 69. Much infested with Wars and Seditions in Commodus his Reign. They
mutiny against Perennis, and send Fifteen hundred Soldiers into Italy, to let
Commodus the Emperor know that Perennis had conspired against him, endeavoring
to make his Son Emperor, Id. p. 70. Come flocking in to Constantius Chlorus
against Allectus, Id. p. 84. Suffer Persecution here under Dioclesian the
Emperor, Id. p. 85. Revolt against the Emperor Constantine, but are subdued,
Id. p. 87, 88. Renounce all further Obedience to the Roman Empire, Id. p. 104.
The first Supplies sent to them, were between the Death of Maximus, and the
setting up of Gratianus Municeps; and when the second, Id. p. 105, 106. Their
Endeavors to get the Roman Protection in Valentinian the Third's time, Id. p.
106. Would by no means receive the Pelagian Doctrine, Id. p. 107. Their Victory
over the Picts and Saxons, and by what means, Id. p. 108. Their doleful Letters
to Aetius, the Emperor's Lieutenant in Gaul, for Assistance. And their
Wickedness both in Clergy and Laity, Id. p. 115. Their leaving Kent, and flying
in great fear to London, l. 3. p. 129. Their Victory over the Saxons through
their Carelessness, Id. p. 148. Believe Augustin's Doctrine to be from God,
from his Miraculous Cure of a Blind Man, l. 4. p. 161. In Bede's time it was
their custom to set at naught the Religion of the English-Saxons, Id. p. 176.
Fight with Kenwalc, King of the West Saxons at Peonnum, but put to flight by
him, and pursued as far as Pedridan, l. 4. p. 188. Deliver the City of Alkuith
upon Conditions to Eadbert King of Northumberland, and Unust King of the Picts,
l. 4. p. 227. A great Battle between them and the Saxons at Hereford, l. 4. p.
228. And at Ruthin, where Caradoc ap Gwin, King of North Wales, was slain, Id.
p. 241. And another between them and the Devonshire men, where the former
were-routed, l. 5. p. 253. Suffer a great slaughter from Hinguar and Hubba, Id.
p. 281. Obtain a Victory over the Danes, and driving them into a River, drown
many of them, Id. p. 298. Northern Britains much infested by the Incursions of
the Danes, Saxons, and Scots, Id. p. 317. Ever since the coming in of the
Saxons, had continued a distinct Principality in the North, and retiring into
North Wales, had there erected the Colony of Straetcluyd, Id. p. 344.
Britains of Armorica, settled there long before ours were driven out by the
Saxons, l. 3. p. 127. British Church sent diverse Bishops to the Council of
Arles in Gallia, l. 2. p. 88. Enjoyed perfect Peace till the Arrian Heresy
overran the whole world, Id. p. 105. All differences cease between this Church
and that of North Wales, and how effected, l. 4. p. 229.
Brixstan, in Somersetshire, (anciently called Ecbyrth-stan) lying on the
East Side of Selwood-Forest, l. 5. p. 282. Brockmaile, the Protector and
Defender of the Britains, l. 4. p. 164. Bromrige in the County of
Northumberland, anciently called Brunanburh, l. 5. p. 334, 335. Bruerne
Brocard, resenting the Injury King Osbryht had done him, in lying with his
Wife, goes over to Denmark to complain of it, and gets a great Army to come
from thence, who revenge the Affront by the King's death, l. 5. p. 268, 269.
Brun-Albin, or Drum-Albin, that is, the Ridge of Scotland, l. 2. p. 98. Brute,
and his Successors, their History. How he consults the Oracle, and the Answer
it returned, l. 1. p. 7, 8. He divides the Kingdom to his Three Sons, the
Eldest to have Loegria, now England; the Second Cambria, now Wales; and the
Third Albania, now Scotland, Id. p. 9.
Bryghtwald takes the Bishopric of Wiltonshire, l. 6. p. 31. Bryghtwulf,
Bishop of Scireborne, deceases, after he had held the Bishopric eight and
thirty years, Id. p. 73. Brythelme, Bishop of Wells, made Archbishop of
Canterbury, but being found not fit for so great a Charge, by the Command of
the King and whole Nation he retired, and went to his former Church, l. 6. p.
2. Buchanan, his Mistakes About Severus his Wall, l. 2. p. 76, 77. About The
last Wall, which he will have built in Scotland, Id. p. 100, 101. About The
last War between the Romans and the Britains, Id. p. 101, 102. About Achaius
King of Scots having reigned 32 years, etc. l. 5. p. 250. About King
Athelstan's Parricide, Id. p. 335.
Budington, in Shropshire, anciently called Butdigingtune, l. 5. p. 301.
Buloigne, the Portus Ictius, and ancient Gessoriacum, from whence the Romans
most commonly passed into Britain, l. 2. p. 31, 40. Buoy in the Nore, supposed
anciently to be called Northmuthe, l. 6. p. 80. Burford, in the Saxon times
called Beorgford, in Oxfordshire, l. 4. p. 226. Burgh, an Abbey, which Leofric
the Abbot of it so adorned with Rich Gildings, that it was called the Golden
Burgh, etc. l. 6. p. 84. Burghmotes, to be held Thrice a Year, and who to be
present thereat, l. 6. p. 13. Burhred, Burherd, or Beorhed, King of Mercia,
fights with the Britains, and kills their King: Enters North Wales with great
Power, and destroys Anglesey, and slays Meyric, l. 5. p. 261. Succeeds
Beorthwulf, and present at the Agreement made by Ceolred Abbot of Medeshamsted,
and his Monks, of a Lease of Land to one Wulfred. By the Assistance of King
Aethelwulf made North Wales subject to him. Marries Aethelwulf's Daughter with
great Solemnity, l. 5. p. 261, 262. Is forced by the Danes to desert his
Kingdom, and pass the Seas to Rome, where not long after he died, and was
buried at the English College in the Church of St. Mary, Id. p. 277.
Byrinus, an Italian, coming hither, by his Preaching converts the West Saxons,
and had a City in Oxfordshire conferred on him, to fix his Episcopal See in, l.
4. p. 179. Baptizes Cuthred at Dorchester, being a Prince of the Blood Royal,
Id. p. 180.
Byrnstan, consecrated Bishop of Winchester, and how long he held it, l. 5. p.
331. His Death, and Burial at Winchester, Id. p. 332, 333.

C
CAdelh, Prince of South Wales, is fallen upon by his Brother Anarawd, who
grievously spoils his Countries, l. 5. p. 299. Second Son to Rodoric the Great,
and Father to Howel Dha, his Decease, Id. p. 315.
Cadocus, Abbot of Lancarvan in Glamorganshire. His Life written by John of
Tinmouth, l. 3. p. 149. Cadwallader, his supposed Journey to Rome, l. 3. p.
145. The last King of the Britains. His death, l. 4. p. 190, 191.
Cadwallo, King of the Britains, an Account of his being routed and killed, l.
4. p. 177. Cadwallo and Ceadwalla; these two Names are confounded together by
the British Historians, Id. p. 204. Cadwallo, supposed to be Edwal, surnamed
Ywrch, and for what reason, Id. p. 205. Cadwallo, succeeds his Father Cadwan in
the Kingdom of Britain, Id. p. 171. Is overcome by Edwin, and flies to Ireland;
but returning afterward he beats Penda, and they joining together fight Edwin,
and slay him, and rout his whole Army. He is in Profession a Christian, but in
his Actions shows himself worse than a Pagan, Id. p. 176. Cuts off Osric on a
sudden, and all his Army, and basely kills Eanfrid, Id. p. 177.
Cadwan, Prince of North Wales, is chose King of all the Britains, l. 3. p.
149. Caedmon, the English-Saxon Poet, what he wrote, and what he printed, l. 4.
p. 199. Caerialis (Petilius) sent hither as soon as Vespatian was acknowledged
in Britain as his Lieutenant. He had inured Agricola to Labors and Dangers, l.
2. p. 54. Caer-Leon upon Usk in South Wales, an Archiepiscopal See, l. 3. p.
149. Caesar's landing in Britain in the Reign of Cassibelan, a small Inland
Prince, l. 1. p. 19. l. 2. p. 33. His Account of the Inhabitants, their
Religion, and Manner of living, l. 2. p. 21. The Pretenses he made for his
Expedition hither, l. 2. p. 24. But first he sends Ca. Volusenus to make his
Observations of the Country; and then upon on his Arrival Ambassadors come to
him from diverse Princes and States of this Island, promising Obedience to the
Roman Empire, Id. p. 25. He had no great cause to boast of his first
Expedition, and why, l. 2. p. 29. Most of his Horse were cast away in a violent
Storm; therefore goes into Italy, resolving to make another Descent upon them,
and orders new Ships to be built, and directs after what Model; whereupon six
hundred such were built, besides eight and twenty Galleys, Id. p. 30. Setting
sail again for Britain, and landing, he fought and conquered; the next day he
had news, That by a great Tempest rising that night, forty of his Ships had
fallen foul upon one another, and were lost, and the rest much shattered, Id.
p. 31, 32. His care about the remainder, and directions for others to be built:
His Engagements with the Britains, and their various successes, Id. p. 32, 33,
34. His description of a British Town, Id. p. 35. Makes Cassibelan submit, and
give Hostages to him, and then goes over to the Continent; and at his Return to
Rome he offers to Venus a Breast Plate covered with British Pearl, Id. Ib.
Calais, never used for a Port, until Philip Earl of Buloigne built, and walled
the Town, l. 2. p. 31. Calcuithe, the troublesome Synod there, where Archbishop
Janbryht lost part of his Province to the Sea of Litchfield, l. 4. p. 233, 235.
The Nicene Creed, and the Seven first General Councils received and confirmed
in it, and many Canons made concerning Matters of Religion, and Ecclesiastical
Discipline, Id. p. 233. There were two distinct Sessions of it, Id. p. 234. It
was supposed to be held in the Kingdom of Mercia, Ibid. A Synod held there
under Wilfrid, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Kenwulf King of the Mercians, l.
5. p. 251.
Caledonians make great Preparations for War, in show more than in reality,
against Agricola, l. 2. p. 58. But they were miserably routed by his Forces,
Id. p. 59. Rodorick King of the Picts aids them, but is slain by Marius, Id. p.
66.
Caligula (Caius) the Magnificent Letters he sent to Rome, l. 2. p. 37. Marches
his Army to the Belgic Shore, and his foolish Bravado after he had put a
little to Sea in a Galley, and then returned to Land, carrying the Shells that
he and his Army had gathered on the shore to Rome, and his Galleys, and demands
a Triumph; but the Senate refused it, and at last he was murdered, Id. p. 38.
Camalodunum (now Maldon in Essex), where Andraste, supposed to have been the
Goddess of Victory, had a Temple, l. 2. p. 24. On the Reverse of Kynobelin's
Coin is CAME, signifying Camalodunum, which was his Royal Seat, Id. p. 37, 40.
Taken by Claudius, who obtaining a Victory over the Britains, left them to the
Government of Plautius, Id. p. 40.
Cambden's History in Latin commended highly by this Author, l. 2. p. 20.
Cambria. Vid. Wales. Cambridge, anciently called Caer-grant, and Grant-Chester,
l. 1. p. 14. Grantbridge, l. 5. p. 272, 322. l. 6. p. 34. Quatbridge, l. 5. p.
302. And Grantecester, l. 5. p. 318. Lay in the Kingdom of the East Angles, and
had no University or School there in the time of King Alfred, l. 4. p. 179,
180. The Antiquity of this University illustrated, l. 5. p. 318. All their
former Privileges confirmed by King Edward the Elder's Charter to them for ever
to endure by a perpetual Right, Id. p. 317, 318. Improbable that it should have
continued an University during the Danish Wars, under the Possession of Three
Danish Kings; but this Edward did restore the University, Id. p. 318. Is burnt
by the Danes, with Oxford likewise; and then all Studies ceased at both places
till about 1133. from which time the Scholars have continued at both
Universities, l. 6. p. 34, 35.
Camelford in Cornwall (anciently Gafulford), where was a Battle fought between
the Britains and Devonshire-men, the latter getting the Victory, l. 5. p. 253.
Candida Casa. Vid. Witerne. Candidus, a Presbyter, whom the Pope sent to
receive and dispose of the Church's Revenues in France, l. 4. p. 153.
Canterbury, anciently called Caerkin, by whom it was first pretended to be
built, l. 1. p. 10. And Cantwic, l. 5. p. 259. The Metropolis of King
Ethelbert's Kingdom, appointed for the Residence of Augustine and his Monks, l.
4. p. 153, 154. When the Sea remained void for four years, l. 4. p. 189. The
Ancient Power of the Archbishop of this See, as Governor of the Church of
England, when under the Power of the Pope in Ecclesiastical Matters, l. 4. p.
209, 210. The City is burnt, Id. p. 226, 228. The Violence done to it by
removing the Sea from thence to Litchfield, Id. p. 234, 235. Is restored to its
ancient Rights, which it had been deprived of by King Offa's taking away all
its Lands which lay within the Kingdom of Mercia, Id. p. 229, 235. By the Sea
of Litchfield's being made an Archbishopric, no more were under this
Jurisdiction than the Bishops of London, Winchester, Rochester, and Shireburne,
Id. p. 235. Forbid on pain of Damnation (if not repented of) for any one
hereafter to violate the Rights of this Ancient See, l. 5. p. 248. Is taken by
the Danes, who then routed Beorthwulf, the King of the Mercians, and his whole
Army, Id. p. 261. And is retaken by the Lady Aethelfleda, with the Assistance
of the King her Brother, wherein a great many Danes were killed, Id. p. 320.
Humbly beseeches a Peace of the Danes, which at the Price of Three thousand
Pounds is concluded, l. 6. p. 33. Is besieged again, and taken by the Treachery
of the Danes, Id. p. 35, 36.
Caractacus and Togodumnus, the Sons of Kynobelin, overcome by the Romans, l.
2. p. 39. His Engagement with Ostorius Scapula, and the Success of it, Id. p.
42, 43. Though he was taken Prisoner, yet his Fame was celebrated as far as
Italy, Id. p. 43. His Manly Procession at Rome, and the Noble Speech he made to
Caesar: His Pardon and Acknowledgment, Id. p. 44.
Caradoc, or Cradoc, Son to Gryffin, Prince of South Wales, his barbarous
Cruelty and Ill Usage both of the House of Harold, Earl of West-Saxony, and of
his Servants, l. 6. p. 93. Carausius, a man of mean Parentage, who through all
Military degrees advanced himself to be Governor of Bononia, now Buloigne, etc.
takes on him the Imperial Purple, and makes Maximilian to conclude a Peace, and
yield him up Britain; making the Picts his Confederates, l. 2. p. 83. Repairs
the Pict's-Walls with Castles, etc. and at last is slain by the Treachery of
Allectus, Id. p. 84.
Carehouse in Northumberland, supposed to be Caere in the time of the Saxons,
l. 4. p. 215. Careticus, succeeds Malgo in the Kingdom of the Britains. His
Character, l. 3. p. 148. Carlisle, built by Leil in the days of Solomon, l. 1.
p. 10. Was afterward by the Romans called Lugubalia, Ib. and l. 2. p. 66.
Carron, a River which had its name from Carausius: where it is, l. 2. p. 84.
Carrum, now Charmouth in Dorsetshire, where a Battle was fought between Egbert
and the Danes, and the latter kept the field, l. 5. p. 256. Another Battle
sought there between Ethelwulf and the Danes, Id. p. 259.
Cartismandua, Queen of the Brigantes, to whose fidelity Caractacus having
committed himself, she delivered him up bound to the Roman Victors, l. 2. p.
43. Despises her Husband Venutius, and a Civil War arising between them, the
issue of it, Id. p. 45, 46.
Carus (Marc. Aurel) succeeds Probus in the Empire, and invading the Persians,
dies suddenly, l. 2. p. 83. He created his Son Carinus, Caesar, and gave him
the Charge of Britain, and the rest of the Western Provinces. Is slain by
Dioclesian, Ibid.
Cassibelan, by his worthy Demeanor so wrought upon the people, that he easily
got the Kingdom for himself, l. 1. p. 16. But he was not sole King of this
Island, only a small Inland Prince, l. 2. p. 33. In his Reign Caesar landed in
Britain; but he engaging with him and his Romans, was forced to submit to
Caesar, and to give him Hostages, l. 1. p. 19. l. 2. p. 33, 34, 35. After the
departure of the Romans he is said to reign ten years, which time he spent in
taking revenge on the Cit^es and States that had revolted from him during his
Wars with Caesar, Id. p. 36.
Cassiterides; these Western Islands were so called by the Greeks, l. 1. p. 2,
3. Castinus, sent into Spain by Honorius against the Vandals, l. 2. p. 105.
Castor, the Worthiest Man in Severus his Court, and Chief of his Bedchamber;
the same as Lord-Chamberlain with us, l. 2. p. 75. Castra Exploratorum, a place
in Cumberland, l. 2. p. 81. Cataract, a fair City in Yorkshire, burnt by
Beornred the Mercian Tyrant, l. 4. p. 229. Cattle, that are brought into a
Town, and said to be found, how to be disposed of, and who to have the Custody
of them, l. 6. p. 103. Caedda, is consecrated Bishop of Litchfield, l. 4. p.
189, 195. Renews his Ordination according to the Catholic Rites, Id. p. 191.
Is deprived of his Bishopric, as being unduly elected, Id. p. 192. His Death,
and Character; called by us at this day St. Chad, Id. p. 193.
Ceadwalla. Vid. Cadwallo, with whom he is confounded, as he is also with
Cadwallader, l. 3. p. 145. l. 4. p. 204. Subdues the Petty Princes of the
West Saxons, and takes the Kingdom to himself, according to Bid, Id. p. 193.
Succeeds to the Kingdom of the West Saxons after the death of Kentwin. He was
the Grandson of Ceawlin by his Brother Cutha, Id. p. 202. Subdues the Isle of
Wight, and gives the fourth part of his Conquests to God, Id. p. 203. He and
Moll his Brother, waste Kent, l. 4. p. 203, 204. Goes to Rome, and is there
baptized by Pope Sergius, by the name of Peter, but dies soon after, and is
buried in the Church of St. Peter, Id. p. 204, 205.
Ceawlin and Cutha fight with, and drive Ethelbert into Kent, l. 3. p. 145,
146. And Cuthwi kill three other Kings, and take there three Cities, Id. p.
145. Fights against the Britains, and takes away several Towns from them; but
is driven out of his Kingdom after one and thirty years reign. His Banishment
and Character. Id. p. 147, 148. His Death in Exile, Id. p. 149. Vid. Cuthwulf.
Ceawlin, King of the West Saxons, and Ethelfrid, fight with Adian, wherein
Cutha, Ceawlin's Son is slain, l. 4. p. 159. Ceawlin, the second King of the
West Saxons, that ruled over all Britain, l. 5. p. 254. Cedda, ordained a
Bishop over the Nation of the East Saxons, l. 4. p. 184. Baptizes Swidhelm,
King thereof in the Province of the East Angles, Id. p. 189.
Cendrythe, an Abbess, is forced to make satisfaction to Archbishop Wilfrid,
for the wrongs that King Kenwulf her Father had done to the Church of
Canterbury, l. 5. p. 253. The same with Quendride; where see more of her.
Cenered, King of Mercia, or Southumbers, succeeds Ethelred by his own
appointment, who himself resigned, and turned Monk, l. 4. p. 207, 212. Cenwall,
or Cenwalch, succeeds his Father Cynegils in the Kingdom of the West Saxons;
and being soon after driven out of it by Penda King of the Mercians, he retires
to Anna, King of the East Angles, and there receives Baptism, l. 4. p. 181.
Fights at Bradenford near the River Aftene in Wiltshire; most likely with the
Mercians, Id. p. 183. Fights against the Welsh at Peonnum, and the success he
met with; as also against Wulfher at Posentesbyrig, who had wasted his Country
as far as Aescasdune, Id. p. 188. Dies, and leaves the Kingdom to Sexburga, his
Wife, Id. p. 192.
Cenwulf, King of the Mercians, restores the Archbishopric of Canterbury to
its former Rights, l. 4. p. 235, 248. Had the Crown of Mercia left him by King
Egferth, as being the Next of the Royal Line, Id. p. 240. The Great Council of
Becancelde held under him, and what Decrees past therein, Id. p. 241. Destroys
Kent, and takes Eadbert Praen, and carries him Prisoner to Mercia, and there
causes his eyes to be put out, and his hands to be cut off, Ibid. Founds the
stately Abbey of Winchelcomb for Three hundred Benedictine Monks, Id. p. 242.
Holds a Third Council at Cloveshoe, and what was done therein, Id. p. 243. He
and Eardulf King of the Northumbers, going to engage each other, a sudden Peace
is concluded on, and confirmed by Oath, by the means of King Egbert, Id. p.
248. His Death, and who said to succeed him, Id. p. 251, 252. Vid. Kenwulf.
Cenwulf, Bishop of Lindisfarne, his Death, l. 4. p. 232. Ceolfus, or Ceulfus,
King of the West Saxons, reigned four and twenty years, l. 4. p. 157. Ceolnoth,
elected and consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury, and when he received his Pall
from Rome, l. 5. p. 255. Consecrates Swythune Bishop of Winchester, with the
Unanimous Consent of the whole Clergy of that Diocese, Id. p. 266. His Decease,
and who elected in his stead, Ibid.
Ceolred, King of the Mercians, and Ina, fight a bloody Battle at Wodensburh in
Wiltshire, l. 4. p. 214, 217. His Death and Burial at Litchfield, Id. p. 217.
The Decease of his Wife Queen Werburh at the Nunnery of Chester, where she was
an Abbess, Id. p. 232.
Ceolred, Abbot of Medeshamsted, and his Monks, lease out to Wulfred certain
Lands, on condition that after his Death they should revert to the Monastery,
paying in the mean time an Annual Rent, l. 5. p. 261, 262. Ceolric, Son to
Cuthwulf, obtains the Kingdom of the West Saxons, which Ceawlin was driven out
of, l. 3. p. 148. His Death, l. 4. p. 157.
Ceolwulf began to reign over the West Saxons, making continual Wars all his
time, l. 3. p. 149. Ceolwulf succeeds Osric in the Kingdom of Northumberland.
His Pedigree, l. 4. p. 220, 221. Surrenders his Kingdom to Eadbert, his Cousin,
Id. p. 223. Dies a Monk in the Isle of Lindisfarne, Id. p. 224, 228.
Ceolwulf, Bishop, when he departed from the Northumbers, l. 4. p. 240. His
Death, Id. p. 241. Ceolwulf, when he began his Reign over the Kingdom of the
Mercians, l. 5. p. 251. Reigned but little more than one year, Id. p. 252, 253.
Ceolwulf, an Inconsiderable Fellow, made King of Mercia by the Danes, upon sad
Conditions, l. 5. p. 277. Cerdic, the Tenth in Descent from Woden; reigned Five
and twenty years; he and his ^ons in six years conquered all the Country of
the West Saxons, l. 3. p. 133. He and his Son Cynric, slew the great British
King Natanleod, or Nazaleod, with Five thousand men, Id. p. 134. Fought often
with King Arthur, and so wearied him out, that he gave him up Hampshire and
Somersetshire, Id. p. 135. He and Cynric took on them the Title of Kings of the
West Saxons; they obtained a great Victory at Cerdicsford, Id. p. 136. They
fought against the Britains at Cerdic's-Leah; conquered the Isle of Wight, and
slew a great many men at Withgarabyrig. His Death, Id. p. 138.
Cerdicsford, now Charford in Hampshire, where Cerdic and Cynric fought against
the Britains, l. 3. p. 136. Cerne, an Abbey in Dorsetshire, near to a Fountain
where St. Augustine had formerly baptized many Pagans, l. 6. p. 22. Chacea, the
signification of the word, l. 6 p. 60. St. Chad. Vid. Ceadda. Chanons Secular;
Archbishop Elfric turns them out of the Cathedral of Christ-Church in
Canterbury, and places Monks in their room, l. 4. p. 167. Put into all the
Abbeys from whence King Edwi had expelled the Monks, l. 5. p. 353. King Edgar
displaced these, and put Monks in their Rooms, l. 6. p. 5, 6. The Monks turned
out, and these put in again, which occasioned a Civil War, Id. p. 15, 16, 17.
Vid. Monks and Benedictines.
Charges at Assizes. Vid. Assize-Charges. Charles, King of the Franks, when he
began to reign, l. 4. p. 229 Enters Spain, and destroys the Cities of
Pampelona, and Caesar Augusta, now Saragosa, Id. p. 231. Gains a Victory over
the ancient Saxons, and laid theirs to his own Dominions, Id. p. 232. Passes
through Almany to the very Borders of Bavaria, and sends certain Synodal
Decrees into England, Id. p. 236. Would have done the Northumbrian Kingdom all
the mischief he could, for their so basely murdering their King Ethelred, but
for Alcuin's Intercession, Id. p. 240.
Charles the Great, when first made Emperor, and saluted Augustus, and anointed
by Pope Leo, Id. p. 242. Receives Aeadburga, Widow to Brihtric, very kindly,
but at last puts her into a Monastery as an Abbess; being expelled thence for
her Incontinency, she makes a miserable End, Id. p. 243. Is taught the Liberal
Arts by Alcuin, a most Learned Englishman, Id. p. 244. Restores by his
Assistance Eardulf to his Kingdom, from which he had been expelled. Makes Peace
with Nicephorus, Emperor of Constantinople, Id. p. 249. The different Accounts
of the Time of his Death, l. 5. p. 251.
Charles, King of the Western-Franks, killed by a Wild-Boar; his Pedigree. And
Charles, King of the Almans, received all the Kingdoms of the Western-Franks,
by the voluntary Consent of all the People. The Extent of his Dominion; his
Pedigree, l. 5. p. 287. Charles the Gross, King of the Franks, his Death; but
he was expelled his Kingdom six Weeks before his Death, by Earnwulf, his
Brother's Son, who divided it into five Partitions, Id. p. 290. Charters, all
of King Ethelbert's, whereby he had settled great Endowments on Christ-Church,
and that of St. Pancrace in Canterbury, which were confirmed in the Mycel
Synod, or Great Council of the Kingdom; but they are much suspected of being
forged in many respects, l. 4. p. 163. Of King Wulfher, at the Consecration of
the Abbey of Medeshamsted, Id. p. 187. Of the Foundation of Evesham Abbey,
certainly forged, and the Reasons why, Id. p. 216, 217. Of the Foundation of
Winburn Monastery (built by Cuthburgh, one of King Ina's Sisters) by Ethelbald,
King of the Mercians, whereby he granted to it the whole Isle of Croyland, Id.
p. 218. Of King Offa to the Monastery of St. Albans, whereby were confirmed
very great Privileges, and vast Possessions, which he had before given to it.
Id. p. 237. Imbezeling the Deeds belonging to the Monastery of Cotham, by King
Cenwulf, l. 4. p. 243. Of Winchelcomb, confirmed by a Great Council, and what
Orders of men were present thereat, l. 5. p. 251. Of Confirmation of the Lands
and Privileges of Croyland Monastery, in a Great Council, Id. p. 254. Of King
Berthwulf to the Abbey of Croyland, confirmed under the Rule of St. Benedict,
in a Great Council of the Kingdom at Kingsbury, Id. p. 261. Of King Edgar,
about his subduing the greatest part of Ireland, with the City of Dublin, and
to be Lord of all the Isles as far as Norway, doubtless fictitious, l. 6. p.
12. By an Extract from King Cnute's Charter, preserved in the Evidences of that
Church, the Port of Sandwich is given to Christ-Church in Canterbury, with all
the Issues, etc. Id. p. 54. Of King Cnute's to the Monastery of St.
Edmundsbury, grants and confirms all its Lands and Privileges. The Beginning of
it somewhat remarkable, Ibid. Of the Foundation of the Monastery of Coventry,
ratified by the Charter of King Edward, and a Bull of Pope Alexander, Id. p.
72. Of Edward the Confessor, to confirm the Foundation of Waltham-Abbey, Id. p.
89. The Curia, or Great Council of the Kingdom, confirm his Charter of
Endowment of the Monastery of Westminster; part of which is there set down, Id.
p. 94. Charters and other Writings, when they began to be made after the French
way, Id. p. 98.
Chastity. Queen Etheldrith, though twice married, yet would not suffer either
of her Husbands to know her, l. 4. p. 198, 199. An Heroic Example of it in the
Abbess of Coldingham Nunnery in Yorkshire, l. 5. p. 269. King Edgar, perhaps,
loved it in others, though he did not much practice it himself, l. 6. p. 11.
Edward the Confessor highly extols his Wife for her Chastity, Id. p. 96.
Cherbury in Shropshire, anciently called Cyricbyrig, l. 5. p. 316. Chertsey in
Surrey, anciently called Ceortesige, l. 6. p. 6. Chester, anciently called
Legions, l. 4. p. 164. Legacester, l. 5. p. 301. l. 6. p. 8. Concacestre, l. 5.
p. 286. Called also Caerlegion, l. 5. p. 315. And Cunaeceaster, l. 6. p. 26.
The Place where the Danes took up their Quarters against King Alfred's Forces,
which made them suffer great extremities, l. 5. p. 301. Repaired by the Command
of Earl Ethelred, and his Wife Ethelfleda, Id. p. 315. The Heads of Leofred a
Dane, and Gryffyth ap Madoc, set up on the top of the Tower there, Id. p. 321.
The Province much spoiled and ruined by the Norwegian Pirates, l. 6. p. 20.
Chichester, the Bishop's See was formerly at Selsey, l. 4. p. 198. Anciently
Cisseancester in Sussex, where the Danes carried their Prey from Alfred, l. 5.
p. 300. The Bishopric was called that of the South Saxons, l. 6. p. 88.
Chiltern, the Woody Country of Bucks and Oxfordshire, anciently called
Clytern, l. 6. p. 34. Chipnam. Vid. Cippenham. Choisy, anciently Cazii,
signifies a Royal Village; it is in France, l. 5. p. 290. Christianity, first
preached in this Island, when, and by whom, l. 2. p. 51, 52. When, and by whom
first preached in Germany, l. 4. p. 211.
Christ-Church in Canterbury had the Port in Sandwich given to it by King
Cnute, with all the Issues and Profits, etc. l. 6. p. 54. Chrysanthius, the Son
of Marcian, a Novatian Bishop, supposed to be sent into Britain by Theodosius,
as his Lieutenant, l. 2. p. 97. Church. Pope Gregory's Determination concerning
the Customs of the Church, l. 4. p. 156. When their Dues ought to be brought
in, and the Punishment for Non-Payment of them. A Sanctuary to those that fly
to it, who are guilty of a Capital Crime. The Punishment those are to undergo
that fight in a Church, Id. p. 208. Withred's great care of the Churches in
Kent, Id. p. 210, 211. Are freed from all Public Payments and Tributes
whatsoever, Id. p. 212. With how bright a Luster Religion shined in the
Primitive Church, l. 5. p. 24^. Alfred's Law, entitled, The Immunity of the
Church, Id. p. 292, 296, 297. The Forfeiture for stealing any thing from
thence, Id. p. 297. How necessary it was in ancient times for Princes
themselves to be blindly obedient to the Discipline of it, l. 6. p. 3. Edgar's
Law concerning the Immunities of the Church, l. 6. p. 13. When Churches in
Wales began to acknowledge the Superiority of the Archbishops of Canterbury,
Id. p. 21. The Original of Coat Armor its being hung up in Churches, from
whence supposed, Id. p. 57. In all Courts of Civil Pleas, Causes concerning
Holy Church were to be first determined, Id. p. 99. Those that hold of the
Church, not to be compelled to plead out of the Ecclesiastical Courts, unless
Justice be wanting there, Ibid. The Law concerning those who violate the Peace
of it, Ibid. When the Church was not excused from paying of Danegelt, Id. p.
100. In what cases the Church was to have one Moiety of Treasure-trove, Id. p.
101.
Cimbric Chersonese, now called Jutland, l. 3. p. 121. Cimerii, and Cimbri,
derived from Gomer, by whom the Ancient Gallia wa^ first inhabited, l. 1. p. 4.
Cippenham, now Chipnam in Wiltshire, l. 5. p. 262, 283. Cirencester, the City,
besieged, taken, and burnt; and by whom, l. 3. p. 148. Civilis, sent for by
Theodosius to govern Britain as Vice-Praefect, l. 2. p. 93. Civil War between
Cartismandua and Venutius, l. 2. p. 45, 46. Between Otho and Vitellius, Id. p.
53.
Claudia Rufina, Wife of Pudens a Senator of Rome, l. 2. p. 66. Vid. Rufina.
Claudian, his Verses in De Bello Getico, supposed to be designed for the
second Departure of the Roman Legions, l. 2. p. 101. Claudius the Emperor, as
he was coming to invade the Britains, had twice like to have been cast away by
Foul Weather; but at last obtains a Victory over them, and at his Return to
Rome the Senate decree him a Triumph, and Annual Games, with two Triumphal
Arches, l. 2. p. 39, 40. Lived about three years after his sending Aulus Didius
into Britain. His Death, supposed of Poison given him by his Wife Agrippina,
Id. p. 45. A Temple dedicated to him, looked on as a Badge of their Eternal
Slavery, Id. p. 47.
Claudius Marc. Aurel. Flav. elected Emperor (Gallienus being slain) performed
several great Actions, and dies suddenly, l. 2. p. 82. Clergy the British,
Gildas his Character and Reproof of them, l. 3. p. 140. May marry, if out of
Holy Orders, and that they cannot otherwise contain. Great care was to be had
of their Stipends, to make them more diligent in Service. And of their
Hospitality, l. 4. p. 155. To receive no Reward for baptizing, or for the other
Sacraments, Id. p. 225. Several Constitutions made against their committing
Offenses, l. 5. p. 284, 285. Their Goods and Possessions established to them by
Edward the Confessor's Laws, l. 6. p. 99.
Chlodius Balbinus. Vid. Balbinus. Chlorus Constantius, adopted Caesar by
Maximinian, is sent by him against Carausius, l. 2. p. 83. Fires his own Ships,
that so his Soldiers might have no hopes left them of Safety but in Victory,
Id. p. 84. Chooses the Empire of the Western Provinces (whereof Britain was one)
and puts a stop to the Persecution here, raised by Dioclesian, Id. p. 87. Died
at York, Ibid. Vid. Constantine the Great.
Cloveshoe, a Synod appointed to be assembled there once a year, l. 4. p. 193.
The Great Synod, where were present Ethelbald the Mercian King, and Archbishop
Cuthbert; where the place was, is uncertain; several Supposals and Conjectures
about it, Id. p. 224. The second Council held here, and what was decreed in it,
Id. p. 225. The third Council held here under King Kenwulf, and what was
transacted therein, Id. p. 243. l. 5. p. 248. A Synod held here under King
Beornwulf and Archbishop Wilfrid, whose Constitutions wholly relate to
Ecclesiastical Affairs, l. 5. p. 253. Another Synodal Council held here by
Beornwulf, etc. wherein some Disputes about Lands between Heabert Bishop of
Worcester, and the Monastery of Westburgh, are determined, Ibid.
Cnobsbury, a Town, wherein Fursaeus, by the help of King Sigebert, erects a
Monastery, which afterward Anna, King of the East Angles, richly endows, l. 4.
p. 180. Cnute having obtained the Crown of England, restores its ancient Laws
and Liberties, l. 5. p. 246. Builds a Noble Monastery at Beadricesworth, now
St. Edmundsbury, whither the Body of Edmund the Martyr was removed some time
before, l. 5. p. 323. Is chosen King by all the Danish Fleet and Army, after
the Death of his Father Sweyn, l. 6. p. 39. Puts the Hostages on Shore at
Sandwich that were given to his Father, but first cuts off their Hands and
Noses, Ibid. Plunders all about Wiltshire, Dorsetshire, and Somersetshire, etc.
and Aedric and the West Saxons Submission to him, Id. p. 40, 41, 42. Is chosen
King by several of the Bishops, Abbots, and Noblemen of England, upon which he
comes up with his Fleet to Greenwich to besiege London; and the Battles he
fought with King Edmund, and those that espoused his Interest, Id. p. 45, 46,
47. A Peace concluded on between him and Edmund Ironside, with an Account of
the Particulars of it, Id. p. 47, 48. The Council he summoned to London about
making him King of all England, and setting aside his Children and Brethren
from the Kingdom of the West Saxons, Id. p. 49. When he began his Reign;
divides all England into four Parts or Governments, r^serving West-Saxony to
himself, Id. p. 50. Marries Emma, Widow of the King his Predecessor, and the
Reason of State for it. Goes to Denmark to subdue the Vandals, carrying along
with him an Army of English and Danes; the former behaving themselves so
bravely against the Enemy, that after that Battle he had the English in as much
esteem at his own Native Subjects. Holds a Great Council at Cyrencester, and
what is ^ransacted therein, Id. p. 51. A Parliament called by him at
Winchester, and who present, and what decreed therein, l. 6. p. 52. Founds the
Monastery of Beadricesworth, where a Church had been built before, and endows
it, which was one of the Largest and Richest in England, Ibid. Goes again into
Denmark with his Fleet, and engages with the Swedes both by Land and Sea, the
latter getting the Victory. Two years after he drives Olaf out of Norway, and
conquers it for himself. Ranishes Hacun a Danish Earl (his Nephew by Marriage),
under pretense of an Embassy, Id. p. 53. Agrees with Robert Duke of Normandy,
That King Ethelred's two Sons should have half the Kingdom peaceably during his
life. Gives the Port of Sandwich to Christ-Church in Canterbury, with all the
Issues, etc. And founds a Monastery for Benedictines in Norfolk, called St.
Bennet's in Holme, Id. p. 54. Goes to Rome, and what he does there he declares
in a Letter he sent (upon his return from thence) into England, to the
Archbishops of Canterbury and York, Id. p. 55. Goes into Scotland, and there
King Malcolme becomes subject to him. Before his Death he appoints Swayn his
Eldest Son, King of Norway; Hardecnute, his Son by Queen Emma, King of Denmark;
and Harold, his Son by Elgiva, King of England after him, Id. p. 56, 61. Dies
at Shaftsbury, and is buried at the new Monastery of Winchester, having reigned
almost Twenty Years. His Character. A pretty Story about the sense he had of
the Vanity of Worldly Empire, Id. p. 57. The Laws he ordains with the Consent
of his Wise Men at Winchester, Id. p. 57, 58, 59, 60. His Laws, afterward
confirmed and renewed by King Edward the Confessor, at the Request of the
Northumbers, Id. p. 90.
Coelestine, the Pope, sends Palladius the Bishop to the Scots, to confirm
their Faith, l. 2. p. 109, 110. Cogidunus, held several British Cities of
Ostorius Scapula, as Tributary to the Roman Empire, l. 2. p. 41. Coifi, chief
of King Edwin's Idol Priests, consents to receive the Christian Religion,
confessing his own to be good for nothing, l. 4. p. 173. Burns the Idol
Temples, and demolishes the Altars of his former Gods, Id. p. 174.
Coil, the Son of Marius, succeeds him in. Britain, loves the Romans, and is
honored by them, and governs the Kingdom long and peaceably, l. 2. p. 67. Dies
toward the end of Marcus Aurelius the Emperor's Reign, Id. p. 68.
Coinage, King Athelstan's Law, That no Money be coined out of some Town; no
embasing to be of the Coin, under Forfeiture of the loss of the Hand, etc. l.
5. p. 340. Though not Treason in King Ethelred's time, yet punishable at the
King's discretion, either by Fine or Death, l. 6. p. 44. Vid. Money.
Colchester, anciently called Colnaceastre; taken from the Danes by the men of
Kent, Surrey, and Essex, and the neighboring Towns: The Wall rebuilt, and all
ruinous places repaired by the Command of King Edward the Elder, l. 5. p. 322.
Coldingham, the Monastery. Vid. Monastery of Coludesburgh. Coleman, Bishop of
Lindisfarne, departs to Scotland, and upon what account, l. 4. p. 189.
Coludesburgh, a great Monastery of Monks and Nuns together, called afterward
Coldingham, in the Marches of Scotland, burnt, and how, l. 4. p. 198, 199.
Columba, the Priest or Presbyter, comes out of Ireland to preach the Word of
God to the Northern Picts, and receives the Island of Hy to build a Monastery
in, l. 3. p. 143. Comets; one appeared in King Egfrid's time, that continued
three Months, carrying with it every morning a large Tail like a Pillar, l. 4.
p. 196. Another in Ethelheard's time, l. 4. p. 220. One appeared some time
after Easter, in the year 891. l. 5. p. 298. Another appeared about the time of
Queen Ealswithe's Death, Id. p. 313. Another was seen in the year 995. l. 6. p.
26. A dreadful one appeared; which was visible in all these parts of the world,
Id. p. 106.
Commodus succeeds his Father Marcus Aurelius in the Empire, l. 2. p. 68. In
his Reign the Britains and other Countries were much infested with Wars and
Seditions, Id. p. 70. Makes Helvius Pertinax Lieutenant in Britain, but was
soon dismissed of his Government there, Id. p. 70, 71, He was odious to the
Commonwealth because of his Vices, by which he not only destroyed it, but
disgraced himself, Id. p. 71. Was not long after poisoned by Martia, his
Concubine, Id. p. 72.
Commons of England; highly probable that they had now their Representatives in
the Great Council of the Kingdom; and why, l. 5. p. 294. Compurgators, the
Antiquity of them, and of what number, l. 6. p. 43. Conan, Duke of Britain,
Geoffrey of Monmouth's story of him, l. 2. p. 96. Conan Aurelius, King of
Powis-Land, or some other Southern Province, l. 3. p. 139, 146. Conan, King or
Prince of North Wales, fights with Howel, upon his claiming the Isle of Mon, or
Anglesey, but loses the Victory, l. 5. p. 250. Afterward chases his Brother
out of the Isle of Anglesey, and compells him to fly into that of Man, and a
little after dies, Id. p. 251.
Conan, or Kynan, a Prince in Possession of South Wales, l. 6. p. 40. The Son
of Jago, his Enterprise upon North Wales, and the Success of it, Id. p. 70.
Conan Tindaethwy, when he began his Reign over the Britains in Wales, l. 4. p.
227. Congal, an Abbot of Bangor, l. 3. p. 149. Constans (the Son of
Constantine) his Success, Declension, and Death, l. 2. p. 103. Constantine the
Great, Son of Constantius Chlorus, succeeding his Father, is saluted Emperor by
the whole Army. Probably born in Britain. Overthrows near Rome the Tyrant
Maxentius, and declares himself a Christian, l. 2. p. 87. Subdues the Britains
that had revolted from him, Id. p. 87, 88. His death, and how be divided the
Empire, Id. p. 88. His Example proposed to King Ethelbert by Pope Gregory, l.
4. p. 159.
Constantine, an Usurper, declared Emperor by the Britains for the good Omen of
his Name, but of what Birth uncertain. His Actions and Successes, l. 2. p. 102,
103. Makes his Son Constans (from a Monk) Caesar. Settles his Imperial Seat at
Arles, and has it called Constantia, Id. p. 103. Flings off his Purple Robes,
and takes Priests Orders, in hopes thereby to save his life, but all in vain;
for being carried into Italy, he was there beheaded, Ibid. The story of his
being elected King in Britain, very Fabulous and False, l. 3. p. 116.
Constantine, called, The Tyrannical Whelp of an Impure Damonian Lioness;
accused of murdering two Innocent Royal Youths at the very Altar, l. 3. p.
139. Builds a Monastery in Ireland, and takes on him the Habit of a Monk, Id.
p. 148.
Constantine, King of Scots, beaten by Athelstane and his Army; renews the War
with him, but is again most miserably beaten, l. 5. p. 332, 333, 334. And at
last killed by Singin, a Captain of the Worcestershire-men, though his Death is
denied by the Scotch Historians, but he became a Monk, and was Abbot among the
Culdees of St. Andrews, Id. p. 335, 336.
Constantine the Black, Son to Prince Jago, hires Godfryd the Dane to engage
with him against his Cousin ap Jevaf, and what success they met with, l. 6. p.
20. Constantius overcomes Magnentius, and what Blot is cast upon his Reign by
the Severities of Paulus, a malicious Inquisitor and Oppressor. Calls the
Council of Ariminum, the most numerous that had ever yet appeared, l. 2. p. 89.
Dies of a Fever at Mopsvestia, on the borders of Cilicia, Id. p. 91.
Constantius Comes, General to the Emperor Honorius, hinders Gerontius from
taking of Arles, l. 2. p. 103. Corfesgeate, now Corfe-Castle in the Isle of
Purbeck, l. 6. p. 17. Cornwall, bestowed by Brute on Corinaeus, a Trojan, l. 1.
p. 9. And Devonshire conquered by Ivour; and the various stories of it, l. 3.
p. 145.
Coronation. None either before or long after the Conquest, took upon them the
Title of King, till they were crowned. And the Ceremony of Coronation was often
in ancient times repeated upon some great occasion, l. 6. p. 8. Corrodies, came
first from King Aethelwulph's Last Will, whereby he ordained, That his
Successors through all his own Hereditary Lands, should maintain out of every
T^n Families one Poor Person with Meat, Drink, and Apparel, l. 5. p. 264.
Coventry, derives its Name from the Convent built there by Earl Leofric and his
Lady Godiva, l. 6. p. 71. How the Town came to be freed from all Taxes imposed
upon it, by this Lady's riding through it naked at Midnight, Id. p. 71, 72.
Councils, of Arles in Gallia, when held, and what British Bishops were sent to
it, l. 2. p. 88. Of Nice, a great one assembled Anno Dom. 325. at which it
appears plain that some of the Bishops of Britain assisted, Ibid. Of Sardica,
when called, and wherein appeared the Bishops of Britain, Id. p. 89. Of
Ariminum, called by Constantius, the most numerous that ever yet appeared,
wherein were above Four hundred Bishops of the Eastern and Western Churches;
The Bishops that were sent to it from Britain, Id. p. 89, 90. Of Bourdeaux;
wherein Priscilla, and other Heretics of Maximus his Party, being condemned
and excomunicated; upon their appeal to the Emperor's Tribunal, are by him
sentenced to be beheaded, Id. p. 96. S^veral Councils in France and Africa
condemn Pelagianism, Id. p. 107. A great one called by King Ethelbert of both
Clergy and Laity, and what transacted therein, l. 4. p. 163. Held by King Edwin
and his Wise Men, concerning the Christian Doctrine and Worship, Id. p. 173.
Ina's great one of all the Bishops, with the Great and Wise Men of the Kingdom;
the first whose Laws are come down to us entire, Id. p. 208. Another great one
at Becanceld, and what done therein, and who present thereat, Id. p. 209, 210,
241. Another held at Berghamsted in Kent, and what Laws made therein by the
Common and Unanimous Consent of them All; they are called the Judgments or
Dooms of King Wightred, Id. p. 210, 211. One in the Kingdom of Kent, at a place
called Cylling, to confirm what had been done in that of Becanceld, six years
before, Id. p. 212. A great one held in the Kingdom of the West Saxons, in
which, after the death of Bishop Hedda, that Bishopric was divided into two,
Id. p. 213. A great one called at Verulam (now St. Albans) wherein the Tribute
of Romescot or Peter Pence, is confirmed to be paid to the Pope by their
general Consent, Id. p. 239. Of Cloveshoe, under Kenwulf King of the Mercians;
and what is transacted therein, Id. p. 243. Croyland-Abbey, its Lands and
Privileges confirmed by King Egbert, in a great Council, l. 5. p. 254. A
General one of the whole Kingdom at London, under King Egbert and King
Withlaff; and what done therein, Id. p. 257. A Common Council of the whole
Kingdom, under Egbert King of the West Saxons, where the Grant of the Manor of
Mallings in Sussex, formerly bestowed on Christ-Church in Canterbury, was
confirmed, Ibid. The Council of Kingsbury, under Berthwulf King of the
Mercians; who present, and what done therein, l. 5. p. 261. The Famous and
Solemn Grant of King Aethelwulf concerning Tithes, and the Form of passing it
into an Act in the Great Council of the Kingdom, and who the Parties to it, Id.
p. 262, 263. The League or Agreement made between King Alfred and Guthrum the
Dane, together with their Ecclesiastical Laws, in a Common Council of the
Kingdom, l. 5. p. 283, 284, 285. A great one, wherein King Alfred made those
Laws that go under his Name, Id. p. 291, etc. A great one held by King Edward
the Elder, where Plegmund presided, in the Province of the Gewisses, about
making of Bishops, Id. p. 313, 314. The Laws made by King Edward the Elder, in
a Common Council of the Kingdom, tho in what, or in what year, uncertain, Id.
p. 325, etc. A great Council held by King Athelstan at Graetanleage, and the
Laws past therein, Id. p. 339, 340, etc. King Edmund's great Council, where
held, and the Constitutions of Civil Concernment made therein, Id. p. 346, 347,
348. A great one meets, and chooses Prince Edward (surnamed the Martyr) for
their King, l. 6. p. 15. Those at Kirtlingtune, Winchester, and Calne in
Wiltshire, called to debate that Great Affair concerning the turning out of the
Monks, and restoring the Secular Chanons; at the last of them, the floor of the
room failed, and killed and hurt abundance there, Id. p. 16, 17. One called to
consult about Pope John's Letters sent to King Ethelred, Id. p. 24, 25. King
Ethelred and his Wise Men in Council ordain to raise an Army both by Sea and
Land against the Danes, Id. p. 27. Another Council summoned, who instead of
consulting the Public Good, fall to impeach one another, and to spend the
whole time in their own private quarrels, Id. p. 35. A great one held under
King Cnute at Cyrencester, wherein Ethelward the Eorlderman is outlawed, Id. p.
51. Another of his Mycel Synods held at Winchester, and what Laws made therein,
Id. p. 57, 58, 59, 60. In a great Council held at London, a Religious Monk of
Evesham is chosen Abbot of that Monastery, Id. p. 73. A great one held at
London in Mid-lent, Id. p. 75. Another at Gloucester, to determine a Difference
between Earl Godwin and the Welshmen, Id. p. 77. A great one without London,
about determining the Quarrel between Edward the Confessor and E^rl Godwin, Id.
p. 81. One h^ld at Westminster, to confirm Edward the Confessor's Charter of
Endowment of the Church of Westminster, Id. p. 94.
Counties. When England was first thus divided by King Alfred, l. 5. p. 291.
Countrymen, by King Alfred's Law, not to be unjustly imprisoned, nor any way
misused, under such and such Penalties, l. 5. p. 293, 294. Their very
Homestalls are secured in Peace and Quietness, Id. p. 295.
County Court, the Antiquity and Power of it; held every Month, as now, l. 5.
p. 326. Coway-stakes, near Lalam in Middlesex, where the Britains placed Piles
to hinder Caesar and his Romans Passage to them; some of which were lately
there to be seen, l. 2. p. 34. Crayford in Kent, anciently called Crecanford,
l. 5. p. 313. Creed. The Bishops at Ariminun forced by the Emperor to subscribe
the New Creed made not long before at the pretended Council of Syrmium, wherein
the Son of God was declared to be only of like Substance with the Father, l. 2.
p. 89, 90. Priests obliged to learn it and the Lord's Prayer in English, l. 4.
p. 225. All men in general commanded to learn it and the Lord's Prayer, Id. p.
233.
Creeklade, now a small Town in Wiltshire, from whence the Muses are said to be
carried to Oxford, supposed an Ancient Great School. Its Derivation, l. 5. p.
290. Creoda, or Crida, first King of the Mercians, one of the l^rgest of the
English-Saxon Kingdoms, and one of the last conquered by the West Saxons. His
Death, l. 3. p. 147, 149. Crimes, all redeemable by Fines in Edward the Elder's
time, and long after, l. 5. p. 326. Punishable rather by Mulcts than by Blood,
in King Athelstan's time, Id. p. 342. For what no satisfaction should be made
by way of Compensation, l. 6. p. 59.
Criminal; none knowingly and voluntarily to have Peace with, or harbor any
one that is condemned; and what such forfeit that act contrary to this Law, l.
5. p. 326. None to absent themselves from the Gemots, or Hundred-Courts; and if
any do, what course shall be taken about him, l. 6. p. 14. No petty Offender to
be put to Death, by Cnute's Law, Id. p. 58.
Crown. After Cnute had found the weak and bounded Power of Kings, by the
Tide's refusing to obey his Majestic Commands, he returns home, and would wear
his Crown no longer, but orders it to be hung on the head of the Crucifix at
Winchester, l. 6. p. 57. Croyland; the whole Isle granted by King Ethelbald's
Charter to this Monastery, l. 4. p. 218. The Lands and Privileges of the Abbey
confirmed by King Egbert in a Great Council, l. 5. p. 254. The Privileges and
Grants of King Withlaff to this Monastery, confirmed in a General Council of
the whole Kingdom, Id. p. 257. The Charter of King Berthwulf to this Abbey,
confirmed under the Rule of St. Benedict at Kingsbury, supposed to be a Great
Council of the Kingdom, Id. p. 261. The Monastery and Church, with a Noble
Library of Books, and all its Charters, burnt and utterly destroyed by the
Danes, Id. p. 271, 272. Is repaired and much enriched by Abbot Turketule, who
by adding six more to the two Bells there, made the first tuneable Ring of
Bells in England, l. 6. p. 12.
Crysanthius, sent by Theodosius, as his Lieutenant, to suppress the Incursions
of the Picts and Scots, l. 2. p. 97. Cuckamsley-hill in Berkshire, by the
Saxons called Cwichelmeslaw, l. 6. p. 32. Cumbran, a most Noble Ealdorman, for
representing the People's Grievances to cruel King Sigebert, at the Request of
the Subjects, is stain by him, l. 4. p. 226, 227, Cuneglasus, supposed by some
Antiquaries to have been King of the Northern or Cambrian Britains, l. 3. p.
139, 145. Curescot, or Cyrescot, that is, First Fruits, or Money given to the
Church, l. 6. p. 55, 56. Cutha. Vid. Cuthwulf. Cuthbert, ordained Bishop of
Lindisfarne. His Noble Character, and approaching Death, l. 4. p. 201, 202.
Retires (after he had resigned his Bishopric) to Farne-Island, and there
deceases; but his Body is translated to Lindisfarne, Id. p 204. Called St.
Cuthbert, and esteemed to have been a very holy man, Id. p. 215. l. 5. p. 286.
Cuthbryht, or Cuthbert, upon the Death of Nothelm, is consecrated Archbishop
of Canterbury, l. 4. p. 224. Sat Archbishop eighteen years, and then d^ceases,
Id. p. 228. His Body, after a hundred years, removed by Aldune from
Cunecaeaster (i.e. Chester) to the place where the City of Durham was
afterward built, l. 6. p. 26.
Cuthred had Three thousand Hides of Land given him by Cenwalc, King of the
West Saxons, near Aescasdune, l. 4. p. 182. He was the Son of Cwichelme, Ibid.
His Death, Id. p. 186.
Cuthred, Cousin to Ethelred, succeeds him in the Kingdom of the West Saxons.
H^s War with Ethelbald, King of the Mercians, with various Successes. He and
Ethelbald fight against the Britains, l. 4. p. 224, 226. In the Twelfth Year of
his Reign figh^s against Ethelune the Ealdorman, and prevails, Id. p. 225. He
and Ethelune reconciled, and both fight against Ethelbald, who fled. His
Decease, and Sigebert his Cousin succeeds to him, Id. p. 226.
Cuthred, King of Kent, made King ^hereof by Kenwulf; instead of Ethelbert,
called Praen. His Death, l. 5. p. 248, 251. Cuthwulf, or Cutha, Brother to
Ceawlin, fights against the Britains at Bedicanford, and takes Four Towns, l.
3. p. 145. They both fight against the Britains, at a place called Frethanleag,
where Cutha is slain, Id. p. 147. l. 4. p. 159.
Cwichelme, Brother to Ceawlin, his Death, l. 3. p. 149. Cwichelme and Cynegils
fight with the Britains at Beamdune, and there slay Two thousand and forty six
men, l. 4. p. 166. His Character, and how related to Cynegils, Id. p. 167.
Matthew Westminster's mistake concerning his Death, Id. p. 172. Fights with
Penda, King of Mercia, at Cirencester, and at last a League is made betw^en
them, Id. p. 174. Is converted, and baptized into the Christian Faith, and soon
after dies, Id. p. 179.
Cycle of Eighty four years, an account of it; the u^e of which the Romans
having left off, took up another of nineteen years, l 4. p. 160. Cynebald the
Bishop, resigns his See at Lindisfarne, l. 4. p. 232. Cynebryht, Bishop of the
West Saxons, goes to Rome, to take the Habit of a Monk, l. 4. p. 242. Cynegils;
when he began to reign over the West Saxons, and whose Son he was, l. 4. p.
166. Vid. Cwichelme. His Character, Id. p. 167. Fights with Penda at
Cirencester, and the Success thereof, Id. p. 174. The West Saxons receive the
Christian Faith in his Reign, and himself too, Id. p. 179.
Cyneheard succeeds Hunferth in the Bishopric of Winchester, l. 4. p. 226.
Cyneheard Aetheling, Brother to Sigebert, kills Cynwulf, l. 4. p. 226, 232. Is
slain by the Thanes of King Cynewulf, and lies buried at Axminster, Id. p. 233.
Cynoth, King of the Picts, to whom Alhred, King of the Northumbers, fled,
after he was deposed, l. 4. p. 230. Cynric fights against the Britains at
Searebyrig (i. e. Old Sarum) and puts them to flight, l. 3. p. 142. And at
Banbury, anciently called Berinbyrig, Id. p. 24^. His Death; and Ceawlin his
Son reigns after him, Ibid.
Cynric Aetheling, a Prince of the Blood Royal of the West Saxons is slain; Son
of Cuthred, a great Warrior for his time, and how he fell, l. 4. p. 225.
Cynwulf, with the Great Council, deposes Sigebert, King of the West Saxons, and
by them is unanimously elected King in his room. He often overcomes the
Britains in fight, but at last is slain, l. 4. p. 226, 227. And Offa, King of
the Mercians, fight at Bensington in Oxfordshire, Id. p. 230. Is slain by
Cyneheard, but he f^ll likewise with him, Id. p. 232. Buried at Wintencester;
he was descended from Cerdic, Id. p. 233. Vid. Kenwulf.

D
DAgobert, King of the French, his Death, l. 4. p. 217. Dalliance with other
men's Wive^, the Fine imposed for it by Alfred's Law, l. 5. p. 293. Danegelt,
viz. Seventy two thousand Pounds paid as a Tribute throughout England, besides
Eleven thousand Pounds more, which the Citizens of London paid, l. 6. p. 51.
Vid. Tribute and Tax. It was now by constant Usage become a Prerogative, Id. p.
66. This cruel Burden taken off the Nation by Edward the Confessor, and how it
came to pass, Id. p. 78. What it was, and upon what occasion it was first
imposed. The Church always excused from this Payment till Will. Rufus's time,
Id. p. 100.
Danes, upon their first arrival in England were forced to fly to their Ships
again. These and the Normans then looked upon to be but one and the same
People, l. 4. p. 235. Miserably destroying the Churches of God in Lindisfarne,
and committing great Ravages, Id. p. 238. Destroy Northumberland, and rob the
Monastery built there by Egbert, Id. p. 240. Their Invasion and Conquest of
several Principalities, till expelled by King Alfred, and his Son Edward the
Elder, when these Kingdoms became united under the general name of England. An
account of their Invasion, both as to its Causes and Instruments, by which
effected, being the fiercest and most cruel that this Island ever felt, Id. p.
246. Their Nation in the Saxon Annals called sometimes Northmanna, and
sometimes Deanscan, l. 5. p. 256. They keep the Fi^ld at the Battle of Carrum
(now Charmouth in Dorsetshire) from Egbert, Id. p. 256. Consultation in a
General Council of the whole Kingdom how to prevent their Invasion. A great
Fleet of them land among the Western-Welsh, (that is, Cornish-Men) and fight
Egbert, Id. p. 257. Danish Pirates beaten at Southampton by Wulfheard the
Ealdorman; they fight again, and their various Successes, Id. p. 258, 259.
Fight with the Somersetshire and Dorsetshire Men, but are miserably worsted, Id
p. 260. Their several Battles and Successes, Id. p. 261, 262. They take
Winchester from King Ethelbert, Id. p. 266. Make a League with the Kentish-men,
but for all that they waste all the East part of it, as knowing they could get
more by Plunder than peace. A great Army of them land here, and take up their
Winter Quarters among the East Angles, who are forced to make Peace with them;
then they march to York, Kill the Two Kings there, and put to flight the whole
Army, as well within as without the Town, Id. p. 267. Make one Egbert King over
the Northumbers, though under the Danish Dominion, Id. p. 268. Force the
Mercians to make Peace with them, Id. p. 269. Return to York, where they stay
Twelve Months, and commit horrible Cruelties there, and in the Kingdom of the
East Angles, which they wholly conquer, Id. p. 269, 270. Landing in
Lincolnshire, they spoil all that Country, committing Murders and Desolations
without mercy, though not without great losses to themselves, Id. p. 271, 272.
The reason of their Invading the Kingdom of the East Angles, Id. p. 272, 273.
Going into the West Saxon Kingdom to Reading in Berkshire, are routed, Id. 274,
275. In other places meet with various Successes of good and evil fortune, Id.
p. 276. Enter into a Peace with the English Saxons to depart the Kingdom, which
they did not long observe; for the next year they land again, and take up their
Winter Quarters in London, and the Mercians forced to make P^ace with them.
They destroy Alcluid in Scotland; oblige Burhred, King of Mercia, to desert his
Kingdom and go to Rome; and bring the whole Kingdom under their Dominion and
Vassalage, Id. p. 277. Destroy the whole Country of Northumberland, and ravag
up to Galloway; ruin Warham in Dorsetshire, a strong Castle of the West Saxons;
give Hostages to King Alfred, but upon breach of their Oath are all put to
death. From whence they date their Reign over the King of Northumbers. A
Hundred and twenty of their Ships cast away in a storm near Swanwick in
Hampshire, Id. p. 278. Fix their Quarters in West-Saxony, and make Aelfred very
uneasy, Id. p. 280. Hinguar their Captain, with Twelve Hundred Men slain near
the Castle of Kenwith, Id. p. 281. Are signally beaten by King Aelfred, so as
to desire Peace on Conditions, Id. p. 282, 283. The Laws made between them and
King Aelfred in a Common Council of the Kingdom, acknowledging his Superiority
over them, Id. p. 285. Besiege the City of Rochester, build a strong Fort
before the Gates of it, but however they are forced to retire and go to their
Ships, Id. p. 286. One Fleet of theirs beaten by King Alfred; another meeting
him on his Return home, prove too hard for him. The Peace lately made with King
Alfred, broke by the Danes of East-England, Id. p. 286, 287. Beaten by the
Bretons, and by Arnulf the Emperor, Id. p. 298. Infest the Kingdom for Three
years worse than ever; their landing in Kent, and their various Successes, Id.
p. 298, 299, 300, 301, 302. Fight at Holme with the Kentish-men, and their
success, l. 5. p. 312, 313. Break their League with King Edward the Elder;
afterward are beaten by the English in Staffordshire, Id. p. 315, 316. Commit
great Ravage and Slaughter in Oxfordshire, and several other Countries, but
often worsted, Id. p. 319, 321. Their power beginning to decrease, and that of
the English to increase, Id. p. 321, 322. Burn Tavistock in less than Fifty
years after it was founded, l. 6. p. 4. With the Welshmen that assisted them,
routed by Howel ap Jevaf, their Pirates destroy Southampton, and commit great
Ravage there: They land in Cornwall, and Burn the Church and Monastery of St.
Petroc, Id. p. 20. They land in Dorsetshire, and spoil the Isle of Portland,
Id. p. 21. Destroy Weedport (that is Watchet) in Somersetshire, Id. p. 22. As
likewise the whole Isle of Anglesey, and the Town of Ipswich in Suffolk, Id. p.
23. Several Tributes paid them, and yet those did not long satisfy their
Covetousness, Id. p. 25, 29, 32. Their Fleet escape by flight from being
encompassed by King Ethelred's, Id. p. 23. Come hither again with Ninety three
Ships, and ravaging several Countries, Id. p. 24, 25. Maintained by the
West Saxons, and received a great Tribute besides, Id. p. 25. Take much plunder
from the Welsh, Cornwall, and Devonshire, etc. Id. p. 26, 27. And the Spoils,
Burnings, and Desolations they made wherever they came, Id. p. 28.29, 30, 31,
32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 45, 46, 47, 74. Leagues made with them, but they
never regarded them long, Id. 28, 31. King Ethelred commands all the Danes that
could be found in England to be slain, with the reason why; which was most
barbarously put in Execution, especially at London; but not long after it was
bloodily revenged, Id. p. 29, 30, 31. They insolently demand greater Tribute of
the King and Kingdom, l. 6. p. 35. Two thousand of them perish by diverse inward
Torments; Their submission to King Ethelred upon Conditions, Id. p. 36, 37.
Upon a Peace with Edmond Ironside, they take up their Winter Quarters at
London, Id. p. 48. They and the English are reconciled and united at Oxford, at
a Great Council, Id. p. 51. At the Election of Edward the Confessor, the Great
Council agreed and Swore, That no Danes should Reign over them any more, and
why, Id. p. 70. Lothen and Yrling, Danes, with Five and twenty Ships, landing
at Sandwic, commit great havoc, and carry off abundance of Booty, Id. p. 74.
Daniel, the Learned and most Pious Bishop of Bangor, in what Age he lived
among the Britains, l. 3. p. 149. Daniel, being worn out by Age, resigns the
Bishopric of Winchester to Hunferth, l. 4. p. 224. His Death, after he had
been Three and forty years a Bishop, Id. p. 225.
Darwent, a River near York, not far from which stood an Idol-Temple, called
Godmundingham, in King Edwin's time, l. 4. p. 174. David, (afterward Sainted)
succeeds Dubritius in the Archbishopric of Caer-Leon, l. 3. p. 149. Is said to
have been Uncle by the Mother side to King Athur, Ibid.
St. David's destroyed by the Danes, who slew Urgeney the Bishop of that See, l.
6. p. 27. Deadly Feuds, vid. Quarrels. Death, None to Die for small offenses,
but Mercy to be shown to such Criminals by King Cnute's Law, l. 6. p. 58. He
that dies in fight, etc. his Heriot shall be remitted, and his Children shall
equally divide his Goods and Lands between them, Id. p. 60.
Decennary, every one of Twelve years old to be entered into it, l. 6. p. 58,
104. Decianus (Catus) solicited by the Romans here to send them some Assistance
against the Iceni and Trinobantes, l. 2. p. 47, 48. Decimation, a very strange
one indeed, which the Danes made both of the Monks and Laity, so that but One
out of Ten persons was kept alive, l. 6. p. 36. Decius (Scil.) Quintus
Trajanus, a great Enemy to Christianity; he raised the Seventh Persecution, l.
2. p. 81. Defamation, punishable by cutting out the Tongue of the Party, or
redeeming it with the Value of his Head, l. 6. p. 13. Degradation of a Priest
for Murder, (as well as Confiscation of all his Estate) unless his Lord will
obtain his Pardon by the Price of his Head, l. 5. p. 297. Degsa-stan (or
Degstan) where Adian, jealous of Ethelfrid's great Success, came against him
with a powerful Army, but was routed, l. 4. p. 159. Deira, a Kingdom in
Northumberland, whose Kings were generally named Ella, l. 4. p. 152. And
Bernicia, united into one Kingdom in Oswald's time, Id. p. 178.
Demetae, that is, South-Welshmen, l. 3. p. 139 Vid. Venedoti.
Denulp, Bishop of Winchester, his Education, Advancement, and Death, l. 5. p.
315. Deomed, supposed to be South Wales, l. 5. p. 319. Deorham, now Durham in
Gloucestershire, l. 3. p. 146. Deposition, the first Instance of it by the
Authority of the Great Council, l. 4. p. 227. Alhred deposed by the Common
Council, and Consent of his own Subjects, Id. p. 230. Of Edwi, confirmed by the
Common Council of the Kingdom, l. 5. p. 354. and Sparsim.
Deprivation of Bosa, Bishop of Dunmoc, and for what, l. 4. p. 193. Derawnde,
now called Beverley in Yorkshire, l. 4. p. 202. Desertion; he that deserts his
Lord, or Fellow-Soldier, either by Land or Sea, in an Expedition, is deprived
both of Life and Estate, l. 6. p. 60. Devils-Ditch, formerly divided the
Mercian Kingdom from that of the East Angles, l. 4. p. 239. l. 5. p. 313.
Devise of Lands by Will. Vid. Testament. Deusdedit the Pope, grants Adrian the
Abbot of Canterbury, a Privilege concerning the free Election of the Abbot of
that Monastery, l. 4. p. 165. Deusdedit, consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury,
and was the first English Monk that had ever been chosen Archbishop of that
See, and the first Bishop consecrated, but by one; he changed his Name to this,
having before been called Fridona, or Fridon, l. 4. p. 186. His Death, Id. p.
189.
Dicul, an Irish or Scotch Monk, that lived in a little Monastery at a place
called Bosenham, with five or six Brethren, in great Devotion, l. 4. p. 198.
Didius (Aulus) a Roman Praetor, sent Lieutenant into Britain, in the room of
Ostorius; his Engagements and Success there, l. 2. p. 45. Difilina. Vid.
Dublin. Dinoth, Abbot of Bangor, instructed how to know whether Augustine's
Preaching were of God, by a Holy man that led the life of an Anchoret, l. 4. p.
161, 162. Diocesses, five made out of two at a Great Council held by Edward the
Elder, l. 5. p. 313. Dioclesian chose Emperor by the Eastern Army, makes Marc.
Aurel. Maximinianus his Associate in the Empire; nominates Galerius, Caesar;
constrains them to divorce their Wives, and to marry their Daughters, l. 2. p.
83. His Persecution of his obedient and harmless Christian Subjects, Id. p. 85.
Dionotus, Duke of Cornwall, Geoffrey of Monmouth's story of him, l. 2. p. 96.
v. 102. Domitian succeeds Titus Vespasian his Brother, l. 2. p. 57. Secretly
designs the Ruin of Agricola, through jealousy that the Glory of a private man
should eclipse that of his Prince, Id. p. 63. Causes it to be reported, That
the Province of Syria should be bestowed on Agricola, Ibid. p. 64.
Dorinea, since Dorchester in Oxfordshire; a City anciently, though now but a
poor Country Town, l. 4. p. 179. Dover; the Sedition there of the Townsmen
against Eustatius Earl of Boloigne, how it arose, and how it ended, l. 6. p.
76, 77. Dower. Where a Widow marries before her Twelvemonth is expired, she
loses it, and who is to have it, and all that her Husband left her, l. 6. p.
60. Draganus, an Irish Bishop, refuses to eat (upon his coming over hither)
with Laurentius Archbishop of Canterbury, and why, l. 4. p. 166. Drinking;
Bonosus a Hard Drinker, having hanged himself for being vanquished by the
Emperor Probus, occasioned that sharp Saying, Here hangs a Tankard, l. 2. p.
82. Brass Pots set upon Posts at Fountains near the Highways, for the use of
Travelers to drink out of, l. 4. p. 175. Edgar's Law to restrain excessive
drinking of great Draughts. Vid. Addenda, p. 136.
Druids, their great Authority, Doctrine, and Gods, l. 2. p. 23, 24. Dublin in
Ireland, anciently called Difiline, l. 5. p. 334. Dubritius, Archbishop of
Caer-Leon upon Usk in South Wales, Founder of the College of Philosophers
there, l. 3. p. 149. Resigned his Bishopric, and became an Anchoret in the
Isle of Bardsey, Ibid.
Duduc, Bishop of Somersetshire, (that is, Wells) his Decease, and who is his
Successor, l. 6. p. 88. Dulcitius, a famous Commander with Civilis, sent for to
Britain by Theodosius; and an Account of their Expedition, l. 2. p. 93. Dun,
consecrated Bishop of Rochester, after the Death of Eardulph, l. 4. p. 224.
Dunbritton in Scotland, anciently called Alcluid, l. 2. p. 101. When it was
destroyed by the Danes, l. 5. p. 277.
Dunmoc, a Town in the Kingdom of the East Angles, but destroyed by the Danes,
l. 5: p. 274. Vid. Dunwich.
St. Dunstan, an Account of his Birth, l. 5. p. 329. Then Abbot of Glastenbury,
when King Edmund conferred diverse large Privileges upon that Monastery, Id. p.
345. King Edred commits the chief Treasures of his Kingdom to his care, to be
kept at his Abbey, Id. p. 351. Is banished out of England by King Edwi, and the
occasion of it, with his Retirement thereupon to a Monastery in Flanders, Id.
p. 353. Is chosen Bishop of Worcester by the General Consent of a Great
Council, and afterward made Archbishop of Canterbury, l. 6. p. 2. The Miracles
that the Monks relate were done by him; as his Harp hanging against the Wall,
and a whole Psalm being audibly played upon it without any hand touching it,
etc. but above all, his taking the Devil by the Nose with a Pair of Red Hot
Tongs, till he made him to roar again, Id. p. 3. A great Propagator of Monkery,
many Monasteries either new built, or new founded in his time. Exercised
Ecclesiastical Discipline without respect of persons; witness the Penance he
made King Edgar submit to, Ibid. As soon as made Archbishop he went to Rome,
and there obtained his Pall, Id. p. 6. Could never endure Ethelfreda, Edgar's
Queen, and the reason why, Id. p. 10. Narrowly escapes being killed, when the
Floor fell down at the Council at Calne in Wiltshire, Id. p. 17. He and Oswald,
etc. crown Ethelred, the Brother of Edward the Martyr. St. Dunstan's Prediction
of this King Ethelred, Id. p. 19. His Decease. He restores the Monkish
Discipline in England, and makes a Collection of Ordinances for the Benedictine
Order, l. 6. p. 22. A Relation of his having erected in his lifetime a small
Monastery at Westminster for Twelve Monks; which was vastly augmented by Edward
the Confessor, Id. p. 93.
Dunwallo Molmutius reduces this Island from a Pentarchy (in which it was
before) into a Monarchy, l. 1. p. 12. Dunwich in Suffolk, Foelix founded his
Episcopal See here, l. 4. p. 179. Anciently called Dunmoc, l. 4. p. 193. And
Domue, Id. p. 242.
Durham, the City, about what time built, and a Church there dedicated to St.
Cuthbert, by whom erected, l. 6. p. 26. Is besieged by Malcolme King of the
Scots, with a very great Army, Id. p. 27.
Durstus, King of the Picts, is slain in Battle; and the particular Account of
it, l. 2. p. 102. Duty to Parents; a pretty remarkable Instance of it in one of
King Leir's Daughters, named Cordiella, if it were true, l. 1. p. 11.
E
EAdbald, Ethelbert's Son, who succeeded him in the Kingdom of Kent. His wicked
Reign, l. 4. p. 168. His Incestuous Marriage upon what account he renounced,
Id. p. 169. Gives Ethelburga his Niece in Marriage to King Edwin, upon
condition that she should enjoy the Christian Religion, Id. p. 171. He and
Archbishop Honorius receive her with great Honor, Id. p. 176. Dies, after he
had reigned Five and twenty years, leaving two Sons, Id. p. 180.
Eadbald, the Bishop, departs from the Northumbers, l. 4. p. 240. Eadbert, or
Egbryht, King of Northumberland, marries Cuthburge, Sister to King Ina; but
they are both made to leave each other's Bed, l. 4. p. 218. He is forced to fly
into Surrey to the South Saxons, and upon what occasion, Ibid. Ceolwulf
surrenders his Kingdom again to him, and he reigned One and twenty years, Id.
p. 223. Leads Kynwulf, Bishop of Lindisfarne, Prisoner to the City of Beban,
who it seems had some way rebelled against him, Id. p. 225. His War against the
Picts, subduing all the Country of Kyle, etc. and joining them to his own
Dominions, Ibid. And Unust, King of the Picts, bring an Army against the City
Alkuith, which was delivered by the Britains upon Conditions, Id. p. 227. Is
shorn a Monk (and Oswulf or Usulf, his Son, succeeds him) after he had reigned
One and twenty Years, with great Wisdom and Courage, insomuch that Pepin King
of France not only made a League with him, but sent him great Presents, Id. p.
228. Dies Ten Years after his taking the Monastical Habit, and is buried at
York, Id. p. 229.
Eadbert, or Ethelbert, (surnamed Praen) begins to reign in Kent, l. 4. p. 240.
Has his Eyes put out, and his Hands cut off, by the order of Cenwulf, King of
Mercia, whither he is carried Prisoner, Id. p. 241. Is set free before the High
Altar (being then a Prisoner of War) upon the Dedication of the Abbey of
Winchelcomb, Id. p. 242.
Eadbriht, King of Kent, his Death, after he had reigned Six Years, l. 4. p.
225. Eadburga, Daughter to King Offa, Marries Brithtrick King of the
West Saxons, l. 4. p. 235. Makes away her Husband by Poison, designed indeed
for one of his Favorites whom she could not endure, Id. p. 243. Retires into
France, is put there into a Nunnery, and why; and being expelled thence for her
Incontinency, she begged her bread in Italy till she died, l. 4. p. 243. A Law
made upon her account, That the King's Consort for the future should not be
called Queen, l. 5. p. 264.
Eadesbyrig, supposed by Mr. Cambden to be Edesbury in Cheshire, where
Aethelfleda, Lady of the Mercians, built a Castle, l. 5. p. 316. Eadfrid, a Son
of King Edwin by his Wife Quenburga, who was Daughter of Ceorle King of Mercia,
l. 4. p. 174. Surrenders up himself to Penda King of the Mercians, Id. p. 176.
Eadhed is Ordained Bishop in the Province of Lindisse, and afterward Governed
the Church of Rippon, l. 4. p. 196. Eadmund Etheling, Son to King Edgar, his
Death and Burial at Rumsey in Hampshire, l. 6. p. 7. Eadred, or Ethelred, King
of the Mercians, Marries Ethelfleda, King Alfred's Eldest Daughter, l. 5. p.
311. Vid. Ethelred Duke of Mercia.
Eadsige, vid. Aeadsige. Eadulf, vid. Adulf. Eadwig Etheling, called Ceorle's
Cyng (that is, King of the Clowns) Brother to King Edward, is Banished; the
whole story of him; he is made Two Persons by the Annals, l. 6. p. 50, 51.
Eadwin, vid. Edwin. Eagle, the Roman Ensigns were in Caesar's time all Eagles,
l. 2. p. 26. Ealcher and his Kentish-men, with Huda and his Surry-men, fight
with the Danish Army in the Isle of Thanet, and the Success thereof, l. 5. p.
261, 262. Ealchstan, Bishop of Scireborne, and Prince Aethelbald, join in a
most wicked Conspiracy to remove Aethelwulf out of his Kingdom, l. 5. p. 263.
Ealerd, a Daughter of King Edwin's by Queen Aethelburga, l. 4. p. 176. Ealfert,
or Alfred, King of the Northumbers, his Decease, l. 4. p. 213. Ealfric, an
Ealdorman, and one of King Ethelred's Admirals, who was to have encompassed the
Danish Fleet by surpise, but underhand he betrays the design, sending them
notice to take care of themselves; and the night before the intended
Engagement, goes over to them himself, l. 6. p. 23, 24. Several other
Treacheries he plays, as leaving the Army whereof he was General, etc. Id. p.
30. Ealswithe, The Daughter of Aethelred Ealdorman of the Gaini, is Married to
King Alfred, l. 5. p. 269, 313. Her Children by him, and her Decease, Id. p.
310, 311, 313.
Eanbald Consecrated Archbishop to the Sea of York on the Death of Ethelheard.
The Pall demanded for him of the Pope by Alwold King of the Northumbers, l. 4.
p. 232. Departs from the Northumbers, and afterward Consecrates and places on
the Throne Eardwulf, who had begun his Reign over Northumberland about a Month
before, Id. p. 240. His Death and Burial at York the Year after, Id. p. 241.
Another of the same Name upon his Decease was Consecrated Archbishop of York,
and the Year following he received the Pall, Ibid. This Eanbald held the Second
Council at Pinchinhale, and what was done therein, Id. p. 242.
Eanbryht, Bishop of Hagulstad, his Decease, l. 5. p. 248. Eanfrid, or
Earlfrid, the Son of Ethelfrid, (the last King before Edwin) Ruled the Kingdom
of Bernicia, and Abjured the Christian Religion, which before he had Professed,
l. 4. p. 176. Is basely put to Death by Cadwallo, when he imprudently came to
him with only Twelve Select Knights in his Company to Treat of Peace, Id. p.
177.
Earcombert, the First English King (viz. of Kent) who Commanded Idols to be
destroyed, and ordered Lent to be observed, l. 4. p. 180. His Death, and who
succeeded him, Id. p. 185, 190. His Character, Id. p. 189.
Earcongath, or Earcongata, Daughter to Earcombert, a Virgin of great Piety,
constantly serving God in a Monastery of the Kingdom of the Franks, in the Town
of Bruges in Flanders, l. 4. p. 180. Eardulf succeeds Alfred, or Ealfert, in
the Kingdom of the Northumbers, but is expelled from it within Two Months by a
Plot laid against him, l. 4. p. 213. Eardwulf, an Earl commanded to be put to
death, is found afterward alive, and after that made King of Northumberland,
Id. p. 236. When he began to Reign there, and whom he succeeded, Id. p. 240.
Returns home Victorious, by destroying the Rebels that rose up against him, Id.
p. 241. Leads an Army against Kenwulf, King of Mercia, for Harboring his
Enemies, but by the Intercession of King Egbert a Peace is agreed on, and
confirmed by Oath, l. 5. p. 248. About Three years after he is driven out of
his Kingdom, and by whom, Ibid. p. 249. The Son of Eardulf, the first King of
that Name there, restored to his Kingdom by the Assistance of the Emperor
Charles the Great, l. 5. p. 249.
Earnred, succeeds Aelfwold King of Northumberland, l. 5. p. 249. Holds his
Kingdom as Tributary to Egbert (Chief King of the English) who had grievously
wasted it with his Arms, Id. p. 248, 255. His Death, his Son succeeding him,
Id. p. 260.
Earnwulf, (Charles the Gross King of the Franks his Brother's Son) expels his
Uncle his Kingdom, dividing it into Five parts, and each of the Kings to Govern
under him, l. 5.290. East Angles, (the Countries we now call Norfolk and
Suffolk) the Kingdom of it supposed to begin about Anno 575. under Uffa, the
Eighth King from Woden, l. 3. p. 145. The Gospel is preached to them by
Furseus, which Converted many of them, l. 4. p. 180. The Kingdom thereof
divided between Hunbeanna and Albert, Id. p. 225. They slay Beornwulf King of
the Mercians, for Challenging this Kingdom as his own, l. 5. p. 253. Edmund
their King fighting with the Danes, they obtain the Victory, kill him, and
wholly Conquer that Kingdom, Id. p. 269, 272, 273, 274. Their Subjection and
Freedom from the Danish Yoke, Id. p. 322,
Easter, it is Observation according to the manner prescribed in the Council of
Nice, l. 2. p. 88. l. 4. p. 166. The Difference about the Rule of keeping it in
Augustin's time, l. 4. p. 160, 161. How it was observed by Bishop Aidan, Id. p.
177. Is Commanded to be kept according to the Order of the Church of Rome, Id.
p. 189. Appointed by the Synod at Hartford in Anno 673. to be kept on the First
Lord's Day after the Fourteenth Moon of the First Month, (that is January);
this was a General Council of the whole Kingdom, Id. p. 193. Aldhelm, Abbot of
Malmesbury, wrote an excellent Book about the Keeping of Easter, whereby he
converted many of the Britains then Subject to the West Saxons, Id. p. 213.
Naitan, King of the Picts, concerns himself about the Celebration of Easter;
and it is appointed to be kept on the First Sunday after the First Full Moon
that follows the Vernal Equinox, l. 4. p. 216. Decreed to be kept after the
Custom of Rome, in a General Synod of the British Nation, Id. p. 229.
Ordinances touching the Keeping of Easter made at the Second Council of
Pinchinhale Id. p. 242
East Saxons, the beginning of this Kingdom (...) Erchenwin, the Son of Offa,
according to H. Huntington, l. 3. p. 13^. It had London (the Chief City of
England) under its Dominion, Ibid. This Kingdom was divided from that of Kent
by the River Thames, etc. l. 4. p. 159. Upon the Death of Sebert, his Three
Sons (whom he left Heirs to the Kingdom) all relapse to Paganism, and great
part of the Nation with them, Id. p. 168. But between Thirty and Forty years
after, at the Instance of King Oswy, they again receive the Christian Faith,
Id. p. 184.
Eatta, Bishop of the Province of Bernicia, had his Episcopal See at Hagulstad,
l. 4. p. 197. Reckoned to be a very Holy Man, Id. p. 215. Ebba, a Queen, is
Converted and Baptized in the Province of the Wectij, but what Queen, Bid says
not, l. 4. p. 197. Ebba, Abbess of Coldingham-Nunnery in Yorkshire, an Heroine
Example of Chastity in her, and all her Sisters, l. 5. p. 269. Eborius, Bishop
of the City of Eboracum, is sent (with others) to the Council of Arles in
Gallia, as one of the Deputies for the rest of the Bishops of Britain, l. 2. p.
88. Eclipses of the Sun, one from early in the Morning till Nine a Clock;
another, where the Stars showed themselves for near half an hour after Nine in
the Morning, l. 3. p. 138. Of the Sun which was so great, that it is whole Orb
seemed as it were covered with a black Shield. Another of the Moon, appearing
first as stained with Blood, which lasted a whole hour, and then a Blackness
following, it returned to its own Color, l. 4. p. 222. One of the Moon, From
the Cock Crowing till the morning, Id. p. 240. One of the Moon, In the Second
hour of the night, 17. Kal. Feb. Id. p. 242. One of the Moon, On the 13th. Kal.
of January, l. 5. p. 248. One of the Moon, And on the Kal. of September, l. 5.
p. 248. Of the Sun, on the 7th. Kal. of August, about the fifth hour of the
day, Id. p. 249. Of the Moon, on Christmas Day at night, Id. p. 254. Of the Sun
About the sixth hour of the day, on the Kal. of October, Id. p. 260. Of the Sun
For one whole hour, Id. p. 283. One of the Moon appeared, Id. p. 313.
Eddobeccus is dispatched away by Constans to the Germans, with an Account of
Gerontius his Revolt, l. 2. p. 103. Edelwalch, King of the West Saxons, when he
was baptized, l. 4. p. 195. Gives Wilfrid Commission to convert and baptize in
his Province, Id. p. 197.
Edgar, Son of Edmund and Elgiva (afterward King) his Birth, l. 5. p. 344. Is
elected by the Mercians and Northumbrians their King, and confirmed so by the
Common Council of the Kingdom, Id. p. 354. On the death of his Brother Edwi, is
elected by the Clergy and Laity King of the West Saxons; and though he was not
the first, yet he was the best that deserved the Title of First Monarch of all
England, l. 6. p. 1. And so he styles himself in his Charter to the Abbey of
Glastenbury, Id. p. 9. His great Charity, and the Nation's happiness under him,
Id. p. 2, 11. Seven years Penance is imposed upon him by Archbishop Dunstan
(part of which was, That he should not wear his Crown all that time), and that
for taking a Nun out of a Cloister, and then debauching her, Id. p. 3. Harasses
North Wales with War, till he forces a Peace, upon this Condition, That the
Tribute in Money should be turned into that of so many Wolves-Heads yearly, Id.
p. 3, 4, 11. Grants a New Charter of Confirmation, with diverse additional
Endowments of Lands and Privileges to the Monastery of Medeshamsted, Id. p. 5.
Marries Ethelfreda (or Elfreda) Daughter of Ordgar Earl of Devonshire; and his
Issue by her, Id. p. 5, 6. Has an Elder Son by Elfleda, surnamed, The ^air
Daughter of Earl Eodmar, who is called afterward, Edward the Martyr; but
doubtful whether he was married to her, or not, Id. p. 6. Places Nuns in the
Monastery of Rumsey in Hampshire; commands all the Country of Thanet to be
laid waste, and for what reason, Ibid. Causes the Chanons to be driven out of
all the great^r Monasteries in Mercia, and Monks to be put in their places, Id.
p. 7. Is crowned King in the ancient City of Ackmanceaster, called Bathan by
the Inhabitants; with Remarks about his Coronation then, for he was crowned
before. And founds a new Church at Bangor, dedicating it to the Virgin Mary,
Id. p. 7, 8. Six Kings make League with him, promising upon Oath their
Assistance both by Sea and Land. An Account who they were, and of his Fleet at
West-Chester, where they all met him. He is the first that was truly Lord of
our Seas, Id. p. 8. His Death and Burial at Glastenbury, and Character. The
great Kindnesses he showed to Ethelfreda's first Husband's Son, Id. p. 9, 10,
11. A mighty Lover of the Fair Sex, Id. p. 3, 5, 6, 9, 10, 11. A Famous
Instance of his great Courage and Strength, though but little of Stature, Id.
p. 11. His Charter about having subdued all Ireland, etc. much suspected to be
fictitious. With this King fell all the Glory of the English Nation, Id. p. 12.
The Laws he made with the Council, by the Consent of his Wisemen, Id. p. 12,
13, 14. Great Dissension amongst the Nobility after his Death, about the
Election of a New King, Id. p. 15.
Edgar, surnamed Aetheling, the Son of Prince Edward by Agatha, Id. p. 49.
Edgar Aetheling, how he was put by from the Throne, though the only surviving
Male of the Ancient Royal Family, l. 6. p. 105, 106. Is proposed to be made
King upon Harold's Death, but his Party were not prevalent enough to carry it,
Id. p. 115, 116.
Edgitha, Daughter of King Egbert, is first bred up under an Irish Abbess, and
then made Abbess her self of the Nunnery of Polesworth, l. 5. p. 257. Another
of this Name, King Athelstan's Sister; her Marriage with Sihtric, the Danish
King of Northumberland; and being afterward a Widow, she became a Nun at
Polesworth. Her Character, and the False Story of the Scots upon her, Id. p.
330.
Edgitha, or Editha, Daughter of Earl Godwin, married to Edward the Confessor,
a Lady not only Beautiful and Pious, but Learned above her Sex in that Age, l.
6. p. 72, 73, 96. An improbable Story of her causing Gospatrick to be
murdered, upon the Account of her Brother Tostige, l. 6. p. 90. Subscribes
King Edward's Charter of Endowment of the Abbey of Westminster, Id. p. 94. Vid.
more in Tit. Edward the Confessor.
Edinburgh, anciently called Mount-Agned, built by Ebrank, the Son of Manlius,
l. 1. p. 10. In the Possession of the English-Saxons, when, and how long, l. 5.
p. 249.
Editha, Daughter to King Edgar by Wilfreda, (whom he took out of a Cloister at
Wilton) and who was afterward Abbess of the said Nunnery, l. 6. p. 3, 12, 20.
Edmund the Martyr, anointed King of the East Angles by Bishop Humbert, at
fifteen years of Age, at Buram, then the Royal Seat, l. 5. p. 265. An Account
of his Pedigree, Education, living in Germany, Return into England, and
Election to the Kingdom, which, as well as himself, he submitted to the
direction of Bishop Humbert; his Reign Fourteen Years in Peace, and his
Glorious End of Martyrdom, Ibid. p. 273. Fighting with the Danes, they slew
him, and wholly conquer that Kingdom, Id. p. 269, 273. A particular Account
both of his Life and Martyrdom, Id. p. 272, 273, 274. Had a Church and
Monastery erected to his Memory, Id. p. 274, 323.
Edmund, Prince, (Son to Edward the Elder) the relation of his commanding part
of his Father's Army, with his Brother Edred, cannot be true, for he was but
Four Years old when his Father died, l. 5. p. 321. A great Benefactor to the
Church built over the Tomb of King Edmund the Martyr, Id. p. 323. He and his
Brother Athelstan overcome the Scots about Bromrige in the North, Id. p. 334.
Succeeds his Brother Athelstan in the Kingdom at eighteen years of Age. Invades
Mercia, and forces Leicester, Lincoln, Nottingham, Stamford, and Derby (all
then under the Power of the Danes) to submit to him. The Battle he had with
Anlaff, and the Agreement made at last between these two Kings, Id. p. 343.
Conquers Anlaff, expels him the Kingdom of Northumberland, and adds it to his
own Dominions, Ibid. p. 344. Subdues the whole Country of Cumberland, giving
it to Malcolme King of Scots, upon this Condition, That he should assist him
both by Sea and Land, Id. p. 344. Sends Ambassadors to Prince Hugh of France,
to restore King Lewis. His decease, and the manner of it. His Burial at
Glastenbury; with his great Benefaction to that Abbey. He styles himself in his
Charter, King of the English, and Governor and Ruler of the other Nations round
about, Id. p. 345. The Laws he made in the Great Council he held at London, Id.
p. 346, 347, 348. The Legend of St. Edmund's Ghost stabbing King Sweyn the
Dane, l. 6. p. 39, 40.
Edmund, a Son of King Alfred, born before Prince Edward (commonly called the
Elder) is crowned King by his Father's Appointment, in his Lifetime, but dying
before him, he was buried in the Abbey-Church of Winchester, l. 5. p. 311.
Edmund Aetheling, marries the Widow of Sigeferth (who was lately murdered)
against his Father's Will, upon the Fame of her Beauty and Virtue: And invades
all the Country where her Husband's Lands lay, l. 6. p. 40. His Expedition
against Cnute and Aedric of little service to him, and why, Id. p. 41. Is
Elected King by all the Great and Wise Men then at London, together with the
Citizens, upon his Father's decease; though he held it but a short time, and
that with great difficulty. He is called Ironside, for his Strength both of
Body and Mind, and born of a Concubine, Id. p. 45. The several Battles he
fought with Cnute and his Party, Id. p. 45, 46, 47. His Prudence not to be
commended, though his Courage and Constancy were praiseworthy, Id. p. 46.
Concludes a Peace with King Cnute, and the Particulars of it, Id. p. 47, 48.
His Decease (being murdered), and Burial at Glastenbury, with his Grandfather
King Edgar, Id. p. 48, 49. His Children (Edward and Edmund) excluded from the
Kingdom of the West Saxons, and by whom. They were sent to the King of Sweden
to be made away; but he generously conveyed them to Solomon King of Hungary, to
be educated, where Edmund died, Id. p. 49.
St. Edmundsbury, anciently called Badricesworth, where King Cnute built a
Noble Monastery, l. 5. p. 323. Is given by King Edmund, with diverse other
Lands, to build a Church and Monastery in Memory of St. Edmund the Martyr, Id.
p. 345. For ever exempt from all Jurisdiction of the Bishops and Earls of that
Country, by Parliament, according to the MS. l. 6. p. 52.
Edred, an Abbot of Northumberland, made a certain Youth, sold to a Widow at
Withingham (whom he redeemed) King; and by that means the Church got all that
Country, now called the Bishopric of Durham, l. 5. p. 286. Edred, Brother to
King Athelstan and Edmund, takes upon him the Title of First Monarch, l. 5. p.
331. Is made King, and the manner of his Succession; Crowned at Kingston,
reduces all Northumberland under his Obedience; and upon their relapse, lays
the whole Country waste, Id. p. 349, 350. Their continual Rebellions against
him, and his regaining that Kingdom, Id. p. 350. The First King of England that
styled himself Rex Magnae Britanniae, as appears by a Charter of his to the
Abbey of Croyland, Id. p. 351. Dies in the Flower of his Age, of what; his
Character and Issue, Id. p. 351, 352.
Edric, vid. Aedric. Edwal ap Meyric, is received by the Inhabitants of the
Isle of Anglesey for their Prince; he was the right Heir of North Wales; routs
Meredith in a set Battle, l. 6. p. 24. But is slain in Battle by Sweyne, the
Son of Harold the Dane, Id. p. 25.
Edwal Ugel (that is, the Bald) Succeeds his Father Anarawd, and is styled by
Historians, Supreme King of all Wales, l. 5. p. 316. Edwal Ywrch, Son of
Cadwallader, Prince of Wales, began to Reign upon his Father's supposed Journey
to Rome, l. 3. p. 145. Conjectured to be Cadwallo by Dr. Powel, and Mr.
Vaughan, l. 4. p. 205.
Edward the First, (commonly called the Elder) the Son of King Alfred, when he
began his Reign; he was Elected by all the Chief Men of the Kingdom, l. 5. p.
311. Meets with a great Disturbance at his first entrance to the Crown from
Aethelwald his Cousin-German, Ibid. and p. 312. Builds new Towns, and repairs
Cities that had been before destroyed. Id. p. 312. Has great Battles with the
Danes, but at last he overcomes them all; calls a great Council, (though the
place where is not specified, but wherein Plegmund presided) which appoints
Bishops over each of the Western-Counties, and makes Five out of Two Diocesses,
Id. p. 313. Subdues East-Sex, East-England, and Northumberland, with many other
Provinces, which the Danes had long before been possessed of, Id. p. 314, 315.
Very much wastes Northumberland with his Army, and destroys many Danes, Id. p.
315. Takes the Cities of London and Oxenford into his own hands; Commands the
Town of Hertford to be New Built; Builds and Fortifies another Town at Witham
near Maldon in Essex, Id. p. 316. Confirms to the Doctors and Scholars of
Cambridg, by Charter, all their former Privileges to endure for ever by a
perpetual Right, Id. p. 317, 318. Builds Two Forts on both sides the River Ouse
in Buckinghamshire, to oppose the Danes, who at last (almost all) submit to
him, Id. p. 319, 320. Has the Town of Bedford surrendered to him, where he built
a Castle; Rebuilds and Fortifies the Town of Maldon; and makes the whole Nation
of the Mercians submit to him, Id. p. 320. Overcomes Leofred the Dane, and
Griffyth ap Madac, Brother-in-Law to the Prince of West-Wales, Id. p. 321. The
several Towns he ordered to be rebuilt, l. 5. p. 321, 322, 323, 324. Is
accepted for Lord and Protector by several Countries under the Danish
Dominions, and adds the Kingdom of the East Angles to his own, Id. p. 322, 323.
Several other Kings make their Submission to him, Id. p. 324. His Decease at
Fearndune in the Province of the Mercians, Id. p. 324. Aelfleda, the Daughter
of the Earl Aethelem, was his Queen and Wife, Id. p. 327. The Laws both Civil
and Ecclesiastical made in his Reign, Id. p. 325, 326. His Children, how bred
up, and bestowed in Marriage, etc. Id. p. 327. His Character of being Mild and
Humble as well as Courageous, Id. p. 328. No Martyr, as Buchanan in his History
fancies him, and why, Id. p. 332.
Edward Aetheling, Son of King Edmund, surnamed Ironside, Marries Agatha, the
Queen of Hungary's Sister; his Issue by her, l. 6. p. 49. Is sought by Ambassy
to return into England, which he did about Three years after, together with his
Children, and soon after Dies, his Body being Buried in St. Paul's Church, Id.
p. 86, 87.
Edward (Surnamed the Martyr) is Elected in a great Council, and presently
Anointed King according to his Father Edgar's Appointment, l. 6. p. 15. Not
present at the Council of Calne in Wiltshire, upon the persuasion of Archbishop
Dunstan, as supposed, Id. p. 16, 17. Is Killed, by whom, and by what, at
Corfesgeate, now Corfe-Castle in the Isle of Purbeck, and buried at Werham
without any Royal Pomp, having Reigned Three years and a half, Id. p. 17, 18.
His Character, Ibid. His Body taken up, and carried and Buried at Shaftsbury
with great Solemnity, Id. p. 20.
Edward the Confessor, Son of King Ethelred, comes into England from Normandy,
and returns no more back, but tarried till his Brother Hardecnute died, l. 6.
p. 66, 67. His Advancement to the Crown by Election in the Great Council, and
how it is effected, Id. p. 69, 70. His undutifulness to his Mother, by taking
from her all the Gold and Silver she had, with other things, because of her
severity to him formerly, shows him not to be altogether so great a Saint as
the Monks represent him, Id. p. 71, 97. Marries Edgitha, or Editha, the
Daughter of Earl Godwin, who was not only Beautiful and Pious, but Learned
above the Women of her Age; but he never carnally knew her, l. 6. p. 72, 73,
97. Sends Bishops to the Great Council at St. Remy, to know what was there
decreed concerning the Christian Faith, Id. p. 74. The Difference between the
King and Earl Godwin and his Sons, and what the ground of it, Id. p. 75, 77,
78, 81. Sends away his Wife who had been Crowned Queen, committing her to the
Custody of his Sister, at the Nunnery of Werwel, and takes away almost all she
had, Id. p. 78. Begs his Mother's Pardon for having suffered her to undergo the
Ordeal, and upon what Account, Id. p. 79. Hearing Earl Godwin was come with his
Ships for England, he orders his Fleet to pursue him, whereupon he returns to
Bruges, but soon after comes again, and commits many Insults upon the
Seacoasts, Id. p. 80, 81. Restores to the Queen, his Wife, (upon his Peace
with Earl Godwin) whatsoever she had been before possessed of, Id. p. 81. In a
great Council is Reconciled to Earl Godwin, whom he restores to his former
Honors and Estate, Id. p. 82, 83. Commands Rees (the Brother of Griffyn King
of South Wales) his Head to be cut off, and sent him to Gloucester, for his
Insolences against the English, Id. p. 85. His Forces under Siward, the
Valiant Earl of Northumberland, are said to Conquer Scotland, Id. p. 86.
Aelfgar's Rebellion against him twice, and yet he was forced to Pardon him,
Ibid. p. 87.88. Confirms by his Charter the Foundation of the Abbey of the
Holy-Cross at Waltham in Essex, Id. p. 89. Wales Subdued, and becomes subject
to him, the Inhabitants giving Hostages, Ibid. After which he makes Two
Brothers Joint-Princes of North Wales, l. 6. p. 90. Confirms and renews the
Laws of King Cnute, at the Request of the Northumbers, Ibid. Builds Westminster
Church and Abbey: its Consecration. Calls his Curia, or Great Council, to
confirm his Charter of Endowment of this Monastery. His Sickness and Speech to
those about him concerning the Vision he had seen of Two Holy Monks that told
him of the Misery which would befall this Nation after his Death, Id. p. 93,
94, 95. The Application of it, with what befell the Kingdom in succeeding
Reigns, Id. p. 96. Recommends upon his Deathbed the Queen to her Brother, etc.
and highly extols her Chastity and Obedience, Id. p. 96. His last Words, Death
and Burial in St. Peter's Church at Westminster, Ibid. p. 97. The various
reports of his Bequeathing the Crown to his Cousin William Duke of Normandy,
Id. p. 96, 97. His Character; and the story of the Boy that Robbed his Chest,
he being then in the Room, Id. p. 97, 98, 104. His Miracles, of Curing the
Blind, and those Sores we now call the King's Evil, and of his being Elected
King by his Father's Command in a Great Council, whilst he was in his Mother's
Belly, Id. p. 98. His Laws, or those which bear his Name, because he renewed
the Observance of them, show what Liberty English Subjects enjoyed before the
Conquest, Id. p. 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104. By the Laws of St. Edward, are
meant the English-Saxon Laws, Id. p. 104.
Edwi, When he Began his Reign, and where, and by whom Crowned; he turns the
Monks out of Glastenbury, and out of the greatest Monasteries in England,
placing Secular Channons therein, l. 3. p. 353. The Mercians and Northumbrians
Deposing him, Elect Edgar, his Brother, for their King, which is confirmed by
the Common Council of the Kingdom; Edwi having no more left him than that of
the West Saxons for his share, Id. p. 354. His Death, and Character, and Burial
at Winchester, Id. p. 355.
Edwin, of the Blood Royal of Northumberland (being the Son of Aella) is forced
to fly from Ethelfrid, as a Banished Man, with the cause of his future
Conversion, l. 4. p. 169. The wonderful Vision he had, and the Success of it.
He succeds Ethelfrid, and Banishes his Sons, Id. p. 170. Being Converted to the
Christian Faith, he receives Baptism with all his Noblemen, and a great many of
the common people, Id. p. 171, 172, 173, 174. At last is killed by the Pagans,
and his whole Army routed, Id. p. 174, 176. Had, after Redwald's death, the
Kingdom of the East Angles delivered up to him by the People, Id. p. 175.
Causes Brass-Pots to be set upon Posts at Fountains near the Highways, for
Travelers to drink in; and had a Banner carried before him as he went through
the streets, Ibid. Chief King over all the English-Saxons; overcomes Cadwallo,
King of the Britains, and conquers almost all his Country, Id. p. 176. His
Head brought to York, and deposited in St. Peter's Church there, which he had
begun to build, Ibid. He was the fifth King that ruled over all Britain, l. 5.
p. 254.
Edwin and Ethelwin, Sons of Prince Ethelwerd, are slain in a fight against
Anlaff King of the Danes, and buried in the Church of the Abbey of Malmesbury,
l. 5. p. 311. Edwin Aetheling drowned, (with an Account how); the greatest Blot
in King Athelstan's Reign, l. 5. p. 331, 337. Edwin, the Brother of Leofric,
Earl of Mercia, is overcome by Griffyth ap Lewellin ap Sitsylt, and slain at
Pencadair, l. 6. p. 64, 65. Edwold, Brother to St. Edmund the Martyr, lived and
died a Hermit, in the Abbey of Cerne in Dorsetshire, l. 6. p. 22. Egbert
succeeds his Father Ercenbryht in the Kingdom of Kent, l. 4. p. 189. Gives
Reculf to Basse the Priest; and at his Death bestows part of the Isle of Thanet
to build a Monastery, for expiating the Murder of his Cousins, whom he had
caused to be slain. His decease, Id. p. 192, 193.
Egbert, the Priest, a Venerable Person, coming out of Ireland, converts the
Monks of Hij to the right Faith, so that they afterward observed the Catholic
Rites; and when he had lived with them here thirteen years, dies, l. 4. p. 217,
220. Egbert, made Bishop of York, and the next year after receives a Pall from
the Pope, whereby he became an Archbishop, and so Metropolitan of all the
Northumbrian Provinces, and had supreme Jurisdiction over all the Bishops in
Deira and Bernicia, l. 4. p. 222, 223. His Death and Burial. He was base
Brother to the King of the same Name, who regained the Pall to that See. Built
a Noble Library in York, accounted then one of the best in Europe, Id. p. 223,
229.
Egbert, the Son of Aealmond, was the Father of Athulf, or Athelwulf, l. 4. p.
233. Egbert, or Egferth, the Son of Offa King of the Mercians, is anointed King
with him, l. 4. p. 233, 235. When he began his Reign, but within a few Months
after dies, Id. p. 240.
Egbert, or Ecgbryht, King of the West Saxons, when he began to reign, l. 4. p.
242. His Succession to Brihtric, and afterward Chief or Supreme King of this
Kingdom, Id. p. 243. l. 5. p. 254. Through Brihtric's jealousy he is forced to
fly to King Offa for Refuge, from him he retires into France, where he tarries
three years, and so polishes the roughness of his own Country Manners, Id. p.
243. But is, upon Brihtric's Death without Issue, recalled by the West Saxon
Nobility, and ordained King, and reigned with great Glory and Honor, Id. p.
244. He unites all the Heptarchy into one Kingdom, to the lasting Peace of the
English Nation l. 5. p. 245. Leaves the Mercians, Northumbrians, and
East Angles, to be held by their respective Princes, as Tributaries to his
Crown, Id. p. 2, 46, 253, 254, 255. Is ordained King, which Ethelwerd expressly
terms his Election, as being the only surviving Prince of the Blood Royal of
the West Saxon Kings, as great Nephew so Ina by his Brother Inegilds, Id. p.
247, 255. And in a Parliament at Winchester, by the Consent of his People, he
changes the name of this Kingdom into that of England, Id. Ibid. Makes up a
Peace between Eardulf and Kenwulf, and has it confirmed by Oath, l. 5. p. 248.
Absolutely subdues Cornwall, and adds it to his own Kingdom, Id. p. 249.
Subdues the Northern Welsh-men, making them Tributary to him, and enters again
their Borders (upon a fresh Rebellion) and lays them wast from North to South,
with Fire and Sword, Id. p. 250, 251, 254, 255. Obtains a great Victory over
Beornwulf, King of the Mercians; the Kentish and Surrey men, the South and
East Saxons, all submit to him, Id. p. 253, 254, 255. Subdues the Kingdom of
Mercia, and all the South of Humber. He was the Eighth King that ruled over all
Britain; the Seven before him are there enumerated, Id. p. 254. Is offered
Peace and due Subjection by the Northumbers, having led an Army against them as
far as Door, a place supposed to be beyond Humber. He was the greatest King
that till then had ever reigned in England. He expels Withlaff, King of Mercia,
and adds it to his own Kingdom, Id. Ibid. Vanquishes Switherd, King of the
East Saxons, and drives him out of the Kingdom, which ever after that Expulsion
the West Saxon Kings possessed. He wastes Northumberland, and makes Eanred, the
King thereof, his Tributary. Is crowned King of Britain by the Consent of the
Clerus and Populus, in a Great Council which he summoned to meet at Winchester,
Ibid. Encounters Thirty Ships of Danish Pirates at Carrum in Gloucestershire;
but after a great slaughter, the latter kept the field, being the only time
that Fortune ceased to favor his Undertakings, Id. p. 256. Fights the Danes
and Cornish-men at Hengston in Cornwall, and beats them. His Death (having
reigned thirty seven years and seven months) and Character. For nine years
reigned Supreme King over all Britain. Id. p. 257. His Burial at Winchester,
Id. p. 258.
Egbert, King of the Northumbers, is by them expelled: His Death, and who
succeeded to him, l. 5. p. 277. Egelfleda, surnamed the Fair, the Daughter of
Earl Ordmar; whether King Edgar's Wife, or Concubine, uncertain, l. 6. p. 12.
Egelnoth. Vid. Ethelnoth. Egfrid, or Ecverth, succeeds Oswi in the Kingdom of
Northumberland, l. 4. p. 192. Wages War with Wulfher, and wins from him all the
Country of Lindsey, Id. p. 193, 196. Gives Abbot Benedict as much Land as
served Seventy Families, lying near the Mouth of the River Wir in the
Bishopric of Durham, Id. p. 194. Had a great Contention with Bishop Wilfrid,
who was expelled his Bishopric, Id. p. 196, 197. Fights with Ethelfred near
Trent, Id. p. 198. Sends a great Army to Ireland, which miserably wastes that
Nation, Id. p. 201. He and his Army through rashness are all cut off by the
Picts, Id. p. 202, 211.
Eglesburh, now called Alesbury, in Buckinghamshire, l. 3. p. 145. Egonesham,
now Enisham, in Oxfordshire, Id. Ib. Egric, upon King Sigebert's Resignation,
and turning Monk, becomes King of the East Angles, l. 4. p. 179. His Death, Id.
p. 181.
Egwin, Bishop of Worcester, founds the Abbey of Evesham, and upon what
occasion r^ported, l. 4. p. 216, 217. Egwinna, a Lady, the Daughter of a
Nobl^man, whose Name is not certainly known: Her strange Dream, and how she
came afterward to yield to the Importunities of Prince Edward the Elder, on
whom he begot Athelstan (that is, The most Noble), that succeeded him in the
Kingdom, l. 5. p. 326, 327. Eighth, the Eighth, an Island so called, in the
River Severne, anciently known by the name of Olanege, where a League was
concluded between Edmund, surnamed Ironside, and King Cnute, l. 6. p. 47.
Elbodius, a Learned and Pious Bishop of North Wales, gets it decreed in a
general Synod of the British Nation, That Easter should be kept after the
Romish Custom, l. 4. p. 229. Archbishop of North Wales (that is, of St. Asaph)
deceases, but when, uncertain, l. 5. p. 249.
Election of Kings. Vid. Kings. Eleutherius, Bishop of Rome, when chosen Pope.
The story of Lucius his sending to him to receive Christianity, of suspicious
credit, l. 2. p. 69. His Letters to King Lucius; the Contents of them discover
their Imposture, Id. p. 70.
Elfeage, succeeds Byrnstan in the Archbishopric of Winchester, l. 5. p. 333.
Deceases at the Feast of St. Gregory, Anno 951. Id. p. 350.
Elfeage, whose Surname was Goodwin, succeeds Athelwald in the Bishopric of
Winchester: He was first Abbot of Bathe, and afterward Archbishop of
Canterbury; at last was killed by the Danes, l. 6. p. 21. Is sent to King
Anlaff, with Aethelward the Ealdorman, and upon what occaslon, Id. p. 25. When
made and consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury, Id. p. 31. Is taken Prisoner by
the Danes, and killed, because they had not Three thousand Pounds in Silver for
his Ransom; he is buried in St. Paul's Minster, Id. p. 36. His Relics
translated from London to Canterbury, by Archbishop Ethelnoth, Id. p. 53.
Elfer, Ealdorman of the Mercians, drives the Monks out of the Monasteries, and
commands them to be spoiled, l. 6. p. 15. His Death is reported by the Monks,
that he was eaten up with Lice, Id. p. 21.
Elfgar, Cousin to King Edgar, and Earl of Devonshire, his Death, l. 6. p. 4.
The Son of Earl Leofric, had the Earldom given him which Harold formerly
enjoyed, Id. p. 78. Is outlawed in a Great Council, and convicted for being a
Traitor to the King and whole Nation. His going to Griffyn, Prince of
North Wales, and their burning Hereford City, Id. p. 86, 87. At length is
restored to the Peace, and to his former Earldom, Id. p. 87. Upon the Decease
of his Father Leofric, he receives the Earldom of Mercia, and is banished a
second time, but soon restored to his Earldom, and by what Force, Id. p. 88.
Elfin, Bishop of Winchester, succeeds Odo in the Archbishopric of Canterbury;
his trampling on the Tombstone of that Pious Prelate, etc. Going to Rome for
his Pall, upon the Alps is found frozen to death, l. 6. p. 2. Elfleda, or
Egelfleda, the Fair Daughter of Earl Eodmar, or Ordmar, by whom King Edgar had
a Son, called Edward the Martyr; but whether this Lady was married to the King,
or not, is uncertain, l. 6. p. 6, 12. Elfric, Archbishop, turns the Secular
Chanons out of the Cathedral of Christ-Church in Canterbury, and places Monks
in their rooms, l. 4. p. 167. Elfwald, King of the East Angles, his Death, l.
4. p. 225. Vid. Alfwald. Elfwinna, Daughter and Heir of Aethelfleda, is
deprived of the Dominion of the Mercians by King Edward the Elder (upon
Contracting her self in Marriage with Reginald King of the Danes) and brought
into West-Seax by him, l. 3. p. 320. Elgiva, Vid. Aelgiva. Elidurus the Pious,
Resigns the Crown (which the Kingdom had given him) to Reinstate his Brother
who had been Deposed, l. 1. p. 14. After his Brother's Death, he receives the
Crown the Second time, but is soon Deposed by the Ambition of his Brethren, who
Seized and Confined his Person to the Tower of London for several years, whilst
they divided the Kingdom betwixt them; but they dying, he Resumes the Crown the
Third Time, and Governs for Four years to the general satisfaction of all, Id.
p. 15.
Ellendune, supposed to be Wilton near Salisbury, where a Battle was Fought
between Egbert, King of the West Saxons, and Beornwulf, King of the Mercians,
l. 5. p. 253. Ellwye in North Wales, a Bishopric, now known by the Name of St.
Asaph, l. 3. p. 149. Elutherius a Priest, comes from France to King Cenwalc,
and is Ordained Bishop of the West Saxons (that is, Winchester) by Theodore
Archbishop of Canterbury, l. 4. p. 182, 192. His Death and Succession, Id. p.
193.
Ely-Monastery Founded by Etheldrethe, late Wife to King Egfrid, in which she
became the first Abbess, l. 4. p. 193. Is destroyed by the Danes, and when; and
afterward Re-edified by King Edgar, Ibid.
Emma, said to be King Ethelred's only Wife, had Edward and Alfred by him, l.
6. p. 45. Is Married afterward to King Cnute, and how she is Censured for it,
Id. p. 51. Her Son Hardecnute, his Father before his Death appointed to be King
of Denmark, Id. p. 56. Decreed in a Great Council that she should reside at
Winchester with the Domestics of the late King her Husband, and possess all
West-Saxony: She is also called Elgiva, Id. p. 61. Her Decease and Character;
is accused of having been too Familiar with Bishop Alwyn, for which she
undergoes the Ordeal, Id. p. 79.
Emperor, the First Emperors that were not Romans, were Trajan and Hadrian, who
were both Spaniards, l. 2. p. 67. Eneon, the Son of Owen, Prince of
South Wales, subdues all the Country of Gwin, or Gwyr, in North Wales, l 6. p.
6. Destroys it again the second time, Id. p. 16. The greatest part of Earl
Alfred's Army is slain by him and his Forces, and the rest put to flight. But
the Year after the Gentlemen of Guentland in South Wales cruelly slay him. His
Character, Id. p. 21.
England; Old England seated between the Saxons and the Jutes, having for its
Capital City that which is called in the Saxon Tongue Sleswic, but by the Danes
Heathaby, l. 3. p. 118. When the Nation came under this General Name, l. 5. p.
246, 247, 255. Never had any long respite from Invasions by the Danes, etc.
from King Egbert's time to the beginning of the Reign of William the First, l.
5. p. 247. Wasted for many years by the Danes, Norwegians, Goths, Sweeds, and
Vandals, Id. p. 255. Is divided first into Counties, and those in^o Hundreds
and Tythings, by King Alfred, Id. p. 291.
Englisherie, what, and the Law made concerning it in Edward the Confessor's
time, l. 6. p. 101. Englishmen, by the general Consent of the Clerus and
Populus Assembled in the Great Council, it is Enacted, That those who before
were called Jutes, or Saxons, should now be called by this Name, l. 5. p. 255,
292. English-Saxons, their Character, vid. Saxons. In one year had fought eight
or nine Battles against the Danes, etc. besides innumerable Skirmishes, l. 5.
p. 277. Entail of the Crown, mentioned by Alfred in his last Will to have been
made formerly in a General Council of the West Saxon Nobility at Swinburne, l.
5. p. 309. Of Lands also to be in force in his time, Ibid. and 310.
Eoppa, who he was, and what his Pedigree, l. 4. p. 217. Eoric, a Danish King
of the East Angles, killed in Battle by the Kentish men, l. 5. p. 313. After
his Death the Danes there yielded themselves up to Edward the Elder, l. 5. p.
322, 323. The Ecclesiastical Laws made between this Eoric (who succeeded
Gutherne in the Government of East-England) and King Edward, Id. p. 326.
Eorpenwald, King of the East Angles, Son to Redwald, when he began his Reign,
l. 4. p. 157. Is succeeded by his Brother Sigebert, whom formerly he had
Banished, Id. p. 179. Eorpwald, or Eorpald, King of the East Saxons, Baptized,
but not long after is slain by one Richbert, a Heathen, l. 4. p. 175. Eowils,
slain in battle with many thousands of his Danes, at a place called
Wodnesfield, by King Edward the Elder's Army, l. 5. p. 315. Ercenbright, or
Ercombert, Vid. Earcombert. Eric, the Son of Harold, whom the Northumbers set
up for their King, and about a year or two after, drove him out again, l. 5. p.
350. Erkenwald, Younger Son to Anna King of the East Angles, is Consecrated
Bishop of London by Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury; He founded Two
Monasteries before he came to be Bishop, and for whom, l. 4. p. 196. Continued
Bishop thereof till after the Reign of King Ina, Id. p. 201.
Ermenred, The Eldest Son of Eadbald, craftily supplanted by his Younger
Brother Earcombert, who got the Kingdom from him. He had Two Sons who were
cruelly Murdered by Thunore, one of the King's Thanes, whom he employed in
that Execucution, l. 4. p. 180, 185. Esylht, Daughter to Conan, King or Prince
of North Wales, Marries Merwyn Urych a Nobleman, the Son of Gwyriad, who
afterward was King in her Right, l. 5. p. 251. Ethelard Ordained Archbishop of
York, l. 4. p. 238. Ethelbald succeeds Ceolred in the Kingdom of Mercia, and
holds it One and Forty years, l. 4. p. 217. Ethelbald after his Father's Death
succeeds him in West-Saxony, l. 5. p. 265. Marries his Father's Widow, but
afterward Repenting of the Incest, puts her away from him. His Character,
Reign, Death and Burial, Id. p. 266. Vid Aethelbald.
Ethelbert King of Kent, in his time Pope Gregory made the English-Saxons
Christians, l. 3. p. 143, 153. Beaten by Ceawlin and Cutha his Brother; his
double Character and Alliance, l. 3. p. 145. The most powerful Prince that had
Reigned in Kent, having extended the bounds of his Dominions as far as Humber;
he Marries Bertha, a Christian Lady, the King of France his Sister, and upon
what Conditions, l. 4. p. 153. By Augustin's persuasion builds the Church of
St. Peter and St. Paul in Canterbury, Id. p. 157. Is Baptized in St. Pancrace
Church there, which before had been a Heathen Temple, Ibid. Had many noble
Presents sent him by Pope Gregory, with a Letter full of Sanatory Advice, Id.
p. 158, 159. Builds the Church of St. Andrew at Rochester, and endows it, Id.
p. 160. Confirms in a Great Council both of Clergy and Laity, all the Grants
and Charters, whereby he had settled great Endowments on both Christ-Church and
that of St. Pancrace, Ibid. But his Charters are very suspicious of being
Forged in many respects, Id. p. 163. The Secular Laws that were Enacted in the
Great Council in his time, Id. Ibid. His Death and Burial in St. Martin's Porch
in the Church of St. Peter and St. Paul. He was the First English King that
ever received Baptism, and lived above Twenty years after his Conversion, Id.
p. 168. He was the Third King that Ruled over all Britain, l. 5. p. 254.
Ethelbert is Consecrated Bishop of Witerne (called in Latin, Candida Casa) at
York, l. 4. p. 231. One of his Name, Bishop of Hagulstad, Deceases, l. 4. p.
241.
Ethelbert, the Son of Ethelred, King of the East Angles, is slain in the Court
of King Offa, and by whose Instigations, l. 4. p. 237. Ethelbert, or
Aethelbryht, after his Brother Ethelbald's Decease, takes the Kingdom, and
holds it in great Peace and Quiet from Domestic Commotions, l. 5. p. 266. His
Death lamented, after having Governed Five years to general satisfaction;
buried at Shireburne, and is supposed to have a Son, called Ethelwald, Id. p.
267.
Ethelbryht, the Son of King Withred, succeeds Eadbryht King of Kent, l. 4. p.
225. Nothing remarkable, but that the City of Canterbury was Burnt in his
Reign, Id. p. 228. His Death, Ibid.
Ethelburgh. Vid. Aethelburga. Etheldrethe, twice married, but would let
neither of her Husbands enjoy her, which was accounted in those days a great
piece of Sanctity, l. 4. p. 193, 198. Is Foundress of the Monastery of Ely, in
which she her self became the First Abbess, Id. p. 193. Daughter to Anna, King
of the East Saxons, her Death; and after Sixteen Years Burial, her Body being
taken up as whole as at first, she was Canonized, and called St. Audrey of Ely,
Id. p. 198, 199.
Etheldrith, Daughter to King Offa (and once the Spouse of Ethelbert, King of
the East Angles), a holy Virgin that lived in a Cell; wherein Withlaff King of
the Mercians found a safe Retreat from the high Displeasure of Egbert for Four
Months, till he was reconciled to him, l. 5. p. 254. Etheler, King of the
East Angles, taking part with Penda against Oswy, is slain, l. 4. p. 185.
Ethelfleda (the Lady of Mercia) builds many Castles, to secure the Mercian
Frontiers against the Danes and Welsh, l. 5. p. 316. Sends an Army against the
Welsh, which took Brecenanmere (supposed to be Brecknock Castle), and the
King's Wife, and about Four and thirty Prisoners, Id. p. 319. Takes the Town of
Derby, and the City of Canterbury. Reduces Leicester under her Dominion, and
the Danes become subject to her. Dies at Tamworth in the Eighth Year of her
Government, and lies buried at Gloucester, in the East-Isle of St. Peter's
Church. Her Character, Id. p. 320. Vid. Ethelred, Duke of Mercia, her Husband.
Ethelfred (the Son of Ethelric, the Son of Ida) reigns over both the
Northumbrian Kingdoms, l. 3. p. 148. l. 4. p. 159. A Warlike Prince, that
wasted the Britains more than any other Saxon Kings, l. 4. p. 159. Leads his
Army to Leger-Ceaster, and the^e slays a great multitude of Britains, Id. p.
164. His Pursuit of Edwin, after his Banishment, though he was of the
Blood Royal, Id. p. 169. Is slain by Redwald, King of the East Angles, and his
Sons banished by Edwin, Id. p. 170.
Ethelfreda, or Elfreda, Daughter to Earl Ordgar, and Widow of Ethelwald Earl
of the East Angles, married to King Edgar, and her Children by him, l. 6. p. 5,
6. The Trick her first Husband played to obtain her, and the return she made him
for it, Id. p. 9, 10. Builds a Nunnery in the place where her first Husband was
slain, Id. p. 10, 20. She is crowned Queen, to the great displeasure of
Archbishop Dunstan, Id. p. 10. Contrives the Death of Edward the Martyr, and
how; but being convinced of her wickedness for it, she betook her self to very
severe Penalties, Id. p. 17, 18. Her violent Passion to her Son Ethelred, a
Youth, in beating him unmercifully with a Wax-Taper, and why, Id. p. 19. Takes
upon her the Habit of a Nun at Were-well, a Nunnery which she had lately
founded; and also builds another at Ambresbury, Id. p. 20.
Ethelfrid, a Prince most skilful in War, though utterly ignorant of the
Christian Religion, l. 4. p. 171. Ethelgar (Bishop of Selsey) succeeds
Archbishop Dunstan in the Sea of Canterbury, enjoys it but a Year and Three
Months, and then dies, l. 6. p. 22. Ethelheard, his Kinsman, succeeds Ina in
the Kingdom of the West Saxons, l. 4. p. 219. Fights with, and worsts Oswald
Aetheling, the Son of Aethelbald, and forces him to flee, l. 4. p. 220.
Ethelheard. Vid. Aethelheard. The Abbot is elected Archbishop of Canterbury,
upon the Death of Janbryht, l. 4. p. 236. Calls a Synod, that confirms all
things relating to the Church, which had been made before the King Withgar, Id.
p. 241. Goes to Rome to obtain his Pall, Id. p. 242.
Ethelnoth, Ailnoth, or Egelnoth, a Monk and Dean of Canterbury, is consecrated
Archbishop of that See, by Wulstan Archbishop of York, l. 6. p. 51. Goes to
Rome, and is honorably received by Pope Benedict, who put on his Pall with his
own hands, Id. p. 53. Consecrates Aelfric Archbishop of York at Canterbury, and
translates the Relics of Aelfeage his Predecessor, from London to Canterbury,
Id. Ib. A Letter sent to him by Cnute, upon his Return from Rome, of what he
did there, Id. p. 55. His Decease, Id. p. 65.
Ethelred, Brother to Wulfher, succeeds him in the Kingdom of Mercia; his
notable Expedition into Kent, and recovering all Lindsey from Egfrid, and his
Fame for Devotion, l. 4. p. 195, 196. Wastes Kent, destroys Rochester, and
carries away a great deal of Spoil, Id. p. 196. A Battle fought, and Peace
made, on condition that this King should pay Egfrid a Pecuniary Mulct, Id. p.
198. His Charter to the Monastery of Medeshamsted, justly suspected of Forgery,
Id. p. 200, 201. He receives Bishop Wilfrid with great Honor, Id. p. 206.
Resigns his Kingdom (passing by his Son Ceolred, whom he had by his Wife
Osgilde) to his Cousin-German Cenered, Son of his Brother Wulfher, and himself
turns Monk, Id. p. 212.
Ethelred, the Son of Moll, is chosen by the Northumbrians for their King, in
the room of Alhred, whom they had expelled from York, l. 4. p. 230, 236. Is
expelled the Land, for causing three of his Nobles to be treacherously slain by
two of the same Order, Id. p. 231. Is again restored to the Kingdom, upon
Osred's being driven out, Id. p. 236, 239. Betroths Elfreda, the Daughter of
King Offa, Id. p. 237. Is slain by his own People, and said deservedly, as
having been the Death of Osred his Predecessor, Id. p. 239, 240.
Ethelred, the Ealdorman, deceases; a famous Commander at first, but a Monk in
the City of York, when he died, l. 4. p. 240. Ethelred, Son to Eanred, succeeds
his Father in the Kingdom of Northumberland; is driven out from his Kingdom,
but soon after restored to it, and about three years after is slain, l. 5. p.
260. Ethelred, Son of King Ethelwulf, reigned in Kent, as also over the East
and South Saxons, l. 5. p. 265. Began his Reign in West-Saxony, after his
Brother Ethelbert's Decease, Id. p. 267. Makes (with his Brother Aelfred) a
great Slaughter of the Danes at Reading, Id. p. 275. Deceases, and is buried in
the Monastery of Winburne in Dorsetshire; but whether slain in Battle, or died
a Natural Death of the Plague, which then reigned, is uncertain; though this
latter is the more probable, Id. p. 276. An Account of his Children, Ibid.
Ethelred, Bishop of Wiltunscire, is elected Archbishop of Canterbury, upon the
Decease of Ceolnoth, his Predecessor, l. 5. p. 274. His Death, Id. p. 298.
Ethelred, Duke, or Ealdorman of Mercia, and Elfleda his Wife, by their Care is
Leicester repaired, l. 5. p. 314. By their command Caer-Legion (that is now
Westchester) is repaired, Id. p. 315. His Decease, Id. p. 316.
Ethelred, Brother to Edward the Martyr, elected King, and crowned; being a
lovely Youth, l. 6. p. 19. He rather distressed than governed the Kingdom for
Seven and thirty years. His aversion to Wax-Lights, and for what reason, Ibid.
Lays waste the Bishopric of Rochester, because of some Dissentions between him
and the Bishop. His sordid Covetousness, Id. p. 21, 22. A weak and unwarlike
Prince, and most of the Nobility as bad as himself. His Fleet designed to
encompass that of the Danes, but he was betrayed by Aelfric, one of his
Admirals, who went over to them, Id. p. 23. Commands the Eyes of Aelfric's Son
to be put out, and for what, Id. p. 24. Calls a Council, who agree (upon
reading the Pope's Letters to the King) to send Ambassadors to the Marquis of
Normandy, to treat of Peace. He receives King Anlaff with great Honor, who
promises never to insest the English Nation more, Id. p. 24, 25. Sends for the
valiant Son of Waltheof Earl of the Northumbers, and for a Reward of his
Bravery in overcoming the Scots, gives him not only his Father's Country, but
adds to it that of Yorkshire, Id. p. 27. Lays Cumberland almost waste, because
the Prince thereof denied to bear his share in the Tribute paid to the Danes,
Id. p. 28. Aelgiva, Daughter of Richard Duke of Normandy, comes hither to be
married to the King, Id. p. 29. At the instigation of Huena, one of his Evil
Counselors, he commands all the Danes in England to be slain at the Feast of
St. Brice, because he was told that they endeavored to deprive him and all his
Great Men of their Lives, and to seize the Kingdom for themselves, Ibid. The
Calamities that befell him and his Kingdom hereupon, by the coming over King
Sweyn from Denmark, with a mighty Fleet, Id. p. 30. His Displeasure against two
Noblemen, depriving one of all his Honors, and putting out the eyes of the
other, Id. p. 31. Enters into several Treaties of Peace with the Danes, and
pays them Tributes in Money, as well as Maintenance and Provision; but nothing
did long oblige them, Id. p. 25, 29, 32, Perceiving his error in the want of a
good Fleet, commands over all England, That out of every Hundred and ten Hides
of Land a Ship should be built, etc. But his Fleet is much destroyed either by
Tempest or Fire, Id. p. 33. Is betrayed, and hindered from falling upon the
Danes, when his whole Army had hemmed them in, and were just ready to give them
Battle. His Forces too signified but little to him, for when the Enemy went
East, they were sure to be taken up in the West, etc. Id. p. 34. He demands of
the Londoners full Pay and Victuals for his Army; and is in such distress by
Sweyn, that he is forced to send his Wife and Children into Normandy, and
afterward to go thither himself, where he tarried till Sweyn died: But upon
his return to his own Kingdom, he is received, on conditions to govern them
better that he had done before, and then is again solemnly crowned at
Westminster, Id. p. 38, 39. But he was not very long mindful of his Promise to
his Subjects, Id. p. 40. Through his Cowardice or Ill Fortune, he was
constantly attended with ill success, Id. p. 41. He is called, THE UNREADY,
(and justly) by our English Historians. His Decease, and Burial at St. Paul's
Church in London, Id. p. 42. His Character, and excellent Laws, Id. p. 19, 42,
43. The Issue he had by his Queen, Id. p. 38, 42.
Ethelwald, succeeds his Brother Etheler in the Kingdom of the East Angles, l.
4. p. 186. His Death, and who succeeds him, Id. p. 190.
Ethelwald, Earl of the East Angles, by what Trick he got Ethelfreda for his
Wife from King Edgar, but which cost him his Life, l. 6. p. 9, 10. Ethelward,
the Third Synod at Cloveshoe was held under him, and twelve Bishops of his
Province, and what was therein transacted. The next year he dies, l. 5. p. 248.
Ethelwerd, King Alfred's Youngest Child, bred up at Oxford; his Death, and
Issue, l. 5. p. 311. Was learned above that Age. He was buried at Winchester,
Id. p. 324.
Ethelwin, Vid. Edwin and Ethelwin. Ethelwold, Bishop, by King Edgar's Command
turns out the Chanons at Winchester, and places Benedictines in their rooms, l.
4. p. 181. His Decease, when, Id. p. 223.
Ethelwold, surnamed Moll, when he began to reign over the Northumbers. Slays
Duke Oswin in a Fight at Edwinscliffe, l. 4. p. 228. Is murdered by the
Treachery of Alhred, who succeeded him, Id. p. 229.
Ethelwulf, the Son, succeeds Egbert in the Kingdom of the West Saxons, who
gave him good Advice how he might be happy in his Kingdom, l. 5. p. 257, 258.
Comes to the Crown by virtue of his Father's Testament. His Education and
Tutors during his Elder Brother's life. His Character, and what Kingdoms he
made over to Athelstan his Son, Id. p. 258. Fights against Five and thirty
Danish Ships at Charmouth, Id. p. 251. A Son, called Aelfred, is born to him by
Osberge his Wife, Id. p. 261. He and Ethelbald his Son, with the Forces of the
West Saxons, fight with the Pagan Danes, and make a greater slaughter of them
than ever before, Ibid. Assisting Burhred, makes the men of North Wales subject
to him, Id. p. 262. His Famous and Solemn Grant of Tithes throughout his
Kingdom, Id. p. 262, 263. Goes to Rome, carrying Aelfred his Son along with
him, Id. p. 263. In his return marries Leotheta, the Daughter of Charles the
Bald, King of the Franks, Ibid. A most infamous Conspiracy is formed in the
West of England against him, on the account of his new Wife, Id. p. 263, 264.
Divides the Kingdom (which was before united) with the Consent of all his
Nobility, between him and his Son Ethelbald. And to prevent Quarrels between
his Sons, he orders by his Will how his Kingdom should be enjoyed amongst them,
l. 5. p. 264. By his Last Will grants Corrodies for the Maintenance of Poor
People, a Yearly Allowance of Three hundred Mancuses to Rome, and one hundred
of them to the Pope. His Death, and Burial at Winchester, after he had reigned
Twenty Years, Id. p. 264, 265. St. Swithune, Bishop of Winchester, and Alstan
Bishop of Shireborne, were this King's two Principal Counselors in all
Affairs, Id. p. 267.
Evesham-Abbey, concerning the Forging of the Charters about it, l. 4. p. 216,
217. Is repaired by Leofric, with the Consent of his Lady Godiva, l. 6. p. 72.
Eugenius, set up against Valentinian the second, by Arbogastes, the former's
General, but he was soon after put to death by Theodosius, l. 2. p. 97.
Eugenius, Prince of Cumberland, assists Anlaff against King Athelstan, l. 5. p.
334, 335. The Scotch call him King of Deira, and own he died in this Battle,
Id. p. 336.
Evil Councils bring all the Miseries imaginable on a Nation, l. 6. p. 23, 27,
32, 35. Europe, first peopled by the Posterity of Japhet, either from one
Alanus, supposed to have been his Grandson, or from Gomer his Son, l. 1. p. 4.
Eustatius (Earl of Boloigne, Edward the Confessor's Brother-in-Law), with his
Retinue entering Dover, and resolving to quarter where they pleased, was
resisted by the Townsmen, upon which ensued a great deal of Bloodshed on both
sides, l. 6. p. 76. Eutherius, Archbishop of Arles; Augustine and the Monks
recommended to his Care and Protection, l. 4. p. 153. Ordains Augustine,
Archbishop of the English Nation, Id. p. 154.
Excommunication had in King Withred's time no other Temporal punishment than a
pecuniary Mulct, l. 4. p. 211. Exeter, anciently Exancester, Besieged, and
where King Alfred pursued the Danes, l. 5. p. 300, 306. The removal of the Sea
from Crediton to this City, l. 5. p. 333. Is made a Bishops See instead of
Credington in Cornwall, at the request of Pope Leo, l. 6. p. 78.
Exmouth, anciently called Exanmuthan, l. 6. p. 28.
F
FAith, the first People that were ever Executed by any Christian Prince for
mere matters of Faith, l. 2. p. 96. False News, the spreaders of it against the
Government to be punished with loss of Tongue, or to Redeem themselves by the
value of their Head, and to be of no credit afterward, l. 5. p. 294. Famine, a
dreadful one about the Year CCCCXLVI in Britain, l. 3. p. 115. Another among
the South Saxons, wherein multitudes of the poorer People perished daily, it
being said not to have rained in that Country for Three years before, l. 4, p.
198. A cruel one followed strange Prodigies in the Country of Northumberland,
Id. p. 238. A little after the Death of King Edgar a very great Famine
happened, l. 6. p. 15, 16. In Ethelred the Unready's time, so great a Famine
raged, as England never underwent a worse, Id. p. 31. And in the Reign of
Edward the Confessor there was another so great here, that a Sester of Wheat
was sold for Sixty Pence and more, Id. p. 72.
Farrington in Berkshire, anciently called Fearndune, where King Edward the
Elder died, l. 5. p. 324. Fealty, or Fidelity, the Oath required by Law to be
taken by all Persons to King Edmund, l. 5. p. 346. King of the Scots Swears
Fidelity to King Edmund, and all the Northumbrian Lords do the same, Id. p.
349. Two joint Princes of North Wales, upon his Grant of it to them, Swear
Fealty to Edward the Confessor, and likewise to Earl Harold, l. 6. p. 90.
Fee, or Feuds, the first footsteps of Military Feuds, afterward so much in
use amongst the Goths, Normans, and other Nations, l. 2. p. 80.
Fee-tayl-Estate, much more Ancient than the Thirteenth of Edward the First,
appears by the Thirty seventh Law of King Alfred concerning Bockland, l. 5. p.
295, 296. Feologild the Abbot, his being said to be chosen Archbishop of
Canterbury, (but certainly a mistake). His Death, l. 5. p. 255. Fergus, the Son
of Erk, bringing great Supplies of the Scots from Ireland and Norway, they came
to recover their Country: With a Relation of Fergus his Action, l. 2. p 98.
King of the Scots is slain in Battle, and by whom, Id. p. 102.
Fernham, the place where King Alfred fought with the Danes, and put them to
flight, l. 5. p. 300. Festidus, a Learned British Bishop, if not an Archbishop,
l. 2. p. 107 Fidelity, vid. Fealty. Fighting, the Punishment of such as do so,
either in the King's House, Church, or Earldorman's, Nobleman's, or Villager's
House, or in the open Field, l. 4. p. 208. The Punishment of those in Holy
Orders if they chance to fight, l. 5. p. 284. The Law against Fighters in the
King's Palace, and the punishment of an Offender that flies, Id. p. 293, 295.
No Fyhtwite, or Manbote, (that is, Fine for Fighting or Killing) to be
Remitted, Id. p. 347.
Finan, a Bishop, calling to him Two other Bishops, Ordains Cedda Bishop over
the East Saxons, l. 4. p. 184. Fines, vid. Pecuniary Fines and Mulcts. Finkley,
in the Bishopric of Durham, and Kingdom of the Northumbers, anciently called
Pynchanhale, or Finekanhale, where a General Synod Assembled, l. 4. p. 236.
Fire, great mischief done thereby at London, Winchester, and other places, l.
4. p. 229. Vid. London and Winchester.
First Fruits, vid. Tithes. Five Burghs, not known where, but somewhere in
Northumberland, l. 6. p. 37, 40. Flanders, what we now call so, was anciently
accounted part of France, or Frankland, l. 5. p. 283. Flattery, notorious in
Two of King Leir's Daughters to their Father, l. 1. p. 11. Of the Bishops,
Ealdormen, and Chief Men throughout the Kingdom, about making Cnute (upon the
Death of Edmund Ironside) King of all England, to the Exclusion of his Children
and Brethren, l. 6. p. 49.
Fleet, set out against the Danes, but continually delayed from doing any good,
l. 6. p. 27, 33. Out of so many Hydes of Land to build a Ship, in order to set
out a great Fleet against the Danes, Id. p. 33. Absolutely necessary for an
Island to maintain a Powerful Fleet, Id. p. 35.
Foelix, a Bishop, Preached the Faith of Christ to the East Angles; he was a
Burgundian, and the first Bishop in Dunwich in Suffolk, l. 4. p. 179. Folemote,
Strangers to be brought before the King's Officers there by the Merchants, that
so their Numbers might be known, and they forthcoming upon occasion, l. 5. p.
294. The Punishment of striking therein before the King's Ealdorman, Id. p.
295. If any Absent himself thrice, he is to be Punished as Contumacious to the
King; and in case of refusal to do right, all he has is to be seized, and he
to give security for his appearance, Id. p. 341.
Folcstone in Kent, anciently called Folcestane, where Earl Godwin took all the
Ships he could find, l. 6. p. 80. Foreign-Tongue, where it prevails, generally
speaking, it is reckoned half a Conquest, l. 6. p. 98. Forests are priviledg'd
places, fenced in with certain Bounds, Laws and Immunities, under Magistrates,
Judges, Officer's, etc. for the King's Service and Game, l. 6. p. 60.
Forfeitures, those the King challenges as due to himself in the County of
West-Saxony, l. 6. p. 58. Formosus the Pope, sends Letters to England,
threatening Excommunication and his Curse to King Edward the Elder and all his
Subjects, for suffering the Province of the West Saxons to be Seven years
without Bishops, l. 5. p. 313. A notable Error either in the Date of these
Letters, or of the Name of the Pope, Id. p. 314.
Fornication, if any one in Holy Orders commit it, what his Punishment, l. 5.
p. 284, 346. vid. Adultery. Framarius King of the Almans, sent by the Emperor
Valentinian into Britain, though with no higher a Command than that of a
Tribune, etc. l. 2. p. 94. France, how early it became the most Civilized of
those Gothic and German Nations, that had some Ages before settled themselves
in this part of Europe, l. 4. p. 243. Frank-pledges, the Antiquity of them; no
Norman Invention, as some People pretend, l. 6. p. 14. Franks, the Kingdom so
called, divided by Earnwulf (Charles the Gross his Brother's Son) into Five
parts, and each King to Govern under Earnwulf, and where their several Kingdoms
were fixed, l. 5. p. 290. Freemen, no English Freeman could in the Saxon times
be hanged for any Crime but Treason, l. 4. p. 209. Every one to find Sureties,
that he shall do right, if accused, l. 6. p. 42. Every one to enter himself
into some Hundred or Tything, Id. p. 58.
Freodguald Succeeds Theodoric in the Kingdom of Bernicia, l. 3. p. 146.
Freothwulf Reigned in Bernicia Seven or Eight years, l. 3. p. 145. His Decease,
Id. p. 146.
Frethanleage, now Fretherne in Gloucestershire, l. 3. p. 147. Friburg, that
is, Barons to have their Dependants forthcoming, or to answer for them upon
any complaint, l. 6. p. 102. Friesland (Old) the Gospel first preached there,
and by whom, l. 4. p. 211. The English-Saxons derived from the Frisians, l. 3.
p. 120.
Frisians assist the ancient Saxons of Germany against the Danes in a
Sea Fight, l. 5 p. 287.. Frithestan, when he was Ordained and took the
Bishopric of Winchester, l. 5. p. 314.315. Edward the Elder's Charter of
Confirmation of the Privileges of Cambridge, directed to this Frithestan, then
Chancellor and Doctor; but the Charter is grievously suspected, Id. p. 318. His
Decease, Id. p. 331.
Frithogithe, Queen of the West Saxons, went with Forthere Bishop of Shireburne
to Rome, l. 4. p. 223. Frithwald Bishop of Wytherne died, when he was
Consecrated; and how long he continued a Bishop, l. 4. p. 228. Fugitives, King
Edward the Elder's Law against them, l. 5. p. 325, 326. What the Forfeiture of
relieving or harboring any, l. 6. p. 58.
Fullenham, now Fulham, not far from London, l. 5. p. 283. Furfeus (or Fursee)
comes out of Ireland to preach the Gospel to the East Angles, and converts many
people, l. 4. p. 180.
G
GAcon, Bishop of Landaff, the First of the Welsh-Bishops that was consecrated
by an Archbishop of Canterbury, l. 6. p. 21. Gaini, anciently the Country about
Gainsborough in Yorkshire, l. 5. p. 269. Gainsborough in Lincolnshire,
anciently called Gegnesburgh, l. 6. p. 37, 39. Galgacus, Chief of the Britains
in Authority and Birth, makes a Noble Oration to his Army, l. 2. p. 60. Their
utter Overthrow and Flight, Id. p. 62, 63.
Galienus (Pub. Licinius) Emperor in his Father Valerian's lifetime. The
Empire had been quite ruined through his Excesses and Carelessness, had not the
Thirty Tyrants, as they are called, undertaken its Defense, l. 2. p. 81. Is at
last slain by the Treachery of three of his own Captains, Ibid.
Gallio, of Ravenna, sent against Bonifitius in Africa; but the year before, he
was sent into Britain, upon their earnest soliciting the Romans the second time
for Supplies; which in all probability were brought hither in the beginning of
the Reign of Valentinian the third, l. 2. p. 105, 106. Game. None in hunting to
meddle with the King's Game, l. 6. p. 60. Gavelkind. That old Custom or Tenure
first set up in Wales, and the great mischief it occasioned, l. 5. p. 250.
Gaul, upon composition, delivered up to the Goths by Honorius, l. 2. p. 105.
Gemote, or Hundred-Court, every one ought to be present at it, l. 6. p. 13, 14.
General; if his heart fails, the Army flies. A Cowardly General often makes
Cowardly Soldiers, l. 6. p. 30, 87. Gentlemen of ordinary Estates had in King
Alfred's time Villages and Townships of their own (as well as the King and the
Great Men), and they received the Penalties due for Breach of the Peace, l. 5.
p. 295. Geoffrey of Monmouth, is the chief, if not the only Author of Brutus
and his Successors, and his History cried out against almost as soon as
published, l. 1. p. 6. His story of the British War in Claudius the Emperor's
time, different frrom the Roman Accounts, and wherein, l. 2. p. 39, 40. A
notorious Falsehood in him about Severus his Death, Id. p. 78. His story of
Constantine's being elected King by the Britains, proved false, l. 3. p. 116.
His story (as to its truth) enquired into, of Augustine's persuading King
Ethelbert to incite Ethelfrid King of Northumberland, to make War on the
Britains, l. 4. p. 164, 165. His Account of Cadwallo's being buried at London,
and his Body put into a Brazen Statue of a Man on Horseback, and set over
Ludgate for a Terror to the Saxons, all false, Id. p. 177.
Gerent, King of the Britains, fights with King Ina, and Nun his Kinsman, l. 4.
p. 215. Is supposed to have been King of Cornwall, and why, Id. p. 216.
Germanus and Lupus, sent from France to confirm Britain in the Catholic
Faith, l. 2. p. 107. His second Voyage to Britain (upon the renewed Addresses
of the Britains) to defend God's Cause against Pelagianism, l. 3. p. 117. The
Miracle he wrought upon a Magistrate's Son, the Sinews of whose Legs had been
long shrunk up, which by his stroking he restored whole as the other, Id. Ibid.
Gerontius, General to Constans, brings all Spain under his Obedience, l. 2. p.
103. But being turned out of his Command, revolts, and sets up Maximus, one of
his Creatures, for Emperor. His cruel End, Id. Ib.
Gessoriacum, Portus Iccius in Caesar's time, afterward Bononia, and now
Buloigne, l. 2. p. 31, 40. Geta, Severus the Emperor's Younger Son, Governor of
the Southern part of this Island, l. 2. p. 75. Is killed by the Treachery of
his Brother Bassianus, in his Mother's Arms, Id. p. 77. And Bassianus had taken
the Surname of Antonini, Ib. and 79. His Name commanded to be razed out of all
Monuments, by this his wicked Brother; which was done accordingly, Id. p. 79.
Gethic, the ancient Scythic, or Gethic Tongue, the Mother of the German, l. 3.
p. 122. Gewisses; the Nation of the West Saxons, anciently so called, received
the Christian Faith in the Reign of Cynegils, by the preaching of Byrinus an
Italian, who came hither by the order of Pope Honorius, l. 4. p. 179. Gildas,
designed not any exact History of the Affairs of his Country, but only to give
a short Account of the Causes of the Ruin of it by the Scots, Picts, and
Saxons, l. 3. p. 137. His sharp Invective against the British Kings, accusing
Five of them of very heinous Enormities, Id. p. 139. His severe Character of
the British Clergy, Id. p. 140, 141. That he could not Study at Oxford, as is
supposed by some, for the Pagan-Saxons were then Masters of that part of
England, l. 5. p. 290.
Girwy, now Yarrow near the mouth of the River Tyne, where a Monastery was
built in Honor of St. Paul, l. 4. p. 194, 205, 222. Gisa succeeds Duduc in the
Bishopric of Somersetshire (i. e. Wells), l. 6. p. 88. Glan-Morgan in Wales,
had its Name from one Morgan, who was driven thither by his Brother Cunedage,
and there slain, l. 1. p. 11. Glappa King of Bernicia, Reigned for Two years,
but who he was, or how Descended, the Authors are silent in, l. 3. p. 144. His
Death, Id. p. 145.
Osgat Glappa, the Danish Earl, when he was Expelled England, l. 6. p. 73.
Glass, when the Art of making it was first taught the English Nation, l. 4. p.
194. Glastenbury Besieged by King Arthur in Gildas his time, with a great Army
out of Cornwall and Devonshire, because Queen Gueniver, his Wife, had been
Ravished from him by Melvas, who then Reigned in Somersetshire, l. 3. p. 135.
The Ancient Registers of this Monastery are not to be wholly slighted as false,
since King Arthur was there Buried, and his Tomb discovered about the end of
the Reign of King Henry the Second, Id. p. 137. This Ancient Monastery was new
built by King Ina with large Endowments and Exemptions from Episcopal
Jurisdictions, etc. l. 4. p. 218, 219. King Edmund's Body was brought from a
place called Pucklekirk (where he was killed) hither, and here buried, l. 5. p.
345. And so likewise King Edgar's with great Solemnity, for he had been a very
liberal Benefactor to this Monastery, l. 6. p. 9. As was Edmund, Surnamed
Ironside, his Grandson's. This was by all the Saxons called Glaestingabyrig,
Id. p. 48.
Gleni, a River, but where is not by our Authors mentioned, l. 4. p. 174.
Glewancester, now called Gloucester, l. 3. p. 145. Glotta and Bodotria, two
Streights, now the F^iths of Edinburgh and Dunbritton in Scotland, l. 2. p. 99.
God in Bede's time was served in Five several Langu^ges, l. 1. p. 5. Goda Earl
of Devonshire, marching out with one Strenwald a Valiant Knight to fight the
Danes, they were both killed, l. 6. p. 22. Godfathers, answerable for those
Children for whom they stand, till they come to years capable of Learning the
Creed and the Lord's Prayer, l. 4. p. 233. Godfred, Son of Harold the Dane,
subdues the whole Isle of Anglesey, and spoils all the Land of Dywet, with the
Church of St. David's, etc. l. 6. p. 7.20. Godiva, a Foundress (with her
Husband Leofrick Earl of the Mercians) of the Monastery of Coventry, and how
she freed the said Town from the Grievous Taxes imposed on it, l. 6. p. 71.
Godmundingham, the place where an Idol-Temple stood in King Edwin's time, not
far from York, Eastward, near the River Darwent, l. 4. p. 174. Godwin, Earl,
Governor, or Lord Lieutenant of West-Saxony, l. 6. p. 61. His Treachery to
Alfred (one of King Ethelred's Sons) whom by a Forged Letter, in the Name of
Queen Emma his Mother, he enticed over into England, then made him Prisoner at
Guilford, and sent him up to Harold; and what afterward became of him and his
Six hundred followers; his Eyes put out, and he not long survived their loss,
and most of them suffered various kinds of cruel Deaths, Id. p. 62, 63. Is
accused of the Villainy by Aelfrick Archbishop of York, and how he purchased his
Reconciliation to King Hardecnute, Id. p. 67. By his Interest gets Edward the
Confessor (the Brother of the abovementioned Alfred) to be Elected, and
afterward Crowned King at Westminster, Id. p. 69, 70. His own and his Son's
great Power, in being able to withstand the King and all the Nobility that were
with him at a Great Council at Gloucester, Id. p. 77, 81. But being summoned to
appear at another Curia held at London, he and Earl Sweyn his Son, fled to
Baldwin Earl of Flanders for Protection, Id. p. 77, 78. His sailing for
England, but being pursued he returns to Bruges, and coming again soon after,
commits a thousand Ravages, Id. p. 80, 81. What the ground of all this contest
between the King and him; at last in a Great Council a Peace was made, and
Hostages given on both sides, Id. p. 81. Is Accused by King Edward for the
Death of his Brother in the Great Council, and how he made his Peace, Id. p.
83. He and his Sons restored to their former Honors and Estates, in a Great
Council, Id. p. 82, 83, 84. His Death, and Burial in the old Monastery of
Winchester, Id. p. 84, 85. His Character, Wives, and Issue, Id. p. 85.
Gogmagog, the mighty Giant in Cornwall, taken up by Corinaeus in his Arms,
though he was no Giant himself, and flung off by him (if you will believe the
Fable) from a Cliff into the Sea, l. 1. p. 9. Gordianus M. Anton. elected
Emperor by the Praetorian Bands, had an Army in Britain; though nothing was
done, by what can be found, l. 2. p. 81. Gormond, an African King, comes out of
Ireland to fight Careticus; and what the success, l. 3. p. 148. Gospatrick (a
great Officer in Northumberland) murdered upon the account of a quarrel
between him and Earl Tostige, l. 6. p. 90. Gospel; supposed to be first
preached in this Island in the Reigns of either Claudius or Nero; though by
whom, unknown, l. 2. p. 51, 52. The story of Joseph of Arimathea, and his
Twelve Companions coming to preach the Gospel in Britain, Id. p. 52, 53. Christ
was preached here as early as the first Conquest of it by the Britains, Id. p.
69. Who first preached the Gospel in the Country of the Grisons, l. 2. p. 70.
The first preaching of the Gospel in Germany, and by whom, l. 4. p. 211. The
joyful Tidings of it first brought to us from Canterbury, l. 6. p. 36.
Government devolved on the People, when the Emperor acquitted the Britains of
the Roman Jurisdiction, l. 2. p. 104. Graetanleage, the Laws that were made
there by King Athelstan, in a Great Council, l. 5. p. 339, 340, 341. Grand
Inquest. Vid. Inquest. Gratian, the Emperor, creates Theodosius the Younger his
Partner in the Empire, assigning him the East for his share, l. 2. p. 95. Being
routed by the Forces of Maximus, is forced to fly with Three hundred Horse
toward the Alps; but Andragathius with some Light Horse being sent after him,
overtakes him near the Bridge of Singidunum, and there kills him, Id. Ibid.
Gratianus, surnamed Funarius (from his great strength in pulling a Rope from
Four Men) made General of all the Forces throughout Britain, l. 2. p. 89. The
British Army elected him Emperor, and clothed him with the Imperial Purple,
Id. p. 102. But he is soon after deprived both of his Life and Empire, Id. p.
104, 105.
Gregory, made Bishop of Rome, in what year, l. 3. p. 149. Surnamed the Great,
to whom the English Nation owed its Conversion, l. 4. p. 152. Would have come
himself to preach God's Word to the English; but the Citizens of Rome would by
no means suffer him to go so far from them, l. 4. p. 153. In the Fourth Year of
his Pontificate he sends Augustine with many Monks over to the Britains, to
preach Gospel to them: Calls the Emperor his Lord, and dates his Letters by the
year of His Reign, and not that of his own, l. 3. p. 149. l. 4. p. 153, 158.
His Decease; the Account of his life may be read in Bid, Id. p. 163, 165.
Griffyn, Prince of Wales, entering England, spoils great part of Herefordshire,
and carries away much Booty, l. 6. p. 84, 86, 87. The Son of Ratherch ap
Justin, raises a great Army against Griffyth Prince of North Wales, and what
the success, Id. p. 85. A Peace mediated between Edward the Confessor and this
Prince, Id. p. 87. How he restores Aelfgar to his Earldom, after he was a
second time banished by King Edward, Id. p. 88. Is slain by his own people, and
his Head sent to Earl Harold, and the gilded Stern of his Ship, which he caused
to be carried to King Edward, Id. p. 89.
Griffyth ap Lewellin ap Sitsylt, raises a great Army against Prince Jago of
North Wales, whose Soldiers deserting him, he was soon overthrown and slain, l.
6. p. 64. His good Government afterward over those of North Wales, and his
total subduction of South Wales, and his other Conquests: Howel ap Edwin
narrowly escapes him; but he took his Wife Prisoner, whom he liked so well,
that he kept her for his Mistress, Ibid. He is taken Prisoner by surprise, but
is immediately rescued, Id. p. 70. His Engagement with Ritherch and Rees, and
the success thereof, Id. p. 71. Revenges the death of One hundred and forty of
his best Soldiers, treacherously killed by the Gentlemen of Ystrad Towy, Id. p.
73.
Griffyth ap Madoc, designing to bring all Wales, etc. under his subjection,
was slain by the Princes Edmund and Edred, who brought his Head to their
Father, l. 5. p. 321. St. Grimbald: the University of Oxford, founded in the
second year of his coming over into England; the difference between him and
those he brought over with him, and the Old Scholars whom he found there, l. 5.
p. 288, 289, 290, 306. St. Grimbald sent for from France by King Alfred to
assist him in his Learning, l. 5. p. 306. His Decease, Id. p. 312.
Grime, King of the Scots, refusing to pay part of a Tribute to the Danes,
which King Ethelred demanded of him, had his Country of Cumberland laid almost
waste, l. 6. p. 28. Grisons make Lucius to have been their Apostle, and first
to have Preached the Gospel in their Country, and show his Tomb at Cloir at
this day, l. 2. p. 70. Grymkyrel, made (upon the Death of Ethelric) Bishop of
the South Saxons, that is, of Selsey, l. 6. p. 65. His Decease, Id. p. 73.
Guarinus King of the Huns, l. 2. p. 96. Gueld, that is, Tribute, l. 4. p. 187.
Guendelew, Son of Keidiaw, a Prince of the North parts of Britain, l. 3. p.
146. Gueniver, Vid. Glastenbury. Guiderac in the British Tongue, is Mould in
Flintshire in the English; the place is called Maes German, that is German's-
Field, where the Britains got a great Victory over the Picts and Saxons, by the
means of Germanus a French Bishop, l. 2. p. 108, 109. Guild, or Fraternity,
signified sometimes such as were Fellow-Contributors to the same Parish-Feast
in honor of the Saints; sometimes such as were bound together in the same
Decennary or Tything, l. 5. p. 294. Guintelin, his Character, his Virtuous Wife
Maetia, and his Reign, l. 1. p. 13. Gunhilda, Cnute's Niece, being his Sister's
Daughter, Marries Hacun a Danish Earl, l. 6. p. 53. Hardecnute's Sister sent
over to the Emperor Henry, to whom she had been before Betrothed, and was
kindly received by him for some time, till she was accused of Adultery, and how
her Honor was vindicated at last be her little Page, Id. p. 66, 67. But it
made her forsake her Husband, and retire into a Monastery for all her life
afeer, Id. p. 67. The Noble Matron was Banished England with her Two Sons, Id.
p. 73.
Gunhildis, a Beautiful Young Lady (Sweyn's Sister) Beheaded, and bore her
death with great bravery, having seen her Husband and her Son slain before her
face, l. 6. p. 37. Gurgi, a British Prince, Son of Gliver Gosgard Vawr, a
Prince of Cumberland, l. 3. p. 147. Gurguint, in his Reign the Danes refused to
pay him the Tribute which had been imposed by Belinus, l. 1. p. 13. Guthfrith,
or Godfred, Son to Syhtric, a Danish King of Northumberland, succeeds his
Father there, but was soon expelled by Athelstan, who added those Dominions to
his own, l. 5. p. 330. Fly into Scotland, and raises a Rebellion against
Athelstan, but he makes him submit to him: The Civil Treatment Athelstan gives
him, and his Revolt from him afterward, Id. p. 331, 332, 333.
Guthlac, first a Monk, then a professed Anchori^e, builds a Cell at Croyland;
the incredible Miracles told of him, l. 4. p. 216. A Monastery founded in
honor of him (by Ethelbald King of the Mercians) who was then lately deceased,
Id. p. 218. The Danes break open his Tomb, and those of the Princes there
buried, and finding no plunder, set the Church on fire, and burn their dead
bodies, l. 5. p. 271.
Guthrun, Gythram, or Gorman, their Leader or King, was promised by the Danes
to become a Christian, and accordingly King Alfred was his Godfather at his
Baptism, l. 5. p. 283, 284, 298. The Kingdom of the East Angles delivered up to
him, Id. p. 283. The League between King Alfred and him, as also the Secular
and Ecclesiastical Laws that were made then by them, Id. p. 283, 284, 285. His
Christian Name, Ethelstan; called King of the Normans; his Decease, l. 5. p.
298. He died Ten years before King Alfred, therefore no Ecclesiastical Laws
could be made between him and Edward the Elder, who was Alfred's Son and
Successor, Id. p. 326.
Guy, Earl of Warwick, returning from the Holy Land in a Pilgrim's Habit,
Fights one Colebrand, a Monstrous Danish Giant near Winchester, and kills him,
and retiring to a Hermitage near Warwick, there ends his days, l. 5. p. 337,
338. Gwgan, King or Prince of Cardigan, his death; some say he was drowned by
misfortune, l. 5. p. 277. Gwido, Earl of Ponthieu, detains Earl Harold
Prisoner, but soon sets him at Liberty by the Command of William Duke of
Normandy, l. 6. p. 92. Gwyn, or Gwyr, a Country in North Wales, subdued by
Eneon, Son of Owen, Prince of South Wales, l. 6. p. 6. Is destroyed a second
time by the same Person, Id. p. 16.
Gwyneth, that is, North Wales, l. 3. p. 147. l. 5. p. 317. Gyrth, King
Harold's Youngest Brother, his excellent Advice to him not to fight in Person
against Duke William, rejected, which cost Harold his Life, l. 6. p. 111.
H
HAcun, a Danish Earl, Banished England (under pretense of an Ambassy) by King
Cnute, who was afraid of him, and why, l. 6. p. 53. Hadrian (Aelius) a
Spaniard, succeeds his Uncle Trajan in the Empire; his Politics, l. 2. p. 67.
Comes over into Britain, and reduces the Inhabitants; he builds a wall of
Eighty Miles in l^ngth cross the Island; Id. p. 67, 76.
Haefe, supposed to be Hatfield in Northumberland, l. 4. p. 215. Halfdene
Marches with one half of the Danish Army into the Kingdom of Northumberland,
and there soon conquers the whole Country, spoiling as far as Galloway, l. 5.
p. 277, 315. Divides that Kingdom amongst his People, from whence they date
their Reign there, Id. p. 278. Is slain by King Alfred, Id. p. 286.
Hamtun (that is now Southampton) where Wulfheard the Ealdorman fights with a
Fleet of Three and thirty Danish Pirates, and obtains a signal Victory over
them, l. 5. p. 258. Hardecnute, Son to King Cnute by Queen Emma, is appointed
by his Father to be King of Denmark, l. 6. p. 56. But is Decreed in the Great
Council at Oxnaford, upon the fierce disputes of the contending Parties, That
this Kingdom should be divided between Harold and him, and Hardecnute to enjoy
all the Southern Provinces; but he never did all the time of his Brother
Harold, Id. p. 62. He being at Harold's Death in Bruges with his Mother, is
invited by the Chief Men of England to come over and receive the Crown, which
he accordingly did with all possible convenience, and so is Elected King. The
several Taxes he raises. His Consecration. His revenging the Injury Harold did
to his Mother, and sending his Sister Gunhilda to the Emperor Henry, to whom
she had been before Betrothed, and the Feast he first kept for her Nuptials,
Id. p. 66. Is incensed against Bishop Lifing and Earl Godwin for the Death of
his Half-Brother Alfred, and how the business was made up, and he reconciled to
them, Id. p. 67. Plunders and Burns the City, and wastes the County of
Worcester, and upon what account; Deceases at Lambeth, and is Buried in the New
Monastery of Winchester. His Character. A Holyday kept to his remembrance, Id.
p. 68.
Harold King of Norway, his Present to King Athelstan of a Ship, whose Stern
was Gilded, and it is Sails Purple, l. 5. p. 339. Harold, Son to King Cnute by
Aelgiva, he appoints to be King of England after him, l. 6. p. 56. Is Chosen
King by the Great Council held at Oxnaford, though opposed by the Great Men of
the West Saxons, upon the pretense of a Supposititious Birth, and the Disputes
rise so high about the Election, that many fearing it would issue in a Civil
War, left their Habitations upon it, Id. p. 61, 62. Sends a Guard to
Winchester, and Tyrannically seizes on his Father's Treasures there, which he
had bequeathed to the Queen his Mother-in-law, Id. p. 62. Dies at Oxnaford, and
is Buried at Westminster; how long he Governed England, Id. p. 65. The Tax he
raised for setting out Sixteen Sail of Ships whereof every Port was to bear
their proportion, incenses the minds of the English against him. His Character,
and the reason of his being called Harefoot, l. 6. p. 65. His Body is dug up by
Hardecnute's Order, his Head cut off, and flung into the Thames, bu^ afterward
taken up by Fishermen, and Buried in St. Clement's Curch-yard, Id. p. 66.
Harold, surnamed Hairfax, King of Norway, and Brother to King Olaf, putting
Sweyn King of Denmark to flight, subdues that Kingdom, but dying soon after,
Sweyn recovers it again, l. 6. p. 74. Harold, Son of Earl Godwin, the Quarrel
that arose between Edward the Confessor and his Father, his Brother Sweyn and
him, and how he is forced to fly into Ireland for Protection, l. 6. p. 75, 77,
78. Returns from Ireland, and kills and plunders all that comes in his way, but
is in a Great Council restored to his former Honor and Estate, Id. p. 80, 81,
82. Is Founder of the Abbey of the Holy Cross at Waltham in Essex; goes (with
Earl Tostige his Brother) with a great Army both by Land and Sea into Wales,
and subdues that Country, Id. p. 89. Seems to be the Adopted and Declared Heir
of the Crown, Id. p. 90. Endeavors to appease the Northumbers about his
Brother Tostige, but in vain; his Character of being a Valiant and Worthy
Prince, Id. p. 90, 91. His going over into Normandy, and the occasion of it.
His promises to Duke William there, That when King Edward died, he would
deliver up Dover-Castle to him, and procure him the Succession; but yet he
succeeded the Confessor, who declared him his Successor in the Kingdom, Id. p.
92. The various Reports how he was advanced to it, whether by Election, or
otherwise, Id. p. 105. The wise course he takes to preserve himself in that
Dignity he had got, Id. p. 106. The several Invasions designed and preparing
against him, and his great Care and Industry in opposing them both by Sea and
Land, Id. p. 106, 108, 109. An Ambassador sent to him from Duke William, to put
him in mind of the Breach of his Word, and threatening to force him to perform
it; with Harold's Answer, l. 6. p. 107. His Victory over the King of Norway,
and his Brother Tostige, Id. p. 109. His going against Duke William (who landed
at Hastings) with but part of his Forces, with a Resolution to fight him, and
his preparations for it, Id. p. 110, 111. The precipitate Answer he gave to the
Monk whom Duke William sent to him with Proposals; telling him, He would leave
it to God to determine between them, Id. p. 111. The manner how he drew up his
Army in order to a Battle, Id. p. 111, 112. His Foot breaking, in pursuit of
the Enemy, who they thought were flying, lost him the Victory, his Crown, and
Life; for he was slain by an Arrow shot through his Brains; his Standard taken,
and sent to the Pope, Id. p. 112, 113. How his Body came to be known amidst the
Crowd of the slain, and not long after buried in the Abbey-Church of Waltham.
His Character: His Wives and Children; and the Law he made, Id. p. 114, 115.
Harwood-Forest, anciently called Warewell, where Athelwold was slain with a
Dart, by whom, and upon what account, l. 6. p. 10. Hastings, or Haestein, the
Dane, his arrival in Kent, and the Ravages he makes there; but is at last
forced to surrender to King Alfred, with his Wife and two Sons, and to become a
Christian, and accept of Conditions, which he soon after broke, l. 5. p. 299,
300. His Ships broke to Pieces, the best of them being saved, and carried into
Port, Id. p. 300.
Hatred; too many men's natures to hate those that have too much obliged them,
l. 2. p. 64, 65. Heacca, Bishop of the South Saxons (that is, of Chichester),
his Decease, l. 6. p. 88. Headda, Abbot of Medeshamsted, the Charter said to be
wrote by him, l. 6. p. 4, 5. Heads; Oswald's Head and Arms cut off by Penda's
Order, and set on a Pole for a Trophy of his Victory, l. 4. p. 181. Scotch;
slain in War, set upon high Poles round about the Walls of Durham, l. 6. p. 27.
Healfange, that is, what is paid in Commutation for the Punishment of hanging
by the Neck, to the King, or Lord, l. 5. p. 347. Vid. l. 6. p. 59. Healfden, a
Danish King, is slain in Battle, with several Earls, and many Thousand
Soldiers, by King Edward the Elder's Army, l. 5. p. 315. Heathens and Pagans;
by these names are meant the Danes and Norwegians, together with the Goths,
Swedes, and Vandals, which for so long together wasted England, l. 5. p. 255,
256. Heavens; a Red-Cross appeared in the Heavens after Sunset, l. 4. p. 230.
Hedda, when he sat as first Bishop of Winchester, Id. p. 181. Took the
Bishopric of the East Saxons, Id. p. 196. His Death, and Excellent Character,
Id. p. 212, 213.
Heddi, consecrated Bishop of Winchester, that is, of the West Saxons, by
Archbishop Theodore, when, l. 4. p. 193. Heddi (Stephen) the Author of the Life
of St. Wilfrid, his Account of the Quarrel between Egfrid King of
Northumberland, and that Bishop, l. 4. p. 197. Heliogabolus (Anton.) succeeds
Opilius Macrinus in the Empire, but after three years Reign is killed by the
Praetorian Band, l. 2. p. 80. Helmestan, Bishop of Winchester, and the Dean of
that Church, had the Education of Prince Ethelwulf, during the Life of his
Elder Brother, l. 5. p. 257. Helmham in Norfolk, a Bishop's See, taken out of
the Bishopric of Dunmoc, l. 4. p. 193. Is continued to be the sole Bishop's
See for the Kingdom of the East Angles, till long after that it was removed to
Norwich, l. 5. p. 274.
Hemeida, a Welsh King, expelled the Bishops of St. David's, and Archbishop
Novis, but at last he and all the Inhabitants of South Wales, and Rodri with
his Six Sons submit to Alfred, l. 5. p. 306. Hengest and Horsa, their first
coming over to Britain, l. 3. p. 118. They were originally Saxons by Descent,
Ib. and p. 120. Those that came over with them were rather Frisians, Id. p.
120. Were the Sons of Witgilfus, who was the Son of Witta, and he the Son of
Vecta, and he the Son of Woden, Id. p. 121. Hengest demands of King Vortigern
the Country of Kent for his Daughter, and has it, Id. p. 126. Sends over for
Octa and Ebusa, his Son and Nephew, Ibid. and p. 142. Is chosen King by the
Saxons, and made to retire into the Isle of Thanet, Id. p. 128. When he and his
Son Aesk fought against the Britains, and obtained a great Victory, l. 3. p.
129. When he and his Brother fought again with them, and took much spoil, Id.
p. 131. His Death, Id. p. 132. With Alrick, King of Kent, ended the Race of
Hengest, l. 4. p. 238. His Brother Horsa, slain at Engleford in Kent, l. 3. p.
128.
Hengestdune (now Hengston in Cornwall) where King Egbert beats the Danes and
Western Welsh, l. 5. p. 257. Henwald, two Priests of this name barbarously
murdered by the Old Saxons, and their Bodies flung into the Rhine; but their
Murder was notoriously revenged, l. 4. p. 212. Heofenfield (or Heaven-field),
lying near to what we call the Picts-Wall, l. 4. p. 177. Heraclitus, made by
Severus Lieutenant of the Southern Parts of Britain, l. 2. p. 74. Herefrith,
Bishop of Winchester, his Decease, l. 5. p. 257. Hereman, King Edward the
Confessor's Chaplain, succeeds Brightwulf in the Bishopric of Shireburne, l.
6. p. 73. Is sent with Bishop Aldred to the great Synod held at Rome, and for
what, Id. p. 75.
Heresy, Arrian, when it first began to infect Britain, l. 2. p. 106. Pelagian,
when it was broached here by a British Monk, for absolute Freewill, without the
Assisting Grace of God, l. 2. p. 107. Of Eutiches (who maintained but One Will
and Person in Christ), condemned in a Synod at Heathfield in Hertfordshire, l.
4. p. 199.
Herethaland, that is, the Country of Pirates, l. 4. p. 235. Heriots, King
Cnute's Law concerning them, settling the Rates of them according to every
one's Rank and Dignity, l. 6. p. 59, 60. Hethfield, supposed Hatfield in
Yorkshire, where King Edwin was slain, and his whole Army quite routed, l. 4.
p. 176. In Hertfordshire, where Theodore the Archbishop summoned a Synod, in
which the Five First General Councils were not only received and confirmed, but
the latter held at Rome under Pope Martyn I. l. 4. p. 199.
Hiberni, whether Irish-men or Scotch understood by that name, l. 2. p. 83, 84.
Higbald, consecrated at Soccabrig to be Bishop of Lindisfarne, l. 4. p. 232.
When he deceased, and who was his Successor, l. 5. p. 248.
Higbert, consecrated Bishop of Hagulstad, in the room of Bishop Alchmund, l.
4. p. 232. Or Higebryht, chosen Archbishop of Litchfield by King Offa, Id. p.
233.
Hilda, founds the Monastery of Streanshale, in which she lived, and died
Abbess, l. 4. p. 188, 199. Grand-Niece to King Edwin, and converted by
Paulinus: Her severe Sanctity, Id. p. 199. Very much against Bishop Wilfrid,
upon substantial reasons, Id. p. 215.
Hinguar and Hubba, two cruel Danish Tyrants, burnt Coldingham-Nunnery, with
the Abbess and all her Nuns in it; and many other Monasteries, l. 5. p. 269,
270. And destroys the whole Country of the East Angles, and Edmund their King,
l. 5. p. 270, 271, 272, 273, 274. Makes a great slaughter of the Britains, but
is slain with 1200 men, near the Castle of Kenwith, Id. p. 281.
Hlothe. Vid. Troops. Hock-Wednesday, a Holiday in Memory of Hardecnute's
Death, on which the people danced, and drew Cords across the ways, as they do
now on stated days in several Parishes in England, to stop Passengers till they
get some Money from them, l. 6. p. 68. Holland in Lincolnshire, anciently
called Hoyland, whence all the Youth were drawn out against the Danes, and
their Success, l. 5. p. 270. Homage; whether the Submission the King of Scots
paid to King Edward the Elder, amounted to it, questioned, l. 5. p. 323. The
story of Llewelyn, Prince of North Wales, his doing Homage to Edward the Elder,
very suspicious; and the reason why, Id. p. 328. Godwin's performing it, shows
this Tenure to be in use before the Conquest, l. 6. p. 83. Vid. Fealty.
Honorius, the Emperor of the West, had, during his Minority, Stilico appointed
for his Governor, l. 2. p. 97. Admits Constantine Partner with him in the
Empire, l. 2. p. 102. Delivers Gaul up to the Goths, and did not in his time
recover the Province of Britain, Id. p. 105.
Honorius, Archbishop of Canterbury, received his Ordination from Paulinus, l.
4. p. 175. Consecrates Ithamar a Kentish-man, Bishop of Rochester (in the room
of Paulinus) who was equal to his Predecessors in Learning and Piety, Id. p.
181. His Death, and who succeeded him in the Archbishopric, Id. p. 185, 186.
Honorius Succeeds Boniface in the Roman See, and sends Paulinus (upon his
hearing the Northumbrians had received the Christian Faith by his Preaching) an
Archiepiscopal Pall, etc. l. 4. p. 175. Another Pope of the same Name, by his
Bull not only ratifies all the Privileges confirmed by former Popes to the
Abbey of St. Albans, but grants to that and his Successors, Episcopal Rights,
etc. Id. p. 237, 238.
Hoocnorton in Oxfordshire, anciently Hocneratune, where the Danes committed
great Ravages and Slaughter, l. 5. p. 319. Horesti, supposed to be the
Inhabitants of Eskdale in Scotland, l. 2. p. 63. Horsa, Vid. Hengest. Horses,
Forbidden by King Athelstane's Law to be Transported out of England, l. 5. p.
341. St. Dunstan's Horse falling down dead under him, upon his hearing a voice
from Heaven, crying aloud, King Edred is dead; as true as that the Sea burns,
Id. p. 351.
Hostages given to Sweyn the Dane wherever he came, l. 6. p. 37, 38.
Hostilianus (Trebonianus Gallus) Deposed from the Empire by the Soldiers that
first raised him to it, l. 2. p. 81. Houses Religious, Vid. Monasteries. Howel,
Brother to Conan, Prince of Wales, upon a Quarrel betwixt them, obtains the
Victory; it was upon his claiming the Isle of Anglesey, l. 5. p. 250. Howel,
the Son of Jevaf, restores his Father to his Liberty, but takes upon himself
the sole Government of all North Wales, l. 6. p. 7, 9. His being Subject to
King Edgar, Id. p. 9. Makes War upon all who Succor his Uncle Jago, and the
Countries he Spoils, Id. p. 16. Routs the Danes and Welsh-men, assisted
Constantine the Black, (Son to Prince Jago) who is there slain in the Field,
Id. p. 20. Comes into England with an Army, where he was fought with, and
killed in Battle; leaving no Issue of his Body, Id. p. 21.
Howel and Meredyth, the Sons of Edwin or Owen, how they came to get the
Government of South Wales, l. 6. p. 56. Is forced to fly his Country from
Griffyth ap Lewelin ap Sitsylt, Id. p. 64. Is slain, and his Army routed by
Prince Griffyth, Id. p. 71.
Howel Dha Succeeds his Father Cadelh in the Principality of South Wales, l. 5.
p. 315. Takes upon him the Government of all Wales, His Laws and Character, Id.
p. 337. A worthy Prince; his Death and Issue; and whom he left his Heirs to all
South Wales, Id. p. 349. l. 6. p. 9. His Sons engaged in long Wars with Jago
and Jevaf, Princes of North Wales, Id. p. 349, 350.
Hubba, Vid. the next Word. Hubblestones, or Hubblestow, in Devonshire, had its
Name from a Danish Captain (one Hubba) being slain by Odun, Earl of that
County, and there buried under a heap of stones, l. 5. p. 281. Huda and his
Surrey-men, with Ealcher and his Kentish-men, fight the Danish Army in the Isle
of Thanet, and their Success, l. 5. p. 262. Huena, General of King Ethelred's
Forces, his advice to have all the Danes in England slain, and for what reason;
which was barbarously put in execution, l. 6. p. 29, 30. Hugh, King of the
French, sends an Ambassador to King Athelstan to demand his Sister in Marriage,
l. 5. p. 339. Hundred-Courts, every one to be present at them, l. 6. p. 13, 14.
Hundreds, when the Counties were first thus divided by King Alfred, l. 5. p.
291. Every one of Free Condition ought to enter himself into some Hundred, l.
6. p. 58, 104. The punishment of them, how it came to be in use where a Murder
could not be found, Id. p. 101.
Hunferth has the Bishopric of Winchester resigned to him by Daniel, Bishop
thereof, and why, l. 4. p. 224. He dies, and who succeeds him, l. 4. p. 226.
Hungus King of the Picts (by Achaius King of the Scots his helping him with a
Thousand Men) beats the English, and slays one King Athelstan in fight. A mere
fancy the whole story, l. 5. p. 250. Hunting, Liberty for every Man to Hunt in
his own ground, but none to meddle with the King's Game under a penalty, l. 6.
p. 60. Huntington, anciently called Huntandune, l. 5. p. 321. Is repaired and
rebuilt in those places that had been destroyed, by the Command of King Edward
the Elder, Id. p. 322.
Hussa Succeeds Freodguald in the Kingdom of Bernicia, l. 3. p. 146. Hyde, and
Abbey called by this Name, near Winchester, l. 5. p. 318. Hye, an Island that
had always a Bishop residing in it, l. 3. p. 143, 144. The Monks of Hye
Converted by Egbert to the Right Faith, in making them to observe Easter
Orthodoxly, as also the Ecclesiastical Tonsure, l. 4. p. 217.

I
JAgo and Jevaf, Princes of North Wales, raise great and long Wars to get the
Supreme Government of all Wales, as being of the Elder House to the Sons of
Howel, l. 5. p. 349, 350. Civil Wars between them, Jago keeping his Brother
Prisoner by force for near six years, l. 6. p. 6. Jevaf restored to his Liberty
by his Son Howel, and Jago driven out of the Country, but by Edgar's mediation
with Howel, his Uncle, was restored to what he held in Jevaf's time, Id. p. 7.
Great Commotions in Wales upon these Princes and their Sons accounts, and the
issue thereof, Id. p. 16, 20, 21, 22, 23.
Jago, Son to Edwal, a Prince of Wales, is advanced to the Throne, as lawful
Heir, but could not be admitted to South Wales, Id. p. 53. His Soldiers
deserting him, he is slain in Battle by Griffyth ap Lewelin, Id. p. 64.
Janbryht (also called Lambert) Consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury, received
the Pall, l. 4. p. 228, 229. Lost part of his Province to the Sea of
Litchfield, Id. p. 233. His Death, and who succeeded him, Id. p. 236.
Japhet, very probable that Europe was Peopled by his Posterity, l. 1. p. 4.
From him originally descended the Saxons that first came into Britain, l. 3. p.
121.
Iberi, were the Spaniards, by whom the Southern part of Britain was Peopled,
l. 1. p. 4. Icanho, supposed to be Boston in Lincolnshire, where one Bottulf
began to build a Monastery, l. 4. p. 185. Iceni, those who inhabited Suffolk,
Norfolk, Camebridge, and Huntingtonshire, l. 2. p. 42. Their being overcome by
Ostorius Scapula, Id. Ib. Are turned out of their ancient Estates, and treated
like Slaves, Id. p. 47. With the Trinobantes, rise up in Arms against the
Romans, to deliver themselves from their hated servitude, Id. p. 47, 48.
Ida, the first that took upon him the Title of King of the Northumbrian
Kingdom, who had Twelve Sons, partly by Wives, partly by Concubines; with his
Sons he came into Britain, and landed at Flensburgh with Forty Ships, and built
Bamborough Castle in Northumberland, l. 3. p. 142. He has the Character of
being a very Gallant Man, but dies within a few years, Id. p. 143.
Idel, a River on the Mercian Border, now in Nottinghamshire, l. 4. p. 170,
171. Idols, Their Temples Pope Gregory would not have pulled down, but anew
Consecrated, l. 4. p. 158. Coisi, Burns and utterly destroys the Idol Temples,
l. 4. p. 173, 174. Are destroyed at Earcombert's Command throughout his Kingdom
of Kent, Id. p. 180.
Jerne, that is according to the Scottish Writers, the Province of Strathern,
l. 2. p. 98. Jerusalem, the Temple there, labored (though in vain) to be
rebuilt by Alypius, a Heathen, l. 2. p. 90. Jews, all that were in the Kingdom
to be under the Protection of the King, l. 6. p. 102. Iffi, the Son of Prince
Osfrid, received Baptism, l. 4. p. 174, 176. Dies in France under King
Dagobert's Tuition, in his Infancy, Id. p. 176.
Igmond the Dane, with a great Number of Soldiers, Lands in the Isle of
Anglesey, where they obtain a Victory over the Welsh-men, who gave them Battle,
l. 5. p. 303. Ilford, near Christ-Church in Hampshire, seated in the New
Forest, called Itene in English-Saxon, perhaps it anciently went by the Name of
Ityngaford, l. 5. p. 314. Iltutus, a Pious and Learned Britain of
Glamorganshire, l. 3. p. 149. Images, not introduced into the English-Saxon
Church at the foundation of the Abbey of Evesham, by Edwin Bishop of Worcester,
as is pretended by some, l. 4. p. 216, 217. Image Worship, the Church of God
wholly abominated, as practiced in the Greek and Roman Churches, and was not
then received in England, l. 4. p. 236, 237.
Impostor, a notable Scotch one, who called himself Run, sets up for Prince of
South Wales, but he and his Army soon put to the Rout, l. 6. p. 52. Ina, King
of the West Saxons, builds a Monastery at Glastenbury, endows it with diverse
Lands, and exempts it from all Episcopal Jurisdiction; Reigns Seven and thirty
years, goes to Rome, and there Dies, l. 4. p. 204, 218, 219, 220. The Son of
Kenred, the Son of Ceolwald, when he took the Kingdom, but without any Right of
Successive Descent, Id. p. 205. Summons the first Authentic Great Council,
whose Laws are come to us entire, Id. p. 208, 209. The Kentish-men enter into a
League with him, and give him Thirty thousand Pounds for his Friendship, and
why, Id. p. 209. And Nun his Kinsman fight with Gerent King of the Britains,
Id. p. 215. And Ceolred fight a bloody Battle at Wodensburgh in Wiltshire, Id.
p. 217. Fights with the South Saxons, and slays Eadbert Aetheling, whom before
he had banished, Id. p. 218. Romescot is conferred on the Bishop of Rome first
by him; but if so, it must be with the Consent of the Great Council of the
Kingdom, Id. p. 219. A Great Example of his Magnanimity and Justice, Piety and
Devotion, Id. p. 219, 220. His being King of Wales as well as England, and his
marrying Guala, the Daughter of Cadwallader, King of the Britains, a groundless
and fabulous story, Id. p. 220.
Indian Apostles; St. Thomas and St. Bartholomew were so called, because they
were there martyred, l. 5. p. 286. Indians; their deadly Feud against all the
Kindred of one that murders any of them, l. 5. p. 347. Ingerlingum, the place
where King Oswin was treacherously murdered, and where afterward a Monastery
was built, l. 4. p. 182, 183. Ingild, the Brother of King Ina, his Death, l. 4.
p. 218. Ingwar, a Danish Captain, who held London, is slain by King Alfred, l.
5. p. 286. Inquest (Grand) the Antiquity of Trials by them of more than twelve
men, l. 6. p. 43. Intestates; how the Goods of those who dye so, are to be
distributed, l. 6. p. 59. Inundation; a mighty one about Greenwich, that
drowned both many People and Towns, l. 6. p. 39. Invasion, Of the Romans upon
the Britains, an Account thereof; as also of that of the Picts and Scots; and
then of the English-Saxons; after that of the Danes; and lastly of the Normans,
Ep. Dedic. l. 5. p. 246. John of Beverlie; first he was Bishop of Hagulstad,
then of York, l. 4. p. 202, 213, 215. He was Bishop Three and thirty Years, and
Eight Months, then dies, and is buried at Beverlie, and afterward canonized by
the name of St. John of Beverlie, Id. p. 218.
John, surnamed Scotus and Erigena, and Grimbald, assisted King Alfred in
founding the University of Oxford: He translates Dionysius his Hierarchia out
of Greek into Latin, l. 5. p. 306. Jointures; the Antiquity of them she^^ from
a Law of King Edmund, l. 5. p. 348. Joseph of Arimathea, his coming to pr^ach
the Gospel here, l. 2. p. 52, 53. Jovian, chosen Emperor by the Army; who
refusing to command Heathens, they cried out, They were all Christians, and
then he accepts the Empire. He dies Seven Months after, by the Damp of a new
plastered Chamber where he lay, at Dadustana, on the Borders of Galatia, l. 2.
p. 91. Ipswich in Suffolk (anciently Gipiswic) is wasted by the Danes, l. 6. p.
23. Ireland exceeds all the Islands of the Mediterranean Sea, and therefore it
was thought worth Agricola's Conquest, l. 2. p. 57, 58. Called Scotland by
Columba, l. 3. p. 143. The Letters directed by Archb^shop Laurentius to the
Irish Bishops, about the better observing of Easter, are superscribed to them,
per Universam Scotiam, that is, throughout Ireland, l. 4. p. 166. Coleman,
Bishop of Lindisfarne, his departure into Ireland is there called Scotland, Id.
p. 189. Is miserably wasted by King Egfrid's Army, which he sent under one Bert
(or Bryt) his General, Id. p. 201.
Island; it is absolutely necessary to maintain a powerful Fleet, if ever any
Island means to be safe, l. 6. p. 35. Ithamar, a Kentish man, succeeds Paulinus
in the Bishopric of Rochester, l. 4. p. 181. Consecrates Deus-Dedit in the
Archbishopric of Canterbury, Id. p. 186.
Ithancester, upon the Bank of the River Pent, was anciently a City, l. 4. p.
184. Ivor, Son to Allan, or Asser, Duke of Armorica, or Little-Bretaigne,
conquers the Countries of Cornwall, Devonshire, and Somersetshire, and
re-peoples them with Britains, and by Agreement marries Ethelburga, Cousin to
Kentwyn, l. 3. p. 145. l. 4. p. 201, 220. Is by the Welsh Chronicles recorded
to have reigned in Wales, l. 4. p. 220.
Judges, when they were first appointed by King Alfred, l. 5. p. 291. None
should presume to take upon them this Office without due Qualifications. How
many Alfred hanged in one year for their false Judgments, Id. p. 308. Obliged
to execute Justice according to the evidence of those that were summoned, Id.
p. 325. How often they were to hold the Gemot, or Assembly for the
Administration of Justice, Id. p. 326. King Edgar's Law of fining a Judge that
passes an unjust Sentence, unless he will take his Oath he did it not out of
malice, but from unskilfulness and mistake of Judgment, l. 6. p. 13, 58. How
Justice was to be administered between the English and the Welsh, Id. p. 44.
Equally to be distributed as well to poor as rich, Id. p. 13.58.
Julia, the Empress, Wife of Severus, the remarkable meeting between her and
the Wife of Argentocoxus, a British King, l. 2. p. 77. Julian the Emperor,
commands the Villain Paulus to be burnt alive, and why, l. 2. p. 89. Sends
Lupicinus to compose the Troubles in Britain, Id. p. 90. Marches against
Constantius, is called the Apostate, and killed by an Arrow in a Battle against
the Persians, Id. p. 91.
Julianus (Didius) buys the Empire for so much Money to be given to each
Soldier, but within two months after is slain by Severus, l. 2. p. 72. Jury.
Trial by Twelve men, appointed in the League made between King Alfred and
Guthrun the Dane, l. 5. p. 283, 284. A way to prevent the too great Partiality
of Juries, Id. p. 296. Vid. Grand Jury, and Inquest, and Introduct. p. 123.
Justin the Elder (the Emperor) when he began to reign, l. 3. p. 136. Justice.
Vid. Judges. Justus, ordained Bishop in Kent of a certain little City then
called Roscaester, now Rochester, l. 4. p. 159, 165. His Departure into France
with Mellitus, and upon what account, Id. p. 168, 169. Succeeds Mellitus in the
Archbishopric of Canterbury, and consecrates Paulinus, a Roman, Bishop of the
Northumbers, Id. p. 171.
Jutes, from them were derived the Kentish-men, the Inhabitants of the Isle of
Wight, and of that Province now called Hampshire, l. 3. p. 118. Descended from
the Getae, or Goths, Id. p. 123. Wholly inhabit the Country of Kent, with the
leave and consent of King Vortigern, Id. p. 126. Commanded by King Egbert's Law
to be ever after called Englishmen, l. 5. p. 255, 292.

K
KEawlin. Vid. Ceawlin. Kemsford in Gloucestershire, anciently called
Cynesmeresford, l. 4. p. 242. l. 5. p. 247. Kenbryht, the Ealdorman (the Annals
call him King), his Death, l. 4. p. 188. Kened, first King of Scotland, makes a
total Conquest of the Picts, but not so far as their Historians pretend to, l.
5. p. 259. Kened, King of the Scots, had the whole Country of Lothian given
him by King Edgar, and upon what terms, l. 6. p. 11. Begs Pardon of King Edgar
for what he had spoken in his Cups of him, Id. p. 11, 12.
Kenelm, Son to King Kenwulf, succeeds his Father, under the Tutelage of his
Sister Quendride, who makes him away, out of an Ambition of reigning her self,
l. 5. p. 251, 252. Keneswith, the Daughter of Penda, marries Offa, Son to
Sigher, King of the East Saxons, l. 4. p. 214. Kenet in Wiltshire, anciently
called Cynet, where a Battle was fought between the English and the Danes, but
the latter got the Victory, and a great Booty, l. 6. p. 32. Kenred, King of the
West Saxons, goes to Rome, and tarries there till he died, l. 4. p. 214. Is
called King of Mercia, in the Charter pr^tended to be made to Evesham Abbey,
Id. p. 217.
Kent, the County wholly planted by the Jutes, with Vortigern's leave, l. 3. p.
126. Kentigern, the famous Bishop of Ellwye in North Wales, l. 3. p. 150.
Kentish-men, the Inhabitants of the Isle of Wight, and of the Province lying
overagainst it (now called Hampshire) derived from the Jutes, l. 3. p. 118.
Make a League with King Ina, and what they give for it, l. 4. p. 209.
Kentwyn, King of the West Saxons, marries his Niece to Ivor, l. 3. p. 145. Is
the Son of Cynegils, and he the Son of Ceolwulf, l. 4. p. 196. Puts the
Britains to flight as far as the Sea, wasting all their Country with Fire and
Sword; but at last they fall into a friendly Composition and Agreement, Id. p.
201. His Death, Id. p. 202.
Kenulf is chosen Abbot of Medeshamstead, and afterward made Bishop of
Winchester, l. 6. p. 5. His Decease, Id. p. 31. Kenwal, Vid. Cenwalch. Kenwulf,
King of the West Saxons, fights with Offa, King of the Mercians, at the Siege
of Bensington-Castle, but was worsted, l. 4. p. 236. Vid. Cenwulph.
Kings. What sort of Kings were anointed by the Britains; such as showed their
Office in Gildas his time to have been a very dangerous Employment: And there
were diverse of them ruling at once, l. 3. p. 116. All of them inveighed against
very sharply by Gildas, Id. p. 139. How to be Elected and Ordained, and by
whom. They were not to be Begot of Adultery or Incest, l. 4. p. 233, 234.
Honor and Obedience to be rendered to them, and none to speak evil of them.
The Punishment either for Conspiring the Death of Kings, or actually Killing of
them, Id. p. 234. l. 6. p. 59. Chief Lords of any Country in Wales, when
called Kings, l. 4. p. 241. The Supreme Dominion of One English King over all
the rest, no new thing in King Egbert's time, l. 5. p. 254. At the Great
Councils they used to appear in State with the Crown on their Heads, Id. p.
261. A weak Prince, by the assistance of Able and Faithful Counselors, may
Govern his Kingdom prudently and happily, Id. p. 267. King of England was
anciently called King of London, Id. p. 279. Alfred's Law concerning the Death
of the King, Id. p. 292. In Athelstan's time the Mercians had not lost their
Ancient Right of choosing their own Kings, Id. p. 329. The King's House no
shelter to him that sheds Blood, l. 5. p. 347. How dangerous it was for Kings
to provoke the Ruling part of the Priests and People, Id. p. 354. Neither in
Edgar's time, nor long after the Conquest, did any King Elect take the Title of
King till after his Coronation, l. 6. p. 8. To be blamed for trusting those who
had before betrayed them, Id. p. 30. Sworn to observe the good Laws of King
Edward, not that he only Ordained, but obserserved them, Id. p. 56. Provision
for his Household, how to be made, not to Oppress the Subject, Id. p. 59. No
Subject in their Hunting to meddle with the King's Game, Id. p. 60. His Office,
how declared by Edward the Confessor's Law. His power to pardon Life, and loss
of Member, but with a Proviso, Id. p. 102.
Kingsbury, a Council held there under Berthwulf, King of the Mercians, l. 5.
p. 261. King's Evil, Edward the Confessor the first that Cured it by his bare
washing the Sores with his own hands, l. 6. p. 98. King's Household, Vid.
Provision. Kingsige, King Edward the Confessor's Chaplain succeeds Aelfric in
the Archbishopric of York, l. 6. p. 79. His Death, Id. p. 88.
Knight's-Service, in England in King Wightred's time, l. 4. p. 211. Knute,
vid. Cnute. Kynan, vid. Conan, Prince of South Wales. Kynobelin, at Rome
saluted by the Emperor, a Friend of the Commonwealth, l. 2. p. 36. Being King,
he caused Coins to be stamped after the Roman manner, Ibid. Died not long
before the Roman Invasion by Claudius, Id. p. 38.

L
LAncaster, anciently called Caer-Werith, supposed to be built by Gurguint, l.
1. p. 13. Lands-End, the Point anciently called Penwithsteort, l. 6. p. 26, 82.
Langoemagog, that is, the Giants Leap; from a persons taking up the mighty
Giant Gogmagog in his Arms, and flinging him off from a Cliff in Cornwall into
the Sea, l. 1. p. 9. Lanthorns, first Invented in England by King Alfred; of
Cow's-Horns cut into thin plates, l. 5. p. 305. Lashlite, a Fine, or Mulct, the
English and Danes were to pay according to the value of their heads, for the
Violation of the Laws made between them, l. 5. p. 284. Lawrence a Priest, and
Peter a Monk, sent to the Pope to acquaint him, that by Augustine and his Monks
their Preaching, the English had received the Christian Faith, and to have his
Opinion about certain Questions, l. 4. p. 155, 165. Consecrates the Old Church
rebuilt by Augustine at Canterbury, and succeeds him as Archbishop there, Id.
p. 157, 166. Draganus refuses to Eat with him, and why, Id p. 166. What
happened to him upon his going to desert his Flock in Britain, Id. p. 169. His
Death and Burial, Id. p. 171.
Laws, called Mercevenlage, from whence said to be derived, l. 1. p. 13. What
those were in King Ethelbert's Reign, l. 4. p. 163. Ecclesiastical Laws made
between King Alfred and Guthrune the Dane, l. 5. p. 284, 285. Every man to
enjoy the benefit of the Law, and to have equal Justice done him, l. 6. p. 13,
58. Three sorts of Laws in use in Brompton the Chronicler's time, viz.
Merchenlage, West-Saxonlage, and Danelage, Id. p. 103.
League, or Agreement made between King Alfred and King Guthrune, setting out
the Territories of each of those Princes, l. 5. p. 283, 284. Between Edward the
Elder, and the Danes Inhabiting East-England and Northumberland, l. 5. p. 314.
Vide Peace.
Learning reduced to a very low ebb in King Alfred's time, by reason of the
Danish Wars, l. 5. p. 304. Lease of Abbey-Lands made in a Great Council, the
first Example of it, l. 4. p. 230. Lee, a River anciently called Ligan, which
divides Middlesex and Essex, l. 5. p. 301.316. Leeds in Yorkshire, anciently
called Loyden, where the Battle was fought between Oswy King of Northumberland,
and Penda King of the Mercians, l. 4. p. 185. Legancester, that is,
West-Chester. Vide Chester. Legion (Roman) being sent over to Britain, made a
great Slaughter of their Enemies, driving the rest out of the British Borders,
and so delivered the Inhabitants from being destroyed, l. 2. p. 99, 100.
Legions, a City now Caerleon upon Uske, l. 2. p. 85. Westchester was anciently
called by this Name, l. 4. p. 164.
Leicester, anciently Caer-Leir, by whom said to be first Built, l. 1. p. 11.
Tocca the first Bishop there, which continued a Bishop's See for diverse Ages,
l. 4. p. 223. Anciently called Ligceaster, and when Repaired, l. 5. p. 314. And
Ligraceaster, Id. p. 319.
Leighton in Bedfordshire, anciently called Ligtune, l. 3. p. 145. l. 5. p.
319. Lent, by the Authority of Earcombert, Ordained to be observed, which seems
to have been the first observed in England by a Law, l. 4. p. 180. Leo the
Pope, whom the Romans took, and cut out his Tongue and put out his Eyes,
Deposing him, but he was Restored to every thing he had lost Miraculously, l.
4. p. 241. When he Died, l. 5. p. 251.
Leo, Bishop of Treve, sent by Pope John as his Nuntio to King Ethelred, with
Letters of Complaint against the Marquess of Normandy, l. 6. p. 24. Leof, a
notorious Thief, Banished by King Edmund, but be returned, and at a great
Entertainment of the King's, Stabs him, so that he instantly died, l. 5. p.
345. Leofgar, Ordained Bishop of Hereford in the room of Bishop Athelstane,
together with his Clerks, is Slain by Griffyn Prince of Wales, l. 6. p. 87.
Leofred, a Dane, his Ravages in Wales, but at last is Beheaded by Athelstan's
Order, l. 5. p. 321. Leofric, Earl of Mercia (with his Lady Godiva) Founders of
the Monastery of Coventry, and the Repairers of several others, l. 6. p. 71,
72. Comes to the Great Council at Gloucester about Earl Godwin, Id. p. 77. His
Death and Burial in the Church of the Monastery of Coventry, Id. p. 88.
Leofric, King Edward the Confessor's Chaplain, succeeds Living, Bishop of
Devonshire, (that is, of Exeter,) l. 6. p. 73. Is Enthroned there, be walking
to Church between the King and Queen Editha, his Wife, Id. p. 78.
Leofwin, the Abbot, is unjustly Expelled from the Monastery of Elig, goes with
Archbishop Athelnoth to Rome, and there clears himself before the Pope, of what
he had been accused, l. 6. p. 53. Leotheta (in French, Judith) Daughter of
Charles the Bald King of the Franks, Married to Ethelwulf King of the
West Saxons, l. 5. p. 263. Places her by him on his Royal Throne, but the
Nation would not permit her to be called Queen, for there was formerly a Law
made against it, upon account of a certain wicked Queen, called Eadburga, Wife
to King Brythtric, Id. p. 264.
Lethard, Bishop to Bertha, Wife of Ethelbert King of Kent, whom she brings
over with her from France to assist and strengthen her in the Christian Faith,
l. 4. p. 153. Levatriae, now Bows upon Standmore in Richmondshire, l. 2. p. 74.
Vid. Stanmore.
Leutherius, or Lothair, Bishop of Winchester, l. 4. p. 192. Vid. Eleutherius.
A Grant of Lands from him to build the Abbey of Malmesbury, Id. p. 195.
Llewelin, Prince of North Wales, surely mistastaken, and put instead of Howel
King of South Wales, l. 5. p. 328. Llewelin ap Sitsylt, in Right of his Wife,
Prince of South Wales, l. 6. p. 27. Raises great Forces against Aedan ap
Blegored the Usurper of his Country, and in a bloody Battle Kills him with his
Four Sons. His Descent, Id. p. 40. After Conan's Death he possesses himself of
South Wales, and Governs both the Countries with great Peace and Prosperity,
Id. p. 51, 52. Slain by Howel and Meredith, the Sons of Prince Edwin, or Owen,
Id. p. 53.
Liblacum, signifies the Art of Conjuration, or Witchcraft, that sort of it
particularly called Fascination, l. 5. p. 340. Licinius, (Priscus) Propraetor,
or Lieutenant in this Island in Hadrian's time, l. 2. p. 67. Lideford,
anciently called Hildaford, l. 6. p. 26. Lising made Archbishop of Canterbury,
l. 6. p. 37. Deceases, and who succeeds in his room, Id. p. 51.
Lightning, such fell as the Age had never seen before; it appeared as if the
stars shot from Heaven, l. 4. p. 224. l. 5. p. 261. Vid. Miracles and
Prodigies. Strange kind of Wildfire appeared, such as none ever remembered, and
did a great deal of mischief, l. 6. p. 56.
Limene, a River, lying from the Eastern part of Kent, as far as the East End
of that great Wood called Andred, l. 5. p. 299. Lindisfarne, an Isle and
Episcopal See, till that Church was destroyed by the Danes, and then the Sea
was removed to Durham, l. 3. p. 144. Desired by Aidan, of Oswald, for his
Episcopal See; it is a Peninsula, except when the Sea quite overflows that Neck
of Land which joins it to England, l. 4. p. 178, 183. Ceolwulf professes
himself a Monk in this Monastery, who brought great Treasures and Revenues in
Land to it, Id. p. 223. Eadbert, King of Northumberland, causes the Cathedral
Church to be besieged, Id. p. 225.
Lindisse, the Danes (landing at Humberstan) spoil all that Country, l. 4. p.
170. Lindissi, now Lincoln, l. 4. p. 175. Litchfield, anciently called
Licetfield, l. 4. p. 217. Two Bishops ordained in this Diocese on the Death of
Alwin, Id. p. 223. Becomes an Archbishopric, the Bishops of the Provinces of
the Kingdom of Mercia, and the East Angles, subject to it; obtained of the Pope
by Offa, Id. p. 229, 233. The Archbishopric confirmed by a General Synod of
the Kingdom, Id. p. 233. Becomes again an ordinary Bishopric, subject to the Sea of Canterbury, Id. p. 235.
Living, Abbot of Tavistock, brings the Letter that Cnute wrote upon his Return
from Rome, and sent into England, the Purport of which is there set down, l. 6.
p. 55. Succeeded in the Bishoprics of Worcester and Gloucester, Id. p. 65. Is
accused to King Hardecnute, and deprived of his Bishopric, Id. p. 67.
Living, Bishop of Devonshire, (that is, Exeter) deceases, and who succeeds
him, Id. p. 73. London, said (though without any ground of truth) to be called
by Brute, Troja Nova, which in time was changed to Trinobantum, or Troynovant,
l. 1. p. 9. Mellitus made Bishop of London, l. 4. p. 159, 166. When it had been
part of the East-Saxon Kingdom for above One hundred years, Id. p. 177. When it
suffered great mischief by Fire, Id. p. 229. With a great Multitude of its
Inhabitants consumed by a sudden Fire, Id. p. 242. Taken by the Danes, Three
hundred of their Ships coming into the Mouth of Thames, l. 5. p. 261. Tribute
due from the King of Aberfraw to the King of London, l. 5. p. 229. l. 6. p. 3.
Taken from the Danes by King Alfred, who repairs it, l. 5. p. 288. The City
miserably destroyed by Fire, l. 6. p. 21. Besieged by the Danes, but they were
forced to draw off, Id. p. 25. Always gave the Danes an ill Reception, Id. p.
34. Becomes subject, and gives Hostages to Sweyn the Dane, Id. p. 38. Besieged
by the Danish Forces both by Land and Sea, but God delivers it from their fury,
Id. p. 46. Submits to the Danes (as part of the Mercian Kingdom) who take up
their Winter Quarters there, Id. p. 48. The flourishing Trade and Wealth of it,
that in Cnute's time could pay above a seventh part of that excessive Tax of
Danegelt which was laid on the whole Nation, Id. p. 51.
Lords, to have none of the Intestate's Goods, but what is due to them as a
Heriot, l. 6. p. 59. Lord's Day; if any Servant do then any work by his
Master's order, he shall be free, and his Master fined Thirty Shillings; but if
he does it of his own accord, he shall be beaten, etc. The Punishment of a
Freeman, or Priest, that works on that day, l. 4. p. 208, 211. l. 5. p. 285.
Strictly observed in the Saxon times, l. 4. p. 209. No Market to be held on
this day, under Penalty of the Wares, and a Mulct of Thirty Shillings besides,
by King Athelstan's twenty fourth Law, l. 5. p. 341. Edgar's Law for keeping
this day like the Jewish Sabbath, l. 6. p. 13.
Lord's-Prayer. Vid. Creed. Lothaire, King of Kent, his Death, l. 4. p. 202.
Lothair, Nephew of Bishop Agelbert, takes on him the Episcopal Charge over the
West Saxons, l. 4. p. 192. Lothebroc, descended from the Royal Family in
Denmark; the story of his coming hither into Norfolk, and being killed by King
Edmund's Huntsman, the Body found out by his own Greyhound, l. 5. p. 272, 273.
Lots; none to be cast for deciding of Civil Controversies, l. 4. p. 234.
Lucius, succeeds his Father Coil, the Tributary King of the Britains; is called
Lees, surnamed by the Britains Lever-Maur, that is, the Great Light, l. 2. p.
68. In the beginning of Commodus his Reign, he sends to Eleutherius, then
Bishop of Rome, desiring by his means to be made a Christian, Id. p. 68, 69.
But the story seems to be of very suspicious credit, Id. p. 69. His Conversion,
when it happened, Ibid. Had Regal Authority under the Romans, in some part of
this Island, Id. Ib.
Lucullus (Salustius) Legate of Britain in the days of Domitian, l. 2. p. 65.
Ludgate, received its name from King Lud, as conjectured, l. 1. p. 16.
Cadwallo's being in a Brass Statue set over Ludgate, false, l. 4. p. 177.
Ludican, King of the Mercians, and five of his Ealdormen, slain by the
East Angles, and upon what occasion, l. 5. p. 253. Lugeanburh, now Loughburrow
in Leicestershire, or Leighton in Bedfordshire, l. 3. p. 145. Lupicinus, sent
into Britain by Julian, to compose the Troubles there raised by the Scots and
Picts, l. 2. p. 90. Lupus, Bishop of Troyes, and Germanus Bishop of Auxerre,
sent to confirm Britain in the Catholic Faith, l. 2. p. 107. Lupus (Virius)
had the Government of the Northern parts of Britain; but buys a Peace of the
Meatae: He gives an Account to Severus of the state of Affairs here, l. 2. p.
74. Was left by the Antonini their Lieutenant in Britain, Id. p. 79.

M
MAccuse, King of Man and several other Islands, l. 6. p. 9. Macrinus (Opilius)
makes away Caracalla, and is chosen Emperor by the Army, l. 2. p. 79. Maelgwn
Gwineth, elected King of the Britains in Wales, and the manner of it, l. 3. p.
146, 147. His Decease, Id. p. 148. Vid. Malgo.
Magnentius, slays Constans, and keeps the Western Empire from Constantius for
three years; and then, not longer being able to contest it, kills himself at
Lions, l. 2. p. 89. Maildulf, a Scotch Monk, and Philosopher, l. 4. p. 195.
Maims and Wounds: King Alfred's Law concerning them, l. 5. p. 296. Malcolm,
King of Scots, receives from King Edmund the whole Country of Cumberland, upon
condition to assist him both by Sea and Land, l. 5. p. 344. And to attend him
at several great Feasts in the year, when he held his Common Council; and for
that end diverse Houses were assigned him to lie at by the way, Id. p. 345.
Receives Sweyn, and gives him free Quarter for fourteen years, l. 6. p. 26.
Wastes the Province of the Northumbers, and besieges Durham, Id. p. 27. Another
of the same Name becomes subject to King Cnute upon his going thither, and
three years after dies, Id. p. 56. A Third of this Name enters Northumberland,
and depopulates the Earldom of Tostige, formerly his sworn Brother, Id. p. 89.
Maldon in Essex (anciently Maldune) rebuilt and fortified by King Edward the
Elder, l. 5. p. 320. Malgo, or Malgoclunus, in Welsh Mailgwn Gwineth, King of
North Wales, or else of the Northern parts of Britain, l. 3. p. 139. Called by
Gildas the Island-Dragon, accused of Sodomy, and of murdering the King his
Uncle, Id. p. 140. Professes himself a Monk; but afterward breaks his Vow, and
reigns as Supreme or Sole King of the Britains, Id. p. 142. The time he reigned
afterward, and his Death, Id. p. 144.
Mallings in Sussex, the Manor given by Baldred King of Kent, to Christ-Church
in Canterbury; but being afterward taken away, it was confirmed by the
Common Council of the Kingdom under King Egbert, l. 5. p. 257. Malmesbury, the
Abbey begun to be built by one Adhelm, l. 4. p. 195. Greatly endowed, and by
whom, Id. p. 196. l. 5. p. 329, 339. King Athelstan's great Liberality to this
Abbey, where he was buried, Id. p. 339. A Nun is taken from hence by King
Edgar, and deflowred, l. 6. p. 4. Anciently called in Saxon, Mealdelnesbyrig,
Id. p. 40.
Man, the City; taken by William Duke of Normandy, l. 6. p. 89. Man, the Isle;
whither Aedan fled from the Borders of Scotland, after he was beaten, l. 3. p.
147. Destroyed by Sweyn, the Son of Harold the Dane, l. 6. p. 25.
Manchester, in the Kingdom of Northumberland, anciently called Manigeceaster,
is rebuilt, and fortified with a Garrison at the Command of King Edward the
Elder, l. 5. p. 324. Mancuses, what Sum of Money, now uncertain; but by
Ethelwulf's last Will he orders Three hundred to be sent every year to Rome for
such and such Uses, and One hundred of them for the Pope himself, l. 5. p. 264,
265. Mandubratius, desires to be relieved from the Injuries of Cassibelan, l.
2. p. 34. Who thereupon is forbid by Caesar further to molest him, Id. p. 35.
Is not restored to the Kingdom of the Trinobantes; whereupon he attends Caesar
to Rome, and is there entertained as King of Britain, and a Friend to the Roman
Commonwealth, Id. p. 36.
Manslaughter. Vid. Murder. Marcellus (Ulpius) sent to stop the Rebellion of
the Britains in Commodus his Reign; a man not to be corrupted by Money, but
severe in his Conversation, l. 2. p. 70. Marcus Aurelius. Vid. Aurelius.
Marcus, is Elected Emperor by the British Army, but they soon took him off, he
not answering their expectations, l. 2. p. 102. Margaret, Daughter of Edward
the Son of Edmund Ironside, is married to Malcolm King of Scotland, l. 6. p.
49. Marriage; concerning the manner and Rights thereof; with Covenants, the
Antiquity of them, and of Bonds for Performance, l. 5. p. 348. Widows not to
marry within the Twelve-Months after their Husbands decease, and what they
forfeit if they do, l. 6. p. 60.
Marinus, the worthy good Pope, sends some Wood of the Holy Cross unto King
Alfred, l. 5. p. 286. His Decease, and freeing the English School at Rome from
all Tax and Tribute, Id. p. 287.
Marius (called by our British Writers Meurig) succeeds his Father Arviragus,
and slays Roderick King of the Picts, who aided the Caledonians, l. 2. p. 66.
His Death, about what year of our Lord, leaving the Kingdom to his Son Coil,
Id. p. 67.
St. Martin, an old ruinous Church without the City of Canterbury, now St.
Pancrace, l. 4. p. 163. Martinus, a Prefect, endeavors to stab Paulus, but
missing his Pass, runs his Sword into his own Body. His good Character, l. 2.
p. 89. Martinus, the Pope, sends some of the Wood of the Holy Cross to King
Alfred, and what re^urn he makes again, l. 5. p. 286. Martyrdom, that of St.
Alban's, a particular Account of it, l. 2. p. 85. Of several other Christians
at Litchfield and Winchester, Id. p. 86.
Maserfield, now called Oswestre in Shropshire, l. 4. p. 180. Maxentius, The
Tyrant, overthrown near Rome by Constantine, l. 2. p. 87. Maximinian, said to
Command the Roman Legion in Britain, the Fabulous story of him, l. 2. p. 101,
102. Marcus Aurelius Maximinianus, Associate in the Empire with Dioclesian,
adopted Constantius Chlorus, Caesar; constrains him to put away his Wife, and
to Marry his Daughter; is forced to conclude a Peace with Carausius, and to
yield him up Britain, l. 2. p. 83. Maximinus (Julius) succeeds Alexander
Severus, but being condemned by the Senate, is slain by the Soldiers, l. 2. p.
80. Maximus (Pupienus) Vid. Balbinus. Maximus (Trebellius) has the Province of
Britain delivered to him, l. 2. p. 51. Falls into the Hatred and Contempt of
his Army for his sordid Covetousness; and the Aversion heightened by Roscius
Coelius, Id. p. 53.
Maximus, General of the Roman Armies, assumes the Imperial Purple, drives back
and subdues the Scots and Picts. l. 2. p. 91. Makes Triers the seat of his
Usurped Empire; sends Andragathius as his General, against Gratian the Emperor,
who is killed by him, l. 2. p. 95. His Image is sent to Alexandria, and set up
in the Marketplace to be Reverenced, l. 2. p. 96. His great concern for the
Catholic Religion, and Execution of Persons for mere matters of Faith. His
Death, Id. Ib.
Meanwari, supposed to be People of that part of Hampshire, lying over against
the Isle of Wight, l. 4. p. 188. Medcant, now called Turne-Island, l. 3. p.
146. Medeshamhamsted, a Monastery built in Honor of Christ and St. Peter; it
had its Name from a Well there, called Medeswell, l. 4. p. 186. The manner of
erecting this Foundation, Id. p. 186, 187. Pope Agatho's Bull of Privileges to
it, supposed to be Forged long after, and by whom, l. 4. p. 200. l. 6. p. 4, 5.
Is burnt and destroyed by the Danes (who killed all the Abbots and Monks they
found there) with a Noble Library, and all its Charters, and they carried away
all the rich spoil of that place, l. 5. p. 270, 271, 272. Afterward the Bodies
of above Fourscore Monks, with their Abbot, there slain, were Buried in one
Grave in the Churchyard, and putting a Pyramidal Stone over them, the Images
of the Abbot and Monks about him, were Carved on it, Id. p. 172. Is rebuilt by
Athelwald, Bishop of Winchester, who is said to have found the Charter, which
Abbot Headda had formerly wrote, l. 6. p. 4, 5. A new Charter of Confirmation,
with many other Endowments granted by King Edgar; the Lands granted by him to
this Monastery to be a distinct Shire, having Sac, Soc, etc. Is more enriched
in Lands by Abbot Adulf, who is succeeded by Kenulf, that changed its name into
Burgh. It has been the Episcopal See of the Bishops of Peterburgh almost ever
since the Dissolution of this Abbey in H. VIII's time, Id. p. 5.
Melgas, King of the Picts, the Story of the Virgins that were Killed, or made
Slaves by him, a notorious Invention, l. 2. p. 96. Mellitus, is sent to Preach
the Word in Britain, and Letters of Instruction sent afterward by the Pope to
him, concerning the Idol-Temples, l. 4. p. 157, 158. Ordained by Augustine
Bishop of the East Saxons; he was to fix his Episcopal See at London, l. 4. p.
159, 165, 166. Sent to Rome to confer with Pope Boniface about the necessary
Affairs of the English Church, Id. p. 166. His departure into France, and for
what reason, Id. p. 169. Succee^s Lawrence in the Archbishopric of Canterbury;
stops a great Fire there by his Prayers, Id. p. 171.
Members, loss of any for Crimes, of the Party survived it Four Nights, he,
with the Bishops leave, might be helped, which before was unlawful, l. 5. p.
285. Menai, a River, near to which Bangor was built, and by whom, l. 3. p. 143.
I^ parts Caernarvonshire from the Isle of Wight, l. 4. p. 165.
Menaevia, now is called St. David's in Pembrokeshire, l. 3. p. 149.
Mercevenlage, from whence the Laws were so called, l. 1. p. 13. Mercia, when
this Kingdom began; it was one of the largest of the English-Saxon Kingdoms,
and one of the last conquered by the West Saxons, l. 3. p. 147. The People
received the Christian Faith under Peadda their Ealdorman, l. 4. p. 183, 186.
The Province of the Mercians is divided into Five Diocesses, Id. p. 199, 200.
The Mercians, or Southumbers, Kill Ostrythe, the Wife of Ethelred their late
King, Id. p. 210, 212. A great part of it destroyed with Fire and Sword by the
South-Welshmen, Id. p. 231. Anciently was called Merscwarum, l. 5. p. 259. Is
forced to come to a Peace with the Danes, Id. p. 269.
Mercy, King Cnute's Law to have it used, and that none should die for small
Offenses, l. 6. p. 58, 59. Meredyth, Conquers the whole Country of North Wales
for himself, l. 6. p. 22. Others laying waste his Country of South Wales, Id.
p. 23. Cast off by the Inhabitants of the Isle of Anglesey, for not well
Protecting them; but afterward resolving (if he could) to recover so
considerable a part of his Dominions, he Fights with Edwal ap Meyric (who had
Usurped upon him) but is worsted by him in a set Battle, Id. p. 24.
Meredyth and Howel, the Sons of Edwin or Owen, how they got the Government of
South Wales, but were afterward slain by the Sons of Conan ap Sitsylt, Brother
to Prince Lewelin. l. 6. p. 56. Merehwit, Bishop of Somersetshire (that is,
Wells) Deceases, and is Buried at Glastenbury, l. 6. p. 56. Meresige (now
Mercey) in Essex, an Island near the Sea, l. 5. p. 301. Merton in Surrey,
anciently called Merinton, l. 4. p. 232. Merwina, an Abbess of the Nunnery of
Rumsey in Hampshire, l. 6. p. 6. Midletune in Kent, where the Danes built a
Fort to infest the English, l. 5. p. 298, 300. Militia, King Athelstan's Law,
that for every Plow a man shall keep Two well-furnished Horsemen; is one of the
Ancientest of this kind in England, being laid according to the rate of
Estates, l. 5. p. 341. Milred, Bishop of the Wiccij, (that is, of the Diocese
of Worcester) his Character and death, l. 4. p. 230. Milton, his History of
England commended by the Author, l. 2. p. 20. Mints, places appointed for them
by King Athelstan's Law, l. 5. p. 341. One granted to the Abbot of Stamford by
King Edgar, l. 6. p. 5.
The first Law whereby the private Mints to the Archbishops and Abbots were
forbid, Id. p. 14. Miracles, Germanus and Lupus, two French Bishops, recover a
Magistrate's Daughter, Aged Ten Years, of Blindness, which the Pelagians
refused to attempt, l. 2. p. 107, 108. A great Fire in Canterbury suddenly
stopped by the Prayers of Mellitus the Archbishop, which caused the Wind to
blow directly contrary to what it had done before, l. 4. p. 171. Of Oswald King
of Northumberland after his Death, Id. p. 180. Of one Eardulf, who after he was
commanded to be put to death, was found alive, Id. p. 236. On Pope Leo, who
received his Sight and Hands, after the one was put out, and the other cut off,
Id. p. 241. About Kenelm, King of the Mercians, whom Quedride, his Sister, made
away out of an Ambition of Reigning her self, l. 5. p. 251. A Pillar of Light
reaching up to Heaven, stood over Wiglaff's Tomb in Repton-Monastery, where
Wulstan was Buried, for Thirty days, which procured him the Title of a Saint,
l. 5. p. 261. Of the Earth's Opening and swallowing up a whole Army of Scots
who came to fight with King Cuthred, l. 5. p. 286. Of Athelstan's striking a
Rock with his Sword near the Castle of Dunbar, which made a Gap in it an Ell
deep, Id. p. 337. Of St. Dunstan's Horse falling down dead under him, at the
Hearing of a Voice from Heaven, which the Horse (it seems) perfectly
understood, Id. p. 351. Of his Harp Playing a whole Psalm, as it hung against
the Wall, without any hands to touch it; and his taking the Devil by the Nose
with red hot Tongs, l. 6. p. 3. Of the speaking of a Crucifix in a Great
Council at Winchester, Id. p. 16. Edward the Confessor's Curing the Blind, and
what we call now the King's Evil, and his being Elected King by his Father's
Command, in a Great Council, whilst he was in his Mother's Womb, Id. p. 98.
Modwina, an Irish Abbess, who first bred up Edgithe, King Egbert's Daughter,
l. 5. p. 257. Mollo, Brother to Ceadwalla, is Burnt in Kent, and Twelve others
with him; but his Body (not being reduced to Ashes) Buried in the Church of the
Abbey of St. Augustine, Cant. l. 4. p. 204. Mona, is now known by the Name of
Anglesey, l. 2. p. 46. Upon Agricola's coming to subdue it, desires Peace, and
delivers up the Island, Id. p. 55.
Monarch, this Title the Saxon Kings never took upon them, though our
Historians have unjustly given it them; for it could not properly belong to
those who had diverse others under them with like Jurisdiction within their own
Territories, l. 5. p. 254. Monasteries, the only Universities wherein the
Liberal Arts and Sciences were Taught, l. 4. p. 151. That of Christ-Church in
Canterbury, when Founded, Id. p. 167. One in a Town called Cnobsbury, enriched
afterward with Noble Buildings and Revenues, Id. p. 180. Of Brige, Cale, and
Andelegium, in the Kingdom of the Franks, where many of the Britains used to
send their Children to be taught and professed, there being then but very few
here, Id. Ib. Of Reculf, l. 4. p. 182. now Reculver in Kent, Id. p. 205. Of
Ingerlingum, and upon what account it was built, l. 4. p. 183. Of Streanshale,
by whom founded, and where it was, Id. p. 188, 189. It was burnt and destroyed
by the Danish cruel Tyrants, l. ^. p. 269. Of St. Peter in the Bishopric of
Durham, by King Egfrid's Consent and License freed from all Secular Servitude,
l. 4. p. 194. Of St. Paul at Girwy, now Yarrow, near Tyne, Id. p. 194, 205. Of
Abington, founded by one Hean, Id. p. 196. Of Berking and Chertsey, by
Erkenwald, Id. p. 196. Of Ely, built by Queen Etheldrethe, Id. p. 198. Burnt,
and all killed in it, etc. l. 5. p. 272. And is rebuilt, l. 6. p. 4. Of
Coludesburgh, for Monks and Nuns, but afterward was called Coldingham, in the
Marches of Scotland, l. 4. p. 198, 199. Of Medeshamsted, l. 4. p. 187, 200. The
Charter of it justly suspected of Forgery, Id. p. 200, 201. l. 5. p. 271. Of
Lindisfarne, l. 4. p. 201. Destroyed, l. 5. p. 269. Of Derawnde, now Beverley,
l. 4. p. 202. Of Glastingabyrig, now Glastenbury, Id. p. 204, 218, 219. Of
Wiremouth and Girwy, built by Abbot Benedict, l. 4. p. 205. And is destroyed,
l. 5. p. 269. Bardeney Abbey, l. 4. p. 212. Destroyed, l. 5. p. 270. Of Selsey,
where Ceadbert the Abbot of that place was consecrated the first Bishop of the
Province of the South Saxons, l. 4. p. 214. Of Evesham, founded by Egwin,
Bishop of Worcester, and on what occassion, Id. p. 216, 217. Of Theoewkesbury
in Gloucester, founded for Benedictine Monks, Id. p. 217. Of Winburne, built by
Cuthburgh, Sister to King Ina, Id. p. 218. Of Berodune, in the Kingdom of the
Mercians, Id. p. 221. Of Vocingas, freed from all Duties besides St. Peter and
the Abbot, Id. p. 230, 231. Of Chester, where Werburh, Wife of King Ceolred,
was Abbess, Id. p. 232. Of Winchelcomb in Gloucestershire, for Three hundred
Benedictine Monks, founded by Kenwulf King of the Mercians, and its
Consecration, Id. p. 242. l. 5. p. 251. Of Cotham and St. Savior's in
Canterbury, l. 4. p. 243. At Wilton, founded by Alburge, Sister to King Egbert,
for Benedictine Nuns, l. 5. p. 248. Some Disputes determined in a Synodal
Council at Cloveshoe concerning this of Westburgh, l. 5. p. 253. Of Croyland,
Egbert's Confirmation of the Lands and Privileges belonging to it in the Great
Council of the whole Kingdom, Id. p. 254. Of Polesworth, whereof Edgithe, King
Egbert's Daughter, was Abbess, Id. p. 257, 330. Of Rependun (now Repton) in
Derbyshire, Id. p. 261. Of Coldingham Nunnery; the Chastity of the Abbess, Id.
p. 269. Of Tinmouth, destroyed by the Danes, Id. Ib. Of Athelney in
Somersetshire, built by King Alfred for men, Id. p. 298, 307. Of Shaftsbury,
for Nuns, built by the same King, Ibid. Of Ambresbyri in Wiltshire, and
Banuwelle, to whom granted by Alfred, Id. p. 307. Of Exeter, anciently called
Exancester, l. 5. p. 307. Of Winchester, its Consecration, when, Id. p. 312.
Abbey of Hyde, near Winchester, Id. p. 318. Of Rochester, Id. p. 320. Of
Badricesworth, now St. Edmundsbury, Id. p. 323. l. 6. p. 52. Of Middletune in
Dorsetshire, founded by King Athelstan, l. 5. p. 337. l. 6. p. 6. Of Tavistock,
by whom founded, and how soon after burnt, l. 6. p. 4. Of Undale in
Northamptonshire, Id. p. 5. Of Winchester, both old and new, Id. p. 6. Of
Chertsey in Surrey, Id. p. 6. Of Rumsey in Hampshire, founded by King Edward,
Id. p. 6. Of Ramsey, founded by Aylwin the Ealdorman, Id. p. 6, 7. Of St. John
Baptist, Id. p. 8. Of Cerne in Dorsetshire, founded by whom, l. 6. p. 22. Of
Burton in Staffordshire, built by one of King Ethelbert's Courtiers, during the
cruel Wars in the Eastern and Southern parts of England; who endowed it with
his Paternal Inheritance; and purchased the King's Confirmation of what he had
done, Id. p. 31. Of St. Bennet's in Holme, founded by King Cnute, for
Benedictines, Id. p. 54. Of Coventry, founded by Leofric Earl of the Mercians,
and the Lady Godiva, l. 6. p. 71. Of Leon, or Lemster, near Hereford, Repaired
by the said Earl and Lady, Id. p. 72. Of Wenlock, Repaired by the said Earl and
Lady, Id. p. 72. Of St. Wereburga, in Chester, Repaired by the said Earl and
Lady, Id. p. 72. Of St. John in Worcester, Repaired by the said Earl and Lady,
Id. p. 72. Of Evesham, Repaired by the said Earl and Lady, Id. p. 72. Of Burgh,
richly endowed by Abbot Leofric, and called the Golden Burgh, Id. p. 84. Of St.
Aethelbert in Hereford City, burnt, and by whom, Id. p. 86, 87. Of the Holy
Cross at Waltham in Essex, founded by Earl Harold, who was afterward King of
England, Id. p. 89. Of Westminster, by whom founded, and when consecrated, Id.
p. 93.
Money; King Athelstan's Law, That through all his Dominions one and the same
Money be current, l. 5. p. 314. The same enacted by the last Law of King Edgar,
l. 6. p. 14. The same Punishment for wittingly receiving, as for making Bad
Money; and for Merchants that import any Counterfeit Money, Id. p 44. No more
Money ought to be raised by any unjust Exactions, Id. p. 55. One and the same
to be current, and none to refuse it. Embasing the Coin punishable by cutting
off the guilty person's Hands without Redemption. Cnute's Law, Id. p. 58. How
Money brought to a Town, and said to be found, shall be disposed of, Id. p. 103.
Monks, formerly almost the only Historians as well as Divines; and from them
we are to have our Accounts both of the Ecclesiastical and Civil Affairs of
Ancient Times, l. 4. p. 151. There were only two Orders of them in use amongst
our Ancestors of the English-Saxon Church, and what Orders they were, Id. p.
168. Most people of all Qualities used to take upon them the Monastic Habit,
Id. p. 221, 223. None but Monks anciently made Archbishops of Canterbury, l. 5.
p. 333. Turned out of diverse Monasteries by King Edwi^, and Secular Channons
put into their places, Id. p. 353. Are restored to them again by King Edgar, l.
6. p. 6, 7. A Civil War is raised in the Nation about them, Id. p. 15, 16. Are
removed from Exeter to Westminster, and Secular Channons placed in their stead,
Id. p. 78.
Morchar, a Dane of great Riches and Power in the Northern Parts, is
Treacherously slain by Edric's Order at his own House, when he was invited to a
Feast, l. 6. p. 40. Morchar, the Son of Earl Aelfgar, is chosen by the
Northumbers to be their Earl, Id. p. 90. Morgant, a Prince of the Isle of
Medcant, l. 3. p. 147. Morindus, Vid. Morvidus. Morini, or Moriani, a People of
Gaul landing in Northumberland, with Fire and Sword wast the Country, but are
at last defeated by Morindus and his Army, l. 1. p. 14. It was the Province of
Picardy, l. 2. p. 25.
Mortality, Vid. Plague. Morvidus, defeating the Moriani, putting all the
Prisoners to death with exquisite Torments, but at last is devoured by a
Monster that came out of the Irish S^a, with which he would needs fight, l. 1.
p. 14. Moston, his British M^ arraigned as to the credit of it, by a late
Romish Writer, but without any material Objection, l. 4. p. 162. Mould in
Flintshire, in the British Tongue is called Guiderac, l. 2. p. 108. Mouric, Son
of Tudric, King of Glamorgan, is reduced to great extremity by the Saxons, l.
3. p. 148, 149. Mulcts, Cnute's Law about them for diverse Offenses, l. 6. p.
58. For what Crimes no satisfaction to be made by way of Compensation, Id. p.
59. The particular Mulcts of those that Violate the King's Peace, Id. p. 103.
Vid. Murder.
Murrain, Vid. Plague. Murder, The Punishment for it, Anciently Redeemable by
Pecuniary Mulcts, l. 4. p. 209. Of Two Priests notably returned on the
Murderers, l. 4. p. 209. If a Layman kill a Thief, no satisfaction to be made
to the Friends of the Party slain, Id. p. 211. The Value of a Man slain,
whether English or Dane, Four Marks of Pure Gold, and the Redemption of each
Four hundred shillings, l. 5. p. 283. The Mulct which was to be paid for
killing a Woman with Child; or of killing in Troops or Companies, and to whom,
Id. p. 293, 294. By a Priest, his Estate is Confiscated and he Degraded, etc.
Id. p. 297. By Witchcraft, the Punishment for it by King Ethelstan's Law, Id.
p. 340. The Murderer alone to bear the deadly feud of the Kindred of the Party
slain, or within a Year to Pay the Value of the slain Man's Head, Id. p. 347.
The Punishment in case of Manslaughter, l. 6. p. 43. Edward the Confessor's Law
concerning it, Id. p. 101. How the Party wrongfully killed is to be cleared in
his Reputation, and what satisfaction is to be made to his Friends for it, Id.
p. 103.
Myranheofod, that is in Saxon, Ant's-head; Thurkytell of that Name fled from
the Danes, and the English Army beaten by them, l. 6. p. 34.
N
NAitan, King of the Picts, desires the Assistance of the English Nation
concerning the Celebration of Easter, l. 4. p. 216, 221. Nation, the Miseries
and Desolations that Divine Providence brings upon a Wicked and Perverse People
in it, l. 3. p. 150. Nazaleod, a Great British King; some think him Ambrosius,
others Uther Pendragon, his pretended Brother; and others again only the
General of the King of the Britains, l. 3. p. 134. Nennius, a British Author of
no great Credit, Id. p. 114. A credulous trivial Writer, who vents a great many
Fables, l. 3. p. 1^6. Could not Study at Oxford, as is supposed by some
Writers, and why, l. 5. p. 290.
St. Neot, the Story of King Alfred in the Account of this Saint's Life, l. 5.
p. 280. Nero, his succeeding Claudius in the Empire, l. 2. p. 45. Nerva, his
short Reign, and the great Commotions in it in this Island, l. 2. p. 66.
Nesse-point in Essex, called by the Saxons, Ealdulfe's Naese, l. 6. p. 81.
Newenden, a Town in Kent, quite destroyed by the Saxons, and afterward,
rebuilt; where it stood in the Reign of King Edward the First, l. 3. p. 132,
133. Nice, the Great Council there, when Assembled; some of our Bishops
assisted at it, l. 2. p. 88. Nicholaus, Bishop of Florence made Pope upon the
Expulsion of Pope Benedict, l. 6. p. 88. Niger (Peseenius) Saluted Emperor in
Syria, War against him by Severus, l. 2. p. 72. Is afterward slain by him, Id.
p. 73.
Nightmare, a Disease, whence it came to be so called, l. 3. p. 125. Nobility,
their Domineering and Severity ^ver poor Countrymen, restrained by King
Alfred's Law, l. 5. p. 294. Most of the English, Nobility slain at the Battle
of Ash-down, by Cnute and his Army, l. 6. p. 47. King Cnute causes several of
them to be put to death, but for what Crimes unknown, Id. p. 50. Their great
Degeneracy before the coming in of William Duke of Normandy, Id. p. 116.
Normandy, formerly called Neustria, entirely Conquered by Rollo the Dane, who
Reigned there Fifty years, l. 5. p. 278. The Succession of the Dukes there, l.
6. p. 53. The great Battle of Vallesdune, between Henry King of France, and the
Nobility of that Dukedom, for their refusing to accept of the Bastard William
for their Duke, Id. p 74.
Normans, or Northlandmen, were Danes and Swedes, their Religion and common
Deities, l. 5. p. 256. All Banished that had introduced unjust Laws, and given
false Judgments, and committed many Outrages upon the English, except a very
few, l. 6. p. 82. Too many brought over by Edward the Confessor, who soon by
their Customs corrupted the English Simplicity, Id. p. 98. Before their
Engaging King Harold, spent the night in Prayers and Confessions, etc. l. 6. p.
112.
Northalbingia, formerly Old Saxony, it is extent and bounds; l. 3. p. 118.
Northampton, anciently called Hamtune, l. 5. p. 319, 321. Northern People of
Britain, described by Herodian, afterward supposed to be called Picti, l. 2.
p. 22. Northumbers, that is, all those English-Saxons who lived North of the
River Humber, l. 4. p. 171. When most part of this Nation, as well Nobles as
others, retired into Monasteries, Id. p. 221. Their frequent Rebellions and
Expulsion of their Kings, show them to be of a proud and turbulent Temper, Id.
p. 239, 240. l. 5. p. 260. Kings of England appointed Earls under them to
Govern that Country, l. 5. p. 259. Expel their Lawful King Osbryht, and set up
a Tyrant and Usurper, not Descended from the Royal Line, Id. p. 267. Expel
Egbert their King, and Wulfher Archbishop of York, Id. p. 277. Rebel against
King Athelstan, and the Event of their so doing, Id. p. 330. Beat the
Scotchmen, many of whose Heads were afterward set upon Poles round the Walls
of Durham, l. 6. p. 27. Take Arms against their Earl Tostige, slaying his
Servants and seizing his Treasures; committing a world of Outrages and
Desolations: And what the ground of this Insurrection, Id. p. 90, 91,
Northumbrian Kingdom began in Ida, and when, l. 3. p. 142. Becomes divided
into Two, viz. Deira and Bernicia, Id. p. 143. The Custom of this Nation was
anciently to sell their own Children, or other near Relations to Foreign
Merchants, l. 4. p. 152. A perverse and perfidious Nation, worse than Pagans,
Id. p. 240. A certain Youth is made King hereof by the joint Consent of both
the English and Danes, King Alfred himself confirming the Election, l. 5. p.
286.
North Wales, a part of the Roman Province, anciently called Genoani, or
Guinethia, l. 2. p. 68. l. 5. p. 317: All the Coasts thereabouts spoiled by the
Danes, l. 5. p. 319. Upon the Death of Howel Dha, it returned to the Two Sons
of Edwal Voel, l. 5. p. 349. Is sorely harrassed by King Edgar, and the cause
of the War, l. 6. p. 3, 4. War is made upon it by Eneon, who subdues all the
Country of Gwin or Gwir, Id. p. 6, 16. Is Conquered by Meredyth, Prince of
South Wales for himself, Id. p. 22. On the Death of Edwal ap Meyric, it was
under an Anarchy for some time, l. 6. p. 25. It gave occasion to great
disturbances, till Aedan got and held it for Twelve Years, but whether by
Election, or Force, uncertain, Id. p. 30, 31. Blithen and Rithwallen made Joint
Princes thereof by King Edward the Confessor, Id. p. 90.
Norway, Harold Harfager their King, coming with a great Fleet to Invade
England, Lands in Yorkshire but is slain in Battle with most of his Men, l. 6.
p. 109. Norwich, the only Bishop in England, since the Dissolution of
Monasteries, that has still the Title of an Abbot, l. 6. p. 54. Nothelm
receives his Pall from Rome, and is made Archbishop of Canterbury after Tatwin,
l. 4. p. 223. His Death, and who is Consecrated in his room, Id. p. 224.
Numerianus, the Son of the Emperor Carus, made Caesar by him, whom he takes
with him into the East; but this pious Son was slain by Aper, one of his
Captains, l. 2. p. 83. Nunnery, Vid. Monastery. Nunnichia, the Wife of
Gerontius, her extraordinary Courage and Affection to her Husband, who was
prevailed upon to slay her by her own Importunity, rather than she would be
left behind him, exposed to the violence of an enraged Multitude, l. 2. p. 103.
O
OAkly in Surrey, anciently called Aclea, where the Danes were beaten by King
Aethelwulf, l. 5. p. 261. Oath of Fidelity. Vid. Fealty. The Oath the Danes
took to King Alfred (which they never would take before to any Nation) upon a
Sacred Bracelet, to depart the Kingdom, l. 5. p. 278. Or Pledge i. e. a man's
Promise to observe the Law, and keep the Peace) to be strictly kept, and the
Punishment in breaking it, made by King Alfred, Id. p. 292. To give Security by
Oath at twelve years of Age, and for what, l. 6. p. 58. Vid. Purgation.
Odo, Bishop of Wells, succeeds, Wulfhelme in the Archbishopric of Canterbury.
His Character, l. 5. p. 333. Is severely revenged on the Lady Athelgiva, for
causing King Edwi to turn all the Monks out of diverse Monasteries, and putting
Secular Channons in their rooms, Id. p. 354. His Decease, l. 6. p. 2.
Offa, the Son of Sigher, King of the East Saxons, marries Keneswith, but not
long after, through her persuasions, takes upon him a Monastic Life, and goes
to Rome for that end, l. 4. p. 214. Vid. 217. Is proposed as a Pattern for all
other Princes to follow, Id p. 214.
Offa, expels the Usurper Beornred, King of the Mercians, (His Pedigree.) and
succeeds him by the General Consent of the Nobles, and afterward becomes a
Terror to all the Kings of England, Id. p. 227. Obtains of the Pope a Pall for
the Sea of Litchfield to become an Archbishopric, Id. p. 229. Subdues the
Nation of the Hestings, but who they were, is not known, Id. p. 230. And
Cynwulf King of the West Saxons, fight at Bensington in Oxfordshire, where Offa
prevails, Id. Ib. and p. 236. Is forced to make a Peace with the Saxon Kings,
Id. p. 231. Seizes on the whole Country of North and South Wales, planting
Saxons in their places, and annexes them to his own Kingdom, making a famous
Ditch from Sea to Sea, to defend his Country from the Incursions of the Welsh,
called Offa's Ditch, Ibid. and p. 239. His Eldest Son Egfred (or Egbert, as in
the Saxon Annals) is anointed and crowned King with him, l. 4. p. 233, 235.
Builds a new Church and Monastery in honor of St. Alban, Id. p. 237. His
Death, after he had reigned forty years, and Burial in a Chapel at Bedford,
near the River Ouse. He had a great mixture in him of Virtues and Vices, and
seems to have been the first of our English-Saxon Kings, who maintained any
great Correspondence with Foreign Princes, Id. p. 238. His Enmity with Charles
the Great, and afterward his firm League with him, Id. p. 239.
Offerings at the Altar, Pope Gregory determines how they were to be divided,
l. 4. p. 155. Olaff, is driven out of Norway, Cnute conquering that Country
for himself, l. 6. p. 53. Returning to regain his Right, he was slain by the
people, but afterward was canonized under the Title of a Martyr, Id. p. 54.
Olanaege, an Island in the River Severne, now called the Eighth, l. 6. p. 47.
Old Saxony. Vid. Northalbingia. Orcades, the Islands in the Northern Ocean,
near Scotland, l. 2. p. 94. Governed long by English and Danish Kings, l. 5. p.
259.
Ordeal, not to be used to a person accused of a Crime, unless there be no
direct proof against him, l. 5. p. 285. A simple and a threefold Ordeal, Id. p.
340. l. 6. p. 59. A Danish Custom, and grew more in request in the Reign of
King Cnute, l. 6. p. 43. After what manner this Judgment was to be executed by
the Bishop's Officer, Id. p. 100.
Order; that of St. Basil, l. 4. p. 167. That of St. Benedict, Id. p. 167, 168.
Of St. Equitus, Id. p. 168.
Ordgar, the Abbot, rebuilds the Abbey of Abingdon, which had been destroyed by
the Danes, l. 4. p. 196. Ordgar, Earl of Devonshire, and afterward
Father-in-Law to King Edgar, founded the Abbey of Tavistock, which was not long
after burnt by the Danes, l. 6. p. 4. Ordination of a Bishop, whether without
the presence of other Bishops, or not, l. 4. p. 156. Ceadda renews his
Ordination, and upon what account, Id. p. 191. Bishop Wilfrid is sent into
France to be reordained, Id. p. 192.
Ordovices, those people now of North Wales, l. 2. p. 42. Almost destroyed a
whole Squadron of Roman Horse, Id. p. 55. Their whole Nation very near cut off
by Agricola, Ibid.
Orgiva. Vid. Edgitha. Orkeney, the Isles, when first discovered by the Romans,
l. 2. p. 63. Orotius (Paulus) took what he wrote from an History of Suetonius,
which is now lost, l. 2. p. 35. Osbald, a Nobleman, is made King of
Northumberland, but held it not long, being forced to fly; and going to the
King of the Picts, dies there an Abbot, l. 4. p. 239, 240. According to Simeon
of Durham, he was buried in York Minster, Id. p. 242.
Osberge, the Daughter of Aslat, or Oslac, chief Butler to King Aethelwulf, to
whom she was married, and became the Mother of Alfred, who was afterward King,
l. 5. p. 261. Her Character, Ibid.
Osbert, or Osbryght, succeeds Ethelred in the Kingdom of Northumberland, and
afterward is killed by the Danes, l. 5. p. 260. Their lawful King, is expelled
by the Northumbers, who set up an Usurper, not descended from the Royal Line,
Id p. 267. Lies with the Wife of one of his Noblemen; who, complaining of the
Affront to the King of Denmark, causes a great Army to come over to revenge
that Injury, Id. p. 268, 269.
Osfrid, a Son of King Edwin by Quenburga, the Daughter of Ceorle, King of
Mercia, l. 4. p. 174. Is slain, with his Father; in the Battle of Hethfield,
Id. p. 176.
Oskytel, first consecrated Bishop of Dorchester, then made Archbishop of York;
his Death and Burial, l. 6. p. 7. Osmund, when he began to reign over the
South Saxons, l. 4. p. 228. Osred, succeeds his Father Alfred in the Kingdom of
the Northumbers, l. 4. p. 213. Is reconciled to Wilfrid, with his Great Men and
Bishops, Ibid. Becomes Bishop Wilfrid's adopted Son, Id. p. 214. Is killed in a
Fight near the Sea, on the Southern Borders. His Character, Id. p. 217.
Osred, the Son of Alchred, Nephew of King Alfwold, reigned after him, and is
betrayed and driven out of his Kingdom, and who succeeded, l. 4. p. 236. Is put
to death by King Ethelred's Command, and where buried, Id. p. 237.
Osric, the Son of Elfric, obtains the Kingdom of Deira, abjures the Christian
Religion, and is cut off by Cadwallo, with all his Army, l. 4. p. 176. Osric
builds a Nunnery at Bath, l. 4. p. 196. And the Nunnery of St. Peter in
Gloucester, which afterward was destroyed by the Danes, and then rebuilt; and
after was King of the Northumbers, Id. p. 201. Osric, King of Northumberland,
slain, and who succeeded him, Id. p. 220. Ostorius Scapula, succeeds Plautius
in the quality of Propraetor, and reduces the most Southerly parts of Britain
to the form of a Province, l. 2. p. 41. Overcomes the Iceni; engages with the
Silures and Caractacus, and his Success over them, Id. p. 42, 43. Is decreed by
the Senate all the Ensigns of a Triumph; and being worn out with cares and
troubles, dies, Id. p. 44, 45.
Oswald and Oswie, with Eanfrid their Elder Brother, all Sons of King
Ethelfrid, are banished by Edwin, l. 4. p. 170, 171. Oswald, Edwin's Successor
in the Kingdom of Northumberland, finishes St. Peter's Church in York, Id. p.
174, 176, l. 5. p. 254. Routs Cadwallo, with all his Forces. His Speech to his
Army, l. 4. p. 177. His Kingdom extended over both Deira and Bernicia. He would
interpret Bishop Aidan's Sermons to his Subjects that heard, but did not
understand them. In his Reign Churches were built in diverse places of his
Kingdom. His Great Character, Id. p. 178. His Charity. He was Edwin's Nephew by
his Sister Acca, Ibid. and p. 179. Fights a great Battle with Penda, ^und was
therein slain, Id. p. 180. The many Miracles supposed that he wrought after his
death, Ibid. He was the sixth King that ruled over all Britain, l. 5. p. 254.
His Body (under the Title of Saint) long after translated from Bardeney in
Lincolnshire, into Mercia, l. 5. p. 315.
Oswald Aetheling, fighting with Ethelhard, is worsted, and the next year dies,
l. 4. p. 220. Oswald, Son to King Ethelred, is mentioned by his Father in his
Charter to the Abbey of Abingdon, l. 5. p. 276. Oswald, Archbishop of York, his
Decease, l. 6. p. 5. Oswald, Bishop of Worcester, succeeds his Kinsman Oskytell
in the Archbishopric of York, l. 6. p. 7. His Death, and Burial in the Church
of St. Mary in Worcester, Id. p. 23.
Oswestre in Shropshire, anciently called Maserfield, where was fought the
great Battle between Oswald, the most Christian King of Northumberland, and
Penda, the Pagan King of the Mercians, l. 4. p. 180. Oswin, the Brother of King
Oswald, is made King of Deira, l. 4. p. 181. His Death at Ingerlingum, Id. p.
182. His Character, Id. p. 183. The Seventh King that Ruled over all Britain,
l. 5. p. 254.
Oswulf, his Son, succeeds Eadbert in the Kingdom of Northumberland, but is
slain within a Year after by the Treachery of his own Servants, l. 4. p. 228.
Oswy, the Son of Usric, King of Bernicia, l. 4. p. 182. Treacherously procures
Oswin to be slain, but afterward builds a Monastery where the Murder was
committed, to expiate the Crime, Id. p. 183. Overcomes Penda, who in the Battle
is slain, Id. p. 185. The Ealdormen of Mercia Rebel against him, Id. p. 188.
His Death and Burial at Streanshale-Monastery, Id. p. 192.
Otford in Kent, anciently called Ottanford, where the Mercians and Kentishmen
had a Battle, l. 4. p. 230. Outlawry, Ethelward the Ealdorman is Outlawed in a
Great Council of the Kingdom, l. 6. p. 51. Earl Sweyn, Son of Godwin, is
declared Outlawed in a Great Council at London, Id. p. 77. The Common Law of
all Outlaws, they are said to have Wulfes hefod, (i. e. a Wolf's head) or as we
say in Latin, gerere Caput Lupinum, Id. p. 99, 100. Usurer's Convicted, to be
looked on as Outlawed Persons, Id. p. 102. Earl Elfgar is Outlawed in the
Witena-Gemot, and for what, l. 6. p. 86. Vid. Pledge.
Oxford, the University when Founded, and who the first Regents and Professors
there. The Quarrel that arose betwixt Grimbald and the Old Scholars of Oxford.
This passage of the Quarrel, etc. objected against by Sir Henry Spelman, and
answered, l. 5. p. 288, 289, 290. The flourishing state of Learning here,
related by Asser, very much questioned, Id. p. 304. King Alfred assisted by
Grimbald, and John Scotus, in Founding this University, Id. p. 306. Is taken
and Burnt by the Danes, l. 6. p. 34, 35. All Studies cease there for a long
time after, till about the Year Eleven hundred thirty three, from which time
the Scholars have continued there, Id. p. 35.

P
PAenius Posthumus runs himself through with his own Sword, and why, l. 2. p.
50. Pagan-Rites, the Forbidding of them to be observed by the Decree of
Calcuith, l. 4. p. 234. Pagans, Vid. Heathens.
Palace-Royal, the Punishment on any that fight within it, l. 4. p. 208.
Palladius, the Bishop sent by Pope Caelestine to the Scots to confirm their
Faith, l. 2. p. 109, 110. St. Pancrace Church, the first Built in Britain, and
from a Heathen Temple was turned into a Christian Church, l. 4. p. 157. It had
been before the Old ruinous Church of St. Martin without the City of
Canterbury, Id. p. 163.
Papinian, the Great Lawyer, helping Geta to Govern the South part of this
Island, l. 2. p. 75. Bassianus would have had him wrote a Defense of his
Murdering his Brother Geta; but his sharp reply to him cost him his Life, Id.
p. 79.
Pardon, Vid. Prerogative. Paris, the University there when first Erected, by
whom, and by what means, l. 4. p. 244. The Danes passing up the River Seine,
take up their Winter Quarters there, l. 5. p. 287.
Parish-Feasts, in several parts of England to this day: Their Antiquity, l. 6.
p. 99. Parker, the Archbishop, Author of the Latin History de Antiquitate
Ecclesiae Anglicanae, l. 4. p. 165. Parliament, King Ethelbert confirms there
all the Charters of Endowment on Christ-Church, and that of St. Pancrace in
Canterbury, l. 4. p. 163. Parliament Men to have no Injury done them, but the
Party shall be Fined for it, Ibid. Egbert changed the Name of this Kingdom into
that of England, by the Consent of his Parliament held at Winchester, l. 5. p.
247. Where the Great Men of the Kingdom were wont of course to attend at the
King's Court, to Consult and Ordain what was good and necessary for the
Commonweal, Id. p. 261.
Paschalis, the Pope, succeeds Stephanus, and is Consecrated, l. 5. p. 251.
Pasham in Northamptonshire, anciently called Passenham, l. 5. p. 322. Pattern, a
Preacher at Llan Pattern in Cardiganshire, l. 3. p. 149. Paulinus, a Roman,
Consecrated by Justus to be Bishop of the Northumbers, l. 4. p. 171. Is sent as
a Spiritual Guide and Guardian with Ethelburga to the Court of King Edwin,
where he is Instructed in the Principles of the Christian Faith, Id. p. 172.
Converts his Chief Idol-Priest, and several of the Nobles. Is the first Bishop
of York, Edwin settling the Episcopal See there. Spent a Month at Adefrin in
doing scarce any thing else but Catechizing and Baptizing, Id. p. 173, 174.
Converts Blecca, the Governor of Lincoln, with all his Family, to the Faith.
Has an Archiepiscopal Pall sent him by Pope Honorius, and be Ordains one of
that Name Archbishop of Canterbury, Id. p. 175. Takes on him the care of the
Church of Rochester, Id. p. 176. His Death at Rochester, and who succeeded him,
Id. p. 181.
St. Paul's Church at London, is caused to be Built by King Sebert, l. 4. p.
159. Burnt in the Reign of King Edgar, and soon after Rebuilt, l. 6. p. 4.
Paulus, a Notary, sent into Britain, a Malicious Inquisitor, and his great
Oppressions there, l. 2. p. 89. He is Burnt alive by the Command of Julian the
Emperor, Ibid.
Peace of the King, Alfred's Law concerning the keeping it, and the Punishment
in breaking it, l. 5. p. 292, 295. All People bound to keep the Peace, l. 6. p.
58. Stated times and days appointed for the more strict observance of it, l. 6.
p. 99. Or Protection granted to Persons and Places, and at certain times; and
it is manifold, as the particulars there show, Id. p. 100. What this was to
free Persons from, Id. p. 101. Those who have it, not to injure others under a
double Penalty; the particular Mulcts or Penalties of those who violate it, Id.
p. 103. Vid. Pledge, Protection, Suretyship.
Peace, or League, agreed on, and confirmed by Oath between Eardulf, King of
the Northumbers, and Kenwulf, King of Mercia, by the Intercession of King
Egbert, l. 5. p. 248. Concluded on (Hostages and Oaths being mutually
exchanged) between Edmund Ironside and King Cnute, with the particularities of
it, l. 6. p. 47. made between Edward the Confessor and Earl Godwin, Id. p. 81,
82, 83. Vid. League.
Peadda, Son of Penda, desiring Alfreda the Daughter of Oswy to his Wife, and
not being able to obtain her unless he turned to the Christian Faith, he
voluntarily accepted it, l. 4. p. 183, 184. Held the Province of South-Mercia
divided from the Northern by the River of Trent, to be held as Tributary to the
Northumbrian Kingdom. At last is slain by the Treachery of his Wife, Id. p. 186.
Pecuniary Fines, Vid. Punishments. Pedidan, or Pendrid's Mouth, the River
Parret in Somersetshire, where a great Battle was fought between these, and the
Dorsetshire-men and the Danes, l. 5. p. 260, 301. Pelagius, a British Monk,
when he first broached his Heresy, l. 2. p. 107. The Britains being averse to
receive it, send for Bishops out of France, and a public Disputation was
agreed on between them and the Heretics, and the success the Bishops had,
Ibid. Vid. Heresy.
Pen, in Somersetshire, by the Saxons called Peanhoe and Peonnan, l. 6. p. 28,
45. Penda, King of the Mercians, is overcome by Cadwallo, l. 4. p. 176. Fights
a great Battle with Oswald, who is therein slain, Id. p. 180. Hates and
despises those professing the Christian Faith, whom he found not to live
answerably to it, Id. p. 184. His Death, with the manner how, Id. p. 185. Had
been the Death of Four or Five Christian Kings in Battle, Ibid.
Pentarchy, when the Kingdom was rent into it, l. 1. p. 12. Pentecost-Castle,
where is not known, l. 6. p. 81. Took it is Name from one Osbern, Surnamed
Pentecost, Id. p. 82.
Penvahel, in the Pict's Tongue, in English Penvellum, where, l. 2. p. 100.
Pepin, King of the Franks, makes a League with Eadbert, King of Northumberland,
and sends him great Presents, l. 4. p. 228. His Death, Id. p. 229.
Perennis, in highest Power with Commodus the Emperor, sets only men of the
Equestrial Order to Command the British Army; their Complaint and his
Punishment, l. 2. p. 70. Perjury, if any in Holy Orders Perjure themselves,
what the Punishment, l. 5. p. 284. No Credit to be given to any one that is
Perjured, etc. Id. p. 325. Some justly punished for it by being put to Death,
l. 6. p. 49.
Pertinax (Helvius) made Lieutenant of Britain by Commodus, but not long enjoys
it, l. 2. p. 70, 71. Created Emperor, but within Three Months is slain by the
Praetorian Bands, l. 2. p. 72.
Pestilence, Vid. Plague. Peter, a Monk, and Lawrence, sent by Augustine to the
Pope, and about what Message, l. 4. p. 155. Vid. Lawrence. A Presbyter, first
Abbot of the Monastery toward the East, not far from the City of Canterbury,
Id. p. 157. Is drowned, going on a Message into France, Id. Ib.
Peterburgh Abbey, an Account of its Foundation, with the form and manner of
erecting it; as also its Consecration, l. 4. p. 186, 187. Peter Pence; viz. a
Penny to be paid to the Bishop of Rome, from every House in the Kingdom, first
given by King Ina; but the truth of it suspected, unless granted by the
Mycel-Synod, or Great Council of the Kingdom, l. 4. p. 219. A perpetual Tribute
granted by King Offa to the Pope, out of Every house in his Kingdom; but
however the Kingdom was not made Tributary to him by it, for it was only a
Voluntary Annual Alms, or Benevolence, Id. p. 239. Alfred called it his Alms,
and how he sent it to Rome, l. 5. p. 281, 286, 291, 298. Justly called Alms,
and not a Tribute, as the Modern Popish Writers term it, Id. p. 291. When it
was to be paid, and the Penalty for not performing it accordingly, l. 6. p. 13.
Edward the Confessor's Law to reinforce the Payment of it, Id. p. 100. Vid.
Romescot.
Petroc, a Learned British Preacher in Cornwall, l. 3. p. 149. Philip, upon the
death of Henry is made King of France, l. 6. p. 88. Visited by Duke William,
who solicited his Assistance in his designed War against Harold, but he would
not hearken to the Proposals made him, and for what reason, Id. p. 109.
Philippus (Marcus Julius) an Arabian, succeeded Gordianus in the Empire, but
his Army soon made away with him, l. 2. p. 81. Philippus (Nonnius) a Lieutenant
in Britain under the Emperor Gordianus, Id. Ib. Phoenicians, the first
Discoverers of this Island, l. 1. p. 2, 3. Picts, came out of Scythia, and
landed first in the North of Ireland, l. 1. p. 4. Are totally subdued by the
Scots. Their Language is unknown, Id. p. 5. Confederate with Carausius against
Constantius Chlorus, l. 2. p. 83. Surrender up many of their Forts and strong
Places to Fergus, Id. p. 98. And Scots, their landing first in Britain, passing
over that part of the Irish Sea which is called the Scythic Vale, l. 3. p. 114.
And Saxons privately make a Peace, Id. p. 126. The Picts cut off King Egfrid
and his whole Army, and recover their Country the English had taken away, l.
4. p. 202. Slay Bert the Ealdorman, Id p. 211. Fight against Beorfrith the
Ealdorman, Id. p. 215. Keep their League with the English, and rejoice to be
partakers of the Catholic Peace and Truth, Id. p. 221. A great fight between
them and the Britains, that is, those of Cumberland, Id. p. 225. These and the
Scots conquer Galloway and Lothian, and the Low-lands of Scotland, as far as
the Friths of Dunbritton and Edinburgh, l. 5. p. 249. Rout the English, and
slay King Athelstan in fight, a story, Id. p. 250. The total Conquest of the
Picts by Kened, the first King of Scotland, Id. p. 259.
Pightwin (or Pechtwin) is consecrated Bishop of Witherne (called in Latin,
Candida Casa) at Aelfet, l. 4. p. 228. His Decease, Id. p. 231.
Pinchenhale, or Finkenhale, now Finkney in the Bishopric of Durham, and
Kingdom of Northumberland, where a General Synod assembled, l. 4. p. 236. The
second Synod, or Council, held here, under Eanbald Archbishop of York, etc. Id.
p. 242.
Pius (Antoninus) succeeds Hadrian, and at his first coming to the Throne, has
a Law made, That all the Subjects of the Roman Empire should be Free Citizens
of Rome, l. 2. p. 67. Plague; a very sore one in Britain, when, l. 3. p. 117. A
great one over all the Isle of Britain, and then it went into Ireland, l. 4. p.
190. A great Mortality both of Men and Beasts, l. 5. p. 269. Another great one
upon Men, and Murrain of Cattle, Id. p. 302. A great Mortality of Men, and a
very malignant Fever in London, l. 6. p. 4. A great Mortality of Cattle in
England, Id. p. 21. A great number of Cattle died; and by the Intemperance of
the Season, the Fruits of the Earth were destroyed, Id. p. 70. So great a
Murrain of all sorts of Cattle in England, that none could ever remember the
like, Id. p. 85.
Plautius, Praetor in Gaul, invades Britain, and his Success, l. 2. p. 38, 39.
Has an Ovation allowed him by Claudius, Id. p. 41.
Pledge; Alfred's Law about keeping the Peace, and the Punishment in breaking
it, l. 5. p. 292, 295. Those who violate the Peace of Holy Church, and despise
the Bishop's Sentence, shall give Pledges to reconcile themselves to God, the
King, and Church, or to be outlawed, l. 6. p. 99, 100. Vid. Security.
Plegmund, elected by God and all his Holy Men to be Archbishop of Canterbury,
l. 5. p. 298. Sent for by King Alfred out of Mercia, to help him in his
Learning, Id. p. 306. Presides at the Great Council held by King Edward the
Elder, where five new Bishoprics were ^rected at once, by the Authority of the
King and Council; with the Pope's Confirmation of this Decree, Id. p. 313, 314.
His Decease, Id. p. 324.
Pl^nty; a wonderful one of all sorts of Pr^vision in Britain, l. 3. p. 115.
Polidore Virgil, an Historian of no ^xtraordinary Credit, though he had the
Perusal of a great many curious Manuscripts, l. 5. p. 323. Polycle^us, one of
Nero^s Freed Men, sent to ^nspect the State of Britain, l. 2. p. 50. Pope, who
called the Emperor Mauritius his Lord; and dated his Letters by the Year of his
Reign, l. 4. p. 153, 158. Sends more Preachers of the Word into England, upon
Augustine's notice of the want of them, Id. p. 157. Sends Letters to King
Edwin, exhorting him to cas^ off his Idols, and to receiv^ Christ, Id. p. 17^.
The Kings of Northumberland tho^ght themselves not bound to observe the Pope's
De^rees on Appeals, if contrary to a General Synod or Council of the whole
Nation, Id. p. 206, 207, 208. Always encouraging Appeals to Rome, Id. p. 215.
Usually sent his Pall to every new Archbishop on his Consecration, as a token
of his Dependence on the Sea of Rome, Id. p. 223. The Church of England thought
his Authority alone not sufficient to annul what had been solemnly decreed in a
great Council of the Kingdom, l. 5. p. 248. Anoint^ Alfred King in his Father's
Lifetime, in way of Prophecy of his future Royal Gr^atness, Id. p. 262.
Aethelwulf orders by his last Last Will Three hundred Mancuses to be sent to
Rome every year for such and such uses; and One h^ndred of them to be for the
Pope himself, Id. p. 264, 265.
Port, now called Portland in Dorsetshire, where the Danes were put to flight,
l. 5. p. 258. The Isle spoiled by the Danish Pirates that landed in
Dorsetshire, l. 6. p. 21. The whole Island, and other Possessions, given to the
Church of Winchester by Edward the Confessor, and upon what account, l. 6. p.
79.
Portlock-bay in Somersetshire, anciently called Portlocan, l. 5. p. 319.
Portsmouth, so called from one Port^, who with his two Sons obtained a great
Victory over the Britains, l. 3. p. 133. Portus Ictius, where it was, and
whether it be yet in being, l. 2. p. 30, 31. Posentesbyrig, supposed Pontesbury
in Shropshire, l. 4. p. 188. Prae^idialis, a Province that is so, is not
governed by any particular Praetor or Proconsul, but is under the immediate
Protection and Eye of the Emperor, l. 2. p. 65. Prasutagus, King of the
Icenians, deceived in leaving Caesar Coheir with his two Daughters; and how
the Romans used them, l. 2. p. 47. Prayer to be made for Kings, by Withred King
of Kent's Law, l. 4. p. 211. Priests to learn the Lord's-Prayer and Creed in
English, Id. p. 225.
Predur, a British Prince, Son of Oliver Gosgard Vawr, a Prince of Cumberland,
l. 3. p. 147. Prerogative, a pretense of King Offa's unlimited Power in
Ecclesiastical as well as Civil Matters, l. 4. p. 239. Danegelt; how by
constant usage it became a Prerogative, l. 6. p. 66. That of Pardoning in the
King, not to extend to the Prejudice of the Party injured, etc. Id. p. 102. To
set at liberty any Captive or Prisoner, when the King comes into a City, etc.
Id. Ib.
Priests, that are not able to contain, may marry, l. 4. p. 155. To learn the
Creed and Lord's-Prayer in English, and to interpret the Mass, and Baptism, Id.
p. 225. By the King's Priest, must be meant either his Chaplain, or Bishop, l.
5. p. 295. Breach of the Peace by Priests, how punishable, Id. p. 297.
Priscilla, and other Heretics of his Party, were sentenced to Death by
Maximus the Emperor, l. 2. p. 96. Probus (M. Aurel. Valor.) succeeds Claudius
Tacitus in the Empire, vanquishes Bonosus, who upon it Hanged himself; prevents
a new Rebellion in Britain, gains other Victories elsewhere, and at last is
slain by his own Army, l. 2. p. 82. Prodigies, a great fight and slaughter of
Birds in the Air, l. 4. p. 192. A Comet continuing Three Months, carrying with
it every morning a large Tail, like a Pillar, Id. p. 196. Another appeared in
King Ethelheard's time, l. 4. p. 220. A Red Cross appeared in the Heavens after
Sun set, Id. p. 230. The sign of the Cross appeared of it self upon men's
Clothes, Id. p. 235. A Light frequently seen from Heaven over the place where
Alfwold was Murdered, Id. p. 236. Immoderate Lightnings, Meteors like fiery
Dragons flying in the Air, Id. p. 238. Sign of the Cross seen in the Moon, 2d.
Nones June, in the Morning; and on the 3d. Kal. September, a wonderful Circle
seen round the Sun, l. 5. p. 248. An appearance of a Cross in daytime, Id. p.
250. Strange Prodigies seen in the Heavens, l. 6. p. 15. A strange cloud
appeared about midnight all over England in diverse Colors, Id. p. 18. A Column
of Light streaming down from Heaven over St. Edward the Martyr's Grave, Id. p.
20.
Protection, granted anciently by the King, not only to Persons, but to Places,
by way of Privilege; the several sorts of giving it, and what this Peace (as it
was called) was to free Persons from, l. 6. p. 100, 101. Provision for the
King's Household, how to be made, not to oppress the Subjects, l. 6. p. 59.
Punishments, all Crimes Redeemable by Pecuniary Fines in Edward the Elder's
time, and some Ages after, l. 5. p. 326. Anciently consisted in Pecuniary
Fines, rather than in Blood, Id. p. 342. In Edgar's time, Fines were not
Arbitrary, nor set above a constant rate, l. 6. p. 13. For what Crimes no
Satisfaction should be made by way of Mulct, Id. p. 59.
Purgation, in case a man be of good Repute, his own should be accepted, but
otherwise either a Threefold one, or his single Oath in Three Hundreds, l. 6.
p. 58, 59. Pusa, Abbot of the Monastery of Vocingas, and whom he succeeded, l.
4. p. 231. Putta, Bishop of Rochester, is forced to retire to the Bishop of the
Mercians (by his Church's being destroyed) and there died. This very Man is
made the first Bishop of Hereford, l. 4. p. 196.
Q
QUarrel, or Deadly Feud, King Alfred's Law concerning it, l. 5. p. 296. King
Edmund's Law about it, Id. p. 347. The Indians Deadly Feud against all the
Kindred of one that Murders any of them, Id. Ib.
Queen, upon the Account of Eadburga's ill conduct of her self, both as Wife to
Brihtric, King of the West Saxons, whom she Poisoned, and as Widow upon diverse
other accounts; a Law was made, That for the future no King's Consort should be
so called, l. 5. p. 264. Quenburga, Daughter of Ceorle King of Mercia, and Wife
to King Edwin, l. 4. p. 174. Quendride, Sister to King Kenelm, Son to Kenwulf
King of Mercia, makes her Brother away, out of a wicked Ambition of Reigning
her self; and the dreadful Judgment that befell her upon it, l. 5. p. 252. Is
forced to make satisfaction to Archbishop Wilfrid for the Wrongs that King
Kenwulf her Father had done to the Church of Canterbury; afterward professed
her self a Nun, and at this time was an Abbess, Id. p. 253.
Quendrith, by her wicked Instigations, Ethelbert, the Son of Ethelred, King of
the East Angles, is slain going to Offa's Court, in order to Woo his Daughter.
l. 4. p. 237. Quichelme, Bishop of Rochester, when he Governed that See, l. 4.
p. 201.
R
RAdnor, the Town destroyed by Meredyth, Prince of North Wales, l. 6. p. 23.
Radnorshire-men* supposed by Cambden, to be meant by the Magaesetons, l. 6. p.
46. Raven, the Raven-Banner* Vid. Banner. Reculf, a Monastery built by Basse, a
Priest, l. 4.192. Now known by the name of Reculver in Kent, Id. p. 205.
Redburge, Wife of King Egbert, was (according to the then West Saxon Law)
never called Queen. What Law she is said to have procured from her Husband, l.
5. p. 257. Redwald, called the greatest King of the East Angles, the Tenth from
Woden, l. 3. p. 146. l. 4. p. 171. His Death, Id. p. 157. Receives Edwin (who
had been forced to fly the Country of Northumberland) very kindly, Id. p. 169.
Slays Ethelfrid in Battle, Id. p. 170. Had been Baptized in Kent by the means
of Eadbald, but was afterward by his Wife and others, perverted from the true
Faith, Id. p. 175. He was the Fourth King that Ruled over all Britain, l. 5. p.
254. Succeeds Ethelred, who was driven out of his Kingdom of Northumberland,
but soon after fighting with the Danes at Alvethelie, he and Earl Alfred were
slain, l. 5. p. 260.
Rees, the Brother of Griffyn, King of South Wales, was by the Command of
Edward the Confessor, put to death for his Insosolencies against the English,
and his Head sent to the King, l. 6. p. 85. Reginald, succeeds Eowils and
Healfden as King over the Danes, l. 5. p. 315. Enters into a Contract of
Marriage, with Aelfwinna, Daughter of Aethelfleda, and Heir of the Kingdom of
Mercia, Id. p. 320. Submits his Kingdom of Northumberland to King Edward the
Elder, Id. p. 323, 324. He takes York, Id. p. 324. Was the Son of Eardulph, Id.
Ibid. Eadmund receive^ him at his confirmation, Id. p. 3^3. Is called King of
York, because he had conquered that Country, Id. p. 344.
Regni, those Parts we now call Surrey and Sussex, l. 2. p. 69. Reiderch-hoel
(that is, the Liberal) a British King of Cumberland, l. 3. p. 146, 147.
Religion, none ought to be Compelled to receive it, for the Service of Christ
is to be Voluntary, l. 4. p. 154. The state of it in the Western Church, when
Augustine came over hither, Id. p. 155. The Christian Religion came not first
into Britain by the Preaching of any Persons sent from Rome, but it was most
likely propagated here by some Apostle of the Eastern or Asiatick Church, Id.
p. 162. The state of it here before the coming in of William the Conqueror, l.
6. p. 116.
Religious Houses, Vid. Monasteries. Resignation of Bishoprics, and why, l. 3.
p. 149. l. 4. p. 224, 232. Restitutus, Bishop of the City of London, is sent
(with others) to the Council of Arles in Gallia, l. 2. p. 88. Revenge, none to
take it for any Injury done him before public Justice be demanded, and the;
Penalty on those that do, l. 4. p. 208. Rhine, fortified with Garrisons by
Constantine, l. 2. p. 102. Richard the Elder, took upon him the Dukedom of
Normandy, and Governed it Two and fifty Years, l. 5. p. 343. His Enmity to, and
War with Pope John, l. 6. p. 24. His Death, and who succeeded him in that
Duchy, Id. p. 26.
Richbert, a Heathen, slays Eorpwald, not long after he had received the
Christian Faith, l. 4. p. 175. Ricsige, succeeded Egbert in the Kingdom of
Northumberland, l. 5. p. 277. His Death, and who his Successor, Id. p. 278.
Ripendune, alias Hrepton Abbey (now Repton) in Derbyshire, Founded by King
Aethelbald, the most famous one of that Age, l. 4. p. 227. l. 5. p. 277. Ripon
in Yorkshire, the Monastery Burnt which had been Built by Bishop Wilfrid, l. 5.
p. 350. Ritheric ap Justin, on the Death of Llewelyn ap Sitsylt, Seizes upon
South Wales, and holds it by Force, l. 6. p. 53. Is slain in Battle by Howel
and Meredyth, with the assistance of the Irish Scots, l. 6. p. 56.
Ritherch and Rees, the Sons of Ritheric ap Justin, their Engagement with
Griffith Prince of Wales, and the Success thereof, l. 6. p. 71. Robber, his
Punishment; who called Robbers, l. 4. p. 209. Robert, Duke of Normandy, sends
Ambassadors to King Cnute to demand that his Nephews (viz. Edward and Alfred,
King Ethelred's Two Sons) might be restored to their Right; and upon his
refusing, he prepares a great Navy to force him to it, and what happened
thereupon, l. 6. p. 54. To whom he recommends his Son William, a Child of Seven
Years Old (afterward King of England) whilst he undertakes his Pilgrimage to
Jerusalem, where he Dies, Ibid. and p. 56.
Robert, a Norman Monk, made Bishop of London by Edward the Confessor, l. 6. p.
73. And upon the Death of Eadsige, made Archbishop of Canterbury: He
immediately went to Rome to obtain his Pall, Id. p. 75. Accuses Queen Emma of
being too Familiar with Alwin, Bishop of Winchester, Id. p. 79. His flight out
of England variously reported, Id. p. 80, 81. Is Banished and Outlawed for
being a Chief Incendiary in the Quarrel between Edward the Confessor and Earl
Godwin, Id. p. 81. But having made his Peace, King Edward sends him Ambassador
to Duke William to acquaint him, That he had designed him his Successor, Id. p.
96, 97
Rodoric, or Rodri, when he began to Reign over the Britains in Wales, l. 4. p.
218. Another Rodoric, one of the Sons of Edwal Voel, Prince of Wales, is slain
by Irishmen, l. 6. p. 6.
Rodri Maur, that is, Rodoric the Great, succeeds his Father Merwyn Urych in
the Kingdom of the Britains, and divides Wales into three Territories. His
Wars, and Death, l. 5. p. 260, 278. His Wife, and Children, and Bequests
amongst them, Id. p. 278, 279. Esteemed by all Writers to be sole King of all
Wales, and in what Right. His Laws, Id. p. 279. The several Ordinances he made
about paying the Ancient Tribute to the King of London, and acknowledging his
Sovereig^ty; as also about who should decide the differences that might arise
between any of his Children, Id. p. 279. l. 6. p. 3.
Rofcaester, or Hrofcester, now Rochester, l. 4. p. 159. l. 5. p. 259. St.
Andrew's Church there built by Ethelbert King of Kent, l. 4. p. 160. Tobias the
Bishop there dies, Id. p. 219. Dun consecrated Bishop here after the Death of
Eadulph, Id. p. 224.
Rollo, the Dane or Norman, wastes Neustria (afterward called Normandy) and
not long after made an entire Conquest of it, reigning there fifty years. His
Dream, l. 5. p. 278. Roman Affairs, when they became desperate in Britain, l.
2. p. 105, 106. Empire, what fell with it in Britain, l. 3. p. 113. Language,
Ga^^, and Gown, came to be in fashion among the Britains in Agricola's time, l.
2. p. 57.
Romans left the ^ritains at their departure Paterns of the Arms and Weapons
they would have them make to defend themselves, l. 2. p. 100. Though they
subdued Britain to their Empire, yet they used their Victory with Moderation,
l. 5. p. 246.
Romanus, Bishop of Rochester, drowned in going on a Message to Rome, l. 4. p.
176. Rome, taken by Alaric King of the Goths, l. 2. p. 104. Romescot, said to
be first given to the Pope by King Ina, but much doubted, l. 4. p. 219. Then by
King Offa, supposed to be confirmed by the great Council's consent, Id. p. 239.
Aethelwulf by his Last Will orders to be sent every year to Rome Three hundred
Mancuses, l. 5. p. 264, 265. Vid. Peter Pence.
Rowena, Hengest's, Daughter, her Arrival into Britain, etc. l. 3. p. 125.
Rufina (Claudia) Wife of Pudens a Senator, famous for her Beauty, in the
Elegant Epigram of Martial: Some assert she was the same St. Paul makes mention
of in his second Epistle to Timothy, l. 2. p. 66. Run, or Reyn, the pretended
Son of Meredyth ap Owen, a vile Scotch Impost^r, that sets up for Prince of
So^th Wale^, but he is soon rou^ed and all his Pa^^y, l. 6. p. 52. Runick
Characters found upon a few Stones in England, l. 3. p. 113. Runkhorne in
Cheshire, anciently called Run-cafan, l. 5. p. 316. Rusticus Decimius, from
Master of his Offices, is advanced by Constans to ^e Prefect, l. 2. p. 103.
Ryal in Rutlandshire, anciently called Rehala, where St. Tibba's ^ody lay
entombed, l. 6. p. 5.
S
Sacrilege, what Punishments to be inflicted on those who commit it, l. 4. p.
156, 163. Salaries, usually allowed to those that h^d been Proconsuls, l. 2. p.
64. Safe of Goods, etc. Vid. Traffic. Sampson; Scholar to Iltutus, and
afterward Archbishop of Dole in Britain, l. 3. p. 149. Sanctuaries, very
ancient in England, l. 4. p. 208, 209. l. 5. p. 296, ^97. Their Design
primitively very good, only to stay there for a time, till the Offender could
agree with his Adv^rsary; l. 5. p. 297. The Punishment of him who (...) any one
that s^es to a Church* The Knig^t Horse no shel^er to him th^^ sheds blo^d, l.
5. p. 347. Granted (...) Westminster ^y Edward ^he Confessor, Charter, and
confirmed by the Great Council, l. 6. p. 94. The Laws concerning them
confirm^d, Id. p. 99.
Sandwic^, anciently c^^led Rutipae, l. ^. p. 90. and Sandwi^, l. 5. p. 261.
The Port given by King Cnute in Christ-Church in Canterbury, with all the
Issues, etc. l. 6. p. 54.
Saragosa, in Spain, anciently called Caesar August^ (a corrupted Compou^d of
th^se two words), destroyed by Ch^rl^s King of the Franks, l. 4. p. 231.
Sardica, the Council there, when called; the Bishops of Britain assisted a^ it,
l. 2. p. 89. Sarum (Old) called in the British times Searebyrig, l. 3. p. 142.
Or Syrbyrig, is burnt by King Sweyn, l. 6. p. 30.
Saturninus (Seius) in Antoninus Pius his time; had the Charge of the Roman
Navy on the British shore, l. 2. p. 68. Saxon Annals, first collected and
writ^en in diverse Monasteries of England, l. 4. p. 151. Saxons (English) at
first so very illiterate, that it is much doubted whether they had the use of
Letters and Writing, among them, or not, l. 3. p. 113. Were sent for to repel
the Scots and Picts, Id. p. 117. Had the Isle of Thanet given them for their
Habitation, Id. p. 118. Came from three valiant Nations of Germany, Id. p. 118,
119, 120, 121. What Country Old Saxony was, Id. p. 118, 119. Great Disputes
about the Name of Saxons, Id. p. 121, 123, 124. Their Religion, and Victory
over the Picts, Id. p. 124, 125. Break League with the Britains, their
Confederates, and overrun almost the whole Island, Id. p. 126. By Vortimer are
forced to return into Germany, and never durst return hither till after his
death, Id. p. 128. Obtain a great Victory over Nazaleod, who was slain in the
Battle, and they remained undisturbed a long time after, l. 3. p. 134. Are
beaten by the Britains at Wodensburg in Wiltshire, Id. p. 148. Were strict
Observers of the Lord's Day, l. 4. p. 209. A great Battle between them and the
Britains, where the King of North Wales was slain, Id. p. 241. The
English-Saxons suffered no Nation to outgo them in Deceit, and all manner of
Wickedness; and therefore they at last met with the Judgments of God in the
Wrath of men, l. 5. p. 247. Commanded to be called Englishmen, by a Law of
King Egbert, Id. p. 255. A great Sea Fight among the Ancient Saxons of Germany,
supposed with the Danes; the former getting the Victory twice, Id. p. 287. Are
driven out of Wales by the Northern Britains into Mercia, Id. p. 317. Utterly
rout and put to flight the Scots, Irish, and Danes, Id. p. 334.
Saxony (Old) called Northalbingia, its Extent and Bounds, l. 3. p. 118.
Saxulph, or Sexwulf, a Monk; to his care is committed the finishing of the
Abbey of Medeshamsted, though Peadda and Oswy had laid the Foundation, and gone
a good way through it, l. 4. p. 186, 187. Is ordained by Archbishop Theodore,
Bishop of the Mercians, in the room of Winfrid, who was deposed, Id. p. 194.
Parted with the Church of Hereford to Putta, Bishop of Rochester, who is said
to be expelled from thence, Id. p. 196.
Scapula. Vid. Ostorius. Sceapige (now the Isle of Sheppy) in Kent, wasted by
the Heathens or Pagans, l. 5. p. 255. The Danes take up their Winter Quarters
there, Id. p. 262.
Sceorstan, (perhaps Shire-stone, for) the place is supposed to be a Stone that
parts now the Four Counties of Oxfordshire, Gloucestershire, Worcestershire,
and Warwickshire, l. 6. p. 45. Sceva, a Roman Soldier, his incredible Valor,
l. 2. p. 29. School, erected for the Instruction of Youth, by King Sigebert, l.
4. p. 179. Supposed to give Being to the University of Cambridge, but without
ground, Id. Ib. Or College of the English Nation (at Rome) burnt, l. 5. p.
251. Whom it were that Alfred obliged to keep their Sons at School until
fifteen years of Age, Id. p. 297.
Scotch Historians, extend the Limits of King Kened's conquering the Picts, too
far, l. 5. p. 259. Scotland, anciently called Albania, North-West to the
Mountains of Braid-Albain, and its Extent, l. 2. p. 83, 98. Said to be
conquered by the Forces of King Edward the Confessor, l. 6. p. 86. The
Low-lands long in the possession of the Kings of England, l. 5. p. 260.
Scots, came into this Nation out of Ireland, l. 1. p. 4, 5. Came into Ireland
in the Fourth Age of the World, Id. p. 7. Scoti, sometimes called Hiberni,
because they first came out of Ireland, l. 2. p. 84. They with the Picts make
cruel Incursions, and lay waste all places near the Borders of Britain, Id. p.
90. The first Roman Author that mentions them, is said to be Ammianus
Marcellinus; but St. Jerome has given a much more Ancient Passage of them,
which he translated out of Porphyry the Greek Philosopher, who wrote an Age
before, Id. p. 91. Are owned by some Antiquaries to be planted in Ireland in
the time of Claudian, Id. p. 94, 95. And Picts continually wasted the Roman
Territories, Id. p. 95. Their Incursions in the beginning of Honorius his
Reign, Id. p. 97, 98. They miserably harassed the Britains, till speedy
Supplies were sent them by the Romans, Id. p. 106. The Scots Conversion to
Christianity, Id. p. 109, 110. Were sometimes used for Irish-men, sometimes for
Native Scots, Id. p. 110. And Picts landing in Britain in shoals, on the Romans
deserting it, l. 3. p. 114. Ever acknowledged Bishops necessary for ordaining
others in the Ministry, l. 3. p. 144. Per Universam Scotiam, that is,
throughout all Ireland, l. 4. p. 166, 189. The Scots in Britain regain their
Liberty, and enjoy it for Six and forty years after, Id. p. 202. Who Inhabited
Britain, practiced no Treachery against the English Nation, when Bid finished
his History, Id. p. 221. Three Scots come from Ireland to King Alfred,
resolving to lead the Life of Pilgrims, l. 5. p. 298. The first time any of
their King's made Submission to the English was in King Edward the Elder's
Reign, l. 5. p. 323, 324. Are miserably routed, with their King Constantine, by
Athelstan and his Army, Id. p. 334, 335, 336. Submit themselves to King Edred,
and their King Swears Fidelity to him, Id. p. 349. Are overcome by Uthred, the
Valiant Son of Waltheof Earl of the Northumbers, and the Reward he received of
King Ethelred for his Bravery, l. 6. p. 27.
Scriptures, the Reading of them Decreed in the Second Council at Cloveshoe to
be more constantly used in Monasteries; and the Creed and Lord's Prayer to be
learned in English, l. 4. p. 225. Sea, Those that have the Command there, may
force a King of England to what terms they please, l. 6. p. 81. Seals, Edward
the Confessor, was the first English King we meet with that affixed any to his
Charters, l. 6. p. 98. The Island of Seals, Vid. Seolefeu.
Sebba, Vid. Siger. Sebbi, King of the East Saxons; becomes a Monk, and soon
after dies, l. 4. p. 210. Sebert, the Son of Richala, King of the East Saxons,
receives Baptism, and causes St. Paul's to be Built at London, l. 4. p. 159.
Founds the Church and Abbey of Westminster, Id. p. 166. His Death, Id. p. 168.
A most Learned and Christian Prince, Id. p. 175.
Secington, (anciently Seccandune) in Warwickshire, l. 4. p. 227. Security to
be given by all Servants for their good Abearing; and all others of ill Fame to
have it given for them, l. 5. p. 346. Every one of Twelve Years of Age to give
it by Oath, and for what, l. 6. p. 58.
Selred, King of the East Saxons, l. 4. p. 214. Surnamed the Good, Reigned
Thirty eight year, and then slain, but is unknown how, or by whom, Id. p. 225.
Sempingham in Lincolnshire, anciently called Sempigaham, l. 5. p. 261. Seneca
(only in his Books a Philosopher) his Extortion on the Britains, l. 2. p. 47.
Seolefeu, that is, The Island of Seals, afterward called Selsey, where Wilfrid
Founded a small Monastery, l. 4. p. 198. Sermon, the first that is to be found
at any King's Coronation, by whom, and to whom made, l. 6. p. 70. Serpents,
strange ones seen in the Province of the South Saxons, l. 4. p. 230. Servants,
none to receive another Man's Man into his Family, without leave first had of
his Master; the Penalty of doing the contrary, l. 5. p. 341. To give Security
for their good Abearing, Id. p. 346. Who Desert their Lord in Battle, what they
Forfeit, and to whom, l. 6. p. 60.
Sester (that is, a Horse-Load) of Wheat, Sold in Hardecnute's time for Fifty
five Pence and more, l. 6. p. 66, 72. Severn, the River, from whence it came to
be so called, l. 1. p. 10. Severus the Emperor, makes War against Pescenius
Niger, and slays him; then sends Messengers to dispatch Albinus, and the effect
thereof, l. 2. p. 72, 73. Puts Laetus Severus to Death for his Treachery, Id.
Ib. Makes an Expedition into Britain, and the issue of it, Id. p. 74, 75. How
he Treats his Son Baffianus that twice attempted to kill him, Id. p. 75, 76.
Makes a Wall cross the Island from Sea to Sea, One hundred thirty two Miles in
length, and from thence he received the Style of Britannicus, Id. p. 76. This
Wall was built in the same place where Adrian's was before, Id. p. 100. His
Death, and Funeral Pile, and Character, Id. p. 77, 78.
Severus (Alexander) succeeds Heliogabolus, having been before declared Caesar
by the Senate; his Actions in this Island, l. 2. p. 80. Is slain by some of his
own Army, Id. Ib.
Severus (Germanus his Scholar) being Ordained Bishop of Triers, preaches the
Gospel to the Germans, l. 3. p. 117. Seward, Abbot of Croyland, conceals
Withlaf King of Mercia, from the Displeasure of King Egbert, in the Cell of the
Holy Virgin Etheldrith, Daughter of King Offa, till a perfect Reconciliation
was made, l. 5. p. 254. Sexburga, Governs the Kingdom of the West Saxons for a
year, as being left to her by King Cenwalch her Husband. Her Character, l. 4.
p. 192. Shaftsbury, first called Paladur, afterward Septonia, by whom Built,
l. 1. p. 10. New built by King Alfred, l. 5. p. 285, 298, 307. Called in Saxon,
Scaeftesbyrig, l. 6. p. 20.
Shaving of Crowns, and about the manner of it, l. 4. p. 216. Sheovesham, or
Secvesham Abbey, Vid. Abingdon. Shepholme, a little Island in the Mouth of
Severne, anciently called Bradanrelic; Florence calls it Reoric, l. 5. p. 319.
Sheriffs, their Antiquity and Appointment by King Alfred, l. 5. p. 291.
Sherwood-Forest, anciently called Walewode, l. 5. p. 321. Ships, a great Tax
raised by Harold, for setting out Sixteen Sail, which highly incensed the minds
of the English, l. 6. p. 65. Sixty two Sail had another Tax of Eight Marks to
be paid the Rowers, Id. p. 66.
Shireburne, anciently called Westwude, l. 4. p. 214. Shiremotes, to be held
Twice every Year, and who to be present thereat, l. 6. p. 13. Shropshire,
anciently called Scrobbesbyrigscire, l. 6. p. 32. Sicga, dies, who killed the
good King Oswald, or Alfwold, (as one Historian says) by his own hands, l. 4.
p. 236, 238. Sigebert, succeeds his Brother Eorpenwald in the Kingdom of the
East Angles, he was Baptized in France, whither he had been Banished; and by
Bishop Foelix his assistance erects a School to Instruct Youth, and two Years
after Resigns his Kingdom to his Cousin Egric, and became a Monk, l. 4. p. 179.
Is forced out of his Monastery by the East Angles, to encourage the Soldiers
against Penda King of the Mercians, where he is killed, Id. p. 181. Is made a
Christian at the persuasion of King Oswy, Id. p. 184. And at last wickedly
Murdered, by whom, and upon what occasion, Id. p. 188, 189.
Sigebert, Cousin to Cuthred, succeeds him in the Kingdom of the West Saxons;
is Deposed by Cynwulf, and the Great Council, for his Cruelty and Injustice,
and at last a certain Hog-herd ran him through, and killed him, l. 4. p. 226.
Sigeferth, a petty King of some Province, makes himself away, and is Buried at
Wilton, l. 6. p. 4. Another of the same Name (a Danish Thane) Treacherously
slain, and his Goods seized on, and his Beautiful Widow secured by King
Ethelred, Id. p. 40. Siger and Sebba, who succeed Swidhelm in the Kingdom of
the East Saxons, their relapse from the Christian Faith into Idolatry, but soon
again they renounced their Apostasy, l. 4. p. 190.
Sigeric, Vid. Syric. Sihtric, a Danish King of Northumberland, is Married to
Edgitha, the Sister of King Athelstan; his professing himself a Christian,
though he relapsed soon after, and Died the next year, l. 5. p. 330. Another of
this Name King of Ireland and the Isles adjacent, Id. p. 334.
Silures, their Complexion Swarthy, and they had Curled Hair like the
Spaniards, l. 1. p. 4. The Inhabitants of the now South Wales, l. 2. p. 42.
Their Name ought wholly to be extinguished, and why, Id. p. 45. Are wasted by
many small Incursions, Id. p. 46.
Simony, the first Example of it in the English Church, l. 4. p. 191. Vid.
Wini. Singin, a Captain over the Worcestershire-men, kills Constantine King of
the Scots, l. 5. p. 335, 336. Sithicundmon, esteemed equal to a Thane, by the
Valuation of his Head, l. 5. p. 342. Slaves, The Common People of England were
not such Slaves in Alfred's time, as some late Writers would fain make them, l.
5. p. 294, 295. Snottingaham, the Town taken, and Commanded to be Repaired and
Garrisoned by King Edward the Elder, l. 5. p. 324. Soldier, the Discovery made
by One, and yet his Fidelity at the same time to a Prince to whom he had
formerly taken a Military Oath, l. 5. p. 335. He that deserts his Lord, or
fellow Soldier, what he Forfeits and to whom, l. 6. p. 60.
Somerton, taken by Ethelbald from the West Saxons, l. 4. p. 221. Was anciently
a great Town and Castle, that gave Name to that Country which is now called
Somersetshire, Id. p. 222.
Southampton, was anciently called Hamtun, l. 5. p. 258. Destroyed by Danish
Pirates, when, l. 6. p. 20.
South Saxons, when this Kingdom began, l. 3. p. 132. Are Converted by the
Preaching of Wilfrid, l. 4. p. 198. Their Province, which had belonged to the
Diocese of Winchester, is made an Episcopal See, Id. p. 214.
South-Shoebury in Essex, anciently called Sceobyrig, where the Danes built a
Castle, l. 5. p. 300. Southumbers, that is, the Mercians, l. 4. p. 210, 212.
South Wales, the Seat of War a long while for the Supremacy between Jevaf and
Jago, the Sons of Edwal Voel, and the Sons of Howel Dha, and the Danes, l. 5.
p. 349, 350. l. 6. p. 6, 7, 16, 20, 21, 22, 23, 26, 27, 53, 64. The Irish-Scots
invade it by the means of Howel and Meredyth, l. 6. p. 56. Is molested by Conan
the Son of Jago, who had fled into Ireland for the safety of his life, Id. p.
70. So infested by the Danish Pirates, that the Seacoasts were almost
deserted, Id. p. 74.
Sparhafock, a Monk of St. Edmundsbury, made Abbot of Abandune; and afterward
Bishop of London, upon the Translation of Robbyrd to the Sea of Canterbury, l.
6. p. 74, 75. But the Archbishop refused to consecrate him (tho he came to him
with the King's Letters and Seal), because the Pope had forbad him. However, he
held his Bishopric, Id. p. 76. Sometime after is deposed from it, Id. p. 78.
Spot Wulfric, a Courtier, builds the Monastery of Burton in Staffordshire,
with his own Paternal Inheritance, and gets King Ethelred to confirm it, l. 6.
p. 31. Stamford, a Castle, commanded by King Edward the Elder to be built on
the South Side of the River Weland, l. 5. p. 323. Standing-Army, no War
possibly to be maintained long either at home or abroad, without one, l. 6. p.
33. Stanmore Battle in Westmorland, between Marius the British King, and the
Caledonians, l. 2. p. 66. Stealing. Vid. Theft. Stephanus, the Pope, succeeds
Leo, and the next year dies, l. 5. p. 251. Another of this name, Abbot of
Mountcassin, is consecrated Pope in the room of Victor, l. 6. p. 87. Deceases
the next year, and who succeeds him, Id. p. 88. Stigand, Cnute's Chaplain, had
the care of the Church of Ashdown (which the King caused to be built there)
committed to him, l. 6. p. 51. Is consecrated Bishop of the East Angles (i. e.
Helmham), Id. p. 71, 73. Receives again his Bishopric, from which it seems by
the Simoniacal Practices of Bishop Grymkitel he had been before deprived, Id.
p. 72. And upon the death of Alfwin, is promoted to the Sea of Winchester, Id.
p. 73. At last is made Archbishop of Canterbury, Id. p. 81. Had the Pall sent
him by Pope Benedict. William of Malmesbury his Character of him. He
consecrates Aegelric a Monk of Christ-Church, Bishop of Chichester, and Syward
the Abbot, Bishop of Rochester, Id. p. 88.
Stilico, Governor to the Emperor Honorius, during his Minority; his Character,
l. 2. p. 97. By a Legion sufficiently furnished with Arms, dispatched to
Britain, delivered the Inhabitants both from spoil and inevitable Captivity,
Id. p. 99, 104, 105. Is killed by the Army, when Bassus and Philippus were
Consuls, Id. p. 104.
Stone in Staffordshire, whence it had its name, l. 4. p. 195. Stonehenge, here
Aurelius Ambrosius was crowned, and not long after buried, l. 3. p. 131. Is
called Mons Ambrosij, said to be the Monument of Ambrosius, and thought by the
latter Antiquaries to be founded by him, Ibid.
Straetcluyd, the Colony erected by the Britains, l. 5. p. 344. Strangers, as
soon as they landed, the Merchants are to declare their number, and bring them
before the King's Officers in Folcmote, l. 5. p. 294. The Law against buying
and receiving Strangers Cattle, Id. p. 346. A Law to harbor them for two
nights, as Guests, but no longer so, l. 6. p. 103.
Strathern, the Scottish Writers will needs have this Province understood by the
word, Jerne, l. 2. p. 98. Streanshale Monastery, founded by Hilda, l. 4. p.
188. Is now Whitby in Yorkshire, Id. p. 189.
Strikers in open Court, before the King's Ealdormen, their Punishment, l. 5.
p. 295. Stufe and Withgar (Nephews to King Cerdic) fight against the Britains,
and put them to flight, l. 3. p. 135. Succession to the Crown, how settled
between the Picts and Scots, l. 1. p. 4, 5. The Britains had no Notion of any
Right the Eldest Brother had to command all the rest, not even after they
became Christians, Id. p. 17.
Suetonius (Paulinus) in his time the Romans received a great Blow in Britain,
and the Account of it, l. 2. p. 46, 47, 48. Afterward he gained a mighty
Victory over Boadicia, and them, Id. p. 49, 50. Carries it too haughtily
toward those that submit, Id. p. 50, 51. Is succeeded by Petronius
Turpilianus, Id. p. 51.
Sunday. Vid. Lord's Day. Supposititious Birth, said to be put upon King Cnute
(viz. the Son of a Shoemaker then newly born) by Aelgiva, one of his Wives, l.
6. p. 61. Suretyship, concerning the Breach of the King's and Archbishops, etc.
what Fine was to be paid upon it by Alfred's Law, l. 5. p. 295. Every one to
find Sureties for his good Behavior, l. 6. p. 14. Every Lord to be Surety for
the appearance of every person in his Family, Id. p. 42. Whosoever refuses to
give it, to be put to death, Id. p. 42, 43. For the Danes that stay in England,
to enjoy in all things perfect Peace, Id. p. 101.
Sutbury in Suffolk, anciently called Southburg, where Bishop Alfwin deceased,
l. 4. p. 242. Swale, a River; but where, is not mentioned, l. 4. p. 174.
Swanawic, now Swanwick in Hampshire, near the place where the Danes lost 120 of
their Ships in a violent Storm, as they were going toward Exmouth, l. 5. p.
278. Swebryht, King of the East Saxons, his Death, l. 4. p. 223. Sweden,
anciently called Scandinovia, l. 1. p. 4. And Gothia, Id. p. 5. Swedes and
Danes, called Normans by the French Historians; an Account of their Religion,
and the Deities they worshipped, l. 5. p. 256. Sweyn, the Son of Harold the
Dane, slays Edwal ap Meyric in Battle, and destroys the Isle of Man: He and
Anlaff besieges London, endeavoring to burn it, but are forced to march off;
the Ravage and Murders they committed in Essex, Kent, and Sussex, etc. l. 6.
p. 25. Ousted his Father both of his Kingdom and Life; was afterward expelled
himself, and wandered up and down without relief, but plagues England after
this all he could, for refusing to receive him, Id. p. 26.
Sweyn, King of Denmark, receiving news of the Massacre of his Countrymen in
England, by the Advice of his Great Council comes with Three hundred Sail of
great Ships, and revenges, this barbarous piece of Treachery, l. 6. p. 30, 31.
His frequent Returns home, and Incursions and Ravages here, Id. p. 32, 37, 38.
His Return into England, and upon what occasion, Id. p. 37. His Decease, and
the Monk's Relation of the Suddenness of it, Id. p. 38, 39, 40.
Sweyn, Eldest Son of King Cnute, he appoints before his death, to be King of
Norway, l. 6. p. 56. Is driven out of his Kingdom by Harold, surnamed Hairfax,
but he recovered it again, Id. p. 74.
Sweyn (Earl) Son of Godwin, goes over to Baldwin Earl of Flanders, and stays
there all Winter, being in disgrace at Court for deflowring an Abbess, l. 6. p.
73, 74. Makes a League with Edward the Confessor, and the King's Promises to
him. How he decoys his Cousin Beorne on Shipboard, and causes him afterward to
be made away, Id. p. 75. Is declared outlawed, in a Great Council held at
London, Id. p. 77. Going from Flanders to Jerusalem barefoot, in Penance for
the Murder of Beorne, in his Return home he dies, Id. p. 82.
Swidhelme, the Son of Sexbald, succeeds Sigebert, and is made a Christian by
Cedda, l. 4. p. 189. Switheard, King of the East Angles, dies, and Elfwold
succeeds him, l. 4. p. 225, 228. Swithred, King of the East Saxons, is
vanquished by King Egbert, and driven out of the Kingdom, which the West Saxon
Kings enjoyed ever after that Expulsion, l. 5. p. 255. St. Swithune, Bishop of
Winchester, his Consecration and Decease; and excellent Character, l. 5. p.
266, 267. Sydeman, Bishop of Devonshire, (that is, Wells) his Death, and
Burial, l. 6. p. 16. Synod, of Augustine, at Augustine's-Ake, on the Confines
of the Wecti, now the Diocese of Worcester, l. 4. p. 160. Of Streanshale, Id.
p. 189. At Hertford, which appointed when Easter should be kept, Id. p. 193. To
be assembled once a year at a place called Cloveshoe, Id. Ib. At Hatfield,
where the Five first General Councils were received and confirmed, Id. p. 199.
Of all the Bishops of Britain, about Bishop Wilfred, where held, and what done,
Id. p. 206, 207, 213. Decree the Province of the South Saxons to be an
Episcopal See, but it did not long continue so, Id. p. 213, 214. Of Cloveshoe,
its Decrees chiefly made in Confirmation of the Charter of King Withred,
concerning free Elections to Monasteries in Kent. A second Synod held there,
and what was done in it, Id. p. 224, 225. At Aclea, where the place was,
uncertain; as also under what King, and what Decrees were made there, l. 4. p.
232, 236. The troublesome one of Calcuithe, where Archbishop Janbryht lost part
of his Province to the Sea of Litchfield, Id. p. 233, l. 5. p. 251. The D^crees
made therein. Two distinct Sessions of it, l. 4. p. 234. At Pinchenhale, now
Finkley, in the Bishopric of Durham, Id. p. 236, 242. Of Frankfort, solemnly
condemns the Worship of Images, Id. p. 237. Called by Ethelheard, Archbishop of
Canterbury, at the command of Pope Leo, and what was confirmed therein. This
was the Great Council of Becanceld, Id. p. 241. The Third Synod at Cloveshoe,
when held, and by whom, Id. p. 243. l. 5. p. 248. Another held there under King
Beornwulf, and Archbishop Wilfred, l. 5. p. 253. The Ecclesiastical Canons that
were passed in the Synod held by King Alfred, Id. p. 296, 297. The Great one
King Edmund held at London, and what was transacted therein, Id. p. 346. A
great one held at Kirtlingtun, but where this was, is uncertain, l. 6. p. 16.
Others at Winchester, Calne, and Ambresbury, about turning out of the Monks,
and restoring the Secular Chanons, Id. p. 16, 17. The Great Synod or Council at
St. Remy, where Pope Leo was present, etc.; and whom Edward the Confessor sent
thither, to be informed what was there decreed touching the Christian Faith,
Id. p. 74. A Great one assembled at Rome, and after that another at Vercelle,
Id. p. 75.
Syric, or Sigeric, consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury, in the room of
Ethelgar deceased, and soon after goes to Rome for his Pall, l. 6. p. 22.
Advises to give the Danes a Tribute, for the great Terror they put the
Inhabitants of the Seacoasts into, Id. p. 23. His Decease, Id. p. 24.
Syward, Abbot of Abingdune, succeeds Aeadsige in the Archbishopric of
Canterbury; by whom consecrated, but soon after deposed for his Ingratitude to
his Predecessor, and at last translated to the Sea of Rochester, l. 6. p. 72.
His Decease, Id. p. 74.
Syward, the Valiant Earl of Northumberland, at Edward the Confessor's Command,
with a powerful Army, and a strong Fleet, goes against Macbeth the Usurper,
into Scotland, to restore Malcolme, the Right Heir, to the Crown, l. 6. p. 85.
Lost his Son in the Engagement, and how bravely he bore it, Id. p. 85, 86. His
Decease, with diverse remarkable Circumstances, Id. p. 86.

T
TAcitus (M. Claudius) elected Emperor against his Will; his Reign, and Death,
l. 2. p. 82. Taliessen, a famous British Bard, whose Verses are preserved to
this day, l. 3. p. 150. Tamworth in Staffordshire, anciently called
Tamaweorthige, l. 5. p. 316. Tatwin, succeeds Bertwald in the Archbishopric of
Canterbury, l. 4. p. 220, 221. His Death, Id. p. 222.
Tavistock-Abbey, founded by Ordgar, Earl of Devonshire (afterward
Father-in-Law to King Edgar) and in less than fifty years burnt down by the
Danes, l. 6. p. 4. Anciently was called Aetesingstoce, Id. p. 26.
Taunton in Somersetshire, called by the Saxons Tengton, l. 6. p. 28. Taxes,
made more easy to the Britains by Agricola, l. 2. p. 56. A great one paid in
Harold's time for the fitting out sixteen sail, and ^very Port was to pay such
a proportion toward it, l. 6. p. 65. Another great one decreed to be paid of
Eight Marks to the Rowers in sixty two sail of Ships; and two other great ones,
viz. of Twenty nine thousand twenty nine pounds for a Military Tax; and after
this, of Eleven thousand forty and eight pounds, for thirty two sail of Ships,
Id. p. 66.
Temples of Idols, ordered not to be pulled down, but new consecrated, l. 4. p.
158. Tenantius. Vid. Theomantius. Testament, Lands bequeathable by men's Last
Wills, before the Conquest, l. 6. p. 60. Testudo, a kind of Arch made with
Shields clapped close to each other, like the back of a Tortoise, from whence
it had its name, l. 2. p. 32. Tetricus, ruled in Gaul and Britain by the Terror
of his Arms, till Domitius Aurelianus reduced, and led him in Triumph to Rome,
l. 2. p. 82. Thaelwalle in Cheshire, anciently Thaelwaele, from whence supposed
to be so called, l. 5. p. 324. Thanet-Island, given to the Saxons for their
habitation, l. 3. p. 118. It lies on the East-part of Kent, l. 4. p. 153. Part
of it given by King Egbert to build a Monastery, Id. p. 193. Commanded to be
laid waste by King Edgar, and why, l. 6. p. 6. Was anciently called
Taenet-Land, Id. p. 20.
Theft, the Punishment of it, l. 4. p. 209. l. 5. p. 346. l. 6. p. 14.
Anciently redeemable by Pecuniary Mulcts, l. 4. p. 209. Alfred's Law about the
quantity of Mulcts appointed for several Thefts, l. 5. p. 293. The Forfeiture
of him that steals any thing out of a Church, Id. p. 297. If a Servant be
accused of it, how he is to be discharged, or else taken into Custody, Id. p.
325. Stealing a second time, what the Punishment thereof, Id. p. 326, 340.
Athelstan's Law against Thieves, Id. p. 339, 340. King Edmund's Law for their
Apprehension; and the first Law whereby Thieves are expressly ordered to be
hanged, Id. p. 346. If a Thief goes out of the Sanctuary, he forfeits the
Privilege, l. 6. p. 99.
Theobald, Ethelfred's Brother, is slain at the Battle of Degstan, l. 4. p.
159. Theodore, Archbishop of Canterbury, is buried in the Church of St. Peter
and St. Paul there, l. 4. p. 162. Another of this name consecrated Archbishop
of Canterbury, at Rome, is sent into Britain, Id. p. 191. Makes a thorough
Visitation of his Province, Id. Ib. Calls a Synod of all the Bishops and Great
Men at Hartford, Id. p. 193. His Death and Burial, Id. p. 205.
Theodoric, the Son of Ida, reigns in Bernicia, l. 3. p. 146. Theodosius, sent
as General by Valentinian, to put a stop to the Incursions on the Britains,
made by several barbarous Nations, l. 2. p. 92. Returns to London victorious,
having recovered the Plunder and Captives, and establishes a firm Peace for a
long time, l. 2. p. 92, 93. A Plot contrived against him by Valentinus of
Pannonia; but he and the Conspirators being seized, are commanded to be put to
death, Id. p. 93. Is received by the Emperor with great Commendations, on his
being recalled to Rome, after he had left Britain in Peace, Id. p. 94.
Theodosius, the Son, created by Gratian, his Partner in the Empire, Id. p. 95.
Undertakes his Quarrel against Maximus the Tyrant, who seizes him and orders
him to be beheaded, Id. p. 96. Restores Valentinian the second to the Empire of
the West, and overcomes Eugenius the Usurper, who was deservedly put to death,
Id. p. 97. Takes the whole Empire to himself both of East and West. His death,
Id. Ib.
Theodwulf, King of Bernicia for one year, and then dies, l. 3. p. 146.
Theomantius, or Tenantius, succeeds Cassibelan, by the general applause of the
people, l. 2. p. 36. In his Reign Octavius obtains the Empire of Rome, Id. Ib.
Toulouse, taken by the Goths, l. 2. p. 104. St. Thomas, called an Indian
Apostle, because he there suffered Martyrdom, l. 5. p. 286. Thunore, a Thane,
cruelly murders the two Sons of Ermenred, l. 4. p. 180, 185. Thurkyll
appointed Earl over East-England by King Cnute, l. 6. p. 50. Is banished by
King Cnute, but the Crime for which is uncertain; though said for being a
principal Promoter of Archbishop Aelfeage's Murder, Id. p. 52.
Thyra, King Aethelred's Daughter, married to Gormun, King of the Danes, whose
Son by her was Sweyn, the Father of King Cnute, l. 5. p. 276. Tiberius,
succeeds Augustus in the Empire, and is given up to Ease and Luxury, which made
him rather have thoughts of contracting than enlarging the Bounds thereof. In
his time the Britains paid their usual Customs and Tolls for those Commodities
they transported to the Romans into Gaul, and what they took in exchange from
them, l. 2. p. 37. Tilabury, now called Tilbury, near the River Thames, l. 4.
p. 184. Tinmouth, anciently called Dunmouth, where the Danes were vanquished,
l. 5. p. 256. Tiowulfingeeaster, a City near the River Trent, but where, is not
known, l. 4. p. 175. Titulus, or Titillus, Son of Uffa, King of the
East Angles, l. 3. p. 145. Tobias, the Bishop, dies at Rochester; a very
Learned man in that Age, l. 4. p. 219. Tocester in Northamptonshire, anciently
called Tofeceaster, l. 5. p. 321, 322. Torswick, anciently Tursige in Lindsey,
part then of the Northumbrian Kingdom, l. 5. p. 277. Tostige, Son of Earl
Godwin, to whom Edward the Confessor gave the Earldom of Northumberland, l. 6.
p. 86. His Earldom depopulated by Malcolme, King of Scots, Id. p. 89. The
Northumbers rise against him, and set him aside, and choose Morchar for their
Earl, Id. p. 90. His Banishment, and what the occasion of it, Id. p. 91, 92.
His Invasion, and endeavors to dethrone his Brother Harold; with the Ravages
he committed up and down the Seacoasts, Id. p. 106. Joins the King of Norway's
Fleet, and lands in Yorkshire with them, but they are both slain by Harold at
Staenford-Bricge, Id. p. 109.
Tower of London, said to be first founded by Belinus, l. 1. p. 13. Tradition,
an uncertain Guide in Matters of Fact, l. 3. p. 114. Traffic, King Edward the
Elder's Law about it, confirming the Fourth Article of the League made between
his Father and Guthrun the Dane, appointing Vouchers to make good the Sale of
any thing, l. 5. p. 284, 325. Atheltan's Law, forbidding any Commutati-of
Goods, unless in the presence of such as are thereby appointed, Id. p. 340, 341.
Trajan, the Emperor, soon reduces the Britains that Revolted against him, l.
2. p. 66. Paved the public ways with Stone, and raised Cause-ways, etc. Id. Ib.
Transmarine-Nations, are the Scots from the North-West, and the Picts from the
North, and why this Name is given to them, l. 2. p. 99. Transportation, a Law
for it as to such and such Criminals, though the King should Pardon them as to
Life and Member, l. 6. p. 102. Traitor, Elfgar was so to the King and the whole
Nation, l. 6. p. 86. Treasure-Trove, all to be the King's, unless found in a
Church, and then too it was the King's if it were Gold; but if Silver, then he
to have one half, and the Church the other, l. 6. p. 101. Trebellius Maximus,
Vid. Maximus. Trekingham, a place so called from Three Danish Kings being
Buried there, l. 5. p. 270. Triades, an Ancient Welsh Chronicle so called,
written near a Thousand Years ago, l. 3. p. 146. Tribute, Caesar appoints how
much should be paid by the Britains to the People of Rome, l. 2. p. 35. It
ceases during the Residence of Kynobelin at Rome, Id. p. 36. Is suspected to be
paid in Kynobelin's time by a Coin of his, Id. p. 37. A great one is imposed
upon North Wales annually by King Athelstan, l. 5. p. 338. War is made upon
North Wales by King Edgar, for non-payment of Tribute from the King of Aberfraw
to the King of London, l. 6. p. 3, 4. Ten thousand pounds decreed to be paid to
the Danes for the Terror they gave the Inhabitants of the Seacoasts, but yet
this did not long satisfy their Covetousness, Id. p. 23. Sixteen thousand
pounds Tribute given them beside their maintenance, Id. p. 25. Another of
Twenty four thousand pound paid them, and provision likewise, Id. p. 29.
Another of Thirty thousand pounds paid them, and to find them Provisions during
their stay, Id. p. 32. And another both of Provisions and Money to make Peace
with them, which they soon after broke, Id. p. 35. Vid. Danegelt.
Triers, The Seat of Maximus his Usurped Empire, l. 2. p. 95. Trinobantes,
submit to Caesar, sending him Forty Hostages, and Corn for his Army, l. 2. p.
34. Moved to Rebel by the Cruelty of the Romans, Id. p. 47, 48.
Triumphal Honors and Ornaments, bestowed on C. Sidius (though he had never
been Consul) for Routing the Britains, l. 2. p. 39. Given to Flavius Vespatian,
and two Sacerdotal Dignities, with the Consulship, and why, Id. p. 41.
Conferre'd on Agricola, By Titus Vespatian, for his great Achievements, Id. p.
57. Conferre'd on Agricola, And by Domitian, with the Honor of a Statue, Id.
p. 63.
Troops, or Companies, by the Saxons called Hlothe, by the Laws of King Ina the
Number that constituted one was above thirty. The Mulcts payable by those that
killed in Troops, and to whom, l. 5. p. 293. Trumbrith, or Trumbert, when
consecrated Bishop of Hagulstade, l. 4. p. 201. Trumwin, consecrated Bishop of
the Picts; this was the Bishopric of Wyterne, called in Latin, Candida Casa,
l. 4. p. 201. Trutulensis, a Port, supposed by Mr. Somner to be Richborough
near Sandwich, l. 2. p. 63. Trials, the Antiquity of them by a Grand Inquest of
more than Twelve men, l. 6. p. 43. Tuda, Bishop of Lindisfarne, dies of the
Plague, and where buried, l. 4. p. 189, 190. Tudric, King of Glamorgan, said to
have exchanged his Crown for a Hermitage, but afterward going out of it
against the Saxons, in the defense of his Son Mouric, he received a mortal
Wound, l. 3. p. 148, 149. Tudwall Gloff, or the Lame; why he was so called, l.
5. p. 317. Turkytel, a Danish Earl, owns King Edward the Elder, for his Lord,
l. 5. p. 319. Goes into France, with King Edward's leave and Convoy, with what
Danes would follow him, Id. p. 320. The Chancellor, his great Valor, and
Slaughter of Constantine and Anlaff's Army, and his narrow Escape from being
killed by them, Id. p. 335, 336. Afterward he was Abbot of the Abbey of
Croyland, Id. p. 336, 349. Sent Ambassador by King Edred to the Northumbers, to
reduce them to their Duty, Id. p. 349. Carries Archbishop Oskytel, his
Kinsman's Body to Bedford, to be buried, l. 6. p. 7. His Death, Id. p. 12.
Turne-Island, formerly called the Isle of Medcant, l. 3. p. 146. Turpilianus
(Petronius) sent in Paulinus Suetonius his room, as being more exorable to the
Britains, l. 2. p. 51. Twelfhind-man, one that is worth Twelve hundred
Shillings of Estate, l. 5. p. 346. Twihind-man, one worth Two hundred Shillings
of Estate; they both to join together to apprehend a Thief, if known where he
is, Id. Ib. Tyrants, said to be justly removed, for being the Occasion of the
Destruction of the Military Forces of their Kingdom, l. 5. p. 253. Tithes, to
be paid according to the Scriptures. The first Decree of any Council in
England, concerning the Payment of them, and that declares them to be of Divine
Right, l. 4. p. 234. Aethelwulfe's famous and solemn Grant of them, which was
the first General Law that ever was made in a Mycel Synod of the whole Kingdom
for their Payment, Id. p. 263. Edgar's Law concerning them and First Fruits, l.
6. p. 13. Edward the Confessor's Laws concerning what things small Tithes shall
be paid out of, Id. p. 100.
Tythings, when Counties were first thus divided by King Alfred, l. 5. p. 291.
Every man of free Condition obliged to enter himself into some Tything, l. 6.
p. 58, 104.

V
VAcancy of the Throne in Edwi's time for above a year, and what Enormities
were committed during that time, l. 5. p. 354. Valentia; who ordered the
Northern Province of Britain to be for the future called Valentia, and why, l.
2. p. 93. In France, defended by Constantine against Honorius, Id. p. 102.
Valentinian, chosen Emperor by the Army at Nice in Bythinia, and not long
after declares Valens his Brother Partner in the Empire, l. 2. p. 91. Is again
restored to the Empire of the West by Theodosius, but held it not long; for he
was strangled by Arbogastes at Vienne in Gallia, Id. p. 97.
Valentinus, plotting with some Soldiers against Theodosius, they were seized
and delivered to Dulcitius, to be put to death, l. 2. p. 93. Valerianus (Pub.
Licinius) Emperor, is made the Footstool of the Tyrant Sapores, King of Persia,
for seven years; then flead alive, and so died, l. 2. p. 81. Valuation. The
Valuation of men's Heads, from the King's, down to the Countreyman's, l. 5. p.
341, 342. Vectius Bolanus, succeeds Trebellius Maximus in the Government of
Britain, l. 2. p. 53. Could not attempt any thing on the Britains, because of
the Factions of the Army, Id. p. 54.
Venedoti, and Daemetae, the Inhabitants of Wales, l. 2. p. 85. l. 3. p. 139.
Venutius, a Prince of the Jugantes, l. 2. p. 45. Is highly provoked by the
Injuries of Queen Cartismandua; his Wife; he takes up Arms against the Romans;
she d^spises him, and embraces an Adulterer, Id. Ib. This War is supposed to
have begun in Nero's time, Id. p. 46. But is carried on against the Romans,
ev^n till, and in the time of tbe Emperor Vitellius, Id. p. 54.
Veranius, wastes the Silures by many small I^cursions; a man of great Vanity
and Ambition, as appears by his Last Will, l. 2. p. 46. Verulam, that is, St.
Albans; the Great Council which was held there, l. 4. p. 239. Vespasian
(Flavius) afterward Emperor, partly under Claudius, partly under Plautius,
fights thirty Battles with the Britains, l. 2. p. 39, 41. Brings two powerful
Nations, and above twenty Towns, with the Isle of Wight, under his subjection,
Id. p. 41. Titus his Son, serving under him as a Tribune, is much renowned for
his Valor, Id. Ib. Succeeds Vitellius, who was deposed about the Tenth Month
of his Reign, Id. p. 54. His Death, when, Id. p. 56.
Vespatian (Titus) succeeds, and rather exceeds than equals his Father in
Valor and Worth, l. 2. p. 56. For the great Achievements of Agricola, he was
fifteen times saluted Imperator, or General; is styled, The Delight of Mankind;
but yet dies, as suspected, by Poison, Id. p. 57. A Cohort of his, having slain
a Centurion and other Soldiers, deserted and went to Sea, turning Pirates where
ever they landed; but at last the Suevians and Frisians took and sold them as
Pirates, Id. p. 59.
Uffa, the Eighth King from Woden, and First of the East Angles, l. 3. p. 149.
Gets himself made sole King, and governs with that Glory, that it is said the
Kings descending from him were called Uffings. How long he reigned, uncertain,
Id. Ib.
Vice-Domini, that is, the Governors of Provinces, divided by King Alfred into
two Offices, viz. Judges and Sheriffs, l. 5. p. 291. Victor, elected Pope in
the room of Leo, that holy Bishop of Rome, l. 6. p. 85. His Decease, and who
succeeded him, Id. p. 87. Victorinus, a Roman Governor in Britain, l. 2. p.
104. Vienne, a City in Dauphine, where Constans was slain, l. 2. p. 103.
Villain, if he wrought on Holidays, he was to satisfy it with his skin, (that
is, by whipping,) or pay his Head-gild, etc. l. 5. p. 285. Villains; great and
prosperous ones often meet with the Punishment they deserve^, as well the
Actors as Contrivers, l. 2. p. 96. Virgilius, the Sco^ish Abbot, his Decease,
l. 5. p. 312. Virgins, Geoffrey of Monmouth's Story of Ursula's being sent over
to Britain, and Eleven thousand Noble Virgins to attend her, besides sixty
thousand of meaner condition; she to be bestowed on Conan, and the rest on the
other Britains, and their End, l. 2. p. 96, 97. Vitalian, the Pope, confirms by
his Bull King Wulfher's Charter to the Abbey of Medeshamsted, l. 4. p. 187.
This Bull is confirmed by Pope Agatho, Id. p. 200.
Ulfkytel, the Ealdorman, his sharp Engagement with the Danes, and the bloody
slaughter on both sides, l. 6. p. 31. University, of Paris, by whose means
erected; Alcuinus an Englishman reading there Logic, Rhetoric, and Astronomy,
l. 4. p. 244. Of Oxford and Cambridge. Vid. their particular Heads.
Unust, King of the Picts. Vid. Eadbert, King of Northumberland. Vortigern, is
chosen King by the Britains, l. 3. p. 116. By the Advice of his Council he sent
for the Heathen Saxons to repel the Scots and Picts, Id. p. 117. Falls
passionately in Love with Rowena, Hengest's daughter, Id. p. 125. Marries her,
and is divorced from his former Wife, Id. p. 126. The story of his taking his
own Daughter to Wife, and having a Son by her, is all unlikely, Id. p. 127,
128. Is deposed, and Vortimer his Son is chosen King by the British Nobles, Id.
p. 128. Is restored; wages War with the Saxons, but by the Treachery of Hengest
is taken Prisoner, and for his Ransom, gives up East-Sex, Middlesex, and
Sussex, Id. p. 129. Uncertain what at last became of him, but was again
deposed, and thought to be burnt in his Castle by his Successor Aurelius
Ambrosius, Id. p. 131.
Vortimer, obtain^ a great Victory over the Saxons, l. 3. p. 128. Drives them
into Germany for all his lif^time, Id. Ib. Dies, supposed by Poison of his
Mother-in-Law Rowena's Procurement, Id. p. 129.
Vortipore, King of that part of South Wales called Demetia, l. 3. p. 139.
Urbgen, or Urien, King of Cumberland, and his Sons, fight with Theodoric and
his Sons, and where, l. 3. p. 146. Urbicus (Lollius) drives back the Brigantes,
draws another Wall beyond that of Hadrian, and keeps out the Incursions of the
Northern Britains, l. 2. p. 68. Urgeney, Bishop of St. David's, is slain by the
Danes, l. 6. p. 27. Urych Merwin, King of the Britains, slain at the Battle of
Ketell, l. 5. p. 260. Uscfrea, a Son of King Edwin's, l. 4. p. 176. Usurers,
not to continue in the Kingdom, but if any were convicted, to forfeit their
Goods, and be looked on as outlawed, l. 6. p. 102. Uther Pendragon, looked on
by the British Antiquaries as a mere imaginary King, l. 3. p. 133. Uthred, his
Bravery against the Scots, and the Reward he met with for it from King
Ethelred; casts off his Wife (but gives her back her Fortune), and marries
another, one Sig^, l. 6. p. 27. Submits, with all his Northumbrian Kingdom, to
King Sweyn, the Dane; and the mischiefs he, his Son, and their Army, did both
there and where ever they went, Id. p. 37, 38. He with Edmund Etheling plunders
all places where ever they come, Id. p. 41. But at last submits to Cnute, and
though he gave Hostages, was soon after slain, and some say by Cnute's Orders,
Id. Ib.
Utrecht, in the Gallick Tongue Trajectum, in the old Language, Wiltaburg, l.
4. p. 212. Vulgar, or Common People; the Care the English-Saxons had of the
Persons and Chastity of their meanest Subjects, l. 5. p. 293, 294.
W
WAda, a Rebel in chief in Northumberland, that leads out the Conspirators to
Battle against King Eardwulf at Billingahoth, near Whalie in Lancashire, l. 4.
p. 241. Wakes, or Parish Feasts, their Antiquity in several parts of England,
l. 6. p. 99. Wales, anciently called Cambria, by some supposed to come from the
King Ina's marrying Gualla, the Daughter of Cadwallader, King of the Britains;
but it is certainly a notorious Falsehood, l. 4. p. 220. Their Chief Lords of
any Country there, called Kings, Id. p. 241. Kings of Cardigan, Divet, and
Powis, died in one year, Id. p. 243. The several Princes of Wales were
perpetually weakening each other with Civil Wars; which the English observing,
at last reduced them all under their Dominion, l. 5. p. 279, 280. Great
Commotions there between Jevaf and Jago, and their Children after them, sev^ral
Countries being thereby spoiled, l. 6. p. 16, 20, 21, 22. Laws concerning the
Inabitants of the Mountains of this Country, Id. p. 44. A great Revolution
happened there from the fickleness of the Nation, Id. p. 64. The last Civil War
or Rebellion there that happened in Edward the Confessor's Reign, Id. p. 85. Is
called Brytland, and subdued by E. Harold and E. Tostige, Id. p. 89.
Wall; That which Severus built from Sea to Sea, 132 miles in length, which
procured him the style of Britannicus, l. 2. p. 76. Is repaired, and fortified
with Castles, etc. by Carausius, Id. p. 84. Built cross the Island between the
two Seas, or Streights, called then Glotta and Bodotria, (now the Friths of
Edinburgh and Dunbritton) with Turf instead of Stone, Id. p. 99, 100. A
Description of the other Wall of Stone, Id. p. 100.
Wall-brook, whence it had its name, l. 2. p. 85. Waltham-Abbey, the Foundation
of it, and the story of the Crucifix brought thither, and the Miracles said to
be effected by it, l. 6. p. 89. King Harold is buried in the Abbey-Church
there, Id. p. 144.
Wall-Town, near the Picts-Wall, anciently called Admurum, l. 4. p. 184.
Wanating, now Wantige in Berkshire, l. 5. p. 261. l. 6. p. 43. Warewell (now
Harwood) Forest, l. 6. p. 10. Warham in Dorfetshire, formerly Werham, a strong
Castle of the West Saxons, is taken and destroyed by the Danes, together with
the Nunnery there, l. 5. p. 278. Warwick, anciently called Caer-Gaurvie,
supposed to be built by Gurgwint, l. 1. p. 13. And Weringwic, l. 5. p. 316. l.
6. p. 41.
Watchet in Somersetshire, anciently called Weced, l. 5. p. 319. And Weedport;
destroyed by the Danes, l. 6. p. 22, 26.
Wax-Tapers, hated by King Ethelred, because of his Mother's unmercifully
beating him with one, and for what reason, l. 6. p. 19. Wectij, or Wiccij, now
Worcester, l. 4. p. 160, 197.230. The same Shire also anciently called Wiccon,
l. 4. p. 242. l. 5. p. 247. Vid. the City and County of Worcester.
Wedesbury in Staffordshire, anciently supposed to be called Wearbyrig, l. 5.
p. 316. Weland River in Northamptonshire, on the side of Rutland, anciently
called Weolade, l. 5. p. 322. Welsh, the Chronicle called Triades, l. 3. p.
140. Manuscript of Britain, the Credit of it arraigned by a late Romish Writer,
l. 4. p. 162. Are forced to quit all the plain Country b^tween Severne and
Wye, and to retire to the Mountains, l. 4. p. 231. Western-Welsh, that is,
Cornish-men, where a great Fleet of Danes landed, l. 5. p. 257. The Welsh
beaten by Igmond the Dane, Id. p. 303. Are forbid to come into England, or the
English to enter Wales, l. 6. p. 44. Raise some Insurrections in Harold's time,
and upon what account, Id. p. 65. A Law that no Welshman should pass over
Offa's Ditch, on pain of death, Id. Ib. And on the Penalty of losing his Right
Hand, Id. p. 115. Vid. Britains. Build a Castle in Herefordshire upon the Lands
of Earl Sweyn, and what ensued thereupon, Id. p. 77.
Wenbury in Devonshire (by the Saxons called Wicganbeorch) a place where Earl
Ceorle with his Forces fights the Pagan Danes, and gets the Victory, l. 5. p.
261. Werfriht, Bishop of Worcester (one very well skilled in the Holy
Scriptures), sent to King Alfred out of Mercia, l. 5. p. 305, 306. West-burgh,
a Monastery in Worcestershire, l. 5. p. 253. West-Chester. Vid. Chester.
Westminster Church and Abbey, founded by King Sebert, Mellitus the Bishop
dedicating it to St. Peter, l. 4. p. 166. But being destroyed by the Danes, it
had ever since lain in Ruins, till Edward the Confessor built it anew, and had
it re-cons^crated, l. 6. p. 93, 94, 95. The Legend of this Church her having
been anciently consecrated by St. Peter, Id. p. 93. Charter of Endowment, and
Privileges of this Church, confirmed by the Great Council. The Greatest and
Noblest of any Foundation in England, Id. p. 94.
West Saxons, when this Kingdom first began, l. 3. p. 133. Were conquered by
Cerdic and his S^ns, Id. Ib. Who first took upon them the Title of the Kings of
the West Saxons, and at last they overcome all the other six Kingdoms, Id. p.
136. They fight with Ivor, and are put to flight, Id. p. 145. Cut off Sebert's
three Sons, who were all Heirs to the East-Saxon Kingdom, l. 4. p. 168, 169.
Their Conversion, by the preaching of Byrinus an Italian, Id. p. 179. Anciently
called Gewisses, Id. Ib. Bishop of the West Saxons, that is, of Dorchester, Id.
p. 203. Their Royal Standard, a Golden Dragon, Id. p. 226. Are forced to
maintain the Danes, and what Money they give them besides, l. 6. p. 25. Submit
to King Cnute, and give him Hostages, and likewise provide Horses for his Army,
Id. p. 41.
Westwude, since called Shireburne, l. 4. p. 214. Whalie, in Lancashire,
anciently called Wealaege, where a bloody Battle was fought, and with whom, l.
4. p. 241. Wheat, at what rate sold in Hardecnute's time. Vid. Sester.
Whipping, a Punishment to be inflicted only on Villains, l. 5. p. 285. Whitby,
in Yorkshire, anciently called Streanshale, l. 4. p. 189. Whitchurch in
Hampshire, anciently called Whitcircan, l. 6. p. 28. Whitsand, an ancient Port,
Five hundred years before Caesar's time, l. 2. p. 31. About the Fourteenth
Century was made unserviceable, being stopped up by the Sands, Id. Ib.
Wibbendon, now Wimbledon in Surrey, l. 3. p. 145. Wiccon, now Worcestershire,
l. 4. p. 242. l. 5. p. 247. Widow, to remain so a Twelvemonth by King Cnute's
Law; and if she marry within that time, to lose her Dower, and all that her
Husband left her, l. 6. p. 60. Wigbryht, Bishop of the West Saxons, goes to
Rome about the Affairs of the English Church, l. 5. p. 251. Wigheard, the
Presbyter, sent to Rome, there to be made Archbishop of Canterbury, but died
almost as soon as he arrived there, l. 4. p. 195, 205. Wight, is brought under
subjection by Titus Vespatian, l. 2. p. 41. The Isle, anciently called Vecta,
l. 2. p. 84. Is conquered by Cerdic and Cynric, who b^stow it on Stufe and
Withgar, Nephews to the former, l. 3. p. 138. Is taken by Wulfher, King of
Mercia, l. 4. p. 188. Received at last the Christian Faith, though upon hard
terms, l. 4. p. 203. The Danes quartering here, made it their old Sanctuary, l.
6. p. 27, 31.
Wightred, confirms all the Privileges of the Monks of the Church of Canterbury
by a Charter under his Hand, l. 4. p. 163. Wigmore in Herefordshire, anciently
called Wigingamere, l. 5. p. 321. Wilbrode, an English Priest, converts several
Nations in Germany to the Christian Faith; is ordained by the Pope Archbishop
of the Frisons, l. 4. p. 211. His Episcopal See was the famous Castle,
anciently called Wiltaburg, now Utrecht, Id. p. 211, 212.
Wilfreda, a Nun taken out of a Cloister at Wilton, by King Edgar, by whom he
had a Beautiful Daughter, that was afterward Abbess of the said Monastery, l.
6. p. 3, 12. St. Wilfrid, Bishop of York, when he caused the Rule of St.
Benedict to be observed in England, l. 4. p. 167, 168. Wilfrid, Abbot, chosen
unanimously by Oswi's Great Council, Bishop of Lindisfarne, and how he came to
lose it, upon his refusing Consecration here at home, l. 4. p. 190. Is sent
into France to be ordained, Id. p. 192. A great Contention between King Egfrid
and him, so that he was expelled his Bishopric, Id. p. 196. He appeals to
Rome, and what the success thereof, Id. p. 197. By his preaching converts the
South Saxons, Id. p. 198. Receives of Ceadwallo as much Land in the Isle of
Wight, as maintained 300 Families, Id. p. 203. Is recalled home by King Alfred,
and restored in a General Synod to his Sees of York and Hagulstad, Id. p. 204,
213. Is a second time expelled by Alfred, and why, Id. p. 205, 206. Three times
deprived, the first time unjustly; but whether so the other two, is doubtful.
His Decease at Undale, and Burial at Ripon in Yorkshire, Id. p. 214, 215. His
Character. Is the first Bishop in that Age that ever used Silver Plate, Id. p.
215. An Account of his building the Monastery of Ripon, l. 5. p. 350. The
second Bishop of York of that name, his Death, l. 4. p. 224.
Wilfrid, or Wulfred, consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury, in the room of
Ethelward deceased; and the next year received his Pall, l. 5. p. 248. Goes to
Rome about the Affairs of the British Church, Id. p. 251. His Death, and the
different Account who succeeded him, Id. p. 255.
William, the Son of Robert Duke of Normandy, by Harlotte, his Concubine,
(afterward King of England); to whom recommended, whilst his Father made his
Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, l. 6. p. 54. When he began to reign in Normandy, Id.
p. 56. The great Battle at Vallesdune in Normandy upon his account, Id. p. 74.
His coming over into England, and noble Reception here; with Edward's promising
to make him his Successor, Id. p. 79. Takes the City of Man, l. 6. p. 89. Sets
Harold at liberty, who was detained by the Earl of Ponthieu; contracts
Friendship with, and betroths his Daughter to him, Id. p. 92. Harold promises
(upon King Edward's death) to deliver up Dover-Castle to him, and procure his
Succession to the Throne, Id. Ib. Could have no pretense to the Crown of
England by Blood, Id. p. 96, 97. His great Preparations to invade England, and
the reasons why; first acquainting the Pope with his Design, and receiving his
Answer; with the account of his craving Aid of his People, and Neighbor
Princes, Id. p. 107, 108, 109. His coming over, and landing at Pevensey, and
Preparations for a Battle; but first sends a Monk to Harold with Proposals,
which he by no means would hearken to, Id. p. 110, 111. The manner how he drew
up his Army, in order to fight him, Id. p. 112. By seeming to retreat, he gets
the Victory; wherein Harold is slain, Id. p. 212, 213. Having got Harold's
Standard, which was curiously embroidered, he sends it to the Pope, Id. p. 113.
Sends Harold's Body, as soon as it was found, to his Mother, Id. p. 114.
Wills (Last) Vid. Testament. Wilton, near Salisbury, supposed anciently to be
Ellendune, where a great Battle was fought between Egbert King of the
West Saxons, and Beornwulf King of the Mercians, the latter being beaten, l. 5.
p. 253. Both Town and County take their names from the River Willie, Id. p. 276.
Wiltshire-men gain the Victory over the Worcestershire-men, or Mercians, l. 5.
p. 247. Wina. Vid. Wini. Winandermere, anciently called Wonwaldermere, a
Village by the great Pool in Lancashire, l. 4. p. 236. Winchelcomb, a Monastery
in Gloucestershire for Three hundred Benedictine Monks, founded by Kenwulf King
of the Mercians, and its Consecration, l. 4. p. 242. l. 5. p. 251. Kenelm, his
Son, martyred by his Sist^r Quendride; after his Body was found, was brought
hither, and buried in the Church of this Abbey, l. 5. p. 252.
Winchester, anciently called Caer-Guent, by whom it is first pretended to be
built, l. 1. p. 10. The Old Church there commanded to be built by King Cenwall,
l. 4. p. 181. The Bishopric is resigned by Daniel, by reason of his Old Age,
to Hunferth, Id. p. 224. Is taken from King Ethelbert by the Danes, l. 5. p.
266. The Consecration of the New Monastery here, l. 5. p. 312. A Great Council
held here, concerning the turning out of the Monks, l. 6. p. 16.
Winchester-Measure, to be the Standard, l. 6. p. 14. Winfrid, Bishop of the
Mercians, deposed by Archbishop Theodore, and why, l. 4. p. 194. Wini, or Wina,
made Bishop of the West Saxons; and the Province being divided into two
Diocesses, he is settled in that of Winchester, l. 4. p. 182, 188. But being
driven from his See by King Kenwalch, goes and purchases the Sea of London of
King Wulfher. The First Example of Simony here, Id. p. 191.
Wipha, or Wippa, the Son of Cryda, succeeded his Father in the Kingdom of the
Mercians, l. 3. p. 148. Wir, a River in the Bishopric of Durham, l. 4. p. 194.
Wiregild, is a satisfaction made by a Murderer to the Friends of the Party
slain, l. 4. p. 211. The Valuation of a Man's Head, l. 5. p. 341.
Wiremouth, a Monastery built by Abbot Benedict, l. 4. p. 194, 205. Witchcraft;
King Athelstan's Law against it, l. 5. p. 340. Wite, a Fine or Mulct to be paid
by the English and Danes, upon the violating of their Laws, l. 5. p. 284, 285.
Witena-Gemote, their large Authority, not only in assenting to new Laws, but in
their Judicial Power in giving Judgments upon all Suits or Complaints brought
before them, as well in Appeals between Subject and Subject, as when the King
himself was a Party, l. 6. p. 83. It outlaws and convicts Earl Aelfgar, upon a
Charge of being a Traitor to the King and the whole Nation, Id. p. 86.
Witerne, a Bishopri^k, called in Latin, Candida Casa, belonging to the Kingdom
of Northumberland, l. 4. p. 201, 231. St. Withburg, her Body found at Durham,
entire and incorrupt, after she had been Fifty five years buried, l. 4. p. 242.
Withgar, Nephew to King Cerdick, with Stufe, put the Britains to flight, l. 3.
p. 135. His Death, and Burial at Withgarasbyrig, supposed Caresbrook-Castle in
the Isle of Wight, Id. p. 138. His Constitutions of the Church confirmed in the
Synod called by Archbishop Ethelheard, l. 4. p. 241. He and Stufe, first
Princes of the Isle of Wight, l. 5. p. 261.
Withlaff, an Ealdorman of Mercia, created King by the Consent of all the
People, l. 5. p. 253. Reigns Thirteen Years as Tributary to King Egbert, Id. p.
254. Is expelled, and upon what account; where he lay concealed till he
procured Egbert's Reconciliation; upon which he was restored, paying a Yearly
Tribute, Ib. Ib. The Privileges and Concessions of this King to the Monastery
of Croyland, confirmed in a General Council held at London, and who were
present in it, Id. p. 257. His Decease, and who succeeded him, Id. p. 259.
Withred, by his Piety and Industry freed Kent from Foreign Invasions, l. 4. p.
205. King of Kent, elected by the General Consent of his Subjects, and held it
thirty years, l. 4. p. 209. Holds a great Council at Becancelde, and who were
there present, and what was transacted, Id. p. 210. Another at Berkhamsted in
Kent, and what Laws were made there, Id. p. 211. His Death. His Children, and
Character, Id. p. 218.
Wittereden, signifies a certain Fine or Forfeiture, l. 5. p. 262. Woden, King
of a City in Asia, called Asgard, dies in Swedeland; counted a great Magician,
and after his Death is worshipped as a God, l. 3. p. 121. Brought back the
Goths out of Asia into Europe, Ib. and p. 122.
Wodensbeorge, now Wodensburg, a little Village in Wiltshire, l. 3. p. 148.
Wolves; a Tribute of so many Wolves Heads to be paid to King Edgar, instead of
that in Money, for his concluding a Peace with North Wales, l. 6. p. 4.
Woodstock in Mercia, where King Ethelred made several Excellent Laws with the
Assistance of his Great Council, l. 6. p. 42, 43. Worcester, anciently was
called Vectij, l. 4. p. 160, 230. Bofel, being ordained Bishop of the Wi^ij,
had his See here, Id. p. 199, 200. The First Bishop hereof was Talfride, a
Learned Monk, but he died before Ordination, Id. p. 200. Thi^ Church was first
founded by Athelred King of the Mercians, Id. Ib. The City plundered and burnt,
and the Country wasted by Hardecnute, and why, l. 6. p. 67. The Shire,
anciently called Wicon, l. 4. p. 242. l. 5. p. 247.
Wounds and Maims, King Alfred's Law concerning them, l. 5. p. 296. Wulfheard,
an Ealdorman, at Southampton fights 33 Danish Pirates, and makes there a
terrible slaughter of them, Id. p 258. Wulfhelme, consecrated Archbishop of
Canterbury, l. 5. p. 329. His Decease, and who succeeds him, Id. p. 333.
Wulfher, succeeds his Brother Peadda, and greatly enriches the Abbey of
Medeshamsted with Lands and other Endowments, l. 4. p. 186, 187. Is proclaimed
King by the Ealdormen of Mercia; takes the Isle of Wight, with the Country of
the Meanvari, Id. p. 188. Fights with Aescwin at Bedanheafde, Id. p. 195.
Concerning his Baptism; and the ridiculous story of his murdering his two Sons
with his own hands, as also his Death, Id. Ib.
Wulfher, Archbishop of York, is expelled by the Northumbers, but restored to
it the next year after, l. 5. p. 277. His Decease, Id. p. 299.
Wulfnoth, Father of Earl Godwin, being impeached before King Ethelred, and
escaping, and running away with some of his Ships, turns Pyrate, and does a
world of mischief, by burning the rest of the Fleet that had escaped Shipwreck,
l. 6. p. 33. Wulfric. Vid. Spot. Wulstan, is wickedly slain by his Cousin
Berthferth, Son of Bertwulf King of Mercia, and his Body buried at the
Monastery of Rependun in Derbyshire, l. 5. p. 261. Wulstan, Archbishop of York,
is made a close Prisoner at Witharbyrig, by King Edred, and for what; but
because of his Function he is afterward pardoned, and restored, l. 5. p. 350.
His Decease, Id. p. 355.
Wulstan, Archbishop of York, consecrates Ethelnoth (a Monk and Dean of
Canterbury) Bishop, l. 6. p. 51. His Decease, and who succeeds him, Id. p. 53.

Y
YArrow, near the River Tine, anciently called Girwy, l. 4. p. 194. Year; the
English-Saxon Year began not at Lady Day, as ours does now, but at
New-Year's-tide, l. 6. p. 93, 94. Year and Day allowed for discovery of
Murder, l. 6. p. 101. York, anciently called Caer-brank, by whom built, l. 1.
p. 10. And Eoferwick, l. 5. p. 324. l. 6. p. 41. Augustine had Power from Pope
Gregory to ordain whom he pleased Bishop there, and he to ordain Twelve Bishops
more, and enjoy the Honor of a Metropolitan, l. 4. p. 158. Paulinus, the first
Bishop of York, Id. p. 173. The City and Monastery of this place burnt, Id. p.
224. A Noble Library built there by Bishop Egbert, accounted one of the best in
Europe, Id. p. 229. Is taken by Reginald the Danish King of Northumberland, l.
5. p. 324. Stormed, plundered, and many of the Inhabitants slain by the King of
Norway, l. 6. p. 109.
Yric, appointed by King Cnute to be Earl of the Northumbers, l. 6. p. 41, 59.
Yrling the Dane, and Lothen, with Twenty five Ships land at Sandwic, and commit
great havoc, l. 6. p. 74. Ywrch (Edwal) the Son of Cadwallader, l. 3. p. 145.
Z
ZEal; the Intemperate Zeal of some Churchmen, how not to be imitated, l. 2. p.
96. The Founding of a Monastery accounted a sufficient Atonement to God for
whatsoever Injustices Princes committed; so great was the Superstitious Zeal of
Ancient Times, l. 4. p. 242. Upon Oswy's Repentance for his Treacherous
Procurement of King Oswin's Death, he builds a Monastery on the Place where the
Murder was committed, to expiate the Crime, and to pray as well for his own
Soul, as for the King's he had caused to be killed, l. 4. p. 183. Vid. Egbert,
Id. p. 192, 193.

The most considerable ERRATA. The smaller the Reader may easily amend.
Book 1. PAge 7. line 21. for his r. certain of his. id. l. 27 for transactions
r. translations. p. 13. l. 32. dele now. p. 14. l. 38. after longer r. able. p.
17. l. 13. for the r. any. ib. for originals r. words.

Book 2. P. 21. in marg. for Lib. r. Diod. p. 22. l. 16. for then r. as. p. 24.
l. 8. for at r. yet. id. l 48. put the Semicolon after it. p. 30. l. 20. d. of.
p. 46. in marg. after History r. Lib. 3. id. in marg. after Annal d. LXIII. p.
54 l. 9. d. partly. p. 56. l. 14. for and that r. at an. p. 60. l. 26. after
Tributes r. they used. p 63. l 7. for some r. sometimes. p 64. l. 49. for who
wanted r. the wonted. id. l. 52. for bought r. sought. p. 66. l. 13. for found
r. famed. p. 7^. l. 9. r. Choir. p. 72. l. 48. for charged r. changed. p. 75.
l. 2. after all r. things. ib. for having r. leaving. p. 79. l. 21. for when he
r. having. id. l. penult. for and r. he then. ib. after Army make a Full Point.
id. l. ult. for other r. (as many of his Successors) within a Parenthesis. p.
83. l. 6. r. Vopiscus. p. 86. l. 30. for wrote r. wrought. p. 87. l. 5. r.
Constantius. id l. 13. d. Augustus. id. l. 14. after declared r. Augustus. id.
l. 26. after out r. of. p. 88. l 1. for Mercurius r. Maxentius. id. l. 32. for
114. r. 314. p. 89. l. 34. d. and. id. l. 50. r. Ariminum. p. 93. l. 33. r.
Dulcitius. p. 95. l. 4. after former r. of that name. p. 96 l. 14. r.
Priscillian. p. 97. l. 30. r. Honorius. p. 98. l. 37. r. Veremundus. p. 100. l.
15. for long so r. so long p. 104. l. 22. after for r. as. ib. for proved for
r. observed. p. 106. l. 33. r. 435*

Book 3. P. 115. l. 45. for by r. the. p. 118. l. 15. for 149 r. 449. id. l.
45. for Else r. Albis p. 119. l. 20. r. Krantzius. p. 122. l. 44. for
Ranulphus r. Angrimus Jonas. p. 123 l. 20. for names other r. other names p.
124. l. 33. for latter r former. p. 128. l. 19. for him r. them. p. 133. l. 45.
for 500 r 504. p. 137. l. 27. for Thom. Radburne r. and others. p. 138. l. 41.
r. Camalan. p. 141. l. 6. put a Semicolon after one. id. in marg. for Anno
DLXIV. r. DXLIV. p. 142. in marg. for DLXVII. r. DXLVII. p. 152. l. 30. for
England r. Britain.

Book 4. P. 158 l. 13. for sixty r. six hundred and one. p. 159 l. 48. after
Sebert, d. also baptized Ethelbert. p. 161 l. 13. d. as they relate. id. l. 38.
for but r. then. p 163. l 28. for Seal r. Hand. p 167. l. 26. for denied r.
much questioned. p 169. l. 3. for them r. him p. 180. l. 37. for one r. this.
p. 191. l. 7. for Monastery r. Mortality. p. 193. l. 27. for January r. March.
p. 199. l. 15. for Seat r. See at. p. 204. l. penult. r. Cadwallo. p. 205. l
41. for he again r. Benedict. p. 211. l. 50. r. 696. p. 219. l. 17. d. by. p.
220* in Marg. after cap. r. 35. f. 148. p. 223. l. 23. for 31. r. 21. id. l.
36. for Leycester r. Chester. p 229. l. 6. for Death r. Resignation. p. 231. l.
37. for flight r. fight. p. 240. l. 36. after Northumbers r. had the year
before. id. l. 39. r. Cobre. p. 241. l. 4. for Bishop r. Dr. p. 242. l. 29. for
Rog. Hoveden r. Simeon of Durham. ib. r. Osbald.

Book 5. P. 250. l. 22. for 40 r. 4. p. 255 l. 49. for thousand r. hundred. p.
258. l. 8. for was not Son but Brother to, r. was Son, not Brother to. p. 265
l. 43. for Ethelred r. Ethelbert, in Capital Letters. p. 266. l. 45. d. all. p.
272. l. 21. for Britains r. Danes. p. 277. l. 19. for Bertulph r. Burhed. p.
278. l. 21. for him r. them. p. 279. l. 26. after his r. third. p. 281. l. 47.
for Hubblestones r. Hubbestow. p. 286. l. 21. d. and says for. p. 289. l 29. d.
though. p. 298. l. 7. for Menia r. Mercia. p. 300. l. 4. for then r. though.
id. l. 5. for sallied r. went. ib. d. of their Camp p. 305. l. 46. d. not only.
p. 306. l. 2. after Asser d. the Parenth. r himself id. l. 44. r. Brocmail. p.
312. l. 27. for some r. new. p 324. l. 25. for that r. Derby. id. l. 26. for
Derby r. that shire. p. 343. l. 11. for them r. him. p. 344. l. 7. d. for this,
r. the next.

Book 6. This Book being printed at another Press, the Title was forgot to be
altered like the rest; therefore in Page 1. in the Title, d. Britain now called
r. England; and so also in the Titles of all the rest of the Pages. P. 3. l.
15. for who r. for he. p. 4. l. 7. d. for that Tribute, r. in lieu thereof. p.
24. l. 50. after Normandy r. and King Ethelred. p. 26. l. 22. for whither r.
either. p. 29. l. 29. for to manage r. who managed. p. 39. l. 36. for then r.
there. p. 56. l. 16. d. after. p 72. l. 15. for consecrated r. designed. p. 89.
l. 10. for chief Standard Bearer r. Marshall. p. 96. l. penult. for some years
r. the year. p 97. l. 9. for suspicious r. certain. p. 110. l. 30. for Kings r.
Dukes. p. 113. l. 26. d. them. ib. for not to shoot r. not to be shot. p. 116.
l. 20. for Ages r. Years.

Appendix to the former Addenda.
SOme things of moment having been casually omitted, or mistaken, I thought
good to insert them here.

The Years of our Lord left out in the Margin by the Oversight of the Printers,
and not perceived till the Work was finished.

P. 132. l 32. in margin add Anno. Dom. CCCCLXXXVIII. p. 174. l. 15. in marg.
add Anno Dom. DCXXVIII.

P. 80. l. 16. after Macrinus, add within a Parenthesis (being slain by the
Army, as was also his Predecessor.) p. 110. l 28. after Notes, r. of the
Learned Dr. Gale. p 138. l. 42. after absence, add but was here also slain: And
yet another Ancient Welsh. Chronicle makes King Arthur to have died at
Glastenbury of the Wounds he received in that Battle. p. 179. l. 39. after
Episcopal See, add, whom Pope Honorius sent into England, to preach the Gospel
to the East Angles p. 181 l. 4. after Victory, add, But he was some years after
esteemed a Saint and Martyr for the Christian Religion Oswin his Brother
succeeded him, and according to the Saxon Annals reigned 30 years. p. 185. l.
45. after Winved, add, Anna was avenged. p. 193. l. 26. after Easter add [day],
and after fourteenth add [day of the]: These words not being Bid 's, are to be
added to explain his meaning. p. 195. l. 22. The Account of St. Erkenwald being
repeated in the next Page, may be here struck out. And p 196. l. 16. after
according to, d. Bid, and read it thus, According to Mat. Westminster (forbid does not give us the time) Archbishop Theodore, etc. consecrated Erkenwald
(younger Son to Anna King of the East Angles) Bishop, etc. p. 225. l. 45.
over against these words, the City of Beban, add in ^he margin, now called
Bamburgh Castle in Northumberland. p. 232 l. 12. over against Soccabyrig, add
in the margin, now called Secburne, in the Bishopric of Durham. p. 241. l 9.
after buried r. thus, and another Eanbald was consecrated in his stead. Also
the same year Bishop Ceolwulf died. And then d the same words in that line. p.
262. l 28. after Dignity, add, Though I conceive the truth of the story was,
That this anointing amounted to no more than the Chrism administered by the Pope
at this young Prince's Confirmation; which by the Monkish Writers of those
times is magnified into a Royal Unction. p. 311. l. 2 after Eadred, add,
Vice-King or Alderman of, etc. p. 315. l. 24. after St. Oswaid, add within a
Parenthesis, (once King of Northumberland.) p. 317. l. 44. after
Northumberland, add* Yet that the Britains of Cumberland were, notwithstanding
this Relation, many years after still remaining in that Country; as you may
find in the next Book, under Anno Dom 945.

Book VI. p. 12 l 9 after Charter, add, commonly called Oswald's Law, from St.
Oswald the Bishop, who is supposed to have procured it. ib. in the margin,
over against the word Charter, add, Vid. Sir H. Spelman's Councils, Vol. 1.
Anno Dom. 964. It is also found to be enrolled (by Inspeximus) in the Tower.
Vid. Chart 9. Edw. 3. n. 49. Chart. 4. Edw. 4. n. 4. p. 14 l. 31. after to
pass, add, This King is also mentioned by William of Malmesbury to have made a
Law for restraining excessive drinking, by which it was ordained, That no man,
under a great Penalty, should drink at one draught below certain Pins which
were ordered to be fixed on purpose on the inside of the Cups or Goblets. p.
25. l 48. after Country, add, Norway, of which (as John of Wallingford informs
us) he was then King. p. 45. l. 40. after Almer d joined, r. both which had
then privately combined with, and assisted the Danes underhand.


