TWO LETTERS, Concerning the HOLY TRINITY; Reconciling together in some measure
the Semi-Arian and the Trinitarian Systems, concerning Christ's Divinity; and
Inquiring, Whether the Term Persons, speaking of God, should be Imposed in Acts
of Church Communion?
To be offered to the Consideration of the Learned, in order to their giving
their Opinion and Reasons concerning the things herein mentioned.
The First LETTER; being a Preparatory of the Matter, more fully treated of in
the Second.
***

I Consume my Spirits daily, in studying more and more the Doctrine of the
Trinity, and cannot cease that Study, for fear I should be wanting to my Duty
on the one Hand or the other. But after all, I can find no Rest, but in the
seeming Generality of the Expressions of Scripture. I believe there may be more
implied in those Expressions, or they may import otherwise, then all Men are
aware of. But then, the Scripture being so Mysterious and Obscure about this
Point, does it not seem to be to the intent, to try the best Industry and
Search of every one in particular, and our Moderation in so intricate and
difficult a Matter, and so to lead and oblige us to bear with one another in
different Sentiments herein, uniting in the Scripture-Generality, no Man being
to judge for another? The Ancients, so far as I can perceive, seem very much
Divided and Uncertain in their Judgment about this Obscure Subject. By the
Expressions of the Primitive Doctors that began to Platonize among Christians,
it seems that they inclined most to Semi-Arianism, as I also in some measure
do, mollifying the Arian System, as I think is the true Import of it,
rationally understood.

I seek only Counsel and Instruction, and desire to be truly Humble and
Moderate as I ought to be, and pray God I may actually discharge my whole Duty.
I believe, that the Godhead is as intimately United with Christ as possible,
and that not only the Divine Power continually assists him, so that he disposes
of it as a Man disposes of his Arms or Hands, (which is merely by Desiring or
Willing,) but also that the Divine Wisdom constantly illuminates and conducts
his Soul, as our Soul does our Body, insomuch that he is thereby enabled to
represent God at the Head of the Universe. And I do not see what more than this
can be understood by the Union of the Divine with Christ's Human Nature.
Wherefore, by this Consideration, the Semi-Arian and Trinitarian Systems seem
herein to be nearly reconciled together.

By the Holy Ghost, or Holy Spirit, I understand the Divine and Sanctifying
Inspiration, and the Miraculous (or Wonder-working) Divine Power, communicated
in some measure to some Men, according to the good Pleasure of God, together
with the concurring Ministry of some Angel, as seems to be inferred from
several Places of Scripture, particularly, Luke 1, 35. 1 Timothy 5, 21. Hebr. 1,
7, compared with Acts 2, 3, 4. Hebr. 1, 14, compared with John, 16, 13. Acts 8,
26, 29, 39.

I believe then, that there is in God, the Divine Mind, the Divine Wisdom, and
the Divine Power. Mr. Calvin asserted, that it was sufficient to acknowledge
these Divine Properties, and that it was not necessary to insist on the term
Persons. ( Instit. Cap. 6. Sect. 25. p. 179. Genev. 1550.) St. Austin owns it
to be very improper. ( De Trin. L. 5, C. 9.) St. Jerome declared, he could not
use it. (Epist ad Papam Damas.) I am of the same Opinion. I have prepared a
Second Letter, humbly to represent my Reasons for it. If I mistake in my
Sentiment, I hope I am but of those Weak in the Faith, who may be received, and
whom God will receive. I conclude, most humbly beseeching you to compassionate
me, and to grant me your Prayers, being, etc.

The Second Letter.
***

THIS Controversy seems exceeding intricate and difficult, after the maturest
and carefullest Consideration of it. But then, seeing the Scripture expresses
it self so obscurely and in so general terms concerning that Subject, it seems
that, as was intimated in the former Letter, it is to the intent to try our
Moderation, as well as every ones best Industry in particular, and that we
should not be too Decisive and Imposing, and should not condemn, but should
bear with one another herein, and should unite and agree in the seeming
Generality of the Expressions of Scripture, considering that sincere Persons
may mistake about so obscure a Point, and considering that a hearty Love of God
and of Christ cannot but be acceptable to them, that the main things are
secured when the Expressions of Scripture are adhered to in this Matter, that
it will in all probability suffice to have a fuller Knowledge of it after this
Life, that in the mean time we are not to judge for one another, and that after
all there is not probably so much Difference as has been imagined between the
contending Parties. There would have been no Disunion, if Christians had
seriously made those reflections, and had contented themselves with this
scriptural and general Profession, that the Word is God, that the Holy Spirit
or Inspiration and Power of God is God, that these three, the Father, the Word,
and the Spirit are one, and that there is but one God. There may undoubtedly,
as I said, be more implied in these Expressions, or they may import otherwise,
than some Men, or all Men, are aware of. Howbeit, the Scripture being thus
general, seems to require indispensibly no more than this general
Acknowledgement. And therefore Protestants, particularly owning that they are
not to judge for one another, can justly require no more for Terms of Union.
And then all Christians, that are sincere, cannot but be safe; for, sincerely
believing the Scripture, as Mr. Chillingworth somewhere observes, they believe
implicitly even those very Truths and Senses which perhaps they are somewhat
short in.

For my part, God is Witness I consider this Subject to the best of my Power,
and act and proceed sincerely herein, howsoever I may sometimes differ from
former Sentiments, and be sometimes perplexed in my Thoughts. But after the
fullest consideration, it seems to me, it is not impossible that the Arian or
Socinian Systems be true, and yet not impossible but that that System also be
true, which by the Word and Holy Spirit understands God himself, or the Acts
and Properties of the Father, (though indeed it seems very improper to say, God
the Wisdom, and God the Power.)

Incontestably there is in God, as was said, a Divine Mind, a Divine Wisdom,
and a Divine Will or Power. Nevertheless, even though by the Word in the
beginning of St. John's Gospel should be understood the Divine Reason or
Wisdom, produced forth or shown in the Old and New Creation, (there said
therefore, by a Figure, to be Incarnate, that is, most intimately to dwell with
and assist the Human Spirit of that Man who is the chiefest of God's
Messengers;) it hinders not, but that at the same time by the Word may be meant
the Soul of the Messiah, which (for the reasons usually alleged for that part
of the Arian Sentiment) it is credible was the first Creature, and which was
God, insomuch as this Spirit not only was the Firstborn and Heir of all the
Creation, and was designed the Chief of all Creatures, but also was so filled
with the Divine Wisdom, and assisted with the Divine Power, that the Godhead
was from the beginning as intimately united with this Holy Soul as possible,
which it was not with any other, in which Sense, among others, (as upon the
account of his being the Creature the most like to God, as also by reason of
his singular partaking of the Divine Sovereignty and Authority,) this Word, or
Word bearer, may be called God's only Son. And, as I take it, there can be
meant no more by the Hypostatick Union.

Now, seeing the Arians hold that Christ was Instrumental in Creating or
Ordering of the World, and the Socinians say he is Deus factus, insomuch that,
as both Parties own, he can act in all things as God, govern the World, raise
the Dead, judge all Men, and do whatsoever the Father can do; they must
necessarily be understood to suppose such a Communication as I have specified
of the Divine Nature to the Spirit of Christ, whereby the Fullness of the
Godhead so dwells in and conducts and assists him, and acts by him, that what
God does is reckoned to be done by Christ, being done by the Divine Virtue,
both, dwelling in him, and disposed of by him according to his Desire. What
Christ does in the discharge of his Office may be imputed to God assisting him
and dwelling in him; In like manner, what is most properly the Work of God may
be ascribed to Christ, procuring it to be done, by his Application to the
Godhead dwelling in him.

Considering then as exactly as I can what can be meant by the Hypostatical
Union of the Divine with Christ's Human Nature, though the term, Hypostatick
Union, be not scriptural, nor strictly proper, it seems not impossible in a
sufficient measure to come to a right understanding in that Matter; seeing all
Parties acknowledge, and the Scripture teaches, the Fullness of the Godhead
dwells in the Man Christ Jesus, so that he is assisted and conducted thereby,
(as the Human Body is by the Human Soul,) and by that means Christ is in God
and God in Christ, who sees Christ sees God, all that is God's is Christ's, and
he can do all that God does, and God is in him to receive our Homages through his
Mediation, and, when in that manner Christ is worshipped, God, who is thus
intimately united to him, is worshipped, Christ incontestably being to be
adored or reverenced, according to his most high Station and Dignity, to the
Glory of the Father, being enabled to be a fit Object of our Service, or of our
Submission as well as Veneration, by the Divine Wisdom and Power inhabiting in
him, and by the Supreme Authority and Honor which it has pleased God to
communicate to him, and invest him with, appointing him to represent God, and
making him most intimately partaker of the Divine Nature, so that in adoring
Christ there is no Idolatry, as in the Invocation of Saints, who have received
from God neither that Dignity nor Power that Christ has, God having put his
Name most eminently in him. Yet the Nature of the Thing, as well as the
Practice of Scripture, shows it is necessary we then should direct our Prayers
and Worship ultimately to God in Christ, when properly Religious Prayers and
Divine Worship.

Thus Christ is the Man Jesus, anointed with the Spirit or Inspiration and
Power of God, assisted and conducted by the Divine Wisdom, and intimately
united to the Godhead, and therefore in that sense he is truly said to be God,
which, as far as I can understand, as I said, is all that can be meant by the
Hypostatick Union, and, so, at the bottom, there need be no Difference about
that Point, but all Parties in this manner may agree about it, though properly
the Title, Son, or the Name, Jesus Christ, denotes the Man, in whom the Godhead
dwells and with whom the Godhead is as much united as possible, (as is observed
by Grotius, in his Annotations, on Matthew. 1, 16, and Col. 1, 16,) tho the Man
properly be not the Godhead it self, no more than the Body is the Soul, and tho
this Man be properly God, or a God, in an inferior sense, in as much as, as he
represents God, so he is the Sovereign of the Universe under God; ( John 10,
35;) so that properly the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ is the only true God,
(1 Cor. 8, 6. John, 17, 3. Ephesians. 4, 6,) and it is He, who by his Divine Wisdom
is said to dwell in our Savior, ( John, 14, 10.) which In-dwelling therefore
of the Godhead in the Man Jesus Christ I take to be what may be meant by the
term, the Hypostatick Union.

But after all the consideration I am capable of, I cannot find that the term,
that there are three Persons in God, can be in any measure justifiable. For
there is no reason, why the Divine Wisdom and Power should be looked upon as
distinct Persons from the Father, (the Father, as we have seen, being said to
dwell thereby in Christ,) any more than there is, that a Man's Reason and Will,
or that his right Hand and left Hand, should be said to be distinct Persons
from him.

A Person is something intelligent, subsisting of it self. But whatsoever is in
God, whether Wisdom or Power, cannot subsist from or without the Divine Mind.
All things in God avowedly are inseparable from one another, and therefore it
must be owned no one of them distinctly can subsist of it self, it being
absolutely necessary for all of them to subsist together, and in particular the
Divine Power and Wisdom necessarily subsisting in the Divine Mind. They are, as
in an Human Spirit, Properties and Acts or Powers of the Mind, and not Persons,
(though Personal Acts may be ascribed to them, by a Figure common in all
Languages, and particularly in the Style of Scripture, Prove. 20.1. Prove. 30,
16. John, 3, 8. Prove. 9.1. Ps. 119, 24)

A Single Personal Pronoun is always used in Scripture, in speaking of God. And
therefore God is to be held one Person, and not three Persons.

The Apostle St. Paul says, that what may be known of God, is discernible by
the Light of Nature, ( Romans 1, 19.) But certainly the Light of Nature teaches
not, that God is three Persons, but one, who is All-wise and Powerful.

A Divine Person must comprise all Divine Perfections. For it must be
All-Perfect; otherwise it were not God, so as to include, as it is said each
Person does, the whole Divine Nature and Essence: For God is All-Perfect. Now
one such Person must be All-Sufficient. Consequently others cannot be
Necessary. There cannot, therefore, be any other, or any more than one, Person
in God. For all that is in God is Necessary.

Moreover, to suppose three All-Sufficient or All-Perfect Persons, implies
three Gods; for every All-Perfect Person, subsisting of its self, must have in
it self whatsoever is necessary to the constituting of a true, entire and
distinct God: The asserting therefore three distinct Divine Persons, is to
assert so many Gods. And, so, it is very important, for the Honor of
Christianity and all the Concerns of Religion, to be freed from that
Scholastic term, which sets up Polytheism, disguises the most excellent
Revelation, destroys the Purity and Simplicity of the Gospel, and appears
contradictory and impossible.

If the Son were a Divine Person as the Father, this Contradiction would
follow, that the Divine Essence were both Begotten, and Unbegotten; for each
Person is said to be the same Essence together with a peculiar Relation. A
Relation alone is not said to be a Person, but a Relation with the Essence.
Therefore the Essence with a peculiar Relation must be Unbegotten, and the same
Essence with another Relation must be Begotten.

The Scripture says, ( Mark 13, 32,) the Son knew not something that God knew,
(the Fullness of the Godhead imparting its influences to him at one time more
than at another, as the Soul does to the Body, insomuch that Christ grew in
Knowledge, and not communicating it is Nature to the Human Spirit in which it
dwells, so as to make it cease to be a Creature or a Finite Being.) Now, not
only there are not two Sons in Christ, but it is not rational, nor the Style of
any Language, to deny simply, or in general terms, of a Being, what is true of
any Part of him. Therefore, denying that the Son knew what God knew, it appears
that by the Son the Scripture does not understand the Divine Nature, but the
Human; (though, by a Figure, possibly, by the Son we may mean that Influence of
the Divine Wisdom and Power, which is communicated to, and dwells in, the Son,
the Man Christ.) This Argument is illustrated, in the 1st. Book of Crell's
Treatise, Touching one God, the Father, Sect. 2, Chap. 9.

It is said, that the Father only knew of that Day, ( Matthew. 24, 36.) Therefore
the Father only is the God, who thus dwells by his Wisdom in the Soul of Jesus,
so as to be intimately united therewith, as was said. This is confirmed by
Crell's observations (in the first Chapter of his aforesaid Book) on John, 17,
3. And in many other Places the Scripture is express, that the Father is the
only Person who is God, in the true or proper Sense of that word, 1 Cor. 8, 6.
Ephesians. 4, 6. etc.

Thus, and it seems thus only, the Divine Unity is preserved and established.
And if so, the Scholastic Terms should not be imposed. There is a small Octavo
on that Subject, entitled, Apologia pro Irenico Magno, which I wish were
considered, and answered if answerable; the said Octavo and its Arguments being
proposed as intended, to know the Reasons of others on this Subject.

By the Holy Spirit, it seems the Scripture understands the Divine Inspiration,
or Miraculous Power, (as was intimated in the First Letter,) commonly joined
with or annexed to and communicated by the Elect Angels, (1 Timothy 5, 21,)
particularly the Seven Archangels, ( Revel. 1, 4,) the First whereof
undoubtedly is the Chief of the Angels, not personally united with the Divine
Power, or God, (for he does not represent God at the Head of the Universe,)
but, as an inferior Officer, acting in concurrence with the Divine Power.
This, as was shown, seems to be deducible from several Texts of Scripture: And
so the Holy Spirit is both the Divine Power, and the Angels whom God employs.
God is pleased to work with them, and to have them work with him. Therefore God
employing them in his Works, and particularly in the Service of the Church,
they are subject to it is Head, the Governor of the World, for whom all the
Parts of the Universe, and all Things whether in Heaven or Earth, were created
to the Glory of God, being disposed of by our Lord Jesus Christ in the best
Order, which is most agreeable to God.

God speaks by his Word, (or Word-bearer, the Firstborn, who is as it were the
Mouth of God, or his Speaker,) and the Angels obey; and the Divine Power
co-operates, and concurs with them. God in the beginning showed the Son what
was to be done. And the Son showed it to the Chief of the Angels, when they
were created and, with the concurrence of the Word, appointed to their several
Stations. God did work before the Son. And the Son did work like him, being
enabled by the Father, taught by the Divine Wisdom, and seconded by the Angels,
when created, but assisted by infinite Power. But the Work is ascribed to the
Sovereign and the First Actor under him, as the taking of a Town is ascribed to
the General, and to the Prince by whose Authority he acts* This System seems to
account for those Places of Scripture, which import, that Christ created or
disposed all things together with God, that the Son can do nothing of himself,
but that what he sees the Father do, he does the like, (the Son seeing,
thereby, what he is to desire of the Divine Power, as Grotius notes, on John 5,
19, 20, 21.) and that Christ is the Word of God, and that he is a God, that the
Angels are Ministering Spirits, etc.

Till his Incarnation, the Word, or aforesaid Word-bearer, was as a Son in his
Minority, in his Father's House. Then a Son little differs from the Servants,
though he is the Heir; he is then under probation for the Inheritance. In his
Pilgrimage on Earth, he was in a State of greater Humiliation. At his Ascension
and Exaltation, he was then properly and most eminently associated to the
Empire of the Universe. This is properly God the Son, or the Man Christ Jesus
exalted, and in his Human Nature made the King of Kings under God; in which
sense, in the Scripture-stile, he may be said to have created, or disposed and
modelled, all things in Heaven and Earth, as Grotius shows, in his Annotations,
on Col. 1, 16, and he may, as such a Man, much more be said to be God, than the
Bread of the Eucharist is said to be his Body.

These things not only appear in a great measure conceivable and intelligible,
rational and free from intolerable difficulties, and in short accountable and
maintainable; but they seem perfectly agreeable to the Holy Scripture. The
Primitive Antiquity, as I said, seems very much divided and uncertain about
this most obscure Subject, concerning which it was not impossible to mistake,
considering the great Generality and the mysterious and obscure Manner in which
it pleased the Holy Inspiration of God to dictate it to the Sacred Writers, and
considering the Philosophy that than prevailed. (Howbeit, even by the Notions
of Irenaeus, Justin Martyr, Origin, and all the Doctors that began so early in
some measure to platonize, it seems that they were then properly Semi-Arians,
and therefore rather Unitarians than otherwise: And, so, the Error of either
side could not then be great.) But there is no Antiquity and Authority like
that of the Scripture. And it seems, that this kind of Arian or Semi-Arian
System, which I have described in these two Letters, is the most agreeable to
it.

If I err in my Sentiment, I said, I hope I am but of those Weak in the Faith,
who may be received, and whom God will receive; for I am heartily desirous to
know his Will, and the Truth, to follow it, and have fervently prayed him to
show it me, so far at least as it is necessary to to be known. And this
Unitarian System little differs from the Trinitarian.

It seems indeed strange, to address distinct Prayers to the Divine Power. The
Scripture does it not. It seems in a manner as harsh, as to represent it as a
distinct Deity; and it seems to do it, in making of it a Divine Person. And
though the Man Christ Jesus may be invocated, (by Wishes, when absent, we find he
is invocated in Scripture,) as Mediator between God and Man and as united to
the Godhead; yet as a distinct supremely Divine Person, is, I think, no where
expressly taught in Scripture, nor necessarily deducible from any Argument. It
seems Christ now is sufficiently invocated here by us, when, both, we are
denominated by him, and he is so called and relied upon in our Prayers, that
our Petitions are put up to God in his Name, and that we therein offer up his
Sacrifice to God, and plead his Merits and Intercession. This is actually to
call upon his Name in Prayer, as is observed in the Brief History of the
Unitarians, on Acts, 9, 14, and 21.

As St. Jerome rejected and protested against the term, Persons, and St. Austin
owned it to be improper, and Mr. Calvin opined it sufficed to say, Properties;
Dr. Sherlock (Page 7th of his Book, which is entitled, The present State of
the Socinian Controversy) observes, that the Truth does not depend upon the use
of this, and other the like Scholastic terms; for, he owns, the true Faith was
before them. Why should they then be imposed?

By the second and third Persons, may those partial Considerations of the
Divine Mind be understood, the Divine Wisdom, and Power or Inspiration? There
would then be no Difference in the Doctrine; for all do acknowledge these
things to be in God. But for the Term, it cannot be warrantable, to impose the
calling Wisdom and Power, Persons, for the reasons aforesaid. And, on the other
hand, when God is worshipped, can we then be wanting in our Worship of what is
supremely adorable? That cannot be imagined.

In sum. The term, Persons, is not in Scripture, in speaking of the Divine
Nature. The Texts alleged for it, or for the sense and import of that term,
are very rationally susceptible of another signification. Nevertheless, the
Divine Mind, Wisdom, and Power, are owned to be in God, and to be God, or
eternal, infinite, all-perfect; ('It Is granted, all that is in God is reducible
to these three, Divine Intellect or Mind, Wisdom, and Power; the Divine Will
being implied in the Divine Power, or the Power in the Will, and the Divine
Wisdom comprehending the Divine Goodness and Justice) But then the Divine Mind
is most properly the Divine Essence, and the Divine Wisdom and Power are
incontestably Divine Properties. ('It Is from Plato's School, that Christians
learned to make Persons of them.) And it seems manifestly, that the Doctrine of
three Persons in one God is encumbred with unavoidable Contradictions. What
must I do? I cannot think otherwise of that term, nor of the Nicene and
Athanasian Creeds, which use it, or imply it.

I most humbly beseech You, for God's sake, to compassionate me, if I seem to
mistake in my thoughts concerning the scholastic terms. May these things be so
considered and illustrated, that the Truth may be made to appear most
conspicuous, to all that are sincere! I humbly beg your Prayers, and am, etc.

P. S.
If by the Word, and the Spirit should seem to be understood some things, in
the Divine Nature, somewhat analogous to Persons; yet, first of all, it seems,
at least, they must be not only inferior to the Father, but as it were some
Portion (as Grotius notes, on John 1, 2,) or but some Beams, of his Person, (in
some measure, as are to a Man his right Hand and left Hand,) insomuch that the
Father communicates of his Perfections to them but so far as he pleases. For
the Scripture, as we have seen, ( John 17, 3. 1 Cor. 8, 6, etc) represents the
Father not only as the Superior, but as the whole Godhead; all that Christ and
the Holy Spirit do, is ascribed to the Father, as the Chief and Primary Cause,
working in and by them; Christ says, that the Father who dwells in him does the
Works, that the Son can do nothing of himself, that the Son knew not when was
to be the Day of Judgment, that the Spirit not only is sent but is taught and
commissionated what to do and say; and if the Practice of Scripture and the
Texts to that purpose be exactly weighed, it seems that Christians are not
directed to address their Prayers to the Son or the Spirit, but to the Father,
or God in general terms. (For when in a Vision Christ is both seen and heard
speak since his Exaltation, that is a particular case; there being no doubt,
but that not only he is then to be personally honored, but may then certainly
be applied to, though not as a distinct and second Divine Person, yet as the
Mediator between God and Men, and as the Viceroy of the Universe, assisted by
the Godhead, dwelling in him, as was said.) It should then be observed, Reason
and Scripture plainly show us, that the Divine Mind is endued with infinite
Wisdom and Power, as being the natural and necessary Perfections and Properties
of the Divine Mind it self. But, that the Divine Wisdom and Power are real and
distinct Persons, that particular Prayers should be addressed distinctly to the
Divine Mind, distinctly to the Divine Wisdom, and distinctly to the Divine
Power, and that the Deity consists of several real Things, or real Portions,
whereof the one has excellencies above the other, seems unaccountable to the
most sedate Reason, and appears not expressly specified in the Word of God. Now
it seems that from this consideration, (all along enforced or made way for in
these Two Letters,) these two Inferences do necessarily follow.

First, We should, then, ordinarily, and in common Assemblies, content our
selves to direct our Prayers to the Father, or God in general terms, as the
greatest number of the reformed Churches do: (these, incontestably, would be
the safest Measures, in so intricate a Matter; it being certain that when God
is worshipped, all is adored that is supremely adorable:) and we should content
our selves with the Apostles Creed, the Expressions whereof are as general as
those of Scripture, whereas Human Terms, more decisive, may be erroneous, and
may cause just scruples in so abstruse a subject.

Secondly, there is, then, truly no such great Difference between the
Trinitarians and the Unitarians, but that the Terms of Church Communion may and
should thus be made so general as to comprehend them. For the Unitarians will
unanimously acknowledge, that there is in God a Divine Mind endued with Wisdom
and Power; that the Wisdom, whereby the World was contrived and redeemed, is
communicated to our Savior, from the beginning, as intimately as it is
possible to be communicated, though he receives larger influences of it
especially since his Ascension and Exaltation; (Dr. Sherlock, in his last Book,
entitled, The Proof of our Savior's Divinity explained, etc. P. 211, owns
this to be the whole meaning of what is called the Hypostatick Union or
Incarnation of the Divinity with Christ's Human Nature;) that by this Divine
Wisdom God dwells in Christ, and is most intimately united with him; that
Christ is to be honored, as thus dignified; that the Godhead, which dwells in
Christ, is to be adored with supreme Worship; and that God has given to Christ
the Disposition of the Divine Power and Inspiration, at his Desire, without
measure, or in the largest measure possible and necessary. ( Grotius, on John,
3, 34.) Now, as was said, it seems, this Divine Mind, Wisdom, and Power, is all
that the Trinitarians can mean by their term, three Persons. (The Scripture, as
was observed, has not that term, three Persons in God: And it is certainly
sufficient to keep to the Scripture terms, especially for a Means of Church
Union.) On the other hand, the Trinitarians generally own, that one Divine
Person, and especially the Father, comprehends the Godhead; (as the Divine Mind
cannot but be considered as being joined with and inseparable from the whole
Divine Nature, as a Man's Head acting is the Man himself acting;) that
therefore when God, or the Father, is worshipped, the whole Godhead actually is
thereby necessarily worshipped; that the Man Christ is not so God, as if the
Manhood were changed into God, or ceased to be a Creature; that the Man Christ,
being still a Creature, tho one as much dignified as possible, is to be
honored, in the manner that the Unitarians hold, as a Creature, as highly
dignified as possible; and that Christ being to be honored to the Glory of the
Father, all the Honor to be paid him is to tend ultimately to God, even as the
Unitarians assert.

It seems that if these Considerations were sufficiently weighed, even the
Agreement between the Trinitarians and Unitarians would appear to be so great,
as to justify the Terms of Church Communion pleaded for here, as in the
Apologia pro Irenico Magno. But (I appeal to God to testify it) I desire above
all things to be certainly informed, and directed in the Truth; and therefore
if the Arguments and Reasonings either here or in that Book are in any measure
defective and erroneous, I do most heartily wish that it may be shown in the
Spirit of Christianity. And if it may be shown, the Subject does well deserve
that pains, and it is to be hoped some Men may be found to be employed in that
Work. But if the Notion of the Generality of Scripture, in this most intricate
and abstruse Subject, be the true Standard of Union; then, as was said, Public
Prayers should be directed to the Father, or God in general terms, and we
should have no other Creed but that of the Apostles. The Unitarian, even the
Socinian, System seems sufficiently Orthodox, and most Safe, as I have
represented it, and there seems to be nothing decisively express in Scripture
against it, but many things seem very much to conduce to confirm Vnitarianism.
Moderation therefore seems here to be absolutely necessary. And that is all,
that is desired. For then Christians would not judge one another any more, nor
set stumbling blocks in one another's way. And it seems, this Moderation cannot
here be reasonably denied. For (I cannot but repeat it) the least that can be
said is, first, on the one hand, that this is a most difficult Matter, and the
human Decisions and uncertain and most probably unscriptural Determinations in
Public Injunctions may be most unjust, dangerous and pernicious; and,
secondly, on the other, that the Unitarians honor the Man Jesus Christ, and
worship the Godhead dwelling in the Man Jesus Christ, even as much as the
Trinitarians can desire, and no otherwise. But, by the Human Terms and
Magisterial Determinations, (which, both, assert three Divine Persons, and make
the Equality of the Son and Spirit with the Father to be an indispensibly
Necessary Point of Faith,) sincere and pious Souls, for whom Christ died, may
be driven out of the Communion of the Church, or destroyed by Doubts and Fears
and Scruples. The Protestant Principles, which imply that there is no living
Magisterial Judge of Controversies and that all are to prove all things and
judge for themselves, seem to require a greater Moderation and Generality in
Terms of Church Communion, with respect to so very abstruse and intricate
Matters.

I find that a mighty stress is laid, on this consideration, that in the second
and third Centuries, and almost ever since, the greatest Number of Christians
seem to have been of a like Sentiment with the present Trinitarians. But it
seems this Argument should not be thought absolutely infallible, for these
reasons, which the Unitarians allege, and which seem very considerable.

I. Men, being apt to take wrong Measures, and often too presumptuous, might
soon deviate from the truth; as appeared by experience, when the Generation
next after Joshua departed from the Law of Moses, Judge. 2, 10, 11. All at once,
ten of the twelve Tribes of Israel irrecoverably revolted from the Institution
of God, 1 Kings, 12, 28, And at the same time, as at other diverse times, all or
the greatest part of their Brethren did evil likewise in the sight of the Lord,
1 Kings, 14, 22. So fickle then and weak are Men, that no stress is to be laid
on their Practice; but our recourse must be to the Law which is the Testimony,
( Isa. 8, 20.) Therefore the Unitarian Arguments, and especially those taken
from Scripture, are still at this day to carry it, if they be solid; for there
is no Prescription against the Truth.

II. A thousand years in the sight of God are as one Day, 2 Petr. 3, 8. And all
Nations before him are as nothing, Isa. 40, 17. Yet a remnant shall be saved,
Romans 9, 27. The little Flock need not fear, Luke 12, 32. Tho reduced as low, as
in Elias his Days, 1 Kings, 19, 10. The Gates of Hell, the Strength of Death
and the Grave, or the Destruction of the Faithful, shall not finally so
prevail, as wholly and for ever to extirpate the Necessary Truth off of the
face of the Earth, Matthew. 16, 18. Therefore a time may yet com, when the Earth
shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea, Isa.
11, 9.

III. It appears, that from the beginning there were great Numbers of
Unitarians, that there have been Unitarians all along, and that many of them
were the most learned of their time. Who, for instance, more learned than
Theodotian, Symmachus, Paulus Samosatenus, Lucianus, and Origin, Arius, and
Eusebius, for these last as Arians or Semi-Arians may as well as the former be
reck'ned Unitarians? Even from the 28th Chapter of the 5th Book of Eusebius his
Ecclesiastical History it appears, that at least a great Number of the
Primitive Bishops and Churches were Unitarians Justin Martyr owns Unitarians
for his Christian Brethren, Colloq. cum Tryphon. Jud. P. 207. But, by a
Quotation in the aforesaid Chapter of Eusebius, it appears the Unitarians
pretended they were all along in the first Century the greatest Number, and had
the Succession of Bishops in their Sentiment in the most considerable Places
even till Popes Victor and Zepherin, at the end of the second Century; which
does not seem to be there disproved, as it might then have been if it had not
been true. Origin owns, the Jewish Christians were generally Unitarians, Contr.
Cells. L. 2. P. 56. It appears, that Theodoret does the same, Haeret. Fab. L. 2.
C. 3. For the Jewish Christians especially were called Nazarens as well as
Ebionites, as appears, Acts, 24, 5. Epiphan. Haeres. Naz. C. 1; Augustine. de
Haeres. C. 9, 10.; St. Jerome. Epist. ad August. Thus it is owned, the Ebionites
and Nazarens were no contemptible Unitarians; and they were thus nick-nam'd
first by the unbelieving Jews, and in like manner probably by the Heathens, and
afterward by the platonizing Christians. A few years after the Council of
Nice, the greatest part of Christians were Unitarians. In fine, there have
always been some Unitarian Christians in Asia; and there are many Churches of
them to this day, in the Dominions of the Pagan and Mohammedan Princes, and even
in Muscovy, as well as in Transylvania, in Hungary, Solavonia, and Illyricum.

IV. It is certain, that all the Doctors, that in the greatest part of the
second Century were proselyted from Heathenism, and that became the great
ringleaders, were wholly devoted to, not to say infatuated with, Plato's
Philosophy. Even the Popish Critics complain of it, Huet. Origenian. L. 2. C.
2. And even some of them do insinuate (what indeed cannot be doubted of) that
upon that account the Writings of the Primitive Unitarians were destroyed by
the Trinitarians, Vales. in Eusebius. L. 5. C. 11. Now all the unscriptural Terms,
which are used concerning the Trinity and which have caused all the Division,
being found in the Platonic Philosophers, and so many of the Primitive
Christians being avowedly Platonists, it cannot be questioned or wondered from
whence those Terms were brought in, or which way came the alteration of
Doctrine.

V. It cannot be denied, but that about and since the Council of Nice, the
greatest Violences have been constantly used, to suppress the Unitarians. It is
not strange therefore, if they have been driven out of many Places, where the
Governors persisted to persecute them. Thus Protestants have been extirpated
out of Spain, Bohemia, and in a great measure out of France.

VI. It seems incontestable, that the Primitive Trinitarians, or those commonly
held such, differed from those of the Council of Nice and their Followers, and
that these as well as the former differ from the present Scholasticks. For the
present Scholasticks assert, that there is but one Divine Spirit, and that the
Son and Holy Ghost are eternal and necessary Persons, equal to the Father. The
Nicene in their Creed say, that the Son is God of God, which implies distinct
God of distinct God, or a distinct God, which title they give not to the
Spirit. Gregory Nazianzen says, that many good Catholics in his time would
have been scandalized, if in the religious Assemblies the Holy Spirit had
openly been said to be God, Orat. 20. The Great St. Basil says, that God is not
one in Number, but only in Nature; (horrid Polytheism, perfect Heathenism, and
too palpable a Demonstration of the Mischief of Platonism, and of the then
prodigious Alteration of the true Doctrine!) and with the current of the
Doctors of those times he represents the three Persons as being as distinct
Beings as three Men, 141 Epist. ad Caesariens. Irenaeus teaches, that the
Father is greater than the Son, Advers. Haeres. L. 2. C, 49, and that besides
the Father and the Son no other is of his own Person Lord or God, L. 3. C. 9.
Justin Martyr, who owns that he and at least many Christians in the second
Century adored and worshipped the Prophetic Spirit and the Host of the other
good Angels together with God and his Son, ( Apol. 2. P. 43,) affirms, that the
Son had not a necessary Being, but was voluntarily begotten of the Father, that
he is inferior to him, ministering to the Will of the Father, ( Ibid. P. 221.)
that the unbegotten God, or the Father, does not descend or ascend from any
place, neither is moved, seeing he cannot be contained in any place, but that
this might be said from the beginning of the World of the Son, who, sais he, by
the Father's Will is a God, and in the beginning before the Creation of the
World was generated of the Father, Ibid. P. 221, and 280. Accordingly,
Tertullian holds, that there was a time when the Son was not, Advers. Hermogen.
C. 3. The Council which magisterially condemned the Doctrine professed by
Paulus Samosatenus and his Party, at Antioch, at the same time decred that the
Son is not of the same Essence with the Father, as is even noted by Dalaeus, in
his Treatise De usu Patrum, Lib. 1. Cap. 5. Thus by these very instances it
appears, that the Trinitarians have so much varied, that a constant Tradition
cannot be pleaded.

For these several reasons it seems, that too great a stress should not be laid
on the pretended (Ecclesiastical) Antiquity of this Sentiment, but, on the
contrary, that the chiefest Inquiry should be, What appears most decisive in
Scripture and Reason concerning the Points themselves that are controverted,
and concerning which it seems that the least that can be granted is that with
relation to them we should keep in Terms of Union to the Generality of the
Terms of Scripture? If that should prove a Mistake, yet it is very fit that so
important a Matter should be most carefully considered and debated, that the
Error may be evinced and confuted, by those that may have the opportunity to
do it. But if this be no Error, the not considering of it cannot but be most
pernicious; wherefore I cannot but wish this were communicated to several
learned Men, in order to their giving their Opinion and Reasons concerning
these things. It seems that (for any thing that appears to the contrary) by the
Father, the Word, and the Spirit (in understanding them of God,) we may
understand what the Unitarians (then) understand thereby, Namely, God, and the
Divine Wisdom, and the Divine Power or Divine Inspiration; and that our Prayers
are to be addressed to the Father, or God in general terms. Most learned Men
among Protestants, have been of that opinion. I have mentioned Calvin's
observation, that the acknowledgement of the Divine Properties is sufficient,
without insisting on the term, Persons. Luther says, it were better to call
Almighty God, God, than Trinity. Postil. Major Domini^. Forbesius asserts, that
the Persons, as Persons, are not the Object of Worship; that the adoring of
them dictinctly, is extremely pernicious; that then diverse Objects of Worship
are represented; and that this Practice is founded on no Precept or Example of
Holy Scripture, etc. Instruction. Historico-Theologic. Part. 1. Qu. 31, a. 1.
Casaubon opines, that in such accumulate repeated Invocations, the Church
imitated the Heathens, who, not knowing which of the Gods or Godesses they had
best apply themselves to, therefore called upon them all, Exercit. P. 327. But
we know, that the Spirit does nothing but what he is commissionated, ( John,
16, 13.) that the Father dwells in the Son, ( John, 14, 10,) and that the Son
does nothing but what the Father shows him, ( John, 5, 30.) Therefore
incontestably it is sufficient, to address to the Father. And we should content
our selves to do so, for this reason, that it is sufficient and safe, on the
one hand, and, on the other, that the Unitarian Arguments appear very
considerable, or, rather, unanswerable.

The Unitarians show; That all that Christ does, he does it by the Assistance
of the Father; ( John, 14, 10;) That, tho there is but one God properly, or in
the most eminent sense, yet that title, in Scripture, is sometimes communicated
to some Creatures, and is of the same import with that of Sovereign; ( John,
10, 34, etc.) That Christ is not only the Word, or Great Messenger of God, but
most eminently represents God, and is made, under God, the Sovereign of Men and
Angels, and that God continually assists him in the discharge of his Office and
continually does for him at his request all that is necessary to that end; (
Hebr. 2, 8; John, 11, 42;) That (it being usual among the Jews) it is the style
of the New Testament, to apply by way of accommodation some Sayings and Texts
of the Old Testament, to some Events and Cases or Circumstances to which they
may be applicable, in a sense not exactly the same with that implied in the
Ancient Prophets; ( Matthew. 2, 15. Matthew. 2, 18. Matthew. 2, 23. Gal. 3, 11, Romans
10, 13;) That the New Creation, or New Modelling of all Things by the Gospel,
is by a Figure in the New Testament constantly compared to the first Creation;
( John. 1.1. etc) Mark (...) Hebr. 1, 10. Hebr. 2, 5;) That, the Godhead most
intimately dwelling and most extraordinarily operating in the Messiah, (so that
the Man Jesus Christ is the most glorious Schechina, figured by the Cloud in
the Wilderness and by the Ark of the Jewish Covenant wherein God showed himself
present and before which the People of God worshipped and prostrated
themselves,) and Christ most eminently representing God, being exalted to the
Sovereignty of the Universe, and being assisted with the Divine Wisdom and
Power, the New Testament, by way of accommodation, ascribes to the Messiah,
invested with that Power and Dignity, the most glorious Actions attributed to
God in the Old Testament, and the Divine Attributes and Properties which may be
supposed to be in some sense or in some manner communicated to him by the
Divine Indwelling; ( John, 1, 1, etc, Hebr. 1, 10. Matthew. 18, 20. Matthew. 28,
20. Revel. 1, 11. Revel. 2, 23.) That after all, in fine, the Scripture
expressly shows, that the Father is the only true God, or that the Father alone
is God in the proper and eminent sense of that word, ( John, 17, 3. 1 Cor. 8,
6. Ephesians. 4, 6. Matthew. 24, 36. Mark, 13, 32. etc.) About two hundred Texts,
distinguish God from Christ.

Now, as Dr. Sherlock himself observes, in his Answer to the Bishop of
Gloucester, or The Scripture-Proofs of our Savior's Divinity explained, etc.
P. 55, If but one Text of Scripture proves, that no other Person but the Father
alone is God, (as the five last quoted are in particular taken by the
Unitarians most expressly to do,) that must put an end to this Controversy, and
excuse or justify all the Interpretations of Scripture given by the Unitarians,
how harsh soever they may otherwise now appear. (The Dr. has that observation
in several other places of that Book; Pages, 47, 50, 58.) It seems the
Unitarian Interpretations do not appear so harsh and unnatural, if the style of
Scripture be carefully attended unto, as may be seen in the Brief History of
the Unitarians, or in Grotius his Annotations.

For these reasons, I conclude for the Generality of the Terms of Scripture;
Scripture and Reason being the Light of God, ( Ps. 119, 105, Prove. 20, 27,) to
which every one is to attend, ( Romans 10, 8, 1 Cor. 10, 15,) no one being to
judge for others in intricate Matters, but all being to unite in that which is
Clear and Express, or in the Latitude and Expressions of the Rule it self, (2
Cor. 1, 24, Romans 14, 13, and 19, Phil. 3, 16, etc.) And if these reasons are
invalid to the concluding of the Fitness of such a Method of Church Communion,
as I have mentioned, I earnestly wish that their invalidity may be shown, in
the Spirit of the Gospel. But if that Method be fit and necessary, then may it
be followed, that God may be propitious to us, and that we may serve him as we
ought to do, in Righteousness, Charity, and true Piety! Amen!

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 2. Line 13. for Desiring or Willing read Willing or Desiring. p. 2. l.
18. f. the r. this. p. 6. l. 1. after Scripture, add, which, like that of all
the Eastern Tongues, is extraordinarily figurative. p. 8. l. 29. f. Is r. If.
p. 8: l. 33. after Trinitarian, add, as the Modalists, who are the greatest
Number, do now represent it:


