A WARNING to all People, Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and Languages, to Repent
and Turn to the Lord God, before the Day of their Visitation pass over, and no
place of Repentance be found for them.
ALL People are gone out of the way, they are gone astray, drove out from God
into the earth, and so live without God in the World, in the lust and vanities
of their minds, devouring every green thing, and spending it upon their Lusts,
being captivated in Chains of Darkness, and knows not when good comes, but
takes pleasure in that which will be their own Destruction, and will have none
of thy ways (O God) but choose out ways to themselves after their own
imaginations; Arise, arise O God for thy own Name sake; Avenge, avenge thy self
on thy Adversaries; O God make known thy everlasting Name in the Earth, and let
the People know that thou art God, and that there is none besides thee.

How are all People degenerated and fallen from God, even like a degenerate
Plant, a Plant of a strange Vine; yea, woefully are they fallen from God into the
imaginations of their own hearts; even as in the days of old, so is it now,
The Priests preach for hire, the Prophets divine for money, and the people love
to have it so; yea the Shepherds, the treacherous Dealers, have daubed with
untempered Mortar, crying, Peace, peace, to whom no peace is; but to them all
both Priests and People, Woe, Woe, Misery, Calamity, and Destruction,
Overturning, Overturning, Heaps upon Heaps, Confusion of Face, Anguish and
Perplexity, until he come to Reign whose right it is; who says, My Kingdom is
not of this world, or else my Servants would fight; but neither with Sword nor
Spear, nay, not with carnal Weapon, but through suffering the Lamb shall get
the Victory: For the true Prophets whom the Lord God has raised up, to bear
testimony unto his Everlasting Name, them ye persecute and make a prey upon, as
in Generations past, so is it now: But the Lord will ease him of his
Adversaries, and avenge himself on his Enemies, yea on a hppocritical
gainsaying People, who honor him with their lips, but their hearts are far
from him.

For, Even as it was in the days of Noah, so shall the coming of the Son of
man be; For all flesh has corrupted his way upon the earth, and the Lord God
is wroth with man, for their Abominations are great before him; for even as
they lusted in the Wilderness in the days of old, so are men and women given
up to fulfill the lusts and abominations of their own hearts in rebelling
against the Lord God, even to their own hurt; For the Lord will not always
strive with man, but account shall he give, and a recompense shall he have at
the hand of the Lord God; for even as they lusted, and perished with the meat
in their mouths, even so will the Lord God plague the rebellious gainsaying
Generation of evildoers; for his Fury burns as fire, and his indignation
waxes hot, and the Fuel for the fire is great, and the breath of the Lord like
a River of Brimstone shall kindle it: Yea Babylon shall fall, and the Merchants
thereof shall lament and bewail themselves, and cry, Alas, alas, that great
City, wherein many were made rich, for in one hour her Torment is come, (yea
and coming.)

Therefore Woe, Woe to the Merchants of Babylon, who make Merchandise of Men's
Souls by Sea and Land; yea upon the waters on which the Whore sits (which John
saw, Rev. 18.13.17.15.) were Peoples, Multitudes, Nations, and Tongues, for
these are the Waters they trade on, and these are the Flocks on whom the
Shepherds make their prey; but the Lord has determined an utter Consumption
for those things, yea their high places shall be laid waste, and their Altars
broken down, and their singing turned into howling, yea their joy into
mourning; for they shall cry to the Hills and to the Mountains to fall upon
them, and to the Rocks to hide them from the wroth of the Lamb, but there shall
be none to deliver; for although they climb up to heaven, thence will I fetch
them down; though they dig into hell, thence shall my hand take them; and
though they be hid from my sight in the bottom of the Sea, thence will I
command the Serpent, and he shall bite them, says the Lord.

And so consider these things all ye that forget God, for Tophet is prepared of
old; and all ye Rulers, Judges and Governors of the People, do Justice, love
mercy, and walk humbly before the Lord God; for Cruelty, Tyranny and Oppression
is amongst you, and ye shall not escape for these things.

Therefore howl, howl ye Shepherds, and lament ye their Flock, for the day of
the Lord is at hand, which will leave neither root nor branch; for the fire of
his Jealousy shall burn and devour before him, and it shall be tempestuous
round about him, and who shall be able to stand in his presence? for a speedy
work will the Lord make in the earth, with righteous judgment will he plead
with the Inhabitants thereof: So all People bow and tremble before the Lord
God, for terrible will his presence be to all the workers of iniquity.

But good is the Lord unto the seed of Abraham, and his mercy endures for
ever, from everlasting to everlasting; yea let the seed of Jacob say, good is
the Lord, and exceeding great is his loving kindness unto all them that are of
an upright heart; Holy, Righteous, and full of Compassion is the Lord our God,
whose Name is worthy to be praised; So praise ye the Lord, praise him O all ye
his Saints, Magnify and extol his holy Name; yea, let all that know the Lord
praise him, for his mercy endures for ever.

Come all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and take his yoke upon you, which
is easy, and his burden which is light, and be ye followers of the Lamb, who
is meek and low in heart, and teaches all his followers so to be, in meekness
and of a Lamb like spirit, gentle and easy to be entreated, full of compession
and bowels of pity toward all that hunger and thirst after Righteousness, who
has promised that all such shall be filled.

O come let us sing unto the Lord a new song, let our mouths be full of his
praises, let us sing unto him upon the well-stringed Instrument, yea let us
sing praises, sing praises unto his holy Name; for he is our God, and we are
his People, even the sheep of his pasture: Whom have we in heaven besides thee,
or on earth in comparison of thee; Everlasting honor and praise be given unto
thee, for thou art worthy O God, thou art worthy, for all is thine, yea the
Cattle on a thousand hills: what shall we prepare for thee, Sacrifices and
burnt Offerings thou would not, but a broken and contrite heart, O God thou will not despise.

O all ye Nations, fear the Lord, yea let the fear of our God be before your
eyes, stand in awe, and sin not, lest he rebuke you in his fore displeasure,
and tear you in pieces, when there is none to deliver; for our God is the
living God, to whom all the Gods of the Heathen shall bow and tremble; when he
utters his Voice the Hills shall melt, and the strong Oaks shall bow, and the
tall Cedars bend before him, for Majesty, Dominion, and Authority is with him,
who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, whose Dominion is an everlasting
Dominion, and of whose Glory there is no end; yea, from Everlasting to
Everlasting is his Name.

How do the People imagine vain things, and the Kings of the Earth take Counsel
together against thine Anointed, even against thy chosen People Israel, but the
Lord will scatter them, and in the imaginations of their own hearts shall they
be confounded; for the Lord will arise for his own People, and shame shall
cover the face of their Enemies; for a work has the Lord begun in the Earth,
and in Righteousness it shall be accomplished; but woe to the workers of
Iniquity, for it shall go ill with them.

Therefore slight not the day of your Visitation, O all ye Kindreds, Tongues,
Languages, and People, but hearken to the call of God, who calls for Purity and
Holiness, Singleness and Uprightness of heart toward God and all men; whose
call is near every one of you, even in your hearts and mouths, to obey it and
do it (as Scripture says, Romans 10.6, 7, 8.) and so you need not say, who shall
ascend to fetch Christ down? or, who shall go beyond the Sea to fetch us a
Teacher? for the Lord is fulfilling his Promise which he made of old, That he
would write his Laws in our hearts, and all should be taught of him; and every
man should not say to his Neighbor, know the Lord, for they shall all know
him, from the greatest to the least, Jer. 31.33, 34.

So all ye People, Kindreds, Tongues, and Languages, turn from your dumb
Idol-Shepherds, who have not fed the Flock, but themselves; who have been
greedy after the Prey, and stood not in my Counsel (says the Lord) for if they
had stood in my Counsel, they would have turned my People from their sins.

And all ye People, who live in the Types, Figures, and Shadows, arise (hence)
this is not the Rest; nay, this is not the Substance, but a Shadow of it, which
passes away, and is no more seen, but the Substance endures for ever, which is
Christ, in the Male and in the Female, which ends the Types, Figures, and
Shadows (which is the first Covenant) and so brings into the second, which is
everlasting, and fades not away, but endures for ever: And so judge not, nor
strive not one with another about these things, as Meats, Drinks, and Days,
Col. 2.16. for the Kingdom of God stands not in these things, but in Joy and
Peace in the Holy Ghost; and so come to Christ the Substance, that a hiding
place you may know, when the storm arises, which will sweep away the refuge of
Lies, and all that which stands not in the Power of God (which is Christ in
you, the hope of Glory) and so you come to witness what the Apostle said, That
the end of all things is at hand; who for a time lived in those things which
were a Shadow of the things to come.

Where if ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the World, why as though
living in the World, are ye subject to Ordinances? Col. 2.20, 21, 22. Touch
not, taste not, handle not, which all are to perish with the using; but mind
the Head, from whence the whole Body is nourished and knit together, with
joints and bands, in unity and fellowship; who sit together in Heavenly places,
and feel their strength renewed, day by day, from the Head (which is Christ)
not from any visible thing, but through his Blood are we washed and cleansed,
and with his Baptism are we Baptized, which is with Fire and the Holy Ghost; so
Bone of his Bone, and Flesh of his Flesh, is his Body (which is the Church) of
whom Christ is Head; who are a Spiritual House of living stones, built up unto
God; not an earthly Tabernacle, made with men's hands, but Spiritual in the
Heavens; whose Praise is of God, and not of man: And this is above all earthly
things, which stands in time, and in time has its end; And so all People, ye
are to come off from those things which are below, which perish with the using,
to that which is Eternal, and fades not away, but endures for ever; which is
the Seed of the Kingdom, which the Lord of the Harvest will gather into the
Gardner; but the Chaff and the Husk, which the Seed lay in for a time, will he
burn with unquenchable Fire: So all People, turn from your dumb Idols, and
serve the living God, who is come near to Judgment, who will purify the Sons
of Levi, even as Gold is purified; for the House of Jacob shall be a Flame, and
the House of Esau as Stubble; for what is the Chaff to the Wheat?

But woe is me, woe is me, the Heritage of the Lord lies waste like a Wilderness,
having no Shepherd, but even as Sheep gone astray, wandering from Mountain to
Hill, seeking rest, but find none; return, return, O ye backsliding People,
turn in your minds to the Lord, and hearken to his Voice, that you may find
rest for your Souls, and hunt no more, lo here, and lo there; for behold,
your Teacher is within you, which tells you Lying is a sin, and Swearing a sin,
Drunkenness, Covetousness, Envy, Wrath, Hatred, Malice, Mocking, Scoffing, and
idle Speaking, are sins; and as you believe in it, and are obedient to it,
strength from the Lord shall you receive in it, over the Devil, and all the
unfruitful works of darkness; for this has the Lord placed in you, which goes
along with you, and beholds your doings, when no eye sees you, nor no man can
accuse you; this will reprove you, and set your sins in order before you; but
as you believe in it, and obey it, it will lead you out of them, up to God,
from whence ye are fallen; for it will be as a Lanthorn to your feet, and a
light to your paths; yea, if you turn to the right hand, or to the left, it
will be as a voice behind you, saying, This is the Way, walk in it; yea, an
everlasting Covenant of Peace shall it be unto all that believe in it, and are
obedient to it; for it is He, which the Lord has promised should be as a Nail
fastened in a sure place, Isa. 22.23. even the Anointing which will teach you
all things, which is Truth, and is no Lie, 1 John 2.27. yea, the same to day,
yesterday, and for ever; a Standard which the Lord our God has lifted up; yea,
an Ensign for the People, a light to enlighten the Gentiles, and the glory of
his People Israel, unto whom the brightness of his rising has appeared, and
unto whom the gathering of the People shall be; and unto it shall the Kings of
the Earth bring in their Treasure; for at his feet shall all Crowns be laid,
and all Tongues shall confess unto his Glory; for it is he whom the Father has
exalted, to be both Lord and King, and given him a Name above every Name, that
at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in Heaven, and things in
Earth, yea there is not another besides him; it is he alone that shall be the
Ruler of his People, a Light to enlighten the Gentiles, and the glory of his
People Israel, unto whom all the Gods of the Heathen shall bow and tremble.

And all ye rebellious and stiff-necked People, that have been gainsaying and
despising this Prophet which the Lord our God has raised up; and all you that
have been persecuting of them, in whom he is risen, Repent and return from the
evil of your doings, lest the Lord cut you off in your Iniquities, (...) so you
die in your sins, and there be no place of Repentance, ^ound for you, but shut
out from the presence of the Lord God, and of his holy Angels, for ever and for
evermore; unto whom shall all his Saints and holy Angels for ever sing
Hallelujah, Honor and Praise be given unto the Lord our King.

Given forth the 9 th day of the 1 st Month, 1662. from the Prison called the
Hole, in Martins Le grand, London; where I bear my Testimony through Suffering
against Wickedness; who am known to the World by the Name John Tyso, but has
received a new Name that none can read but the Seed of the Woman which bruiseth
the Serpents head.
My People shall be a willing People in the day of my power, says the Lord.
THe cause of these Lines, is not that I seek whereof to glory, but the Lord be
glorified over all, and his living Truth exalted above all; neither on this
wise do I open my mouth as to accuse any man out of envy or hatred toward his
person; but the desire of my soul is, that all men might turn from the evil of
their doings, and that the Lord might have mercy on their souls and bodies, and
that they might come to the knowledge of the truth and be saved; for God is
merciful and desires not that man should die, but rather that he should repent
and return to him (from whom he is fallen) and live to serve his Maker, for which
end he was created, and not to serve his own lusts in oppressing and destroying
the Creation of God thereupon, but to live in Gods fear in meekness, and to
love his neighbor as himself; then Equity and Justice would flow as a mighty
stream, and Righteousness run down our streets like a river, and God would
bless our increase, and great should be our store; but where the contrary is
brought forth, as Pride, Covetousness, Drunkenness, and all manner of
Wickedness, how can people expect but that the hand of God should be against
such things? Although his patience and long-suffering has waited on man long,
yea whose loving kindness has been great toward me from a Child, who has
many a time raised from his own Seed in me breathings and hungrings after him,
and desires to know him of whom I was ignorant; but knowing not where to stay
my mind, the enemy soon got advantage, and drew out my mind into vanity, and so
I heeded not that tender Principle which the Lord had placed in me, which would
have drawn me toward himself, and giv^ me a good Understanding to have walked
before him in fear, and wi^^ ^n upright heart; so evilly did I reward the Lord
for all his mercies, but still the Lord continued his loving kindness toward
me, in that he left himself not without a witness in me; but when I was alone
in secret, and going by the way, yea and laying on my bed, should I feel the
secret hand of the Lord reproving me, and setting my sins in order before me,
and smiting the hardness of my heart, and causing a tenderness to arise from
his own seed in me, which now makes me to cry, Oh the highth and depth of the
love of God toward mankind; for now I know the Lord is no respecter of
persons, but his love is toward all the Sons and Daughters of men; and in whom
the Lord has opened his living Fountain, and caused the fresh springs of Life
to spring up, they cannot be silent, but even their bowels earn toward others,
yea, with sighs and groans toward the whole Creation, that the Day might dawn,
and that darkness might fly away, and the singing of Birds might come, and the
yelling noyses of the wild Beasts might cease, and that they might return again
into their Dens from whence they came: So the Lord our God open the hearts of
his People, and enlighten their understanding, that his living Truth they may
come to know, which has been hid from their eyes in this cloudy and dark day,
and night of Apostasy, which has been over the face of all People, since the
days of the Apostles; but the night is far spent, and the day is dawning, and
the time is at hand, that darkness shall fly away, and the light shall shine
forth of obscurity; for the light of the Moon, shall be as the light of the
Sun, and the light of the Sun as ten days, and Glory, Honor and Praise shall
be given unto the Lord, who is God blessed over all, for ever and for ever,
Amen.

THE END.
LONDON, Printed for the Author, in the year, 1662.


