TWO PRESENTIMENTS OF THE GRAND JURY IN BRISTOL, AT THE General Quarter Sessions
OF THE PEACE Holden there in October, 1681.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXXXI.

To the Right Worshipful, Thomas Earl, Esquire MAJOR; and to the Worshipful Court
of Aldermen, His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for this Ctiy of Bristol, and
County of the same City, now Assembled in the General Quarter Sessions of the
Peace, begun the 4th day of October, in the three and thirtieth year of His
Majesty's Reign, An. Dom. 1681. and by Adjournments continued to this present
19th. day of the same.
The Humble Presentment of the Grand Inquest.
WE, the Grand Jurors for the Body of this City, and County of the same City,
being by the Sacred Obligation of an Oath. Administered to us at our first
entrance into this Service and Trust, and also by that Suitable and most
Excellent Charge given Us pursuant thereunto, Engaged to Enquire for Our
Sovereign Lord the King, for the Body of the said County, in Discharge of the
said Obligation do Present as follows.

The Excellency and Necessity of Laws and Government are more then insinuated
unto Us by the Early Provision made for them, even in the Infancy of the World,
and first Original of things; and also by the special Care and Constant
Endeavors that have been ever since used for keeping the same Sacred and
Inviolable, and for delivering of it so, down to Posterity through all
Generations unto these days.

The unspeakable Miseries, Mischiefs and Dangers which inevitably follow on the
want hereof, we need not have recourse to former times to relate; the Present
Age having felt effectually the smart thereof, and many of our selves cannot
but remember.

On the other hand, the great Benefit, Satisfaction, and Comfort, which are
restored when the Government is returned to its Ancient Constitution, as it was
by the miraculous Restoration of his Sacred Majesty to his Throne and Dignity;
and the Blessed Effects thereof which we have enjoyed for above twenty years
last past; cannot be of less weight than to persuade all (whom their own Wills
and Interests have not hardened into Obstinacy) to the Highest and best Esteem
of our present Governments, and to exert their utmost endeavor toward the
Countenance and Support thereof.

It is heartily to be wished that all men would be of such Good Principles, and
Ingenuous Dispositions as to live contentedly and Obediently under the best
Government, of the best of Princes; and in the enjoyment of the best of
Privileges, the Protestant Religion, Liberty, Property and Peace can afford
us. But Experience teaches us that tho it may be desired, yet it can never be
expected; whilst Interest leads men the contrary way, whilst Disobedience is so
interwoven with some men's Creeds, and whilst Rebellion does pass for a
Profitable Sin.

This Year has been a Year wherein the face of Public Affairs have appeared
in great variety; it has been a year of Great Expectation, of Great
Discoveries, Great Endeavors, and Great Disappointments. Providence has
seemed to be involved in a Cloud, and to discover it self only by its Chequer
Workings; notwithstanding all which being now Happily arrived at the End
thereof, and having this Opportunity put into our hands, we cannot but with all
Humility and Thankfulness of Heart, acknowledge the Infinite Goodness and Mercy
of Almighty God exercised toward us in the manifold mercies we still enjoy; in
the Gracious Continuation of Health in our Dwellings and Peace within our
borders; when most part of our Neighbor Nations are imbroiled in Wars, and the
dismal consequences thereof. For preserving the Kings Majesty in his happy
Reign over us, notwithstanding all the wicked Machinations of the sons of
Violence, whereby they have Diligently sought to Murder, or Depose him; and
those, whether our Open and Declared Enemies, of the Religion of the Church of
Rome, or other Seditious and Ungrateful men, who under pretense of Zeal,
Religion, and Loyalty, put themselves in a Better Condition to perpetrate their
Wicked Designs; who tho from Differing Interests, and unto Differing Ends, yet
concur with the former in this Third thing; The Ruin of Monarchy, and the
Subversion of the Government. But the hand of Justice has Begun to find them
out, and has Distrbuted to some of them the Just Reward of their Treasonable
and Wicked Enterprises. So that there is Good Hopes that Vengeance will not
suffer such Murderers to escape, and that such Blood-thirsty and Deceitful men
shall not live out half their Days.

Also we return our True and Unfeigned Thanks to our Sovereign Lord the King
for all those Unspeakable Benefits which from the Throne of his Majesty are
Freely dispensed for the Advantage of his People, for his great Wisdom in
Foreseeing approaching Dangers, and taking timely care to Prevent them from
falling on his Subjects. And for all those frequent instances of his Grace and
Goodness toward this City; and more especially for his Gracious Condescension
in his last most Gracious Declaration, to give the meanest of his Subjects an
account of some of the Greatest of his Actions, wherein amongst many other
things (of his Royal Bounty promised) he is pleased to insert his Special Care
of the Protestant Religion as by Law established; his Intentions of Governing
by Frequent Parliaments, and his Resolutions that he will never suffer his
People to be Ruined by Arbitrary Power, either of Himself or their
Fellow Subjects.

In the next place we Present our Hearty Thanks to the Worshipful Sir Richard
Heart, late Mayor of this City, for the Several and Singular instances of his
Extraordinary Readiness and Care in Serving this City in those Emergent
Occasions which happened in the year of his Majoralty; In the beginning whereof
things appeared with a Sad and Dismal Aspect, for that the Factious Party in
this City being grown to a Head, knew no Bounds to their own Mischievous
Designs: First they Branded the Magistrates and Ministers, and other his
Majesty's best Subjects with the Odious Name of Papists; then they procured
several Aldermen to be Seized on and Imprisoned. The the^ late Sheriffs to be
taken into Custody, our Ministers, to be several of them severely Threatened and
one (with whom they began) to be severely Handled, to be under a long
Confinement, and exposed to their Malicious Slanders by Libellers and
Pamphleteers even of their own Procuring, and all this at great Distance from
their Own Homes, to the vast Expense of their Estates and manifest Hazard of
their Lives. For Accomplifhing whereof, they got themselves admitted Members of
such Clubs in London, as made them fitter for Acting this, and what they had
farther Projected. And then they proceeded publicly to Threaten utter Ruin to
several other Aldermen; many Members of Common Council, and other substantial
Inhabitants of this City to the number of several Scores at once, under the
Notion of Pulling down the Artillery; and no less then utter Undoing to a whole
Grand Jury for Declaring their Opinion in the matter of Petitioning.

They go on (by their Old refuge of Lies) to render the Interest of this City
very Contemptible in the Face of the Nation, openly Declaring at Westminster,
before the Members of the Honorable House of Commons, that our Mayor was there
a Factor for the Abhorrers of Bristol, and that Himself was one of them, and
did publicly Declare before the Commons of England that it was a Crime in
Bristol in the year 1679 to Acknowledge that there was any Popish Plot. All
things seeming to lie at the mercy of their false Tongues, and to be Obnoxious
to the Prosecution of their unreasonable Anger.

It was now Crime enough to be declared Loyal, and almost Capital to ^^n^radi^t
Fnaticism, for to that Confidence were they grown, That these Words [ You shall
answer this before the House of Commons] were as confidently spoken by the most
Inconsiderable of them to those that were not of their Judgment on very Trivial
Occasions as a Man in Authority may say to a Thief [ You shall be sent to
Prison] or to a Drunkard [ You shall be set by the Heels.] Thus intending to
carry all before them; to what further Heights they would have proceeded,
neither themselves nor any other could know, had not Deliverance arisen in such
a way as they never thought of, except it was to to damn it as Impossible.

This was the time wherein our said then Mr. Mayor was pleased to (the manifest
hazard of Himself, his Credit and Estate,) to interpose and assert the Right
and Interest of this City, and with great Care and Industry did bring off the
Cause thereof very much to its Reputation and Advantage; for which, and for his
Readiness to do the like on all other Occasions, and for the whole Management
of Public Affairs during his year of Mayoralty, we present him with our Hearty
Thanks.

We likewise present our Hearty Thanks to the Worshipful Court of Aldermen for
their readiness to Stand by, and Encourage, and Assist our said May or in all
those things that tended to the Public Good: For that by your Joint Endeavors
herein the Credit and Reputation of this City is publicly retrieved, so that
his Sacred Majesty has been graciously pleased to conceive Better and more
Friendly thoughts of us, and we hope for the future will find no cause to
esteem us otherwise than as one of his Loyal Cities.

The little Experience which we have had within the space of one year last past
has let the World see, That when men of ill Principles set their Ambitious
eyes upon the Government. Their restless Endeavors will stick at nothing which
they think may conduce to the bringing it into their Hands; and that those who
think themselves too good to be Governed by Law, think all others but good
enough to Receive Law from them. But Blessed be God we now see the Crest of the
Faction fairly fallen, the Countenance of its Abetters Dejected, and their
Actions receive public Discouragement so that the great Expectation they had
of fingering once more the Management of the Government, being wholly for this
time Disappointed: We do heartily wish they would now sit down contentedly
under the Government as it is already Established, as it becomes Good
Christians and Dutiful Subjects: but if not, if they will still persist to
trouble the Waters for their own more profitable Fishing -- We all know the Law
is made for the Lawless and Disobedient, and the Sword of Justice is entrusted
in the hands of the Ministers of Justice for the Chastising of evil Manners,
and for the punishment of evil Doers, as well as for the encouragement of them
that do well: and therefore if the Laws Enacted are in force, and if Laws in
force were intended for the Good of the People, by whom, and for whom they were
made; we hope and expect that we shall never have cause to complain of our
Magistrates for denying to us the Benefit of those Laws in not applying them to
the ends of our Advantage, for which they were at first so designed, and
afterward committed to their Administration.

We should not have said so much on this particular had it been the Condition
of this Place alone: but the true Vox Patriae, in all the Loyal Addresses
lately presented to the Kings Majesty, agree that the cause of all the troubles
we have been sensible of, or may now fear, has been occasioned by those
amongst us, who by Dissenting from, declare themselves Enemies to the
Government as it is now Established, and that the only way to preserve Peace is
to bring the Actions of all men to be conformable to those wholesome Laws, by
which all good men endeavor to regulate their Lives; and against the
Severities and Execution whereof, none but the Guilty and Self-condemned
Criminals Storm and Revile.

We do therefore Recommend it to your Worships, as a matter most worthy your
utmost care, The Observation and Preservation of the good Laws of this Kingdom,
in Reference both to Ecclesiastical and Civil Concernments; That you by all
means Discourage all manner of Profaneness and Debauchery; That you continue to
be Constant and Vigorous Asserters of the Protestant Religion according to the
Laws of this Kingdom now established, the true Profession whereof is an
Antidote against the numerous evils we lie under, and the Causes of what we
farther fear; and a Thorough United Conformity whereunto would be an Invincible
Bulwark against the wicked Machinations of all our Enemies: And that you would
be pleased always to endeavor the Preservation of the Peace of this City by
all those means the Law has prescribed, and Experience has taught are
necessary to be used.

Many things have been presented to this Court, and now lie before your
Worships by former Grand-Juries; particularly those of Easter and
Midsomer-Sessions last, which we Recommend to your Worships care, as worthy to
be considered of in order to their Amendment: Many things also have been
Presented by the Constables of the several Wards in this Quarter Sessions: And
what other things have further come to our Knowledge, we have Ennumerated in a
Paper hereunto annexed; To which we humbly refer the Court; and conclude with
Our Hearty Prayers that God would Bless all your Worships Endeavors for the
rendering of this City an United and a Flourishing City: That God will bless
this Kingdom with the great Blessings of Prosperity and Peace, and all his
Majesty's Subjects with the Blessed Effects thereof. And chiefly, that God
would bless the Kings most Excellent Majesty with Health, Length of Days,
Victory, Riches and Honor: That he may live to see the Fruit of all his
extraordinary Care, and Wonderful Wisdom, in Swaying the Scepter of these
Kingdoms, returned to him in Love and Loyalty from all his Subjects. That those
that Rise up against Him may be as the Dust before the Wind: That all his
Enemies may be clothed with Perpetual Confusion, and that upon his Sacred Head
and the Head of his Royal Posterity, the Crown may for ever Flourish.

ANOTHER PRESENTMENT OF THE Same Grand Jury AT ANOTHER ADJOURNMENT OF THE
COURT, Viz. The Twenty fourth day of October, 1681. To the Right Worshipful,
Thomas Earl, Esquire Mayor of this City, etc.
The Humble Presemment of the Grand Inquest.
WE, The Grand Jurors for the Body of this City and County, etc. -- Having
drawn up our former Presentment, with intention to have given it into the Court
on a former Adjournment; since which time some New Matter being come to our
Knowledge, which we cannot without apparent Violation of our Trust, neglect to
bring before your Worships, do make bold farther to Present.

And we do therefore Present, That the Court of Oyer and Terminer, and General
Jail-delivery held for this City and County, being Lawfully called upon the
eighteenth day of this instant, October; The Wilful Departure of Sir Robert
Atkins, our Recorder, from the said Court, and thereby annihilating the same
(his Presence being essential to the Constitution thereof,) after the Grand
Jury were Sworn, the Justices on the Bench, the appearance of Prosecutors and
Witnesses in several Notorious Murders and Felonies attending, and the Bills of
Indictment against some of them, ( viz. One against Nicholas Butler for Felony
and Burglary, another against Francis Warden for Felony and Burglary, and
another against Elizabeth Windgett, for Murdering her Bastard Child, being by
the said Grand Jury found, and ready to be delivered into Court: The Sheriffs
ready attending with their Goal, and the Prisoners at the Bar waiting their
Deliverance, is a most Unpresidented denial of Justice, and a most
Unwarrantable and Arbitrary Proceeding. In comparison whereof, the so much
complained of Discharge of a Grand Jury in Middlesex, some time since, before
their usual time of being Discharged (there being only a possibility the Bills
might be preferred to them: And the Court continued still to be a Court, and to
do Justice without them) is not so much as to be mentioned or thought of: This
necessarily tending to the Impunity of Notorious Offenders, besides other
Mischiefs; as the Prosecutors and Witnesses being Discharged of their
Recognizances, by the Discontinuance of the Court; The Offenders continued in
Gaol without Prosecution; His Majesty's Gracious Charter to this City, by which
the said Court is Granted, beyond expression, Affronted; The Mayor and
Aldermen, his Majesty's Justices of the Peace, openly Contemned; The Honor and
Justice of this City greatly Disparaged; and his own Unfaithful Execution of
his Office, as Notoriously Betrayed and made Public.

And it is our Opinion that his endeavoring to avoid the Swearing of Sir
Richard Heart, an Alderman, is not only an Aggravation of this Offense, but
another denial of discharging his Duty: For he, the said Sir Richard Heart,
being by the said Sir Robert Atkins himself, together with the Mayor and Court
of Aldermen, Nemine Contradicente, Legally and Duly Elected, the Swearing of
him became a Duty Executive i^ the Mayor and Recorder, the Arbitrary part of it
being determined by the Election: For should it be in the Power of the Mayor,
or Recorder, or both, to refuse Swearing as Alderman duly Elected, the very
Constitution of Aldermen, on which the Justice of this City does principally
depend, as it is prescribed in our Charter, would necessarily be Destroyed; and
the whole Power of making Aldermen be virtually devolved into the Mayor and
Recorder alone.

Wherefore we make it our humble Request, that either by Complaint to the Kings
most Sacred Majesty, or by Displacing the said Sir Robert Atins, or by such
other Methods of Proceedings, as to your Worships shall seem most Fitting and
Effectual, we may be Redressed for this present Grievance, and be secured for
the Future against such Failure of Justice, and Arbitrary Proceedings within
this City.

God Save the King.
James Millerd. John Hollister. Nicholas Standfast. Joseph Bullock. Samuel
Rogers. Jasper Cause. Francis Fisher. Scarborow Chapman. John Matthew. William
Jones. Thomas Davidg. Francis Ballard. John Bachellor. John Estwick. John
England.


FINIS.

