A MODEST and JUST APOLOGY FOR; OR, DEFENSE OF THE PRESENT East-India-Company.
AGAINST THE ACCUSATIONS OF THEIR ADVERSARIES. Wherein the CRIMES alleged
against them, are fairly Examined; The CALUMNY's Confuted, and all submitted to
the Judgment of Impartial and Unprejudiced PERSONS.

LONDON, Printed Anno Domini, MDCXC.

To the READER.
THIS Apology was drawn up some little time before the last Prorogation of the
late Parliament; though upon some Reasons, forborne to be published, which I
thought it necessary to give you notice of; lest finding some Passages therein
adapted to that time, you may think them something improper, as to the present:
You will not find in this any particular notice taken, of any of those many
Papers, by their Enemies published abroad to defame them, (except the Preamble
of their own Subscriptions) which indeed was industriously avoided: They being
so filled with scurrilous Language, and opprobrious Expressions, that they
deserve no Answer: What has been here endeavored, is to relate matter of Fact
truly (leaving you to make the Inference) which I have not willingly falsified
in any one particular: If any such should be, I do declare, it has bin through
inadvertency, and not designedly. The whole is submitted to the censure of the
unprejudiced Person, which being fairly and impartially considered, together
with the Circumstances attending those several. Actions here discoursed of: I
doubt not, but the supposed Monster, will not now appear, so black and ugly, as
he has bin of late depainted: It is possible, That these Papers may meet with
a Reply: For I cannot expect they will satisfy every one: But if such be their
fate, If the said Reply be managed with Candor and Ingenuity, they shall have
from me a fair acknowledgment of my Error, where it is so; or a fair Rejoinder
where it is otherwise. But if it be filled with such scurrilous Language, as
those Papers have bin, which of late have bin exposed to the Public against
them: Let the matter be what it will, It shall receive no other Answer from me,
than the rest have done, viz. Contempt and Silence. Farewell.

N. T.

A Modest and Just Apology for, or Defense of the present East-India-Company,
etc.
WHAT great and indefatigable industry has bin employed? What Arts and Devices
made use of, to blast the Reputation of the present East-India-Company, is
notoriously evident to all, who either give themselves the trouble of listening
to those Calumnies, daily inculcated in all noted Coffee-Houses against them,
or to the reading of those Prints exposed publicly, and delivered gratis in
the said Coffee-Houses, to all such as will but accept them: Wherein the said
Company are not only set forth to be Bankrupts as to their present Condition,
but represented as vile and odious as Malice it self can invent, or a Pen dipped
in the very gall of Asps can depaint; so that it may justly seem necessary,
that at this time a just and modest Vindication of them, and their present
Condition from the said Aspertions should be published; and the rather since
their Enemies have endeavored of late to impose, not only upon the unthinking
Vulgar, but upon the Members of the Honorable House of Commons, by putting
Papers into their hands; wherein besides the scurrility of the Language suitable
to the Authors, there are many things notoriously untrue; nay they have
presumed so far upon the whole Body of the Legislative Power of the Nation,
King, Lords and Commons, as to declare to them, in the preamble to their new
Subscriptions, by them now Printed and Published, the very terms of an Act of
Parliament to be by them passed, without which, their Subscriptions are ipso
facto void, and no ways obliging, and withal are become so confident, as to
publish to the World their Assurance, that an Act shall pass in such terms, as
they have there prescribed, which withal submission is left to a just censure.

It is now confessed almost by all, even the very Enemies of the present
Company, That the East India Trade is of a great National advantage; That for
the making of it more advantageous, it must be carried on in a Joint Stock:
That that Stock must be in a Company exclusive to all Interlopers: That a Joint
Stock and Interlopers, are things inconsistent: That such a Company must
necessarily be invested with Powers sufficient to govern their respective
Residences abroad, and carry on their Trade; So that these things being
sufficiently evident to common sense, and now by almost all in general
acknowledged, it will be needless to bring any Arguments for the proof of them;
by which means the business of this present Paper will be much contracted, and
applied only to undeceive the World, in some of those Calumnies, by which the
Enemies of the present Company have endeavored to blacken them, and render
them most obnoxious to the Public; Wherein I shall be as concise as possible I
can, without so much as in the least taking notice in particular of that
scurrilous Language and opprobious Expressions, they are pleased to cast upon
them.

The first Objection then that presents it self to Consideration, and which
has created them so many Enemies, is, That the said Company have at several
times given disturbance to those Persons, who traded into the places of their
Privilege, and were not free of the said Company, and are therefore styled
Interlopers, and that, by stopping their Ships and Goods, and by other ways and
means to the hindrance of their Trade.

To this it is answered, That the Premises before laid down fairly considered,
and which are now in a manner universally acknowledged, viz. That the Trade of
India to render it Nationally advantageous, must be carried on in a Joint
Stock; That the said Trade in this Nation has been so carried on all along in
a Joint Stock, exclusive to all others not free of the said Company, by virtue
of, and under the Power of the Charters of the several Princes of this Realm,
ever since the Trade was first established; That a Joint Stock and Interloping
are wholly inconsistent; And that the present Company had the same Trade wholly
and entirely granted to them equally with their Predecessors, from the lawful
and undoubted Sovereigns of this Realm: I say these things fairly and
impartially considered, It will appear no more injustice in this present
Company, to put all stops and Inconveniences they could upon all Persons not
free of the said Company, attempting to break in upon them, by trading into the
parts of their Privilege so granted to them as aforesaid, than it would be in
a private Person to defend himself from the attempts of those, who would wrong
him in his Person or Estate, and by force endeavor to wrest him out of the
Possession of his Freehold: Nay it may truly and rationally be affirmed, That
had not the Managers of the said Stock exerted all the Powers granted them in
their Charters, to the keeping out of all unfree Persons from breaking into
their Trade, they had been unfaithful to the Trust reposed in them by the
Generality, and Betrayers of the Interest both of themselves, and of the
Nation. For whatever Company for the future may or shall be established (if the
Wisdom of the Nation shall think sit to make any Alteration,) unless they have
Powers granted, and Liberty as occasion shall offer to exert them, to keep out
Interlopers, and secure the Trade entirely to the Joint Stock, they can never
preserve that Trade to themselves or the Nation. And since it is now almost
generally confessed, and is most certainly true, That if the Wisdom of the
Nation shall think fit to establish this or any other Company by Act of
Parliament, If they will enable them to carry on the said Trade to a National
advantage, they musT grant them the same, if not an increase of that Power
which the present East-India-Company have granted to them by their Charter,
Wherein then is the great Crime which the present Company is guilty off? And
has created them so many bitter and implacable Enemies? In stopping
Interlopers Ships, and giving them what disturbance they could in their Trade,
since either there must be no Company and Joint Stock, or all Interloping must
be excluded? All Mankind being agreed, that both cannot consist at the same time.

To this I presume it will be answered, That the thing in it self, for a
Company established in a Joint Stock to obstruct all others, may not be
criminal, because necessary and rational: But that this present Company have
either exceeded the Powers granted to them in their Charters, Or if they have
not exceeded them, Their Charters themselves are not agreeable to Law, and so
they are criminal in acting by an unlawful Power. I shall therefore now fairly
consider, how far the present Company is criminal in either of these two
respects.

For the first of these, That the present Company have exceeded the Powers
granted to them by their Charters, It is wholly denied by them, That they have
at any time exceeded the Powers given them therein, by any of their Actions
here at home, Or by any Orders given by them to their Servants abroad. And this
being matter of fact, must rest upon the proof of the Complainants; and that
being to be in particulars, as is always in cases of matter of fact; The
charge will then appear, either to be true or false, when the matter of the
Complaint being first fully proved, and the Powers granted to the said Company,
being likewise fully examined, and both compared together, Then I say it will
be clearly seen, and not before, Whether the present Company have exceeded the
Powers therein granted, which is the first Objection. But it being the business
of this Apology to be as concise as may be, there is no room left to enter upon
Particulars; Only by the way it may seem to incline any rational Man to
believe, that they themselves are very doubtful of the Truth of it, when upon
their Complaints which they make so much noise about, they fly to other places
for Remedies, and not to the Courts of Judicature, which are always open to
receive all just Complaints, and the Company as liable to be fued in those
Courts, as any private Person. But if it should be granted, that the Companies
Agents abroad may have in some particular Cases varied from, or exceeded their
Instructions from hence, and thereby some particular Persons have been
agrieved, Are the Company here therefore guilty of those Exceedings? Especially
since it has been their constant practice, that if any Persons come from
thence, who find themselves agrieved by such irregular Proceedings made in
India, upon their Complaint made to the Company here, They do order the said
matter to be re-examined, and heard by some of their Members here, and if their
Complaints be just, never fail to give the injured Person satisfaction; as may
be instanced in many particulars: And it is irrational to affirm, that any
Person can be rendered Criminal by the Transactions of his Agents abroad, unless
done upon his Order; for though in some particular Cases, as they may be
circumstantiated, he may be liable to make satisfaction, for Injuries done by
his Agent abroad; yet Criminal no Man can ever be said to be, but from Actions
done by himself, or by his Order.

To this it may be believed, Diverse Persons will reply, What! Is it denied,
that the Company have exceeded the Powers granted them in their Charters? How
comes it then to pass, That the Right Honorable the House of Commons have
declared that their Proceedings at St. Helena were illegal? etc. For answer to
which, It must first be declared, That it is not the business of this Paper,
nor the intention of the Author of it, to dispute, much less to determine the
legality, or illegality of their Charter in general, or any separate Clauses of
it in particular: That being premised, this is certain, that they had Martial
Law granted them in their Charter, and as certain that their Predecessors had
from time to time several Commissions of that Nature, particularly in the
Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and King James the First; the Originals of which lie
yet by them: That they had in that very affair the particular Commission and
Orders from His then Majesty; so that in that affair, how culpable soever to
some they may seem to be, It was their Charter which had once been judicially
affirmed in Westminster Hall, warranted by a particular Commission from their
then Sovereign as to that affair, that led them into the Error; Nor did, nor
well could they know, until the House of Commons had declared it, that such
proceedings were illegal; since their present Charter, and the then Kings
particular Commission, and the Customs and Usages of their Predecessors,
sufficiently attested by several Original Commissions of Martial Law lying by
them, seemed to warrant them: So that though their proceedings therein should
not be strictly justifiable, yet are they fairly excusable, because led into
the Error ignorantly; And that upon such grounds as are before mentioned; and
they being Merchants, and not Lawyers, the Illegality of it, was by them not
easily to be discerned. And this fairly brings me to the Consideration of the
next particular in this Objection, which is, To consider how far this Company
can be accounted Criminals, by Acting under the Powers of their present
Charters, which some are pleased to affirm are not legal, because not made, or
confirmed by Act of Parliament.

And here as before, Be it far from me to dispute, much less determine the
Legality or Illegality of their Charters in general, or any branches of it in
particular; that being a point beyond the intentions of this Discourse, and no
ways as is conceived, fit to be handled by a private Person. But how this
present East-India-Company, over and above all Companies whatsoever, should be
esteemed Criminal, by acting by the same Powers, and under the same Authority
that all other Companies do, (One only, which is the Russia Company being
excepted) is worthy consideration. It is well known, that upon the first
Establishment of the East India Trade in this Nation, the Adventurers were
established in a Company with a Joint Stock by Queen Elizabeth, as by her
Letters Patents, in the Forty Third Year of her Reign appears; That during
the remainder of that Reign, they traded as a Company, exclusive to all others
without interruption, under the Powers granted to them by the said Charter.
That by King James the first their Charter was again renewed, and they
continued in the Enjoyment of their Trade exclusive to Interlopers, by virtue
of the same Powers during His Reign, and that of King Charles the first. True
it is, That in the time of the late Usurpation, more particularly, from the
year One Thousand Six Hundred Fifty Three, to the year One Thousand Six Hundred
Fifty Seven; they were invaded in their Trade by Interlopers, so that in a
manner the whole Trade was carried on by private hands, and by that means the
Trade of India was brought to that miserable pass, as it became so far from
being an advantageous Trade, that to the knowledge and experience of many yet
living, it proved the contrary; And while our Neighbors the Dutch managed the
same Trade in a Company and Joint Stock to their great advantage, The English
by a general permission to all Persons to trade thither, drove on their Trade
to a considerable loss, besides many indignities, affronts, and injuries, which
were by several Princes in India where they traded put upon them; even to the
forcing them to sell their Goods, and to take others at such Rates, and Price
as they pleased; which could not have been put upon a Company in a Joint Stock:
This made the then Traders thither (though originally Interlopers themselves)
to apply to the Usurper Oliver for the Erecting a New East India Company, as He
did in the Year 1657; and during his time, they enjoyed their Trade, exclusive
to all Interlopers. Upon the happy Restoration of His late Majesty, King
Charles the Second, The Company applied themselves to Him, for the renewal of
their Charter, and had it granted to them accordingly; And under the Powers
thereof, enjoyed the Trade to themselves in all peaceable manner both here and
in India, exclusive to all Interlopers, until about the Year 1680; About which
time, and in the following Years, the Nation being then in a ferment, they were
broke in upon by Interlopers, their now inveterate Enemies: The fatal
consequence of which, in relation to the Interest of the Nation, will be more
particularly considered, when I come to discourse of the Origin of the War in
India.

Their Trade being as above broke in upon by Interlopers, They did as in reason
they ought, address themselves to their then Sovereign, the late King Charles
the Second, for further Powers to obviate those inconveniences, who being fully
convinced of the necessity of them, in order to the preserving that Trade to
the Nation, granted them accordingly, which were afterward again renewed, and
confirmed by the late King James the Second.

This being then the true state of matter of Fact, as to the carrying on of the
Trade in India, ever since it was established in England, it is fairly left to
the Impartial Judgment of all Indifferent and unprejudiced Persons, to judge,
what the present Company could or should have done, when their Trade was so
broke in upon by Interlopers. Should they have broke up themselves, and traded
as private Persons? That had been infallibly to have lost the Trade to the
Nation: Should they have continued their Trade in a Joint Stock, and permitted
all Freedom to the Interlopers? That had been as certain to have ruined
themselves first, and let the Trade be utterly lost in time: Or, Should they
(as some do allege) have got their Charter to have been confirmed by Act of
Parliament? That it must be confessed, had been as happy for them, as it was
earnestly desired by them: But those who shall seriously consider, the temper
of the Princes of the two last Reigns, how tender they were upon all the points
of their Prerogative, must withal acknowledge, that such an attempt in them,
would have been to have attempted that, which was next door to an
impossibility: Should they have first addressed themselves to the King for such
an Act of Confirmation, they would have been rejected with indignation, scorn
and contempt, as calling in question the validity of that Power derived from
their Prerogative; by which they had enjoyed the Trade all along since its
first establishment: Should they have petitioned the Parliament that then was,
for an Act to establish it? For that being to pass the Royal Assent, would in
all Men's Judgment (should such an Act have passed both Houses) have been there
rejected, and either of the late Kings so far exasperated against the Company
by an attempt of that Nature, in diminution of their Prerogative, that the
least which could have been expected, had been a Quo Warranto upon their backs,
to an utter dissolution of them; So that upon the whole matter, the present
Company were put upon this Dilemma, either to relinguish the Trade to the
Interlopers, and trade as private Persons, which had been as before hinted to
ruin themselves first, and lose the Trade to the Nation in time: Or to
continue the Trade in a Joint Stock exclusive to Interlopers, upon and under
the same Powers they then had; as that Trade had been carried on, ever since
its first establishment; Which they doing, How can it reasonably be fixed upon
them, that they were therefore Criminal, or any ways deserve those black
aspersions, which are now cast upon them for so doing? Which is all shall be
said to this last part of the first Objection: That they had acted upon the
Powers in their Charter; which as some are pleased to say, are not legal, as
not confirmed by Act of Parliament.

The next Objection against the present Company, by which they are endeavored
to be rendered vile and odious, is, that they are in a Bankrupt Condition; An
Imaginary Fund, a Nominal Stock, not having any Estate or real Stock: And to
fortify this Calumny, they have been pleased to take the pains, to draw up the
form of an account, wherein besides vast Sums left in Blank, They have therein
made the present Company to be 900000 l. worse than nothing: A most excellent
attempt! and suitable it is confessed to the confidence of the Undertaker. To
enter upon the examination of any of the particulars therein contained, would
seem as ridiculous, as their attempt of exposing them: Since no Man that
understands any Dealing in the World, but understands withal, that at that
rate, it is an easy matter, to make any, either Community, or Private Persons
Bankrupt at their pleasure. Sufficient it is, that the present Company are not
only willing, but able to pay their own just Debts, without being liable to
satisfy the capricious Demands of every idle Brain: Nor can any one be said to
be in a Bankrupt Condition, who neither hides his Head, nor refuses Payments
of his Just Debts when due; neither of which is done by the present Company.
How far their Enemies have prevailed to render them (if possible) what they
would fain have them, and give them out to be; may appear, by the Companies
having been required to give a true state of their Stock, by delivering in a
perfect Account of their Moneys, Goods, and Debts both here and in India, as
they now stand in their Books: A thing justly questionable, Whether ever before
demanded, of either private Person, or Commonalty; Since exposing themselves
and their whole concern to so public a view, must certainly have broke them,
had they not had a valuable and real Stock to have subsisted upon:
Notwithstanding which, the Company did humbly submit to that Command, and in
Obedience to it, did present to the Honorable Committee of Parliament, a
Faithful, Just and True account of the same, and perfect so far as their Books
did enable them: And to make their candidness therein appear, For the
Justification of the said Account, did humbly submit the inspection of their
Books, in order to the Valuation of their Stock, to such Committee as the
Honorable the House of Commons should appoint, and their last Advices from
India to the Honorable the Chairman of the said Committee, or to such two or
three of them, as the Committee should appoint; not thinking it reasonable,
that their whole concerns should be exposed to the public view, whereby their
inveterate Enemies would likewise have come to the knowledge of them. And that
not without reason, since a Copy of that very individual Account, which was by
the Company presented to the Honorable House of Commons, was immediately by
some of their Adversaries sent into Holland, for them to make such advantages
of it, to the prejudice of the Company, as they should think fit; as may appear
by a Transcript of it, returned to some Jews here, with a desire to be informed
by them, Whether that Transcript agreed with the Account devered in by the
Company. So that what uses they would have made of such an advantage, is easily
judged by those who shall consider what they have done without it. But to close
this Subject, which is so apparent a Calumny, that it may rationally be
supposed, they themselves do not believe, what they do so industriously
insinuate into the belief of others. For whenever was any Man envied that was
worse than nothing? Or to what purpose is the dissolution of the present
Company so earnestly desired by them, if they are worse than nothing, and are
not able to carry on their Trade; For if that be true, they will quickly
dissolve in course, nor will their Credit be able long to support them, without
there be a real and substantial Stock left to found it upon; That having been
as much blasted, as the Wit or Malice of Men could invent. Diverse other public
Funds have failed, The Exchequer that has been stopped, The Chamber of London
that has not been able to comply; The most noted Bankers have turned Bankrupt,
and some other Companies there are, which shall be here nameless, whose Debts
are now of a long standing, and are not yet satisfied: But where is the Person
that ever lent Moneys to this East-India-Company, which have not been satisfied
both their Principal and Interest? their greatest Enemies cannot instance in
any one single Person. And shall those who have so faithfully and readily
complied with all their Engagements, be now upon the bare affirmation of their
Enemies esteemed Bankrupt, until they are guilty of some Action, that may truly
render them such? No, no! It is not their Poverty, but their supposed Wealth,
that has created them so many Enemies, amongst which (more ungrateful they)
are some, who have been Servants under them, and have taken the Oath of a
Freeman, of the said Company, or purely raised by them. True it is, upon what
Stock has been continued there for diverse years, or those Persons who have had
the good Fortune to sell themselves out, when the Actions were very high
(amongst which are some of their now greatest Enemies) Those it is confessed,
have made considerable advantage by it: But as for many, if not most of the
present Adventurers, who came in when the Stock was sold very high, they will
be so far from deserving Envy, that they will rather deserve Pity; (amongst
which are many Widows and Orphans) in as much as they will be most certainly
great sufferers by a Dissolution. Notwithstanding which, the present Company
have not presumed like their Adversaries to dictate to the Legislative Power of
the Nation, the very terms of the Act to be by them passed: But as in Duty
bound, in their Petition lodged with the Chairman of the Committee, in order to
be presented to the Honorable House of Commons, did submit themselves and
their Concerns to the Justice and Wisdom of the Parliament.

Another Aspersion, which is cast upon the present Company, and urged by their
Adversaries, as an Argument for their dissolution, is, That its present
Constitution is not sufficiently National: To which is answered, That what is
free for every Man to come into, cannot be said to be limited. It is well
known, that by the present Constitution, no Man is debarred coming into it,
either Englishman or Stranger: It is likewise well known, That there is every
day Stock to be bought on the Exchange (and that much cheaper, if Truth may be
the Judge, then it is really worth) so that no Man but may when he pleases
come into the Company, and have what share in the Trade he pleases, so far as
he is able to purchase. And what greater extent can any new Company to be
Erected, have than this, where no Man is debarred?

But whereas they further Object,

That the present Stock is not sufficient to carry on so great a Trade, as
those Places comprised within their Privilege will bear. It is answered,
Suppose that to be true, which is not granted; yet that defect may be supplied
otherwise than by a dissolution, even by an enlargement of Stock in a new
additional Subscription, to such an increase, as the Wisdom of the Nation shall
think fit; Nor need they fear to graft their new Subscription upon the present
Stock, notwithstanding those Twelve Reasons instanced in their late scurrilous
Paper, (which had they been penned without such opprobrious Expressions, should
have received an Answer; but being such as they are, put out not to convince
others, but to blast the Company, they deserve none) For in truth, Whatever the
Adversaries of the present Company do, or may exclaim to the contrary, their
present Stock is really worth more, than it was then valued at, and will and
must appear so, when Persons indifferently chosen on both sides, shall examine
it; in order to the adjusting of its Valuation.

But if it be further alleged, that there are many of the Constitutions of the
present Company, which render it not so comprehensively National, as otherwise
it might be; As the great quantity of the Stock in the hands of some particular
Persons, and consequently the advantage they may have thereby, by the Number of
their Votes, as to the management of it. It is answered, Not to enter upon
particulars: Diverse of these things are submitted by them, to the Regulation of
the Wisdom of the Parliament, as appears by the Scheme by them delivered into
the Honorable the Committee of Parliament, at their Command: And this is all
shall be said as to this Objection.

Another thing that the Adversaries of the present Company do take advantage to
calumniate them upon, is the present War in India, which they endeavor to make
the World believe, was entered into them by capriciously, and not enforced
thereunto by the Necessity of Affairs; Whereas the contraty is true, that they
were not only necessitated thereunto, But that the Occasion of that Necessity
did arise from the breaking in of the Interlopers upon them into their Trade
(which are now the greatest Exclaimers against the War) which breaking in upon
them by the said Interlopers, and thereby the dividing of the English Interest
in India, The Company did wisely foresee would inevitably occasion, either the
breach of all the Agreements made by their Predecessors and themselves, with
the great Mogul, by and under which, they had enjoyed their Trade with all
peaceableness and quietness from its first Establishment, to that time; and
that thereby they would be enforced tamely to submit unto all such Impositions
and Avenia's which his Avaritious Officers would at their pleasure lay upon
them, and raise out of their Estates, Or they must be at the charge, and run
the hazard of a War, to oblige the Moors to make good their former Agreements
and Phirmaunds: One of these two was certainly foreseen, would follow the
dividing the English Interest as above, and accordingly the Company did prepare
for the worst: Notwithstanding which, they did not exercise any Hostile Act
(though they had reason enough to have begun, having had very great Sums of
Money extorted from them,) until the Moors by their barbarous Murder of an
Englishman, and assaulting the rest at Hughly begun the War, and became the
Agressors, which will most plainly appear, by giving a true, though short
Account of the Origin of the War, which was as follows.

It is well known, What a flourishing Condition the East-India-Company were in
about the Years 1680, 1681, 1682, 1683. When besides many large Dividents to
the Adventurers, their single Stock was sold for 360 per Cent. to the
admiration of Foreigners, and Emulation of their own Countrymen; especially
some Merchants, who made not the like advantage in their particular Trades; who
though they might have come into the Company, and enjoyed a share of the Trade
with them; Yet resolving to go a shorter way to work, and taking advantage of
the great fermentation that was then in this Nation, arising between several
different Parties, and Persuasions of Men; they fell to Interloping, into
which, many well-meaning Men, by the Craft of some Cunning designing Persons
(bred in the said Companies Service,) and the hopes of finding quicker returns
for their Stock, by an Interloping Trade, than they could do, by coming into
the Companies Stock, gave them the encouragement. And this proceeded so far, as
to the sending out for East India at several times, very many private Ships,
with large Stocks, contrary to the Companies Charter, and His then Majesty's
Proclamation. Upon the whole, the Company did address themselves to His then
Majesty, humbly representing unto him the Injustice of such Proceedings, and
the destructive consequences to the Company, to whom the sole Trade had been
granted by his said Majesty exclusive to all others: By which they had been
encouraged to be at vast charges in the Establishment of it, and were at very
great Expenses in maintaining Forts and Garrisons to defend it: And withal, did
further represent to His said Majesty, what evil consequences such attempts
would have upon the Trade and Navigation of this Kingdom, by such a division of
the English Interest and Nation in India; particularly, that it would be a
means to loose all the English Privileges in India; That the Native Governors
of India would oppress the English, seeing them so divided, And the French,
Dutch, and Danes would make their advantages of such a confusion amongst the
English: Their Debtors in India would neglect to pay them their just Debts, And
above all, All the Wicked and Evil disposed Persons amongst the Companies
Commanders, Factors and Servants, would, that they might the better carry on
their designs of wronging the Company, and enriching themselves, join
themselves to the said Interlopers, which if not prevented, would produce
Rebellion in some of the Companies Garrisons in India; So that the loss and
expense of a Million of Money, and many English men's Lives, would not re-estate
the English Interest in India, in so prosperous a condition, as it was before
the breaking in of the said Interlopers into their Trade: All which they humbly
submitted to His Majesty's consideration, nor were they out in their
Conjectures; For accordingly as they did foresee, and foretold to His Majesty,
in their representations to him, it came to pass; For upon the first arrival of
the Interlopers in India, They to procure Abettors to themselves, and the
better to carry on their own Undertakings, corrupted some of the Companies old
Servants, which had lived long abroad; gave out many untruths of the Companyes
weak condition in Europe; Suggested that the old Company were fallen under the
displeasure of the King; That the Nation was under great disturbances; That
themselves were the new Company: All which untrue reports were ecchoed and
improved by the Enemies of the present Company; especially, by such of their
Servants, as by their unfaithful dealings, had rendered themselves obnoxious,
and consequently had no way so proper to secure themselves, as to herd and join
with the Interlopers: Upon this, Captain Kegwin, with other Confederates, set
up for themselves; at Bombay; and under pretense, that our Nation was together
by the Ears, and that the Company was in Rebellion against His Majesty, They
declared for the King exclusive to the Company, Imprisoned the Companies
Deputy Governor there, refused Obedience to the Companies President; Seized on
the Companies Treasure, and took the Companies own Ships, Arming and Manning
them against the Company, particularly the Hunter and Return, and some other
smaller Ships. And our Rivals in Trade took the advantage of dividing the
English Interest in India, which was not to be let slip, to possess themselves
of Bantam, and drove the English from thence.

The like consequences upon the Report and Suggestion of the Interlopers,
followed at St. Helena, where almost the whole Island ran into an open
Rebellion, and attempted to take the Companies Castle by force of Arms; and by
imitation of the Rebels at Bombay, declared for the King; Set up the Union
Flag, and with Colors flying assaulted the Fort,) But by Gods good Providence
were prevented; For had they succeeded therein, not being able to maintain it
themselves without support from England, they must and would have sold it to
Foreigners, and run away with the Moneys to have secured themselves.

In Bengal, where the Companies Chief Trade was, the Nabob or Governor, and
those under him, took the advantage of those Reports, and the dividing of the
English Interest in India, to break all their agreements formerly made with the
Company, and their Predecessors, and deprive them of all those very great
Privileges, which the English had so long enjoyed under former stipulations;
drew great sums of Money from both Parties, by such oppressive ways of
Violence, Injustice, and open Hostility; as at another time, when the English
were united under the prudent Conduct of the Company, would not have been, nor
never was before attempted; Which they were encouraged to do, because the
Interlopers, that they might carry on their Trade, submitted to any Impositions
the Moors would lay upon them, though never so much more than the Company by
their Agreements were bound to pay.

The particulars of the Injuries sustained, and of the several Sums of Money
extorted from them, as they were then faithfully represented by them, to His
then Majesty and Council, are too long here to incert: But such as they were,
as together with the apprehension of loosing the whole English Interest in
India, did so far prevail with His Majesty, as to consider what proper remedies
to apply to such an inevitable Mischief, and made use of these two; The one,
the preventing the further Trade of Interlopers which had been the root of all
the Mischiefs; which He did by issuing out his Proclamation to restrain them,
and order all the English Nation in India, either to come home, or put
themselves in the service of the Company, that the English Interest might not
be divided, but united in one: And further, in order to the preventing so great
a Mischief, and the better to countenance the Company in their proceedings, He
sent one of his own Ships of War into India, with Commission to sieze upon all
English Interlopers, that he could meet withal there.

As to the Injuries, the Company sustained, by the Natives taking away all
their Privileges, though never so firmly stipulated by former agreements
(which certainly being once gone, could never be again recovered by
Complements) and exacting from them several great Sums of Money: The Remedy
pitched upon by His then Majesty, was by directing the Company to put
themselves in a posture to right themselves, and withstand the like for the
future; and to that end, granted them such new Powers, as were necessary for
the carrying on so great a work, as appears by the supplements to their
Charter, viz. The Erecting of Courts of Admiralty in India in several places,
and empowering all the Companies Ships, with Commissions of War, from himself,
who also had particular Power, Order, and Direction from His said Majesty, to
seize all Interlopers in India, and compel them by force of Arms, in case of
resistance, to go up to such places, where the Company had their Residence and
Garrisons, that so the English Interest might be no longer divided, which had
been the Root of all the Mischief, to the hazard of the loss of the whole
Trade.

Pursuant to whose Direction, and empowered by the Authority of their said
Sovereign, (which might very well be by them thought sufficient for their
Justification, it being never yet questioned, but that the Power of making War
and Peace was vested in the Crown.) The Company were at very great charges, in
sending out diverse great Ships fitted with all manner of Warlike Provisions,
furnished with Land-Soldiers, in order first to reduce their own Factories of
Bombay and St. Helena, which were then in Rebellion; And afterward by
appearing so formidable, it might the better incline the Moors to come to an
amicable agreement, with them, by restoring them their former Privileges,
which they had so unjustly deprived them of, and give them some satisfaction,
for those Extortions they had exercised upon them; which they were to endeavor
first by all fair means imaginable.

According to which, the Islands of Bombay, and St. Helena were reduced; and
settled under the Government of the Company: Some of the Interlopers seized on
by His Majesty's Ship the Phoenix, Captain Tyrrel Commander. The Kings
Proclamation issued out, and proclaimed for all Englishmen to withdraw
themselves out of the Service of Foreign Princes, and to come into the
Companies Garrisons and Residences, that so the English Interest might no more
be divided, and all amicable means made use of, to come to a just agreement
with the Natives: Nor was there by the Company any Hostile Act committed
(though thereunto sufficiently provoked, by many great and repeated injuries)
until the business which happened at Hughly, wherein the Moors were the
Agressors, as does appear by a particular Narrative of the said Action,
extracted out of the Companies Letter, how that begun, which is as follows.

The 28th of October, 1686, At Hughly, in the Bay of Bengal, Three of the
Companies Soldiers going into the Buzar, or Market place as usual, to purchase
Victuals in the Morning, were not only denied the same, but were violently set
upon by the Governors Peons or Soldiers, were sorely beat and cut (of which,
one of them dyed of his wounds then received,) then bound, and carried
Prisoners to Abdul Gunny, the Governor of the place: The News of which,
immediately arrived at the English Factory, in the said Town of Hughly, in
these terms, That two English men were set upon by the Governors, Peons, or
Soldiers, and were desperately cut and wounded, and lay a dying in the
Highway, Upon which Captain Leshly was immediately ordered out with a Party,
with Orders to bring in their Bodies dead or alive; but to offer violence to no
Man, except they were assaulted; Which they attempting to do, were upon the
way, set upon by a Body of Horse and Foot, in a Hostile manner, whom they
received, as Men not willing to be wanting in their own defense; and after some
skirmish, put them to flight; having in the Engagement killed and wounded
several of them: The whole Town being immediately upon this alarmed, set fire
to those of their own Houses, which were nearest the English Factory, by which
many of the Companies Goods were consumed. What follows in the said
Narrative, is but a further prosecution of repeated Acts of War and Hostility,
each against the other; And it being not the intent of this Discourse, to give
you a full History of the War, (which possibly hereafter may be done by another
hand) and the proceedings in it, but only the true occasions of the Rise of it,
I thought it needless to carry it on further; so much of it as is here
inserted, being sufficient to give you a true account how it began, Whereby it
appears. That the Moors were the first Aggressors, and the first Blood shed
in this War, was by them.

Thus having in as contracted a manner as I could, give you an account of the
Origin of the War: Which I do assure the Reader, is done with all faithfulness
and truth, so far as I was enabled, by all the Light I could gather out of the
Companies Records; either as to their Proceedings here, or their advices from
India: I do submit the whole to your perusal and Judgment, and do appeal to the
reason of every impartial Man, whither upon the same, these following
particulars are not plainly, rightly, and truly to be inferred.

First, That the Company did for many years, from its Establishment, until
about the Year 1680, enjoy their Trade, by virtue of their Charters at home,
and their agreements with the Indians abroad, without any molestation, and with
all Peace and good agreement, with the Persons with whom they traded.

That the said Company were now necessitated to defend themselves by Arms, from
the many Injuries daily done unto them, and to endeavor thereby the regaining
of those Privileges, which both they, and their Predecessors had so long
enjoyed, by virtue of formal Stipulations and Agreements, solemnly made and
agreed to, between the Indians and the English.

That the sole occasion of the depriving them of their Privileges, and putting
such exactions upon them, by the Indians, and consequently of the War for
regaining them, was the Interlopers breaking in upon them in their Trade,
thereby dividing the English Interest in India, which rendered them contemptible
in the esteem of the Natives, and encouraged them to do them those Injuries; so
that some of those Persons, who now so much exclaim against that War, were the
sole occasion of it.

That the Encouragements, the Companies Servants received from the Interlopers,
and the advantages they made by joining with them, was the sole occasion of the
two Rebellions in the Islands of Bombay, and St. Helena, and consequently of
the vast charge the Company was at, and the bloodshed that was spilt in
regaining of them.

That the Company being so put upon a necessity of defending and righting
themselves by Arms, did not do it unadvisedly, but did in all humility address
themselves to their then Sovereign, in whose Person it was always believed the
right of making War and Peace, was vested, and took not only his Approbation,
but his Directions and Authority therein, testified by the Instructions for the
War, and granting Commissions of War to all the Captains, which went out in the
Companies Service, and sending one of His Royal Ships in that Service.

That notwithstanding the many Injuries received by the Company, the exacting
and taking away from them several great Sums of Money, and breaking their
solemn agreements made by them, with the present Company, and their
Predecessors, in depriving them of their Privileges enjoyed so long time by
virtue of the said agreements: The Company did commit no Act of Hostility,
until the Indians had made themselves the Agressors in shedding the first
Bloodshed in this War, in the business of Hughly.

The foregoing particulars being so clearly and rationally to be inferred, from
the true account which has been given above of the Rise of the War, I shall
only add, the great and many Endeavors, and Attempts, which the Company has
made, since the first Eruption of the War, to the attainment of a wished for
Peace, That so it may appear, That as the Company were by necessity, and not
willingly engaged in the said War, so they are most willing and desirous of a
Peace; as is evident, by the several attempts they have made thereunto: As
first, After the unhappy Eruption at Hughly, there was made a cessation of
Arms, in order to an accommodation; but it proved ineffectual through the
deceitfulness of the Moors; After that, in the said Bay of Bengala, there was a
perfect Peace made between the English, and the Moors; The particular Articles
thereof being in number Twelve, were sent to the Company; But the Moors as soon
as they had attained their ends upon the Company, in getting them to quit their
Fort, they most perfidiously receded from their agreements, and broke it.

Since that, There has been made two several Agreements with the Nabob, or
Governor of Surrat; and an assurance by him of the great Mogul's ratification;
But when the Council at Surrat, upon Summons, came to receive the Mogul's
Ratification, according to the said Agreement, they were made Prisoners, and at
the same time, A Detachement of Horse and Foot sent to surprise the General and
Council at Swally: And much about the same time, Another Army sent to surprise
Bombay, which they apprehended, might easily be done in the Generals absence.
So that it was no sham upon the Nation, as by some is suggested, for the
Company to give out, that the Peace was made in India; for according to their
Advices they received from thence, which they must govern themselves by, It was
really made, and on account of the very Articles upon which it was made, was
sent to them: But who could foresee, that the Moors would make no other use of
those Agreements, than thereby to make the General more secure, and less
mindful; while in the mean time, in a most treacherous manner, they plotted his
destruction; And when their Plots had not taken those Effects they designed,
they most perfidiously fell from their Agreement.

When the last Letters came from Bombay, which bore date the 9th, and 10th of
May, 1689. The General had again condescended to a Cessation of Arms, in order
to a Peace, which he would with all his Industry endeavor to obtain, and was
the better in hopes of it, by reason of an Information, he had just then
received from one Sheck Ebraim, that he was coming to him with a Letter,
directed to him from the great Mogul himself, (a respect with them most
extraordinary) but whether they will be more real in this Treaty, than they
were in the former, or only as then, pretend an inclination to Peace with the
General, that they may the better destroy him by War: Time, and our next
Advices from thence must discover. This is true, That in this posture, and
under a Cessation of Arms, in order to an Accommodation, things stood when our
last Advices came from thence, which I pray God may answer the Companies
Expectation in a firm and good Peace: For certainly it cannot be supposed, much
less believed, even by their Adversaries themselves; That the Company should in
the least desire the continuance of the War, and not be willing to make all
possible Condescentions, for the obtaining a Peace; Since no one can receive
more prejudice by the War, nor none reap greater advantage by the Peace, than
the present Company: (and Interest, you know, will not lie.) Though the
Adversaries of the Company do make use of this amongst other their Calumnies,
That the Company do needlessly continue the War, and not use their endeavors
for the obtaining of a Peace, and yet, at the same time, by publishing to the
World, in the Preamble to their new Subscriptions, that the Company should be
obliged by Act of Parliament, to purchase a Peace, have done as much as in them
lies, to render it next door to an impossibility ever to obtain it; which will
come to be considered, amongst those Observations, which shall be made upon
some of the particulars of the said Preamble: And this is what at present I
think sufficient to answer to that Calumny, so industriously spread abroad by
the Enemies of the present Company, that They did begin the War in India, not
out of necessity, but capriciously; and have, and do continue it wilfully.

Having thus (as briefly as I well could) answered the main and most plausible
Objections against the present East India Company, by which their Adversaries
endeavored to render them so odious to the World, It may not be amiss in the
close of this Discourse, to consider a little, the Preamble to their new
Subscription, by them lately Printed and Published.

Not to enlarge upon the boldness of the Attempt in General, which has been
hinted at already: As for them to Erect, as it were a new Company, before ever
the matter was come into either of the Two Houses of Parliament; Or, That any
of them had voted, There should be one: And, Not only so, but to take upon them
to dictate to the whole Legislative Power of England, King, Lord, and Commons,
the very terms of an Act to be by them passed, (or else their Subscriptions
signify nothing:) Which is as much as to say, If we may have a new Company
upon our own Terms, we will; but if not, we will have none: And that which is
yet a further degree of presumption, they do publish to the World. That they
have received assurance, That such an Act shall be passed, even before the
things are come into the House of Commons, by a report from their own
Committee. To come to the Preamble it self: Wherein may be taken notice of the
disingenuity of the Preface, and the unreasonableness of the Terms by them
prescribed to the Parliament: For should the Parliament comply with the Terms
by them proposed, or prescribed rather, It would be so far from promoting the
Peace they seem so much to desire, as that it would infallibly obstruct it. In
the Preface, they are pleased to say, That the Committee of the Honorable
House of Commons, did declare their Opinion, That the best way of managing the
East India Trade, is, by a new Company, with a new Joint Stock to be
Established by Act of Parliament. And it is so for Truth, but it is not the
whole Truth; For they most disingeniously, leave out the latter part of the
said Vote, (which is, That the present Company be continued exclusive to
Interlopers, and all Permissive Ships, until the said Act of Parliament be
passed,) as not for their Turn, and wholly inconsistent with their present
Undertaking; for it being in Terminis, that the present Company should be
continued until the said Act of Parliament was passed, it does wholly exclude
the Erecting of a New Company until that be done. And what is the publishing
their Preamble, consisting amongst other things, of the Term of their present
Constitution, and future Government of their new Company, and appointing when,
and how their Governor and Committees should be Elected; their subscribing
several Sums of Moneys, and appointing when, and how their Subscriptions should
be paid in, and propounding Interest to such, as shall timely pay in their
Money; I say, What is all this, but as much as in them lies, the Erecting a
new Company, during the continuance of the Old; and consequently contrary to
the Vote of the said Committees; so that in stead of waiting the Issue of the
Parliaments Determination: They by way of prevention, Erect their New Company
to the destruction of the Old, which is quite contrary to the sense of the Vote
of the Honorable House of Commons.

The Unreasonableness, if not Injustice of their Terms hereby appear, in that
they do require the Parliament to oblige by an Act, the present Company to make
good the demands of the Subjects of the great Mogul, and King of Syam, before
it be so much as inquired into, much less known, of what Nature the said
demands are, whether for Debts contracted for Goods bought, or Goods taken by
the Company Flagrante Bello, by way of Reprisal, for the Goods of the Company
by them seized in the Companies Factories: But taking it for granted, without
any Examination of matter of Fact, that this present Company have bin the
Agressors; they would have by Act of Parliament, the Company be obliged to make
good, whatever the Subjects of either of these two Princes should demand. If
they do reply, they do limit it to Debts and Demands that are just: In that
case, I would desire to be informed, Who should adjust the Account? Should the
Subjects of the Great Mogul, and King of Syam? it may be presumed, That they
would demand enough; especially knowing before hand (as without doubt they
would be well informed) that the Company are under an Obligation by Act of
Parliament, to comply with their Demands. Or should the present Company adjust
the Account? that on the other hand would be thought to be done partially for
themselves. Or, Should the Account be stated and adjusted by Commissioners
chosen respectively by the said Princes and the Company? How can that well be,
when there is no room left for such an indifferent adjustment? that Act being
once passed: For how can it be supposed, there can be an equitable Arbitrament,
where the one Party is at liberty to demand what they please, and the other
Party previously bound up to comply with their Demands: Or, Should the New
Company depute Persons to adjust the said Demands? it may reasonably be
supposed in that case, That those who without cause, have so industriously
endeavored the ruin of the present Company, in a matter of that Nature, will
not be very favorable to their just Interest.

Nor is it less unjust, That they fix the Damage (if any such should be due
from the Company) as they do, to be made good by the Persons, and out of the
Estate of the Managers thereof: Whereas, It is well known to every one that
knows any thing of the Company, that the Company being a Joint Stock, and the
Court of Committees, who are the Managers thereof; being generally many of
them, as much if not more concerned in the Joint Stock than others, are
annually chosen by the Generalty; and by them entrusted with the management
thereof, are not liable, either in Law or Equity in their own Persons and
Estates, to any Action for any thing done by them in the management of that
their Trust; For if they were, it is not reasonable to be supposed, that any
one would take upon him such an Employment, where the Hazard of any
Miscarriage should be his; and the profit arising by such success, should
accrue to the Joint Stock. Besides the Court of Committees consists of diverse
Men, chosen some one year, and some another; so that after that rate, those who
came in one year, may thereby be answerable for the mismanagement of those, who
were in before; a thing altogether unjust and unreasonable: Nor is it to be
supposed, that those who are the Erecters of this new Joint Stock, would
themselves think this reasonable to be one of the terms of its Constitution:
That their Committees chosen for its management, should be liable in their own
Persons and Estates, to answer for all Miscarriages which should accrue to it,
during the time of their being of the same; For if they had, they whould have
certainly put it in, as as one of their terms in their Preamble, which they
have no ways done.

The next thing observable in their Preamble is, That they would have the
Parliament to enact, That the present Stock should defray the Charge of making
Peace with the said Indian Princes: And certain it is, That no one who ever
desired Peace in India, as they seem to pretend to, took such a preposterous
way to the attainment of it: Can it otherwise be believed. Then that those
Indian Princes (if they should once come to the Knowledge, of such an
Obligation laid upon the Company, to buy their Peace with them,) would set a
vast Price upon it? They are little acquainted with India, and the avaritious
temper of their Princes in general, that think otherwise. And the present
Stock, and their new Stock added to it, would not be able to buy a Peace with
them; they knowing (as certainly they would even by the Information, of some of
the new Company,) that the Company were previously obliged to purchase it of
them; nor could they have taken a more certain way to prevent it, than they
have done by publishing such a Proposition to the World: And it is to be
wished, That the publishing such a Notion, though it never take effect, do not
become a great obstruction to the making of it, or if already made, be not an
encouragement to the Moors to break it.

It is certain, Thta no Persons have greater reason to desire a Peace in
India,) as whose Interest does more lead them to it,) than the present Company:
And it is as certain, That they will do what becomes Prudent Men and Persons
so much concerned for the attainment of it, even to the parting with much of
their right: But the quickest and most effectual way for the obtaining such a
Blessing, is, That the present Company be supported, and not discountenanced by
the present Government; for without that, all their Endeavors will prove
ineffectual.

What remains in the Preamble, relates more immediately to their own New
Establishment; in which, Though many things may justly be objected against, yet
not concerning the present Company, comes not within the intention of this
Discourse; Only the design of their whole Project, by its several
Circumstances, may clearly appear to all such, as shall but seriously consider
it, to be, to oblige the Parliament, as much as in them lay, by the
Encouragement of a New Subscription to destroy the present Company, otherwise
their Subscriptions would not have bin so conditionally annexed to Terms; which
they themselves could not expect, That the Wisdom and Justice of the Nation
assembled in Parliament, would ever assent to: And so at the same time, they
hoped to attain their End; which was to to prejudice the present Company,
without running any Hazard of parting with their Money: But the present
Company have other Thoughts of the Wisdom of the Nation, assembled in
Parliament: And as they have, so they will always be ready to submit
themselves to the Wisdom and Justice of that August Assembly; not doubting, but
when they come to weigh things seriously in their Debates, they shall receive
such Encouragement from them, as the neeessity of preserving so Important a
Trade to the Nation, does require.

FINIS.

