Via Intelligentiae. A SERMOM Preached to the UNIVERSITY OF DUBLIN: Showing by
what means the Scholars shall become most Learned and most Useful.

Published at their desire.

By the R. R. Father in God, JEREMY, Lord Bishop of Down, etc. and
Vicechancellour of that UNIVERSITY.

Ad majorem Dei gloriam. LONDON: Printed for R. Royston Bookseller to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1662.

TO THE READER.
PEACE is so great a Blessing, and Disputations and Questions in Religion are
so little friends to Peace, that I have thought no man's time can be better
spent then in propositions and promotions of Peace, and consequently in finding
expedients, and putting periods to all contentious Learning. I have already in
a discourse before the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons assembled in this
Parliament proved that Obedience is the best medium of Peace and true Religion;
and Laws are the only common term and certain rule and measure of it. Vocata
ad concionem multitudine, quae coalescere in populum Unius corporis nulla re
praeterquam legibus poterat, said Livy. Obedience to Man is the external
instrument; and the best in the World. To which I now add, that Obedience to
God is the best internal instrument; and I have proved it in this discourse.
Peace and Holiness are twin-Sisters; after which because every man is bound to
follow, and he that does not shall never see God, I concluded that the office
of a Bishop is in nothing so signally to be exhibited as in declaring by what
means these great duties and blessings are to be acquired. This way I have here
described is an old way; for it was Christ's way, and therefore it is truth and
life: but it has been so little regarded and so seldom taught, that when I
first spoke my thoughts of it in the following words before the Little, but
Excellent, University of Dublin, they consented to it so perfectly, and so
piously entertained it, that they were pleased with some earnestness to desire
me to publish it to the World, and to consigne it to them as a perpetual
memorial of their duty, and of my regards to them, and care over them in my
Station. I was very desirous to serve and please them in all their worthy
desires, but had found so much reason to distrust my own abilities, that I
could not resolve to do what I fain would have done; till by a Second
communication of those thoughts, though in differing words, I had published it
also to my Clergy at the Metropolitical Visitation of the most Reverend and
Learned Lord Primate of Armagh in my own Diocese. But when I found that they
also thought it very reasonable and pious, and joined in the desire of making
it public, I consented perfectly, and now only pray to God it may do that Work
which I intended. I have often thought of those excellent words of Mr. Hooker
in his very learned discourse of Justification; [Such is the untoward
constitution of our Nature, that we do neither so perfectly understand the way
and knowledge of the Lord, nor so steadfastly embrace it when it is understood,
nor so graciously utter it when it is embraced, nor so peaceably maintain it
when it is uttered, but that the best of us are overtaken sometime through
blindness, sometime through hastiness, sometime through impatience, sometime
through other passions of the mind, whereunto (God knows) we are too
subject]That I find by true experience, the best way of Learning and Peace is
that which cures all these evils, as far as in this World they are curable; and
that is the ways of Holiness, which are therefore the best and only way of
Truth. In Disputations there is no end, and but very little advantage; but the
way of godliness has in it no Error, and no Doubtfulness. By this therefore I
hoped best to apply the Counsel of the Wise man: Stand thou fast in thy sure
Understanding, in the way and knowledge of the Lord, and have but one manner of
word, and follow the word of peace and righteousness. Ecclus. 5. 10. Vulg.
edit. Lat.
I have reason to be confident that they who desired me to publish this
discourse will make use of it, and find benefit by it: and if any others do so
too, both they and I shall still more and more give God all thanks, and praise,
and glory.

Sermons newly Printed, and are sold by R. Royston.
A Sermon preached at the opening of the Parliament in Ireland, May 8. 1661.
Before the Right Honorable the Lords Justices, and the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal and the Commons.

A Sermon preached at the Consecration of two Archbishops and ten Bishops, in
the Cathedral Church of St. Patrick in Dublin, January 27. 1660. Both by Jeremy
Tailor D. D. Lord Bishop of Down and Connor.

A Sermon preached at the Consecration of Herbert Lord Bishop of Hereford, by
Jasper Main D. D. one of His Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

The grand debate resumed in the point of Prayer, being an Answer to the
Presbyterian papers presented to the most Reverend the Lord Bishops at the
Savoy, upon the subject by a Member of the Convocation.

7 JOHN 17. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the Doctrine, whether
it be of God, or whether I speak of my self.
THe Ancients in their Mythological Learning tell us, that when Jupiter espied
the men of the World striving for Truth, and pulling her in pieces to secure
her to themselves, he sent Mercury down amongst them, and he with his usual
Arts dressed Error up in the Imagery of Truth, and thrust her into the crowd,
and so left them to contend still: and though then, by Contention men were sure
to get but little Truth, yet they were as earnest as ever, and lost Peace too,
in their Importune Contentions for the very Image of Truth. And this indeed is
no wonder: but when Truth and Peace are brought into the world together, and
bound up in the same bundle of life; when we are taught a Religion by the
Prince of Peace, who is the Truth it self, to see men Contending for this Truth
to the breach of that Peace; and when men fall out, to see that they should
make Christianity their theme, that is one of the greatest wonders in the
World. For Christianity is (...), a soft and gentle Institution; (...), it was
brought into the World to soften the asperities of humane nature, and to cure
the Barbarities of evil men, and the Contentions of the passionate. The Eagle
seeing her breast wounded, and espying the Arrow that hurt her to be feathered,
cried out, (...), the feathered Nation is destroyed by their own feathers; That
is, a Christian fighting and wrangling with a Christian; and indeed that is very
sad: but wrangling about Peace too; that Peace it self should be the argument
of a War, that is unnatural; and if it were not that there are many who are
homines multae religionis, nullius pene pietatis, Men of much Religion and
little Godliness, it would not be that there should be so many Quarrels in and
concerning that Religion which is wholly made up of Truth and Peace, and was
sent amongst us to reconcile the hearts of men when they were tempted to
uncharitableness by any other unhappy argument. Disputation cures no vice, but
kindles a great many, and makes Passion evaporate into sin: and though men
esteem it Learning, yet it is the most useless Learning in the world. When
Eudamidas the Son of Archidamas heard old Xenocrates disputing about Wisdom, he
asked very soberly, If the old Man be yet disputing and enquiring concerning
Wisdom, what time will he have to make use of it? Christianity is all for
Practice, and so much time as is spent in quarrels about it is a diminution to
its Interest: men inquire so much what it is, that they have but little time
left to be Christians. I remember a saying of Erasmus, that when he first read
the New Testament with fear and a good mind, with a purpose to understand it
and obey it, he found it very useful and very pleasant: but when afterward he
fell on reading the vast differences of Commentaries, then he understood it
less then he did before, then he began not to understand it. For indeed the
Truths of God are best dressed in the plain Culture and simplicity of the
Spirit; but the Truths that men commonly teach are like the reflections of a
Multiplying-glasse: for one piece of good money you shall have forty that are
fantastical; and it is forty to one if your finger hit upon the right. Men
have wearied themselves in the dark, having been amused with false fires: and
instead of going home, have wandered all night (...), in untroden, unsafe,
uneasy ways; but have not found out what their Soul desires. But therefore
since we are so miserable, and are in error, and have wandered very far, we
must do as wandering Travelers use to do, go back just to that place from
whence they wandered, and begin upon a new Account. Let us go to the Truth it
self, to Christ, and he will tell us an easy way of ending all our Quarrels.
For we shall find Christianity to be the easiest and the hardest thing in the
World: it is like a secret in Arithmetic, infinitely hard till it be found out
by a right operation, and then it is so plain, we wonder we did not understand
it earlier.

Christ's way of finding out of truth is by doing the will of God. We will try
that by and by, if possibly we may find that easy and certain: in the mean
time let us consider what ways men have propounded to find out Truth, and upon
the foundation of that to establish Peace in Christendom.

1. That there is but one true way is agreed upon; and therefore almost every
Church of one denomination that lives under Government propounds to you a
Systeme or collective Body of Articles, and tells you, that is the true
Religion, and they are the Church, and the peculiar people of God: like Brutus
and Cassius, of whom one says, Ubicunque ipsi essent, praetexebant esse
rempublicam, they supposed themselves were the Commonwealth; and these are the
Church, and out of this Church they will hardly allow salvation. But of this
there can be no end. For divide the Church into Twenty parts, and in what part
soever your lot falls, you and your party are Damned by the other Nineteen; and
men on all hands almost keep their own Proselytes by affrighting them with the
fearful Sermons of Damnation: but in the mean time here is no security to them
that are not able to judge for themselves, and no Peace for them that are.

2. Others cast about to cure this evil, and conclude that it must be done by
submission to an Infallible Guide; this must do it or nothing: and this is the
way of the Church of Rome. Follow but the Pope and his Clergy, and you are
safe, at least as safe as their warrant can make you. Indeed this were a very
good way, if it were a way at all; but it is none; for this can never end our
Controversies: not only because the greatest Controversies are about this
Infallible Guide; but also because, 1. We cannot find that there is upon Earth
any such Guide at all. 2. We do not find it necessary that there should. 3. We
find that they who pretend to be this Infallible Guide are themselves
infinitely deceived. 4. That they do not believe themselves to be Infallible
whatever they say to us; because they do not put an end to all their own
Questions that trouble them. 5. Because they have no peace but what is
constrained by force and Government. 6. And lastly, because if there were such
a Guide, we should fail of Truth by many other causes: for it may be that Guide
would not do his duty; or we are fallible followers of this infallible Leader;
or we should not understand his meaning at all times, or we should be perverse
at some times, or something as bad: because we all confess that God is an
Infallible Guide, and that some way or other he does teach us sufficiently, and
yet it does come to pass by our faults that we are as far to seek for Peace
and Truth as ever.

3. Some very wise men finding this to fail, have undertaken to reconcile the
differences of Christendom by a way of moderation. Thus they have projected to
reconcile the Papists and the Lutherans, the Lutherans and the Calvinists, the
Remonstrants and Contra-emonstrants, and project that each side should abate of
their asperities, and pare away something of their propositions, and join in
Common terms and phrases of Accommodation, each of them sparing something, and
promising they shall have a great deal of peace for the exchange of a little of
their opinion. This was the way of Cassander, Modrevius, Andreas Frisius,
Erasmus, Spalato, Grotius, and indeed of Charles the Fifth in part, but
something more heartily of Ferdinand the Second. This device produced the
conferences at Poissy, at Montpellier, at Ratisbon, at the Hague, at many
places more: and what was the event of these? Their parties when their
Delegates returned, either disclaimed their Moderation, or their respective
Princes had some other ends to serve, or they permitted the Meetings upon
uncertain hopes, and a trial if any good might come; or it may be they were
both in the wrong, and their mutual abatement was nothing but a mutual
quitting of what they could not get, and the shaking hands of false friends; or
it may be it was all of it nothing but Hypocrisy and Arts of Craftiness, and,
like Lucian's man, every one could be a Man and a Pestle when he pleased. And
the Council of Trent, though under another cover, made use of the artifice, but
made the secret manifest and common: for at this day the Jesuits in the
Questions de auxiliis Divinae gratiae have prevailed with the Dominicans to use
their expressions, and yet they think they still keep the sentence of their own
Order. From hence can succeed nothing but folly and a fantastic peace. This
is but the skinning of an old sore, it will break out upon all occasions.

4. Others, who understand things beyond the common rate, observing that many
of our Controversies and peevish wranglings are kept up by the ill stating of
the Question, endeavor to declare things wisely, and make the matter
intelligible, and the words clear; hoping by this means to cut off all
disputes. Indeed this is a very good way, so far as it can go; and would
prevail very much, if all men were wise, and would consent to those stateings,
and would not fall out upon the main enquiry when it were well stated: but we
find by a sad experience that few Questions are well stated; and when they are,
they are not consented to; and when they are agreed on by both sides that they
are well stated, it is nothing else but a drawing up the Armies in Battalia
with great skill and discipline; the next thing they do is, they thrust their
Swords into one another sides.

5. What remedy after all this? Some other good men have propounded one way
yet: but that is a way of Peace rather then Truth; and this is, that all
Opinions should be tolerated and none persecuted; and then all the World will
be at peace. Indeed this relies upon a great reasonableness: not only because
Opinions cannot be forced; but because if men receive no hurt, it is to be
hoped they will do none. But we find that this alone will not do it. For
besides that all men are not so just as not to do any Injury (for some men
begin the evil) besides this (I say) there are very many men amongst us who are
not content that you permit them; for they will not permit you, but rule over
your faith, and say that their way is not only true, but necessary; and
therefore the Truth of God is at stake, and all Indifference and moderation is
carnal Wisdom, and want of Zeal for God: nay more then so, they preach for
Toleration when themselves are under the rod, who when they got the rod into
their own hands thought Toleration it self to be Intolerable. Thus do the
Papists, and thus the Calvinists: and for their Cruelty they pretend Charity.
They will indeed force you to come in, but it is in true Zeal for your Soul:
and if they do you violence, it is no more then if they pull your Arm out of
joint, when to save you from drowning they draw you out of a River; and if you
complain, it is no more to be regarded then the outcries of Children against
their Rulers, or sick men against Physicians. But as to the thing it self, the
truth is, it is better in Contemplation then in Practice: for reckon all that
is got by it when you come to handle it, and it can never satisfy for the
infinite disorders happening in the Government; the scandal to Religion, the
secret dangers to public Societies, the growth of Heresy, the nursing up of
parties to a grandeur so considerable as to be able in their own time to change
the Laws and the Government. So that if the Question be whether mere Opinions
are to be persecuted, it is certainly true, they ought not. But if it be
considered how by Opinions men rifle the affairs of Kingdoms, it is also as
certain, they ought not to be made public and permitted. And what is now to be
done? must Truth be for ever in the dark, and the World for ever be divided,
and Societies disturbed, and Governments weakened, and our Spirits debauched
with Error and the uncertain Opinions and the Pedantery of talking men?
Certainly there is a way to cure all this evil; and the wise Governor of all
the World has not been wanting in so necessary a matter as to lead us into all
Truth. But the way has not yet been hit upon, and yet I have told you all the
ways of Man and his Imaginations in order to Truth and Peace: and you see
these will not do; we can find no rest for the soles of our feet amidst all the
waters of Contention and disputations, and little artifices of divided Schools.
Every man is a liar, and his understanding is weak, and his Propositions
uncertain, and his Opinions trifling, and his Contrivances imperfect: and
neither Truth nor Peace does come from man. I know I am in an Auditory of
inquisitive persons, whose business is to study for Truth, that they may find
it for themselves, and teach it unto others: I am in a School of Prophets and
Prophets Sons, who all ask Pilate's Question, What is Truth? You look for it in
your Books, and you tug hard for it in your Disputations, and you derive it
from the Cisterns of the Fathers, and you enquire after the old ways, and
sometimes are taken with new appearances, and you rejoice in false lights, or
are delighted with little umbrages and peep of Day. But where is there a man,
or a Society of men, that can be at rest in his enquiry, and is sure he
understands all the truths of God? where is there a man but the more he studies
and enquires, still he discovers nothing so clearly as his own Ignorance? This
is a demonstration that we are not in the right way, that we do not inquire
wisely, that our Method is not artificial. If men did fall upon the right way,
it were impossible so many learned men should be engaged in contrary parties
and opinions. We have examined all ways but one, all but God's way: Let us
(having missed in all the other) try this: let us go to God for Truth; for
Truth comes from God only, and his ways are plain, and his sayings are true,
and his promises Yea and Amen: and if we miss the Truth, it is because we will
not find it: for certain it is, that all that Truth which God has made
necessary, he has also made legible and plain, and if we will open our eyes,
we shall see the Sun, and if we will walk in the light, we shall rejoice in the
light: only let us withdraw the Curtains, let us remove the impediments and the
sin that does so easily beset us; that's Gods way. Every man must in his station
do that portion of duty which God requires of him, and then he shall be taught
of God all that is fit for him to learn: there is no other way for him but
this. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and a good
understanding have all they that do thereafter. Psalm. 111. ver. 10.
And so said David of himself, I have more understanding then my Teachers;
because I keep thy Commandments. Psalm. 119.
And this is the only way which Christ has taught us: if you ask, What is
truth? you must not do as Pilate did, ask the Question, and then go away from
him that only can give you an answer; for as God is the author of Truth, so he
is the teacher of it; and the way to learn it is this of my Text: For so says
our blessed Lord, If any man will do his will, he shall know of the Doctrine,
whether it be of God or no.

My Text is simple as Truth it self, but greatly Comprehensive, and contains a
truth that alone will enable you to understand all Mysteries, and to expound
all Prophecies, and to interpret all Scriptures, and to search into all
Secrets, all (I mean) which concern our happiness and our duty: and it being
an affirmative hypotheticall, is plainly to be resolved into this Proposition,
The way to judge of Religion is by doing of our duty, and Theology is rather a
Divine life then a Divine knowledge. In Heaven indeed we shall first see, and
then love; but here on Earth we must first love, and love will open our eyes as
well as our hearts, and we shall then see and perceive and understand.

In the handling of which Proposition I shall first represent to you that the
certain causes of our Errors are nothing but direct sins, nothing makes us
Fools and Ignorants, but living vicious lives; and then I shall proceed to the
direct demonstration of the Article in question, that Holiness is the only way
of truth and understanding.

1. No man understands the Word of God as it ought to be understood, unless he
lays aside all affections to Sin: of which because we have taken very little
care, the product has been that we have had very little wisdom, and very
little knowledge in the ways of God. (...), said Aristotle, Wickedness does
corrupt a man's reasoning, it gives him false principles and evil measures of
things: the sweet Wine that Ulysses gave to the Cyclops put his eye out; and a
man that has contracted evil affections, and made a League with sin, sees only
by those measures. A Covetous man understands nothing to be good that is not
profitable; and a Voluptuous man likes your reasoning well enough if you
discourse of Bonum jucundum, the pleasures of the sense, the ravishments of
lust, the noises and inadvertencies, the mirth and songs of merry Company. But
if you talk to him of the melancholy Lectures of the Cross, the content of
Resignation, the peace of Meekness, and the Joys of the holy Ghost, and of
rest in God; after your long discourse and his great silence he cries out,
What Is the matter? He knows not what you mean. Either you must fit his humor,
or change your discourse.

I remember that Arianus tells of a Gentleman that was banished from Rome, and
in his sorrow visited the Philosopher, and he heard him talk wisely, and
believed him, and promised him to leave all the thoughts of Rome and splendours
of the Court, and retire to the course of a severe Philosophy: but before the
good man's Lectures were done, there came (...), letters from Caesar to recall
him home, to give him pardon, and promise him great Employment. He presently
grew weary of the good man's Sermon, and wished he would make an end, thought
his discourse was dull and flat; for his head and heart were full of another
story and new principles; and by these measures he could hear only and he
could understand.

Every man understands by his Affections more then by his Reason: and when the
Wolf in the Fable went to School to learn to spell, whatever letters were told
him, he could never make any thing of them but Agnus; he thought of nothing but
his belly: and if a man be very hungry, you must give him meat before you give
him counsel. A man's mind must be like your proposition before it can be
entertained: for whatever you put into a man it will smell of the Vessel: it
is a man's mind that gives the emphasis, and makes your argument to prevail.

And upon this account it is that there are so many false Doctrines in the only
Article of Repentance. Men know they must repent, but the definition of
Repentance they take from the convenience of their own affairs: what they will
not part with, that is not necessary to be parted with, and they will repent,
but not restore: they will say nollem factum, they wish they had never done it;
but since it is done, you must give them leave to rejoice in their purchase:
they will ask forgiveness of God; but they sooner forgive themselves, and
suppose that God is of their mind. If you tie them to hard terms, your
Doctrine is not to be understood, or it is but one Doctors opinion, and
therefore they will fairly take their leave, and get them another Teacher.

What makes these evil, these dangerous and desperate Doctrines? not the
obscurity of the thing, but the cloud upon the heart; for say you what you
will, He that hears must be the expounder, and we can never suppose but a man
will give sentence in behalf of what he passionately loves. And so it comes to
pass that, as Rabbi Moses observed that God for the greatest Sin imposed the
least Oblation, as a she-Goat for the sin of Idolatry; for a woman accused of
Adultery, a Barly-cake: so do most men; they think to expiate the worst of
their sins with a trifling, with a pretended, little, insignificant repentance.
God indeed did so, that the cheapnesse of the oblation might teach them to hope
for pardon; not from the Ceremony, but from a severe internal repentance. But
men take any argument to lessen their repentance, that they may not lessen
their pleasures or their estates, and that Repentance may be nothing but a
word, and Mortification signify nothing against their pleasures, but be a term
of Art only, fitted for the Schools or for the Pulpit, but nothing relative to
practice, or the extermination of their sin. So that it is no wonder we
understand so little of Religion: it is because we are in love with that which
destroys it; and as a man does not care to hear what does not please him, so
neither does he believe it; he cannot, he will not understand it.

And the same is the Case in the matter of Pride; the Church has extremely
suffered by it in many ages. Arius missed a Bishopric, and therefore turned
Heretic; (...), says the story, he disturbed and shaked the Church; for he
did not understand this Truth [ That the peace of the Church was better then
the satisfaction of his person, or the promoting his foolish Opinion.] And do
not we see and feel that at this very day the Pride of men makes it seem
impossible for many persons to obey their Superiors? and they do not see what
they can read every day, that it is a sin to speak evil of Dignities.

A man would think it a very easy thing to understand the 13. Chapter to the
Romans, Whosoever resists the power, resists the Ordinance of God: and yet
we know a generation of men to whom these words were so obscure, that they
thought it lawful to fight against their King. A man would think it easy to
believe that those who were in the gainsaying of Corah, who rose up against
the high Priest, were in a very sad condition: and yet there are too many
amongst us who are in the gainsaying of Corah, and think they do very well;
that they are the Godly party, and the good people of God. Why? what is the
matter? In the world there can be nothing plainer then these words, Let every
soul be subject to the higher powers, and that you need not make a scruple who
are these higher powers, it is as plainly said, there is no power but of God;
all that are set over you by the Laws of your Nation, these are over you in the
Lord: and yet men will not understand these plain things; they deny to do
their notorious duty, and yet believe they are in the right, and if they
sometimes obey for wrath, they oftener disobey for Conscience sake. Where is the
fault? The words are plain, the duty is certain, the Book lies open; but, alas!
it is Sealed within, that is, men have eyes and will not see, ears and will
not hear. But the wonder is the less; for we know when God said to Jonas,
do thou well to be angry? he answered God to his face, I do well to be angry
even unto the death. Let God declare his mind never so plainly, if men will not
lay aside the evil principle that is within, their open love to their secret
sin, they may kill an Apostle, and yet be so ignorant as to think they do God
good service; they may disturb Kingdoms, and break the peace of a well-ordered
Church, and rise up against their Fathers, and be cruel to their Brethren, and
stir up the people to Sedition; and all this with a cold stomach and a hot
liver, with a hard heart and a tender Conscience, with humble carriage and a
proud spirit. For thus men hate Repentance, because they scorn to confess an
Error; they will not return to Peace and Truth, because they fear to lose the
good opinion of the people whom themselves have couzened; they are afraid to be
good, lest they should confess they have formerly done amiss: and he that
observes how much evil is done, and how many Heresies are risen, and how much
obstinacy and unreasonable perseverance in folly dwells in the World upon the
stock of Pride, may easily conclude that no learning is sufficient to make a
proud man understand the truth of God, unless he first learn to be humble. But
Obedite and intelligetis (says the Prophet) obey and be humble, leave the
foolish affections of sin, and then ye shall understand. That Is the First
particular: All remaining affections to sin hinder the learning and
understanding of the things of God.

2. He that means to understand the will of God and the truth of Religion must
lay aside all inordinate affections to the world. 2 Cor. 3. 14. S. Paul
complained that there was at that day a veil upon the heart of the Jews in the
reading of the Old Testament: they looked for a Temporal Prince to be their
Messiah, and their affections and hopes dwelt in secular advantages; and so
long as that veil was there, they could not see, and they would not accept the
poor despised JESUS.

For the things of the world, besides that they entangle one another, and make
much business, and spend much time, they also take up the attentions of a man's
mind, and spend his faculties, and make them trifling and secular with the very
handling and conversation. And therefore the Pythagoreans taught their
Disciples (...), a separation from the things of the body, if they would purely
find out truth and the excellencies of wisdom. Had not he lost his labor that
would have discoursed wisely to Apicius, and told him of the books of Fate and
the secrets of the other World, the abstractions of the Soul and its brisker
Immortality, that Saints and Angels eat not, and that the Spirit of a man
lives for ever upon wisdom and holiness and contemplation? The fat Glutton
would have stared a while upon the Preacher, and then have fallen asleep. But
if you had discoursed well and knowingly of a Lamprey, a large Mullet, or a
Boar, animal propter Convivia natum, and have sent him a Cook from Asia to
make new Sawces, he would have attended carefully, and taken in your discourses
greedily. And so it is in the Questions and secrets of Christianity: which made
St. Paul, when he intended to convert Felix, discourse first with him about
Temperance, Righteousness and Judgment to come. He began in the right point;
he knew it was to no purpose to preach Jesus Christ crucified to an intemperate
person, to an Usurper of other men's rights, to one whose soul dwelt in the
World, and cared not for the sentence of the last day. The Philosophers began
their Wisdom with the meditation of death, and St. Paul his with a discourse of
the day of Judgment: to take the heart off from this world and the amabilities
of it, which dishonor and baffle the understanding, and made Solomon himself
become a child and fooled into Idolatry, by the prettiness of a talking woman.
Men now-a-dayes love not a Religion that will cost them dear. If your Doctrine
calls upon men to part with any considerable part of their estates, you must
pardon them if they cannot believe you; they understand it not. I shall give
you one great instance of it.

When we consider the infinite unreasonableness that is in the Popish Religion,
how against Common sense their Doctrine of Transubstantiation is, how against
the common Experience of humane nature is the Doctrine of the Popes
Infallibility, how against Scripture is the Doctrine of Indulgences and
Purgatory; we may well think it a wonder that no more men are persuaded to
leave such unlearned follies. But then on the other side, the wonder will
cease, if we mark how many temporal ends are served by these Doctrines. If you
destroy the Doctrine of Purgatory and Indulgences you take away the Priests
Income, and make the Sea Apostolic to be poor; if you deny the Popes
Infallibility, you will despise his Authority, and examine his Propositions,
and discover his Failings, and put him to answer hard Arguments, and lessen his
Power: and indeed, when we run through all the Propositions of difference
between them and us, and see that in every one of them they serve an end of
money or of power; it will be very visible that the way to confute them is not
by learned disputations; (for we see they have been too long without effect,
and without prosperity) the men must be cured of their affections to the World,
ut nudi nudum sequantur crucifixum, that with naked and divested affections
they might follow the naked Crucified Jesus, and then they would soon learn
the truths of God, which till then will be impossible to be apprehended. (...).
Men (as St. Basil says) when they expound Scripture, always bring in
something of themselves: but till there be (as one said) (...), a rising out
from their own seats, until they go out from their dark dungeons, they can
never see the light of Heaven. And how many men are there amongst us who are
therefore enemies to the Religion, because it seems to be against their profit?
The argument of Demetrius is unanswerable; by this craft they get their liings:
leave them in their Livings, and they will let your Religion alone; if not,
they think they have reason to speak against it. When men's souls are possessed
with the World, their souls cannot be invested with holy Truths. (...), as St.
Isidor said: the Soul must be informed, insoul'd, or animated with the
propositions that you put in, or you shall never do any good, or get Disciples
to Christ. Now because a man cannot serve two Masters; because he cannot
vigorously attend two objects; because there can be but one soul in any living
Creature; if the World have got possession, talk no more of your Questions,
shut your Bibles, and read no more of the words of God to them, for they cannot
tell of the Doctrine, whether it be of God, or of the World. That is the Second
particular: Worldly affections hinder true understandings in Religion.

3. No man, how learned soever, can understand the Word of God, or be at peace
in the Questions of Religion, unless he be a Master over his Passions. Tu
quoque si vis Lumine claro
Cernere verum, Gaudia pelle,
Pelle Timorem: Nubila men's est
Vinctaque fraenis Haec ubi regnant.
said the wise Boethius. A man must first learn himself before he can learn
God. Tua te fallit Imago: nothing deceives a man so soon as a man's self; when a
man is (that I may use Plato's expression) (...), mingled with his nature and
his Congeniall infirmities of anger and desire, he can never have any thing but
(...), a knowledge partly moral and partly natural: his whole life is but
Imagination; his knowledge is Inclination and opinion; he judges of Heavenly
things by the measures of his fears and his desires, and his Reason is half of
it sense, and determinable by the principles of sense. (...), then a man learns
well when he is a Philosopher in his Passions. Nazianz. ad Philagrium.
Passionate men are to be taught the first elements of Religion: and let men
pretend to as much learning as they please, they must begin again at Christ's
Cross; they must learn true mortification and crucifixion of their anger and
desires, before they can be good Scholars in Christ's School, or be admitted
into the more secret enquiries of Religion, or profit in spiritual
understanding. It was an excellent Proverb of the Jews, In passionibus Spiritus
Sanctus non habitat, the Holy Ghost never dwells in the house of Passion. Truth
enters into the heart of Man when it is empty and clean and still; but when
the mind is shaken with Passion as with a storm, you can never hear the voice
of the Charmer, though he charm very wisely: and you will very hardly sheath a
sword when it is held by a loose and a paralytic Arm. He that means to learn
the secrets of Gods wisdom must be, as Plato says, (...), his soul must be
Consubstantiated with Reason, not invested with Passion: to him that is
otherwise, things are but in the dark, his notion is obscure and his sight
troubled; and therefore though we often meet with passionate Fools, yet we
seldom or never hear of a very passionate wise man.

I have now done with the First part of my undertaking, and proved to you that
our evil life is the cause of our Controversies and Ignorances in the Religion
of the things of God. You see what hinders us from becoming good Divines. But
all this while we are but in the preparation to the Mysteries of Godliness.
When we have thrown off all affections to sin; when we have stripped our selves
from all fond adherencies to the things of the world, and have broken the
chains and dominion of our Passions; then we may say with David, Ecce paratum
est Cor meum, Deus; My heart is ready, O God, my heart is ready: then we may
say, Speak, Lord, for thy servant hears: but we are not yet instructed. It
remains therefore that we enquire what is that immediate principle or means
by which we shall certainly and infallibly be led into all truth, and be taught
the mind of God, and understand all his secrets: and this is worth our
knowledge. I cannot say that this will end your labors, and put a period to
your studies, and make your learning easy: it may possibly increase your
labor, but it will make it profitable; it will not end your Studies, but it
will direct them; it will not make humane Learning easy, but will make it wise
unto salvation, and conduct it into true notices and ways of wisdom.

I am now to describe to you the right way of knowledge. Qui facit voluntatem
Patris mei (says Christ) that is the way: do Gods will, and you shall
understand Gods Word. And it was an excellent saying of St. Peter, Add to your
faith Virtue, etc. If these things be in you and abound, ye shall not be
unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. 2 Pet. 1.
For in this case it is not enough that all our hindrances of knowledge are
removed; for that is but the opening of the covering of the Book of God: but
when it is opened, it is written with a hand that every eye cannot read. Though
the windows of the East be open, yet every eye cannot behold the glories of
the Sun. (...), says Plotinus; the eye that is not made Solar cannot see the
Sun; the eye must be fitted to the splendour: and is not the wit of the man, but
the spirit of the man; not so much his head as his heart, that learnes the
Divine Philosophy.

1. Now in this inquiry I must take one thing for a praecognitum, that every
good man is (...), he is taught of God: and indeed unless he teach us, we shall
make but ill Scholars our selves, and worse guides to others. Nemo potest Deum
scire, nisi a Deo doceatur, said St. Jrenaeus, ( lib. 6. c. 14.) If God teaches
us, then all is well: but if we do not learn wisdom at his feet, from whence
should we have it? it can come from no other spring. And therefore it naturally
follows, that by how much nearer we are to God, by so much better we are like
to be instructed.

But this being supposed, as being most evident, we can easily proceed by
wonderful degrees and steps of progression in the Economy of this Divine
Philosophy. For,

2. There is in every righteous man a new vital principle: the Spirit of Grace
is the spirit of Wisdom, and teaches us by secret inspirations, by proper
arguments, by actual persuasions, by personal applications, by effects and
energies: and as the soul of a man is the cause of all his vital operations,
so is the Spirit of God the life of that life, and the cause of all actions and
productions Spiritual. And the consequence of this is what St. John tells us
of; Ye have received the Unction from above: and that anointing teaches you
all things. 1 John 2. 27.
All things of some one kind: that is, certainly, all things that pertain to
life and Godliness; all that by which a man is wise and happy. We see this by
common experience. Unless the soul have a new life put into it, unless there
be a vital principle within, unless the spirit of life be the Informer of the
spirit of the man, the Word of God will be as dead in the operation as the body
in its powers and possibilities. Sol and Homo generant hominem, says our
Philosophy. A Man alone does not beget a man; but a Man and the Sun: for
without the influence of the Celestial bodies all natural actions are
ineffective: and so it is in the operations of the Soul.

Which principle diverse Fanatics, both amongst us and in the Church of Rome,
misunderstanding, look for new Revelations, and expect to be conducted by
ecstasy, and will not pray but in a transfiguration, and live upon raptures and
extravagant expectations, and separate themselves from the conversation of men
by affectations, by new measures and singularities, and destroy order and
despise Government, and live upon illiterate phantasmes and ignorant
discourses. These men do (...), they belly the holy Ghost: For the Spirit of God
makes men wise; it is an evil Spirit that makes them Fools. The Spirit of God
makes us Wise unto Salvation, it does not spend its holy influences in
disguises and convulsions of the understanding. Gods spirit does not destroy
Reason, but heightens it: he never disorders the beauties of Government, but is
a God of Order; it is the spirit of Humility, and teaches no Pride: he is to be
found in Churches and Pulpits, upon Altars and in the Doctors Chaires; not in
Conventicles and mutinous corners of a house: he goes in company with his own
Ordinances, and makes progressions by the measures of life: his infusions are
just as our acquisitions, and his Graces pursue the methods of nature: that
which was imperfect he leads on to perfection, and that which was weak he
makes strong: he opens the heart, not to receive murmurs, or to attend to
secret whispers, but to hear the Word of God; and then he opens the heart, and
creates a new one; and without this new creation, this new principle of life,
we may hear the Word of God, but we can never understand it; we hear the
sound, but are never the better; unless there be in our hearts a secret
conviction by the spirit of God, the Gospel it self is a dead Letter, and
works not in us the light and righteousness of God.

Do not we see this by a daily experience? Even those things which a good man
and an evil man know, they do not know them both alike. A wicked man does know
that good is lovely, and sin is of an evil and destructive nature; and when he
is reproved, he is convinced; and when he is observed, he is ashamed; and when
he has done, he is unsatisfied; and when he pursues his sin, he does it in the
dark. Tell him he shall dye, and he sighs deeply, but he knows it as well as
you: proceed, and say that after death comes Judgment, and the poor man
believes and trembles. He knows that God is angry with him; and if you tell him
that for ought he knows he may be in Hell to morrow, he knows that it is an
intolerable truth, but it it also undeniable. And yet after all this he runs to
commit his sin with as certain an event and resolution, as if he knew no
argument against it. These notices of things terrible and true pass through
his understanding as an Eagle through the Air: as long as her flight lasted,
the Air was shaken; but there remains no path behind her.

Now since at the same time we see other persons, not so learned it may be, not
so much versed in Scriptures, yet they say a thing is good and lay hold of it,
they believe glorious things of Heaven, and they live accordingly, as men that
believe themselves; half a word is enough to make them understand; a nod is a
sufficient reproof; the Crowing of a Cock, the singing of a Lark, the dawning
of the day, and the washing their hands are to them competent memorialls of
Religion and warnings of their duty: What is the reason of this difference?
They both read the Scriptures, they read and hear the same Sermons, they have
capable understandings, they both believe what they hear and what they read,
and yet the event is vastly different. The reason is that which I am now
speaking of: the one understands by one Principle, the other by another; the
one understands by Nature, and the other by Grace; the one by humane Learning,
and the other by Divine; the one reads the Scriptures without, and the other
within; the one understands as a son of man, the other as a son of God; the one
perceives by the proportions of the World, and the other by the measures of the
Spirit; the one understands by Reason, and the other by Love; and therefore he
does not only understand the Sermons of the Spirit, and perceives their
meaning, but he pierces deeper, and knows the meaning of that meaning, that is,
the secret of the Spirit, that which is spiritually discerned, that which gives
life to the Proposition, and activity to the Soul.

And the reason is, because he has a Divine principle within him, and a new
understanding: that is plainly, he has Love, and that is more then Knowledge;
as was rarely well observed by St. Paul, Knowledge puffethup, but Charity
edifieth; that is, Charity makes the best Scholars. No Sermons can edify you,
no Scriptures can build you up a holy building to God, unless the love of God,
be in your hearts; and purify your souls from all filthiness of the Flesh and
spirit.

But so it is in the regions of Stars, where a vast body of fire is so divided
by excentric motions, that it looks as if Nature had parted them into Orbs and
round shells of plain and purest materials: but where the cause is simple and
the matter without variety, the motions must be uniforme; and in Heaven we
should either espy no motion, or no variety. But God, who designed the Heavens
to be the causes of all changes and motions here below, has placed his Angels
in their houses of light, and given to every one of his appointed officers a
portion of the fiery matter to circumagitate and roll; and now the wonder
ceases: for if it be enquired why this part of the fire runs Eastward and the
other to the South, they being both indifferent to either, it is because an
Angel of God sits in the Center, and makes the same matter turn, not by the
bent of its own mobility and inclination, but in order to the needs of Man and
the great purposes of God; and so it is in the understandings of men: When they
all receive the same notions, and are taught by the same Master, and give full
consent to all the propositions, and can of themselves have nothing to
distinguish them in the events, it is because God has sent his Divine spirit,
and kindles a new fire, and creates a braver capacity, and applies the actives
to the passives, and blesses their operation. For there is in the heart of man
such a dead sea, and an indisposition to holy flames, like as in the cold
Rivers in the North, so as the fires will not burn them, and the Sun it self
will never warm them, till Gods holy Spirit does from the Temple of the new
Jerusalem bring a holy flame, and make it shine and burn.

The Natural man (says the holy Apostle) cannot perceive the things of the
Spirit: they are foolishness unto him; for they are spiritually discerned. 1
Cor. 2 14.
For he that discourses of things by the measures of sense, thinks nothing good
but that which is delicious to the palate, or pleases the brutish part of man;
and therefore while he estimates the secrets of Religion by such measures, they
must needs seem as insipid as Cork, or the uncondited Mushrom; for they have
nothing at all of that in their constitution. A voluptuous person is like the
Dogs of Sicily, so filled with the deliciousness of Plants that grow in every
furrow and hedge, that they can never keep the sent of their game. (...), said
St. Chrysostom: the fire and water can never mingle; so neither can sensuality
and the watchfulness and wise discerning of the spirit. Pilato interroganti de
veritate, Christus non respondit: When the wicked Governor asked of Christ
concerning truth, Christ gave him no answer. He was not fit to hear it.

He therefore who so understands the Words of God, that he not only believes,
but loves the proposition; he who consents with all his heart, and being
convinced of the truth does also apprehend the necessity, and obeys the
precept, and delights in the discovery, and lays his hand upon his heart, and
reduces the notices of things to the practice of duty; he who dares trust his
proposition, and drives it on to the utmost ssue, resolving to go after it
whither soever it can invite him; this Man walks in the spirit: at least thus
far he is gone toward it, his Understanding is brought in obsequium Christi,
into the obedience of Christ. This is a loving God with all our mind; and
whatever goes less then this, is but Memory, and not Understanding; or else
such notice of things by which a man is neither the wiser nor the better.

3. Sometimes God gives to his choicest, his most elect and precious Servants,
a knowledge even of secret things, which he communicates not to others. We find
it greatly remarked in the case of Abraham, Genesis 18. 17. And the Lord said,
Shall I hide from Abraham that thing that I do? Why not from Abraham? God tells
us. v. 19. For I know him, that he will command his Children and his household
after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and
judgment. And though this be irregular and infrequent, yet it is a reward of
their piety, and the proper increase also of the spiritual man. We find this
spoken by God to Daniel, and promised to be the lot of the righteous man in the
days of the Messiah; Many shall be purified and made white and tried; but the
wicked shall do wickedly: and what then? None of the wicked shall understand;
but the wise shall understand. Dan. 12. 10.
Where besides that the wise man and the wicked are opposed, plainly signifying
that the wicked man is a Fool and an Ignorant: it is plainly said that None of
the wicked shall understand the wisdom and mysteriousnesse of the Kingdom of
the Messiah.

4. A good life is the best way to understand Wisdom and Religion, because by
the experiences and relishes of Religion there is conveyed to them such a
sweetness, to which all wicked men are strangers: there is in the things of
God to them which practice them a deliciousness that makes us love them, and
that love admits us into Gods Cabinet, and strangely clarifies the
understanding by the purification of the heart. For when our reason is raised
up by the spirit of Christ, it is turned quickly into experience: when our
Faith relyes upon the principles of Christ, it is changed into vision: and so
long as we know God only in the ways of man, by contentious Learning, by
arguing and dispute, we see nothing but the shadow of him, and in that shadow
we meet with many dark appearances, little certainty and much conjecture: But
when we know him (...), with the eyes of holiness and the intuition of
gracious experiences, with a quiet spirit and the peace of Enjoyment; then we
shall hear what we never heard, and see what our eyes never saw; then the
mysteries of Godliness shall be opened unto us, and clear as the windows of
the morning. And this is rarely well expressed by the Apostle, If we stand up
from the dead and awake from sleep, then Christ shall give us light. Ephesians. 5. 14.


For although the Scriptures themselves are written by the Spirit of God, yet
they are written within and without: and besides the light that shines upon the
face of them, unless there be a light shining within our hearts, unfolding the
leaves and interpreting the mysterious sense of the spirit, convincing our
Consciences and preaching to our hearts; to look for Christ in the leaves of
the Gospel, is to look for the living amongst the dead. There is a life in
them, but that life is (according to St. Paul's expression) hid with Christ in
God: and unless the spirit of God be the Promo-condus, we shall never draw it
forth.

Humane Learning brings excellent ministeries toward this: it is admirably
useful for the reproof of Heresies, for the detection of Fallacies, for the
Letter of the Scripture, for Collateral testimonies, for exterior advantages;
but there is something beyond this, that humane Learning without the addition
of Divine can never teach. Moses was learned in all the learning of the
Egyptians; and the holy men of God contemplated the glories of God in the
admirable order, motion and influences of the Heaven: but besides all this,
they were taught of God something far beyond these prettinesses. Pythagoras
read Moses's Books, and so did Plato; and yet they became not Proselytes of the
Religion, though they were learned Scholars of such a Master. The reason is,
because that which they drew forth from thence was not the life and secret of
it.

Tradidit arcano quodcunque Volumine Moses. There is a secret in these Books,
which few men, none but the Godly, did understand: and though much of this
secret is made manifest in the Gospel, yet even here also there is a Letter and
there is a Spirit: still there is a reserve for Gods secret ones, even all
those deep mysteries which the old Testament covered in Figures, and stories,
and names, and prophesies, and which Christ has, and by his Spirit will yet
reveal more plainly to all that will understand them by their proper measures.
For although the Gospel is infinitely more legible and plain then the obscurer
Leaves of the Law, yet there is a seal upon them also: which Seal no man
shall open but he that is worthy. We may understand something of it by the
three Children of the Captivity; they were all skilled in all the wisdom of the
Chaldees, and so was Daniel: but there was something beyond that in him; the
wisdom of the most high God was in him, and that taught him a learning beyond
his learning.

In all Scripture there is a spiritual sense, a spiritual Cabala, which as it
tends directly to holiness, so it is best and truest understood by the sons of
the Spirit, who love God, and therefore know him. (...), every thing is best
known by its own similitudes and analogies.

But I must take some other time to speak fully of these things. I have but one
thing more to say, and then I shall make my Applications of this Doctrine, and
so conclude.

5. Lastly, there is a sort of Gods dear Servants who walk in perfectness,
who perfect holiness in the fear of God; and they have a degree of Clarity
and divine knowledge more then we can discourse of, and more certain then the
Demonstrations of Geometry, brighter then the Sun, and indeficient as the light
of Heaven. This is called by the Apostle the (...). Christ is this brightness
of God, manifested in the hearts of his dearest servants.

(...)
(...). --
But I shall say no more of this at this time, for this is to be felt and not
to be talked of; and they that never touched it with their finger, may secretly
perhaps laugh at it in their heart, and be never the wiser. All that I shall
now say of it is, that a good man is united unto God (...), as a flame touches
a flame, and combines into splendour and to glory: so is the Spirit of a man
united unto Christ by the spirit of God. These are the friends of God, and they
best know Gods mind, and they only that are so know how much such men do know.
They have a special Unction from above. So that now you are come to the top of
all: this is the highest round of the Ladder, and the Angels stand upon it:
they dwell in love and Contemplation, they worship and obey, but dispute not;
and our quarrels and impertinent wranglings about Religion are nothing else but
the want of the measures of this State. Our light is like a Candle, every wind
of vain Doctrine blows it out, or spends the wax, and makes the light
tremulous; but the lights of Heaven are sixed and bright, and shine for ever.

But that we may speak not only things mysterious, but things intelligible; how
does it come to pass, by what means and what Economy is it effected, that a
holy life is the best determination of all Questions, and the surest way of
knowledge? Is it to be supposed that a Godly man is better enabled to determine
the Questions of Purgatory or Transubstantiation? is the gift of Chastity the
best way to reconcile Thomas and Scotus? and is a temperate man always a
better Scholar then a Drunkard? To this I answer, that in all things in which
true wisdom consists, Holiness, which is the best wisdom, is the surest way of
understanding them. And this

1. Is effected by Holiness as a proper and natural instrument: for naturally
every thing is best discerned by its proper light and congenial instrument.

(...). For as the eye sees visible objects, and the understanding perceives
the Intellectual; so does the spirit the things of the Spirit. The natural man
(says St. Paul,) knows not the things of God, for they are Spiritually
discerned: that is, they are discovered by a proper light, and concerning these
things an unsanctified man discourses pitifully, with an imperfect Idea, as a
blind man does of Light and Colors which he never saw.

A good man, though unlearned in secular notices, is like the windows of the
Temple, narrow without and broad within: he sees not so much of what profits
not abroad, but what soever is within, and concerns Religion and the
glorifications of God, that he sees with a broad inspection. But all humane
learning without God is but blindness and ignorant folly.

But when it is (...), righteousness dipped in the wells of Truth, it is like an
eye of Gold in a rich Garment, or like the light of Heaven, it shows it self by
its own splendour. What Learning is it to discourse of the Philosophy of the
Sacrament, if you do not feel the virtue of it? and the man that can with
eloquence and subtilty discourse of the isntrumental efficacy of Baptismal
waters, talks ignorantly in respect of him who has the answer of a good
Conscience within, and is cleansed by the purifications of the Spirit. If the
Question concern any thing that can perfect a man and make him happy, all that
is the proper knowledge and notice of the good man. How can a wicked man
understand the purities of the heart? and how can an evil and unworthy
Communicant tell what it is to have received Christ by faith, to dwell with
him, to be united to him, to receive him in his heart? The good man only
understands that: the one sees the color, and the other feels the substance;
the one discourses of the Sacrament, and the other receives Christ; the one
discourses for or against Transubstantiation, but the good man feels himself to
be changed and so joined to Christ, that he only understands the true sense of
Transubstantiation, while he becomes to Christ bone of his bone, flesh of his
flesh, and of the same spirit with his Lord.

We talk much of Reformation, and (blessed be God) once we have felt the good
of it: But of late we have smarted under the name and pretension. The Woman
that lost her groate, everrit domum, not evertit; she swept the house, she did
not turn the house out of doors. That was but an ill Reformation that untiled
the Roof, and broak the Walls, and was digging down the Foundation.

Now among all the pretensions of Reformation, who can tell better what is, and
what is not, true Reformation, then he that is truly Reformed himself? He knows
what pleases God, and can best tell by what instruments he is reconciled. The
mouth of the just brings forth wisdom; and the lips of the righteous know
what is acceptable, says Solomon. Prove. 10. 31, 32.
He cannot be cousen'd by names of things, and feels that Reformation to be
Imposture that is Sacrilegious: himself is humble and obedient, and therefore
knows that is not Truth that persuades to Schism and Disobedience: and most of
the Questions of Christendom are such which either are good for nothing, and
therefore to be laid aside; or if they be complicated with action, and are
ministeries of practice, no man can judge them so well as the spiritual man.
That which best pleases God, that which does good to our Neighbor, that which
teaches sobriety, that which combines with Government, that which speaks honor
of God and does him honor, that only is Truth. Holiness therefore is a proper
and natural instrument of Divine knowledge, and must needs be the best way of
instruction in the Questions of Christendom, because in the most of them a Duty
is complicated with the Proposition.

No man that intends to live holily can ever suffer any pretenses of Religion
to be made to teach him to fight against his King. And when the men of Geneva
turned their Bishop out of doors, they might easily have considered that the
same person was their Prince too; and that must needs be a strange Religion
that rose up against Moses and Aaron at the same time: but that has been the
method ever since. There was no Church till then was ever Governed without an
Apostle or a Bishop: and since then, they who go from their Bishop have said
very often to their King too, Nolumus hunc regnare: and when we see men
pretending Religion, and yet refuse to own the Kings Supremacy, they may upon
the stock of holiness easily reprove their own folly; by considering that such
recusancy does introduce into our Churches the very worst, the most intolerable
parts of Popery. For perfect submission to Kings is the glory of the Protestant
cause: and really the reproveable Doctrines of the Church of Rome are by
nothing so much confuted, as that they destroy good life by consequent and
evident deduction; as by an Induction of particulars were easy to make
apparent, if this were the proper season for it.

2. Holiness is not only an advantage to the learning all wisdom and
holiness, but for the discerning that which is wise and holy from what is
trifling and useless and contentious: and to one of these heads all Questions
will return: and therefore in all, from Holiness we have the best
Instructions. And this brings me to the next Particle of the general
Consideration. For that which we are taught by the holy Spirit of God, this new
nature, this vital principle within us, it is that which is worth our learning;
not vain and empty, idle and insignificant notions, in which when you have
labored till your eyes are fixed in their Orbs and your flesh unfixed from
its bones, you are no better and no wiser. If the Spirit of God be your
Teacher, he will teach you such truths as will make you know and love God, and
become like to him, and enjoy him for ever, by passing from similitude to union
and eternal fruition. But what are you the better if any man should pretend to
teach you whether every Angel makes a species? and what is the individuation of
the Soul in the state of separation? what are you the wiser if you should study
and find out what place Adam should for ever have lived in if he had not
fallen? and what is any man the more learned if he hears the disputes, whether
Adam should have multiplied Children in the state of Innocence, and what would
have been the event of things if one Child had been born before his Fathers sin?

Too many Scholars have lived upon Air and empty notions for many ages past,
and troubled themselves with tying and untying Knots, like Hypochondriacs in a
fit of Melancholy, thinking of nothing, and troubling themselves with nothing,
and falling out about nothings, and being very wise and very learned in things
that are not and work not, and were never planted in Paradise by the finger of
God. Men's notions are too often like the Mules, begotten by aequivocall and
unnatural Generations; but they make no species: they are begotten, but they
can beget nothing: they are the effects of long study, but they can do no good
when they are produced: they are not that which Solomon calls viam
intelligentiae, the way of understanding. If the Spirit of God be our Teacher,
we shall learn to avoid evil, and to do good, to be wise and to be holy, to be
profitable and careful: and they that walk in this way shall find more peace
in their Consciences, more skill in the Scriptures, more satisfaction in their
doubts, then can be obtained by all the polemical and impertinent disputations
of the world. And if the holy spirit can teach us how vain a thing it is to do
foolish things, he also will teach us how vain a thing it is to trouble the
world with foolish Questions, to disturb the Church for interest or pride, to
resist Government in things indifferent, to spend the peoples zeal in things
unprofitable, to make Religion to consist in outsides, and opposition to
circumstances and trifling regards. No, no, the Man that is wise, he that is
conducted by the Spirit of God, knows better in what Christ's Kingdom does
consist, then to throw away his time and interest and peace and safety; for
what? for Religion? no: for the body of Religion? not so much: for the garment
of the body of Religion? no, not for so much: but for the Fringes of the
garment of the Body of Religion; for such and no better are the disputes that
trouble our discontented Brethren; they are things, or rather Circumstances and
manners of things, in which the Soul and spirit is not at all concerned.

3. Holiness of life is the best way of finding out truth and understanding;
not only as a Natural medium, nor only as a prudent medium, but as a means by
way of Divine blessing. He that has my Commandments and keeps them, he it is
that loves me: and he that loves me shall be loved of my Father, and I will
love him, and will manifest my self to him. John 14. 21.
Here we have a promise for it; and upon that we may rely.

The old man that confuted the Arian Priest by a plain recital of his Creed,
found a mighty power of God effecting his own Work by a strange manner, and by
a very plain instrument: it wrought a divine blessing just as Sacraments use to
do: and this Lightning sometimes comes in a strange manner as a peculiar
blessing to good men. For God kept the secrets of his Kingdom from the wise
Heathens and the learned Jews, revealing them to Babes, not because they had
less learning, but because they had more love; they were children and Babes in
Malice, they loved Christ, and so he became to them a light and a glory. St.
Paul had more learning then they all; and Moses was instructed in all the
Learning of the Egyptians: yet because he was the meekest man upon Earth, he
was also the wisest, and to his humane Learning in which he was excellent, he
had a divine light and excellent wisdom superadded to him by way of spiritual
blessings. And St. Paul, though he went very far to the knowledge of many great
and excellent truths by the force of humane learning, yet he was far short of
perfective truth and true wisdom till he learned a new lesson in a new School,
at the feet of one greater then his Ganialiel: his learning grew much greater,
his notions brighter, his skill deeper, by the love of Christ, and his desires,
his passionate desires after Jesus.

The force and use of humane learning and of this Divine learning I am now
speaking of, are both well expressed by the Prophet Isaiah, 29. 11, 12. And the
vision of all is become unto you as the words of a Book that is sealed, which
men deliver to one that is learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee: and he
says, I cannot, for it is sealed. And the Book is delivered to him that is not
learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee: and he says, I am not learned. He
that is no learned man, who is not bred up in the Schools of the Prophets,
cannot read Gods Book for want of learning. For humane Learning is the gate and
first entrance of Divine vision; not the only one indeed, but the common gate.
But beyond this, there must be another learning; for he that is learned, bring
the Book to him, and you are not much the better as to the secret part of it,
if the Book be sealed, if his eyes be closed, if his heart be not opened, if
God does not speak to him in the secret way of discipline. Humane learning is
an excellent Foundation; but the top-stone is laid by Love and Conformity to
the will of God. For we may further observe, that blindness, error and
Ignorance are the punishments which God sends upon wicked and ungodly men.
Etiamsi propter nostrae intelligentiae tarditatem and vitae demeritum veritas
nondum se apertissime ostenderit, was St. Austin's expression. The truth has
not yet been manifested fully to us, by reason of our demerits: our sins have
hindered the brightness of the truth from shining upon us. And St. Paul
observes, that when the Heathens gave themselves over to lusts, God gave them
over to strong delusions, and to believe a Lie. Romans 1. 25, 26.
But God gives to a man that is good in his sight, wisdom and knowledge and
joy, Eccl. 2. 26.
said the wise Preacher. But this is most expressly promised in the New
Testament, and particularly in that admirable Sermon which our blessed Savior
preached a little before his death. The Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost,
whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things. John 14.
26.
Well: there is our Teacher told of plainly. But how shall we obtain this
teacher, and how shall we be taught? v. 15, 16, 17. Christ will pray for us
that we may have this spirit. That Is well: but shall all Christians have the
spirit? Yes, all that will live like Christians: for so said Christ, If ye love
me, keep my Commandments; and I will pray the Father, and he will give you
another Comforter, that may abide with you for ever; even the spirit of truth,
whom the World cannot receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him.
Mark these things. The Spirit of God is our teacher: he will abide with us for
ever to be our teacher: he will teach us all things; but how? if ye love
Christ, if ye keep his Commandments, but not else: if ye be of the World, that
is, of worldly affections, ye cannot see him, ye cannot know him. And this is
the particular I am now to speak to, The way by which the Spirit of God teaches
us in all the ways and secrets of God is Love and Holiness.

Secreta Dei Deo nostro et filiis domus ejus, Gods secrets are to himself and
the sons of his House, says the Jewish Proverb. Love is the great instrument
of Divine knowledge, that is the (...), the height of all that is to be taught
or learned. Love is Obedience, and we learn his words best when we practice
them: (...), said Aristotle: Lib. 2. Ethic. c. 1.
those things which they that learn ought to practice, even while they practice
they will best learn. Nullum bonum perfect noscitur quod non perfect amatur.
Quisquis non venit, profecto nec didicit: Ita enim Dominus docet per Spiritus
gratiam, ut quod quisque didicerit, non tantum cognoscendo videat, sed etiam
volendo appetat and agendo perficiat. St. Austin De gratia Christi lib. 1. c.
14. Aug. lib. 83. qu. de gratia Christi.
Unless we come to Christ, we shall never learn: for so our Blessed Lord
teaches us by the grace of his spirit, that what any one learns, he not only
sees it by knowledge, but desires it by choice, and perfects it by practice.

4. When this is reduced to practice and experience, we find not only in things
of practice, but even in deepest mysteries, not only the choicest and most
eminent Saints, but even every good man can best tell what is true, and best
reprove an error.

He that goes about to speak of and to understand the mysterious Trinity, and
does it by words and names of man's invention, or by such which signify
contingently, if he reckons this mystery by the Mythology of Numbers, by the
Cabala of Letters, by the distinctions of the School, and by the weak
inventions of disputing people; if he only talks of Essences and existencies,
Hypostases and personalities, distinctions without difference, and priority in
Coequalities, and unity in Pluralities, and of superior Praedicates of no
larger extent then the inferior Subjects, may amuse himself, and find his
understanding will be like St. Peter's upon the Mount of Tabor at the
Transfiguration: he may build three Tabernacles in his head, and talk
something, but he knows not what. But the good man that feels the power of the
Father, and he to whom the Son is become Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption; he in whose heart the love of the Spirit of God
is spread, to whom God has communicated the Holy Ghost, the Comforter; this
man, though he understands nothing of that which is unintelligible, yet he only
understands the mysteriousnesse of the Holy Trinity. No man can be convinced
well and wisely of the Article of the Holy, Blessed and Undivided Trinity, but
he that feels the mightiness of the Father begetting him to a new life, the
wisdom of the Son building him up in a most holy Faith, and the love of the
spirit of God making him to become like unto God.

He that has passed from his Childhood in Grace under the spiritual
generation of the Father, and is gone forward to be a young man in Christ,
strong and vigorous in holy actions and holy undertakings, and from thence is
become an old Disciple, and strong and grown old in Religion, and the
conversation of the Spirit; this man best understands the secret and
undiscernable Oeconomie, he feels this unintelligible mystery, and sees with
his heart what his tongue can never express, and his Metaphysics can never
prove. In these cases Faith and Love are the best Knowledge, and Jesus Christ
is best known by the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ; and if the Kingdom of God
be in us, then we know God, and are known of him: and when we communicate of
the Spirit of God, when we pray for him, and have received him, and entertained
him, and dwelt with him, and warmed our selves by his holy fires, then we know
him too. But there is no other satisfactory knowledge of the Blessed Trinity
but this: And therefore whatever thing is spoken of God Metaphysically, there
is no knowing of God Theologically and as he ought to be known, but by the
measures of Holiness and the proper light of the Spirit of God.

But in this case Experience is the best learning, and Christianity is the best
institution, and the Spirit of God is the best teacher, and Holiness is the
greatest wisdom; and he that sins most is the most Ignorant, and the humble
and obedient man is the best Scholar. For the Spirit of God is a loving Spirit,
and will not enter into a polluted Soul: But he that keeps the Law gets
the understanding thereof, and the perfection of the fear of the Lord is
wisdom, said the wise Ben-Sirach. Ecclus. 21. 11.
And now give me leave to apply the Doctrine to you, and so I shall dismiss
you from this attention.

Many ways have been attempted to reconcile the differences of the Church in
matters of Religion, and all the Counsels of man have yet proved ineffective.
Let us now try Gods Method, let us betake our selves to live holily, and then
the spirit of God will lead us into all truth. And indeed it matters not what
Religion any man is of, if he be a Villain; the opinion of his Sect, as it
will not save his Soul, so neither will it do good to the public. But this is
a sure Rule; If the holy man best understands Wisdom and Religion, then by the
proportions of holiness we shall best measure the Doctrines that are obtruded
to the disturbance of our peace, and the dishonor of the Gospel. And therefore

1. That is no good Religion whose Principles destroy any duty of Religion. He
that shall maintain it to be lawful to make a War for the defense of his
Opinion be it what it will, his Doctrine is against Godliness. Any thing that
is proud, any thing that is peevish and scornful, any thing that is
uncharitable, is against the (...), that form of sound Doctrine which the
Apostle speaks of. And I remember that Ammianus Marcellinus telling of George a
proud and factious Minister, that he was an Informer against his Brethren, he
says, he did it oblitus professionis suae, quae nil nisi justum suadet and
lene; He forgot his profession, which teaches nothing but justice and
meekness, kindnesses and charity. And however Bellarmine and others are
pleased to take but indirect and imperfect notice of it, yet Goodness is the
best note of the true Church.

2. It is but an ill sign of Holiness when a man is busy in troubling himself
and his Superior in little Scruples and Fantastic Opinions about things not
concerning the life of Religion, or the pleasure of God, or the excellencies of
the Spirit. A good man knows how to please God, how to converse with him, how
to advance the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus, to set forwards Holiness and the
love of God and of his Brother; and he knows also that there is no Godliness in
spending our time and our talk, our heart and our spirits, about the garments
and outsides of Religion. And they can ill teach others, that do not know that
Religion does not consist in these things; but Obedience may, and reductively
that is Religion; and he that for that which is no part of Religion destroys
Religion directly, by neglecting that duty that is adopted into Religion, is a
man of fancy and of the World: but he gives but an ill account that he is a man
of God, and a son of the Spirit.

Spend not your time in that which profits not; for your labor and your
health, your time and your studies are very valuable; and it is a thousand
pitties to see a diligent and a hopeful person spend himself in gathering
Cockleshells and little pebbles, in telling Sands upon the shores, and making
Garlands of useless Daisies. Study that which is profitable, that which will
make you useful to Churches and Commonwealths, that which will make you
desirable and wise. Only I shall add this to you, That in Learning there are
variety of things as well as in Religion: there is Mint and Cummin, and there
are the weighty things of the Law; so there are studies more and less useful,
and every thing that is useful will be required in its time: and I may in this
also use the words of our blessed Savior, These things ought you to look
after, and not to leave the other unregarded. But your great care is to be in
the things of God and of Religion, in holiness and true wisdom, remembering the
saying of Origin, that the knowledge that arises from goodness is (...),
something that is more certain and more divine then all demonstration, then all
other Learnings of the World.

3. That Is no good Religion that disturbs Governments, or shakes a foundation
of public peace. Kings and Bishops are the foundations and the great
principles of unity, of peace and Government; like Rachel and Leah they build
up the house of Israel: and those blind Samsons that shake these Pillars intend
to pull the house down. My Son, fear God and the King, says Solomon; and
meddle not with them that are given to change. That is not Truth that loves
changes: and the new-nothings of Heretical and Schismatical Preachers are
infinitely far from the blessings of Truth.

In the only Language Truth has a Mysterious Name, (...) Emet; it consists of
three Letters, the first and the last and the middle most of the Hebrew
Letters: implying to us that Truth is first, and will be last, and it is the
same all the way, and combines and unites all extremes; it ties all ends
together. Truth is lasting, and ever full of blessing. For the Jews observe
that those Letters which signify Truth, are both in the figure and the number
Quadrate, firm and cubical; these signify a foundation, and an abode for
ever. Whereas on the other side, the word which in Hebrew signifies a lie,
(...) Secher, is made of Letters whose numbers are imperfect, and their figure
pointed and voluble: to signify that a Lie has no foundation.

And this very observation will give good light in our Questions and disputes.
And I give my instance in Episcopal Government, which has been of so lasting
an abode, of so long a blessing, has its firmament by the principles of
Christianity, has been blessed by the issues of that stabiliment, it has for
sixteen hundred years combined with Monarchy, and has been taught by the
spirit which has so long dwelt in Gods Church, and has now (according to the
promise of Jesus, that says the gates of Hell shall never prevail against the
Church) been restored amongst us by a heap of Miracles; and as it went away, so
now it is returned again in the hand of Monarchy, and in the bosom of our
Fundamental Laws. Now that Doctrine must needs be suspected of Error and an
intolerable Lie that speaks against this Truth, which has had so long a
testimony from God, and from the wisdom and experience of so many ages, of all
our Ancestors, and all our Laws.

When the Spirit of God wrote in Greek, Christ is called A and (...): if he had
spoken Hebrew, he had been called (...) and (...), that is Christ is (...)
Emet, he is Truth, the same yesterday and to day and for ever: and whoever
opposes this holy Sanction which Christ's Spirit has sanctified, his word has
warranted, his blessings have endeared, his promises have ratifyed, and his
Church has always kept, he fights against this (...) Emet, and Secher is his
portion; his Lot is a Lie, his portion is there where holiness can never dwell.

And now to conclude, to you Fathers and Brethren, you who are, or intend to be
of the Clergy; you see here the best Compendium of your Studies, the best
abbreviature of your labors, the truest method of wisdom, and the infallible,
the only way of judging concerning the Disputes and Questions in Christendom.
It is not by reading multitude of Books, but by studying the truth of God: it
is not by laborious Commentaries of the Doctors that you can finish your work,
but by the expositions of the Spirit of God: is is not by the Rules of
Metaphysics, but by the proportions of Holiness: and when all Books are read,
and all Arguments examined, and all Authorities alleged, nothing can be found
to be true that is unholy. Give your selves to reading, to exhortation, and to
Doctrine, says St. Paul. Read all good Books you can: but exhortation unto
good life is the best Instrument, and the best teacher of true Doctrine, of
that which is according to Godliness.

And let me tell you this, The great learning of the Fathers was more owing to
their piety then to their skill; more to God then to themselves: and to this
purpose is that excellent ejaculation of St. Chrysostom, with which I will
conclude. O blessed and happy men, whose names are in the Book of life, from
whom the Devils fled and Heretics did fear them, who (by Holiness) have
stopped the mouths of them that spoke perverse things! But I, like David, will
cry out, Where are thy loving-kindnesses which have been ever of old? Where is
the blessed Quire of Bishops and Doctors, who shined like lights in the World,
and contained the Word of Life? Dulce est meminisse; their very memory is
pleasant. Where is that Evodias, the sweet favor of the Church, the successor
and imitator of the holy Apostles? where is Ignatius, in whom God dwelt? where
is St. Dionysius the Areopagite, that Bird of Paradise, that celestial Eagle?
where is Hippolytus, that good man, (...), that gentle sweet person? where is
great St. Basil, a man almost equal to the Apostles? where is Athanasius, rich
in virtue? where is Gregory Nyssen, that great Divine? and Ephrem the great
Syrian, that stirred up the sluggish, and awakened the sleepers, and comforted
the afflicted, and brought the young men to discipline, the Looking-glass of
the religious, the Captain of the Penitents, the destruction of Heresies, the
receptacle of Graces, and the habitation of the holy Ghost? Lib. de Consummat.
saeculi, inter opera Ephrem Syri.
These were the men that prevailed against Error, because they lived according
to Truth: and whoever shall oppose you and the truth you walk by, may better be
confuted by your lives then by your disputations. Let your adversaries have no
evil thing to say of you, and then you will best silence them. For all Heresies
and false Doctrines are but like Myron's counterfeit Cow, it deceived none but
Beasts; and these can cozen none but the wicked and the negligent, them that
love a lie and live according to it. [But if ye become burning and shining
lights; if ye do not detain the truth in unrighteousness; if ye walk in light
and live in the Spirit; your Doctrines will be true, and that Truth will
prevail.] But if ye live wickedly and scandalously, every little Schismatic
shall put you to shame, and draw Disciples after him, and abuse your flocks,
and feed them with Colocynths and Hemlock, and place Her^^^ in the Chaires
appointed for your Religion.

I pray God give you all grace to follow this Wisdom, to study this Learning,
to labor for the understanding of Godliness: so your time and your studies,
your persons and your labors will by holy and useful, sanctified and blessed,
beneficial to men and pleasing unto God, through him who is the wisdom of the
Father, who is made to all that love him Wisdom and Righteousness and
Sanctification and Redemption: To whom with the Father, etc.

FINIS.

