MERCVRIVS INFERNALIS; OR ORDERLESSE ORDERS, Votes, Ordinances, and Commands
from Hell, established by a close Committee of the Devil and his Angels. DONE
Neither by Day, Night, nor Order, because neither Time, Place, Person or Order
is to be observed in the Infernal KINGDOM.

THE Copy of this was found in a Chink or Cranny of a Wall in Frier-Bacons
Study, By JOHN TAILOR.

Printed in the Year 1644.

MERCVRIVS INFERNALIS, Or orderlesse Orders, etc.
WE Sultan Satan, Great Emperor of Erebus, Barathrum, Averuus, Acheron,
Stix, and Phlegeton; King of Gehenna, Cocytus, Dis, Tophet, and Tartarus; Lord
of the Infernal Cimmerian Abyss. profundity of the Sulphurous Limbo, Lethe,
and the Stigian Lakes, did long since with the advice of our States and
Committees Aslembled, for the enlarging of our Kingdoms and Territories, and
the amplifying of our greatness and renown, cause these our Commands to be
put in speedy Execution.

Whereas our Trusty Agents, Messengers, Scouts, and others our ingenious and
vigilant servants, have (by our Instigations and Commands) done us great and
acceptable Services in Germany for these 24. years, insomuch that that goodly
Empire is wasted with Wars, Bloodshed, Famine and desolation; and for that the
Kingdoms of Great Britain and Ireland have been these many years in such a
happy condition of Peace, plenty, and all other blessings, to the Envy and
admiration of all Nations, and to our great grief and Sorrow; for we could not
but with shame and astonishment wonder that those Countries and Regions only
enjoyed the fruition of Tranquillity, whilst most of the Nations of the world
were filled with rapine, mischeife, murder and confusion; so that it was a
common speech amongst them (in derision of our profound ancient policy and
wisdom) to say, The Diuell's an Ass: which abuses and calumnies coming to
the ears of our Infernal Hell-hood, we (in vindication of our honor) thought
it high time to bestirre our self to work some vengeance on those refractory
people, by sowing and dispersing divisions amongst them in their Churches, and
Rebellion to their King. For the Government which they kept, both
Ecclesiastical and Civil, was so grievous unto us, that since our first fall
from Heaven we had never any thing that tormented us more. In serious
consideration of the Premises, we, with the advice of our Trusty Councillors,
and Judges, Namely Caine, Corah, Dathan, Abiram, Pharaoh, Achitophell,
Rabshekah, Judas, Cataline, Sylla, Marius, Nero, Caligula, Domitian,
Helliogabalus, Minos, Eacus, Radamanthus, Machiavell, Faux, Ravillac, and many
of the Turkish, Jewish, Anabaptisticall, Brownisticall and Jesuitical Clergy,
we did (3. years past) order and ordain, for the breach of the peace in the
aforesaid Kingdoms of great Britain and Ireland, these plots, policies and
projects following.

First, we order that some of our cunningest Devils should be sent by our
Authority into those parts, who should take upon them the shapes and habites of
sincere religious persons, and insinuate themselves, first amongst foolish
women, and silly Tradesmen, with huge multitudes of the off-scum rabble of the
people. These were all to be persuaded to despise, scorn, and contemn the
true settled religion amongst them; To deride and hate all order, decency, and
Christian conformity either to the Church, Church Government, or Governors; To
demolish and deface all manner of ornaments, or any thing of Laudable memory,
either of Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, or of our greatest Conqueror and
Enemy Jesus Christ. All these things were effectually done according to our
command; and for the further increase of our Kingdom of Darkness, we have
caused our deadly foes (the Orthodox preachers) to be degraded, dismissed,
banished, impoverished, imprisoned, despised, disgraced, starved and murtherd,
that spoke so boldly and frequently against us and our adherents. And in their
rooms we have placed Hypocrites of our own moulding and stamping, who do
persuade the people vehemently to our service and liking, and most violently
against their Sovereign in Rebellion.

Secondly, we ordered that because the King was our greatest and Inveterate
opposite upon Earth, our new pulpit-men should preach nothing but Sedition,
contention, and disobedience against him, and that it should be the loss of
their places and Liberty to speak truth, to mention the Belief, or Christian
Faith, to read the Lords Prayer, or repeat the ten Commandments, to the end
they shall forget to believe in God, or put any confidence in the King: by
which two principles or Maxims, there are many thousands come to us, which we
did not so suddenly expect: for though we seldom speak truth, yet we must
acknowledge that those late good Members at Westminster have done us more
service in so short a time then all the Rebels (their predecessors, and our
dear sonns) have done since the Creation of the world.

We our self are endued with much Learning, for we have so much schollarship
that we know and understand all the Speeches, Tongues and Languages in the
Universe and Universities; and we must with admiration stand amazed at the
Loyalty, Integrity, Ingenuity, and policy of those (our trusty Agents) that
with such expedition could so soon and so much ruinate their own Country, and
so Eclipse the Protestant Religion (which we most hate) that we could not have
devised to have given and granted them a Commission that could have so large an
extent as they have stretched their political power.

We confess, that though we were the first Rebel, and the most ancient father
of Rebellion, we began it in Heaven; for the which we were thrown down to
Hell: we practiced it on poor Adam and his Consort in Paradise, we have not,
nor will not be negligent to infuse it into all their posterity; yet we must
acknowledge, that our self and all the rest of you assembled here (our trusty
Councillors) neither could, or ever did accomplish so great a service as the
doing these pleasing mischeifes to the Church and Kingdoms of great Britain
and Ireland: in which meritorious work they have so far out gone us, and all
former precedents, that we must confess old age has brought us to dotage; and
all the Rebels and Traitors since Time began were but slight witted shallow
pated fellows to these our sons of England, Scotland, and Jreland, which
though we know they cannot continue, and that they must fail and fall in the
end, yet (by our inspirations) they will go on; and where they cannot conquer
and overcome, they shall attempt to do mischeife.

First, (beyond our capacity or knowledge) the most part of the Members had the
subtilty to enforce and affright their Tenants and other people to spend their
voices for them in their election to be Parliament Men. Secondly, many who
feared them not, were bribed to come their selves and bring their friends to
cry alowd, and make a wicked musical noise with bawling out the names of Pym,
Haslerigge, with the rest of our sons, the Members. Thirdly, some were guld,
foold, and flatterd to extend their Stentorian voices, not knowing why,
wherefore, or for whom. And the first business of these politicians was to
work so, that an act must pass that they might sit, vote, rule, and do what
they please as long as they list.

That being enacted, they craftily searched and undermined the opinions and
dispositions of all the Members (their bre^hren) and as many of them as they
found or suspected to be Loyal to the King, or true Protestants, those were
droven, expulst, and thrust out of their society, as Malignant persons to the
State, and unfit for their company. This being done, they very wittily got all
the strength of the Militia into their hands, and withal (by the means of our
trusty servants their preachers, and our dear villains the Pamphleteers) filled
and possessed the people with lies, fears and jealousies against the King, that
he would alter Religion, and turn Tyrant: and these services of theirs were
exceeding pleasing to our Graceless Majesty.

Then because they would have no King, (or keep him they had brought him so low
down, that he should never rise) they seized on all his Revenues, his
Subsidies, Goods, Lands, Moneys, Jewels, Towns, Castles, Ammunition,
Ordnance, Navy, Parkes, nay his very Children they took and do keep from him;
they forced him from them by Tumults, to seek safety. And also they caused his
Queen to cross the dangerous Ocean twice, rather exposing her self to the
danger of Winds and Seas, then to remain in hazard amongst them. And this
service was much delighting to us, and all our damned Subjects.

In these employments (Money beginning to be short) and Ireland in Rebellion,
they devised a most rare project, to sell their Lands that they esteemed as
Rebels there, to as many fools and mad men in London (or any where) as would
buy them: of which chapmen they found enough, for large penniworths were
afforded; and Coin came in a pace with avengeance, which was by the Members
declared to be for the releife of the oppressed distressed protestants in
Ireland; but wondrous wisely they never were releived with it: for the said
Money was employed to more necessary and important uses, as in Rebellion
against their King, and spoiling of England, the whilst poor Ireland was left
open to Intestine wars and self destroying.

That Spungy Project being squeezd dry in the press of Rebellion, the Members
having no more invisible Land to sell, and cheated fools would buy no more
Castles in the Air, or Meddowes in the Clouds; then they made a fine thing
(like a Puppet) which they called Public Faith, which Faith had more tricks
then the famous Hocus Pocus, for though it was never seen, felt, heard or
understood, yet (by the imposturing Art of Equivocating Legerdemaine) the said
Faith did pass with hey pass and repasse, as an universal pawn for Millions
of money to be lent upon it (in the Kings name and Parliaments) to be employed
to destroy the King and Kingdom, and to deceive or beggar as many as did put
any confidence in that unsaving Faith. And now the People do perceive
themselves to be palpable couzened and cheated of their Plate, Mon^y, Jewels,
and other goods, they not knowing where to find the pawn, (or the Faith that
is publicly engaged for it) the Members having no other way to save their
dismemberd Reputations, nor secure themselves from being torn in pieces by the
seduced cheated multitude; then they began to levy. Assessements, and weekly
and monthly Contributions, with most heavy insupportable Taxations; and though
they had made the People believe things against the King, which he never meant,
as that he would raise the Dutch Excise upon them, yet they raised the same
Excise themselves more then a year before the King did; nor had the King ever
done it, but that they began long before him, and showed him the way; nor will
he hold it longer then they are Rebels, and necessity requires. But the
Members have no other means left now to pay the said vast Sums again, but
by Robbing, Plundering, and utterly undoing all the Kings true Subjects, (who
are our most opposite, hated, and hateful enemies) that so by Ruinating the
good and honest men of their goods, estates and lives, they may pay the Fools
and Knaves such debts as are due unto them upon the empty pawn of the Public
Faith.

And (to our further great contentment) they have devised, and enforced upon
the People such Covenants of Confusion, such Oaths of Rebellion, and such
Protestations of Damnation, that we our self, with the advice of you, and all
our Infernal old and new Counselors, could never have contrived the like for
the enlarging of our greatness.

And for our further contentment, our ignorant Sons, Coach-men, Carters,
Colliers, Coopers, Cuckolds, Tinkers, and Tub-preachers, have sufficiently
abused the Scriptures with thousands of various Interpretations and
Expositions, whereby many herds and droves of our simple single-sould sons
and daughters have sent their threadbare wits a wool gathering, being all most
delicately mad in Rebellion against God and the King: yet we must confess our
self to be indebted to some of their learned Pastors and Poets, who have good
wits and parts in 'em, but (to advance our service) they deliciously, viciously
employed them; such as are Cornelius Burgess, the two Sedgwicks, the poor
wicked Case, etc. with our dear sons Mercurius Britannicus, George Wither (the
Gull's Darling) and Booker, the Aetheriall Planeteriall learned
Preterpluperfect Asse-trologian, with the rest of our English and Scottish
Doves, Scoutes, Scoundrells and Lyurnall-makers; we, (by our incitement and
spirit of damnable infusion) set them a work, nor will we fail to pay them
their wages, for we are sure that never any Rebel or Traitor, or witch or
villain, had cause to complain against us for non-payment.

Our fear is, that this rare and dear Rebellion will not last and continue as
long as we would have it; we doubt the King will prevail, and then our market
is quite spoild: but when all comes to all, and that all comes to nothing, we
have provided for our sons (the Rebels) that no wordly want or trouble shall
molest them, for we intend to send all or many of them sailing by Land in a
hanging Voyage.

Thus have we, contrary to our nature and custom, spoken truth^ but consider
it is in private amongst our selves, we would not have it known to the People;
for then it may perhaps be Printed and published to the hinderance of our
Cause, and discouragement of our sons the Rebels, to whom we wish increase
of wickedness and malediction Eternal.

FINIS.

