Imprimatur, Sept.21.1663.

M. FRANCK, S.T.D. Rsso. in Xte. P. ac Dno. D. GILB. Archiep. Cant. a Sacris
Dom.
A SERMON Preached in Christs-Church Dublin, July 16. 1663. AT THE FUNERAL Of
the most Reverend Father in God, JOHN, Late Lord Archbishop of Armagh, and
Primate of all Ireland: WITH A succinct Narrative of his whole Life.

The third Edition, enlarged.

By the Right Reverend Father in God, JEREMY, Lord Bishop of Down and Connor.

LONDON: Printed by I. G. for Richard Royston, Bookseller to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, 1663.

1 Cor. 15. 23.
But every Man in his own order: Christ the first fruits; afterward they that
are Christ's at his coming.

THe Condition of Man in this world is so limited and depressed, so relative
and imperfect, that the best things he does he does weakly, and the best things
he has are imperfections in their very constitution. I need not tell how
little it is that we know; the greatest indication of this is, That we can
never tell how many things we know not: and we may soon span our own Knowledge,
but our Ignorance we can never fathom. Our very Will, in which Mankind pretends
to be most noble and imperial, is a direct state of imperfection; and our very
liberty of Choosing good and evil is permitted to us, not to make us proud, but
to make us humble; for it supposes weakness of Reason and weakness of Love. For
if we understood all the degrees of Amability in the Service of God, or if we
had such love to God as he deserves, and so perfect a conviction as were fit
for his Services, we could no more Deliberate: For Liberty of Will is like the
motion of a Magnetic Needle toward the North, full of trembling and
uncertainty till it were fixed in the beloved Point; it wavers as long as it is
free, and is at rest when it can choose no more. And truly what is the hope of
Man? It is indeed the resurrection of the Soul in this world from sorrow and
her saddest pressures, and like the Twilight to the Day, and the Harbinger of
joy; but still it is but a conjugation of Infirmities, and proclaims our
present calamity, only because it is uneasy here, it thrusts us forwards
toward the light and glories of the Resurrection.

For as a Worm creeping with her belly on the ground, with her portion and
share of Adam's curse, lifts up its head to partake a little of the blessings
of the air, and opens the junctures of her imperfect body, and curles her
little rings into knots and combinations, drawing up her tail to a
neighborhood of the heads pleasure and motion; but still it must return to
abide the fate of its own nature, and dwell and sleep upon the dust: So are the
hopes of a mortal Man; he opens his eyes and looks upon fine things at
distance, and shuts them again with weakness, because they are too glorious to
behold; and the Man rejoices because he hopes fine things are staying for him;
but his heart aches, because he knows there are a thousand ways to fail and
miss of those glories; and though he hopes, yet he enjoys not; he longs, but he
possesses not, and must be content with his portion of dust; and being a worm
and no Man must lie down in this portion, before he can receive the end of his
hopes, the Salvation of his Soul in the resurrection of the dead. For as Death
is the end of our lives, so is the Resurrection the end of our hopes; and as we
die daily, so we daily hope: but Death, which is the end of our life, is the
enlargement of our Spirits from hope to certainty, from uncertain fears to
certain expectations, from the death of the body to the life of the soul; that
is, to partake of the light and life of Christ, to rise to life as he did; for
his Resurrection is the beginning of ours: He died for us alone, not for
himself; but he rose again for himself and us too. So that if he did rise, so
shall we; the Resurrection shall be universal; good and bad; all shall rise,
but not altogether. First Christ, then we that are Christ's; and yet there is a
third Resurrection, though not spoken of here; but thus it shall be. The dead
in Christ shall rise first; that is, next to Christ; and after them the wicked
shall rise to condemnation.

So that you see here is the sum of affairs treated of in my Text: Not
whether it be lawful to eat a Tortoise or a Mushrome, or to tread with the foot
bare upon the ground within the Octaves of Easter. It is not here inquired
whether Angels be material or immaterial; or whether the dwellings of dead
Infants be within the Air or in the regions of the Earth; the inquiry here is
whether we are to be Christians or no? whether we are to live good lives or no?
or whether it be permitted to us to live with Lust or Covetousness acted with
all the daughters of rapine and ambition? whether there be any such thing as
sin, any judicatory for Consciences, any rewards of Piety, any difference of
Good and Bad, any rewards after this life? This is the design of these words by
proper interpretation: for if Men shall die like Dogs and sheep, they will
certainly live like Wolves and Foxes: but he that believes the Article of the
Resurrection, has entertained the greatest Demonstration in the world, That
nothing can make us happy but the Knowledge of God, and Conformity to the life
and death of the holy Jesus. Here therefore are the great Hinges of all
Religion: 1. Christ is already risen from the dead. 2. We also shall rise in
Gods time and our order. Christ is the first fruits. But there shall be a full
harvest of the Resurrection, and all shall rise. My Text speaks only of the
Resurrection of the just, of them that belong to Christ; explicitly I say of
these; and therefore directly of Resurrection to life eternal. But because he
also says there shall be an order for every man; and yet every man does not
belong to Christ; therefore indirectly also he implies the more universal
Resurrection unto judgment. But this shall be the last thing that shall be
done; for, according to the Proverb of the Jews, Michael flies but with one
wing, and Gabriel with two; God is quick in sending Angels of peace, and they
fly apace; but the messengers of wrath come slowly: God is more hasty to
glorify his servants then to condemn the wicked. And therefore in the story of
Dives and Lazarus we find that the beggar died first; the good man Lazarus was
first taken away from his misery to his comfort, and afterward the rich man
died: and as the good many times die first, so all of them rise first, as if it
were a matter of haste: And as the mothers breasts swell and shoot and long to
give food to her babe; so Gods bowels did yearn over his banished children, and
he longs to cause them to eat and drink in his Kingdom. And at last the wicked
shall rise unto condemnation, for that must be done too; every man in his own
order: first Christ, then Christ's servants, and at last Christ's enemies. The
first of these is the great ground of our faith, the second is the consummation
of all our hopes: the first is the foundation of God that stands sure, the
second is that superstructure that shall never perish: by the first we believe
in God unto righteousness, by the second we live in God unto salvation: But the
third, for that also is true and must be considered, is the great affrightment
of all them that live ungodly. But in the whole Christ's Resurrection and ours
is the (...) and (...) of a Christian; that as Jesus Christ is the same
yesterday and to day, and the same for ever; so may we in Christ, become in the
morrow of the Resurrection the same or better then yesterday in our natural
life; the same body and the same soul tied together in the same essential
union, with this only difference, that not Nature but Grace and Glory with an
Hermetick seal give us a new signature, whereby we shall no more be changed,
but like unto Christ our head we shall become the same for ever. Of these I
shall discourse in order. 1. That Christ, who is the first fruits, is the first
in this order: he is already risen from the dead. 2. We shall all take our
turns, we shall all die, and as sure as death we shall all rise again. And 3.
This very order is effective of the thing it self. That Christ is first risen,
is the demonstration and certainty of ours, for because there is an order in
this economy, the first in the kind is the measure of the rest. If Christ be
the first fruits, we are the whole vintage, and we shall all die in the order
of Nature, and shall rise again in the order of Christ: They that are Christ's,
and are found so at his coming, shall partake of his resurrection. But Christ
first, then they that are Christ's: that is the order.

1. Christ is the first fruits; he is already risen from the dead. For he alone
could not be held by death. Free among the dead. (...), Synes.him. 6

(...);
Death was Sins eldest daughter, and the Grave-clothes were her first mantle;
but Christ was conqueror over both, and came to take that away, and to disarm
this. This was a glory fit for the head of mankind, but it was too great and
too good to be easily believed by incredulous and weak-hearted Man. It was at
first doubted of by all that were concerned; but they that saw it had no reason
to doubt any longer. But what is that to us who saw it not? Yes, very much.
Valde dubitatum est ab illis, ne dubitaretur a nobis, says S. Augustine. They
doubted very much, that by their confirmation we might be established and doubt
no more. Mary Magdalene saw him first, and she ran with joy and said she had
seen the Lord, and that he was risen from the dead; but they believed her not.
After that diverse women together saw him, and they told it, but had no thanks
for their pains, and obtained no credit among the Disciples. The two Disciples
that went to Emaus saw him, talked with him, eat with him, and they ran and
told it: they told true, but no body believed them. Then S. Peter saw him, but
he was not yet got into the Chair of the Catholic Church, they did not think
him infallible, and so they believed him not at all. Five times in one day he
appeared; for after all this he appeared to the Eleven; they were indeed
transported with joy and wonder, but they would scarce believe their own eyes,
and though they saw him they doubted. Well, all this was not enough; he was
seen also of James, and suffered Thomas to thrust his hand into his side, and
appeared to S. Paul, and was seen by five hundred brethren at once. So that
there is no capacity of mankind, no time, no place, but had an ocular
demonstration of his Resurrection. He appeared to Men and Women, to the Clergy
and the Laity, to sinners of both sexes; to weak men and to criminals, to
doubters and deniers, at home and abroad, in public and in private, in their
houses and their journeys, unexpected and by appointment, betimes in the
morning and late at night, to them in conjunction and to them in dispersion,
when they did look for him and when they did not; he appeared upon earth to
many, and to S. Paul and S. Stephen from heaven. So that we can require no
greater testimony then all these are able to give us, and they saw for
themselves and for us too, that the Faith and certainty of the Resurrection of
Jesus might be conveyed to all that shall die and follow Christ in their own
order.

Now this being matter of fact, cannot be supposed infinite, but limited to
time and place, and therefore to be proved by them who at that time were upon
the place; good men and true, simple and yet losers by the bargain, many and
united, confident and constant, preaching it all their life, and stoutly
maintaining it at their death. Men that would not deceive others, and Men that
could not be deceived themselves in a matter so notorious and so proved, and so
seen: and if this be not sufficient credibility in a matter of Fact as this
was, then we can have no story credibly transmitted to us, no Records kept, no
Acts of Courts, no narratives of the days of old, no traditions of our
Fathers, no memorials of them in the third generation. Nay, if from these we
have not sufficient causes and arguments of Faith, how shall we be able to know
the will of Heaven upon Earth? unless God do not only tell it once, but
always, and not only always to some Men, but always to all Men: for if some
Men must believe others, they can never do it in any thing more reasonably than
in this; and if we may not trust them in this, then without a perpetual
miracle, no Man could have Faith: for Faith could never come by hearing; by
nothing but by seeing. But if there be any use of History, any Faith in Men,
any honesty in manners, any truth in humane intercourse; if there be any use of
Apostles or Teachers, of Ambassadors, or Letters, of ears or hearing; if there
be any such thing as the Grace of Faith, that is less than demonstration or
intuition, then we may be as sure that Christ the first Fruits is already
risen, as all these credibilities can make us. But let us take heed; as God
hates a lie, so he hates incredulity; an obstinate, a foolish and pertinacious
understanding. What we do every minute of our lives in matters of title and
great concernment, if we refuse to do it in Religion, which yet is to be
conducted as all humane affairs are, by humane instruments and arguments of
persuasion proper to the nature of the thing, it is an obstinacy as cross to
humane reason, as it is to Divine Faith.

But this Article was so clearly proved, that presently it came to pass that
Men were no longer ashamed of the Cross, but it was worn upon breasts, printed
in the air, drawn upon foreheads, carried upon Banners, put upon crowns
Imperial, presently it came to pass that the Religion of the despised Jesus did
infinitely prevail: a Religion that taught Men to be meek and humble, apt to
receive injuries, but unapt to do any; a Religion that gave countenance to the
poor and pitiful, in a time when riches were adored, and ambition and pleasure
had possessed the heart of all Mankind; a Religion that would change the face
of things, and the hearts of Men, and break vile habits into gentleness and
counsel; that such a Religion, in such a time by the Sermons and Conduct of
Fishermen, Men of mean breeding and illiberal Arts, should so speedily triumph
over the Philosophy of the World, and the arguments of the subtle, and the
Sermons of the Eloquent; the Power of Princes and the Interests of States, the
inclinations of Nature, and the blindness of zeal, the force of custom, and the
solicitation of passions, the pleasures of sin and the busy Arts of the
Devil; that is, against Wit and Power, Superstition and Wilfulness, Fame and
Money, Nature and Empire, which are all the causes in this World that can make
a thing impossible; this, this is to be ascribed to the power of God, and is
the great demonstration of the Resurrection of Jesus. Every thing was an
Argument for it, and improved it; no Objection could hinder it, no Enemies
destroy it; whatsoever was for them, it made the Religion to increase;
whatsoever was against them, made it to increase; Sunshine and Storms, Fair
Weather or Foul, it was all one as to the event of things: for they were
instruments in the hands of God, who could make what himself should choose to be
the product of any cause; So that if the Christians had peace, they went abroad
and brought in Converts; if they had no peace, but persecution; the Converts
came in to them. In prosperity they allured and enticed the World by the beauty
of holiness; in affliction and trouble they amazed all men with the splendor
of their Innocence, and the glories of their patience; and quickly it was that
the World became Disciple to the glorious Nazarene, and men could no longer
doubt of the Resurrection of Jesus, when it became so demonstrated by the
certainty of them that saw it, and the courage of them that died for it, and
the multitude of them that believed it; who by their Sermons, and their
Actions, by their public Offices and Discourses, by Festivals and Eucharists,
by Arguments of Experience and Sense, by Reason and Religion, by persuading
rational Men, and establishing believing Christians, by their living in the
obedience of Jesus, and dying for the testimony of Jesus, have greatly advanced
his Kingdom, and his Power, and his Glory, into which he entered after his
Resurrection from the dead. For he is the first fruits; and if we hope to rise
through him, we must confess that himself is first risen from the dead. That Is
the first particular.

2. There is an order for us also. We also shall rise again. Combustusque senex
tumulo procedit adultus,
Consumens dat membra rogus; --
The ashes of old Camillus shall stand up spritely from his Urne; and the
Funeral fires shall produce a new warmth to the dead bones of all those who
died under the arms of all the Enemies of the Roman greatness. This is a less
wonder than the former: for admonetur omnis aetas jam fieri posse quod
aliquando factum est. If it was done once, it may be done again; for since it
could never have been done, but by a power that is infinite, that infinite must
also be eternal and indeficient. By the same Almighty power which restored life
to the dead body of our living Lord, we may all be restored to a new life in
the Resurrection of the dead.

When Man was not, what power, what causes made him to be? whatsoever it was,
it did then as great a work as to raise his body to the same being again; and
because we know not the method of Natures secret changes, and how we can be
fashioned beneath in secreto terrae, and cannot handle and discern the
possibilities and seminal powers in the ashes of dissolved bones, must our
ignorance in Philosophy be put in balance against the Articles of Religion, the
hopes of Mankind, the Faith of Nations and the truth of God? and are our
Opinions of the power of God so low, that our understanding must be his
measure; and he shall be confessed to do nothing, unless it be made plain in
our Philosophy? Certainly we have a low Opinion of God unless we believe he can
do more things then we can understand. But let us hear S. Paul's demonstration:
If the Corn dies and lives again; if it lays its body down, suffers
alteration, dissolution and death, but at the spring rises again in the verdure
of a leaf, in the fullness of the ear, in the kidneys of wheat; if it proceeds
from little to great, from nakedness to ornament, from emptiness to plenty,
from unity to multitude, from death to life: be a Sadducee no more, shame not
thy understanding, and reproach not the weakness of thy Faith, by thinking that
Corn can be restored to life and Man cannot; especially since in every creature
the obediential capacity is infinite, and cannot admit degrees; for every
Creature can be any thing under the power of God, which cannot be less than
infinite.

But we find no obscure footsteps of this mystery even amongst the Heathens.
Pliny reports that Appion the Grammarian by the use of the plant Osiris called
Homer from his grave; and in Valerius Maximus we find that AElius Tubero
returned to life when he was seated in his Funeral pile; and in Plutarch, that
Soleus after three days burial did live, and in Valerius that AEris Pamphilius
did so after ten days. And it was so commonly believed, that Glaucus who was
choked in a vessel of honey did rise again, that it grew to a Proverb; Glaucus
poto melle resurrexit; Glaucus having tasted honey, died and lived again. I
pretend not to believe these stories true; but from these instances it may be
concluded that they believed it possible that there should be a Resurrection
from the dead; and natural reason, and their Philosophy did not wholly destroy
their hopes and expectation to have a portion in this Article.

For God knowing that the great hopes of Man, that the biggest endearment of
Religion, the sanction of private Justice, the band of Piety and holy Courage,
does wholly derive from the Article of the Resurrection, was pleased not only
to make it credible, but easy and familiar to us; and we so converse every
night with the Image of death, that every morning we find an argument of the
Resurrection. Sleep and Death have but one mother, and they have one name in
common.

Soles occidere and redire possunt,
Nobis cum semel occidit lux brevis,
Nox est perpetua una dormienda.
Catul. Charnel-houses are but (...), Cemeteries or sleeping-places, and they
that die are fallen asleep, and the Resurrection is but an awakening and
standing up from sleep: but in sleep our Senses are as fast bound by Nature; as
our Joints are by the grave-clothes; and unless an Angel of God awaken us every
morning, we must confess our selves as unable to converse with Men, as we now
are afraid to die and to converse with Spirits. But however Death it self is no
more; it is but darkness and a shadow, a rest and a forgetfulness. What is
there more in death? what is there less in sleep? For do we not see by
experience that nothing of equal loudness does awaken us sooner then a Man's
voice, especially if he be called by name? and thus also it shall be in the
Resurrection. We shall be awakened by the voice of a Man, and he that called
Lazarus by name from his grave, shall also call us: for although S. Paul
affirms, 1 These. 4. 16.
that the trumpet shall sound, and there shall be the voice of an Archangel;
yet this is not a word of Nature, but of Office and Ministry: Christ himself is
that Archangel, and he shall descend with a mighty shout, John 5. 28.
(says the Apostle) and all that are in the grave shall hear his voice, says
S. John: So that we shall be awakened by the voice of a Man, because we are
only fallen asleep by the decree of God; and when the Cock and the Lark call
us up to prayer and labor, the first thing we see is an argument of our
Resurrection from the dead. And when we consider what the Greek Church reports,
That amongst them the bodies of those that die Excommunicate will not return to
dust till the Censure be taken off; we may with a little faith and reason
believe, that the same power that keeps them from their natural Dissolution,
can recall them to life and union. I will not now insist upon the story of the
Rising Bones seen every year in Egypt, nor the pretenses of the Chemists, that
they from the ashes of Flowers can re-produce from the same materials the same
beauties in color and figure; for he that proves a certain Truth from an
uncertain Argument, is like him that wears a Wooden leg when he has two sound
legs already; it hinders his going, but helps him not: The Truth of God stands
not in need of such supporters, Nature alone is a sufficient preacher: Quae
nunc herba fuit, lignum jacet, herba futura, Dracuntius de opere Dei.

Aeriae nudantur aves cum penna vetusta,
Et nova subvestit reparatas pluma volucres.
Night and Day, the Sun returning to the same point of East, every change of
Species in the same matter, Generation and Corruption, the Eagle renewing her
youth and the Snake her skin, the Silkworm and the Swallows the care of
posterity and the care of an immortal name, Winter and Summer, the Fall and
Spring, the Old Testament and the New, the words of Job, and the Visions of the
Prophets, the prayer of Ezekiel for the resurrection of the men of Ephraim, and
the return of Jonas from the Whales belly, the histories of the Jews and the
Narratives of Christians, the Faith of Believers and the Philosophy of the
reasonable; all join in the verification of this Mystery. And amongst these
heaps it is not of the least consideration that there was never any good man,
who having been taught this Article, but if he served God, he also relied upon
this. If he believed God, he believed this; and therefore S. Paul says that
they who were (...), were also (...), they who had no hope (meaning of the
Resurrection) were also Atheists, and without God in the world. And it is
remarkable what S. Augustine observes, That when the World saw the righteous
Abel destroyed, and that the murderer outlived his crime, and built up a
numerous family, and grew mighty upon Earth, they neglected the Service of God
upon that account, till God in pity of their prejudice and foolish arguings
took Enoch up to heaven to recover them from their impieties, by showing them
that their bodies and souls should be rewarded for ever in an eternal union.
But Christ the first fruits is gone before, and himself did promise that when
himself was lifted up he would draw all men after him. Every man in his own
order; first Christ, then they that are Christ's at his coming. And so I have
done with the second Particular, not Christ only, but we also shall rise in
Gods time and our order.

But concerning this order I must speak a word or two, not only for the fuller
handling the Text, but because it will be matter of application of what has
been already spoken of the Article of the Resurrection.

3. First Christ and then we. And we therefore because Christ is already risen.
But you must remember, that the Resurrection and Exaltation of Christ was the
reward of his perfect obedience and purest holiness; and he calling us to an
imitation of the same obedience, and the same perfect holiness, prepares a way
for us to the same Resurrection. If we by holiness become the Sons of God as
Christ was, we shall also as he was become the Sons of God in the Resurrection:
But upon no other terms. So said our blessed Lord himself: Ye which have
followed me in the regeneration, Luke 14. 14.
when the Son of Man shall sit on the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit
upon thrones judging the tribes of Israel. For as it was with Christ the first
fruits, so it shall be with all Christians in their own order: as with the
Head, so it shall be with the Members. He was the Son of God by love and
obedience, and then became the Son of God by Resurrection from the dead to life
Eternal, and so shall we; but we cannot be so in any other way. To them that
are Christ's, and to none else shall this be given. For we must know that God
has sent Christ into the World to be a great example and demonstration of the
Economy and Dispensation of Eternal life. As God brought Christ to glory, so
he will bring us, but by no other method. He first obeyed the will of God, and
patiently suffered the will of God; he died, and rose again, and entered into
glory; and so must we. Thus Christ is made Via, Veritas, and Vita, the Way, the
Truth, and the Life; that is, the true way to Eternal life: He first trod this
Wine Press, and we must insist in the same steps, or we shall never partake of
this blessed Resurrection. He was made the Son of God in a most glorious
manner, and we by him, by his merit, and by his grace, and by his example: but
other then this there is no way of Salvation for us. That Is the first and great
effect of this glorious order.

4. But there is one thing more in it yet, Every Man in his own order. First
Christ, and then they that are Christ's. But what shall become of them that are
not Christ's? why there is an order for them too. First, they that are
Christ's; and then they that are not his. Rev. 20. 6.
Blessed and holy is he that has his part in the first resurrection. There is
a first and a second Resurrection even after this life. The dead in Christ
shall rise first. Now blessed are they that have their portion here; for upon
these the second death shall have no power. As for the recalling 1 These. 4. 16.
the wicked from their graves, it is no otherwise in the sense of the Spirit to
be called a Resurrection, then taking a Criminal from the Prison to the Bar is
a giving of liberty. When poor Attilius Aviola had been seized on by an
Apoplexy, his friends supposing him dead carried him to his Funeral pile; but
when the fire began to approach, and the heat to warm the body, he revived, and
seeing himself incircled with Funeral flames, called out aloud to his friends
to rescue, not the dead, but the living Aviola from that horrid burning. But it
could not be. He only was restored from his sickness to fall into death, and
from his dull disease to a sharp and intolerable torment. Just so shall the
wicked live again; they shall receive their souls, that they may be a portion
for Devils; they shall receive their bodies, that they may feel the everlasting
burning; they shall see Christ, that they may look on him whom they have
pierced; and they shall hear the voice of God passing upon them the intolerable
sentence; they shall come from their graves, that they may go into hell; and
live again, that they may die for ever. So have we seen a poor condemned
Criminal, the weight of whose sorrows sitting heavily upon his soul has
benumbed him into a deep sleep, till he has forgotten his groans, and laid
aside his deep sighings; but on a sudden comes the messenger of death, and
unbinds the Poppy garland, scatters the heavy cloud that incircled his
miserable head, and makes him return to acts of life, that he may quickly
descend into death and be no more. So is every sinner that lies down in shame,
and makes his grave with the wicked; he shall indeed rise again, and be called
upon by the voice of the Archangel, but then he shall descend into sorrows
greater then the reason and the patience of a man, weeping and shrieking louder
then the groans of the miserable children in the Valley of Hinnon.

These indeed are sad stories, but true as the voice of God and the Sermons of
the holy Jesus. They are Gods words and Gods decrees; and I wish that all who
profess the belief of these, would consider sadly what they mean. If ye believe
the Article of the Resurrection, then you know that in your body you shall
receive what you did in the body, whether it be good or bad. It matters not now
very much whether our bodies be beauteous or deformed; for if we glorify God
in our bodies, God shall make our bodies glorious. It matters not much whether
we live in ease and pleasure, or eat nothing but bitter herbs: the body that
lies in dust and ashes, that goes stooping and feeble, that lodges at the foot
of the Cross and dwells in discipline, shall be feasted at the eternal supper
of the Lamb. And ever remember this, that beastly pleasures, and lying lips,
and a deceitful tongue, and a heart that sends forth proud things, are no
good dispositions to a blessed Resurrection. (...).
It is not good that in the body we live a life of Dissolution, for that is no
good harmony with that purpose of glory which God designs the body. (...);
(...),
said Phocyllides; for we hope that from our beds of darkness we shall rise
into Regions of light, and shall become like unto God. They shall partake of a
Resurrection to life and what this can infer is very obvious. For i^ it be so
hard to believe a Resurrection from one death, let us not be dead in trespasses
and sins, for a Resurrection from two deaths will be harder to be believed, and
harder to be effected. But if any of you have lost the life of Grace, and so
forfeited all your title to a life of Glory, betake your selves to an early and
an entire piety, that when by this first Resurrection you have made this way
plain before your face, you may with confidence expect a happy Resurrection
from your graves. For if it be possible that the spirit, when it is dead in
sin, can arise to a life of righteousness; much more it is easy to suppose
that the body after death is capable of being restored again. And this is a
consequent of S. Paul's argument, Romans 5. 10.
If when ye were enemies ye were reconciled by his death, much more being
reconciled we shall be saved by his life; plainly declaring that it is a harder
and more wonderful thing for a wicked man to become the friend of God, then for
one that is so, to be carried up to heaven and partake of his glory. The first
Resurrection is certainly the greater miracle: But he that has risen once, may
rise again; and this is as sure as that he that dies once, may die again, and
die for ever. But he who partakes of the death of Christ by Mortification, and
of his Resurrection by holiness of life and a holy Faith, shall, according to
the expression of the Prophet Isaiah, Enter into his chamber of death; when
Nature Isa. 26. 20.
and Gods decree shall shut the doors upon him, and there he shall be hidden
for a little moment: But then shall they that dwell in dust awake and sing,
with Christ's dead body shall they arise: all shall rise, but every man in his
own order; Christ the first fruits, then they that are Christ's at his coming.
Amen.

I have now done with my Meditation of the Resurrection; but we have a new and
a sadder subject to consider: It is glorious and brave when a Christian
contemplates those glories which stand at the foot of the Account of all God's
Servants; but when we consider, that before all or any thing of this happens
every Christian must ^wice exuere hominem, put off the Old man, and then lie
down in dust and the dishonours of the Grave, it is Vinum Myrrhatum, there is
Myrrh put into our Wine; it is wholesome, but it will allay all our pleasures of
that glorious expectation. But no man can escape it. After that the Great Cyrus
had ruled long in a mighty Empire; yet there came a Message from Heaven, not so
sad it may be, yet as decretory as the Handwriting on the wall that arrested
his Successor Darius, (...) Prepare thy self, O Cyrus, and then go unto the
Gods; he laid aside his Tiar and his beauteous Diadem, and covered his face
with a cloth, and in a single Linen laid his honored head in a poor humble
Grave; and none of us all can avoid this sentence. For if Wit and Learning,
great Fame and great Experience, if wise Notices of things, and an honorable
Fortune, if Courage and Skill, if Prelacy and an honorable Age, if any thing
that could give Greatness and Immunity to a wise and prudent man, could have
been put in bar against a sad day, and have gone for good plea, this sad Scene
of Sorrows had not been the entertainment of this Assembly. But tell me, where
are those great Masters, who while they lived flourished in their studies? Iam
eorum praebendas alii possident, and nescio utrum de iis cogitant; Other men
have got their Prebends and their Dignities, and who knows whether ever they
remember them or no? While they lived they seemed nothing, when they are dead,
every man for a while speaks of them what they please, and afterward they are
as if they had not been. But the piety of the Christian Church has made some
little provision toward an artificial Immortality for brave and worthy
persons; and the Friendships, which our dead contracted while they were alive,
require us to continue a fair memory as long as we can; but they expire in
monthly minds, or at most in a saint and declining Anniversary; -- (...)
(...).
And we have great reason so to do in this present sad accident of the death of
our late most Reverend Primate, whose death the Church of Ireland has very
great reason to deplore; and we have great obligation to remember his very many
worthy Deeds done for this poor afflicted and despised Church. S. Paul made an
excellent Funeral Oration, as it were instituting a Feast of All Saints, Who
all died having obtained a good report; and that excellent Preacher in the 11.
chap. of the Hebrews made a Sermon of their Commemoration. For since good men,
while they are alive, have their conversation in Heaven; when they are in
Heaven it is also fit that they should in their good names live upon Earth. And
as their great Examples are an excellent Sermon to the living, and the praising
them when Envy and Flattery can have no Interest to interpose, as it is the
best and most vigorous Sermon and Incentive to great things; so to conceal what
good God has wrought by them, is great unthankfulness to God and to good men.

When Dorcas died the Apostle came to see the dead Corpse, and the friends of
the deceased expressed their grief and their love by showing the Coats that
she, whilst she lived, wrought with her own hands. She was a good Needle-woman
and a good Huswife, and did good to Mankind in her little way, and that it self
ought not to be forgotten, and the Apostle himself was not displeased with
their little Sermons, and that (...) which the women made upon that sad
interview. But if we may have the same liberty to record the worthy things of
this our most venerable Father and Brother, and if there remains no more of
that Envy which usually obscures the splendor of living Hero's, if you can
with your charitable though weeping eyes behold the great gifts of God with
which he adorned this great Prelate, and not object the failings of Humanity to
the participation of the Graces of the Spirit, or think that Gods gifts are the
less because they are born in Earthen Vessels, (...), for all men bear
Mortality about them, and the Cabinet is not beauteous as the Diamond that
shines within its bosom; then we may without interruption pay this duty to
Piety, and Friendship, and Thankfulness, and deplore our sad loss by telling a
true and sad story of this great man, whom God has lately taken from our eyes.

He was bred in Cambridge in Sidney-college under Mr. Hulet, a grave and a
worthy man, and he showed himself not only a fruitful Plant by his great
progress in his Studies, but made him another return of gratitude, taking care
to provide a good Employment for him in Ireland, where he then began to be
greatly interested. It was spoken as an honor to Augustus Caesar, that he gave
his Tutor an honorable Funeral; and Marcus Antoninus erected a Statue unto
his; and Gratian the Emperor made his Master Ausonius to be Consul: And our
worthy Primate, knowing the Obligation which they pass upon us, who do
Obstetricari gravidae animae, help the parturient Soul to bring forth fruits
according to its seminal powers, was careful not only to reward the industry
of such persons so useful to the Church in the cultivating infantes palmarum,
young Plants, whose joints are to be stretched and made straight; but to
demonstrate that his Scholar knew how to value Learning, when he knew so well
how to reward the Teacher.

Having passed the course of his studies in the University, and done his
Exercise with that Applause which is usually the reward of pregnant Wits and
hard study, he was removed into Yorkshire; where first in the City of York he
was an assiduous Preacher, but by the disposition of the Divine Providence he
happened to be engaged at North-Alerton in Disputation with three pragmatical
Romish Priests of the Jesuits Order, whom he so much worsted in the Conference,
and so shamefully disadvantaged by the evidence of Truth, represented wisely
and learnedly, that the famous Primate of York, Archbishop Matthews, a learned
and an excellent Prelate, and a most worthy Preacher, hearing of that Triumph,
sent for him and made him his Chaplain; in whose service he continued till the
death of the Primate, but in that time had given so much testimony of his great
Dexterity in the Conduct of Ecclesiastical and Civil Affairs, that he grew dear
to his Master. In that Employment he was made Prebendary of York, and then of
Rippon; the Dean of which Church having made him his SubDean, he managed the
affairs of that Church so well, that he soon acquired a greater fame, and
entered into the possession of many hearts, and admiration to those many more
that knew him. There and at his Parsonage he continued long to do the duty of a
learned and good Preacher, and by his Wisdom, Eloquence and Deportment, so
gained the affections of the Nobility, Gentry and Commons of that Country,
that as at his return thither upon the blessed Restoration of His most Sacred
Majesty he knew himself obliged enough, and was so kind as to give them a
Visit; so they by their coming in great numbers to meet him, their joyful
Reception of him, their great Caressing of him when he was there, their forward
hopes to enjoy him as their Bishop, their trouble at his Departure, their
unwillingness to let him go away, gave signal testimonies that they were wise
and kind enough to understand and value his great worth.

But while he lived there he was like a Diamond in the dust, (or Lucius
Quinctius at the plough) his low Fortune covered a most valuable person, till
he became observed by Sir Thomas Wentworth Lord President of York, whom we all
knew for his great Excellencies, and his great but glorious Misfortunes. This
rare person espied the great abilities of Doctor Bramhall, and made him his
Chaplain, and brought him into Ireland as one whom he believed would prove the
most fit instrument to serve in that design, which for two years before his
arrival here he had greatly meditated and resolved, the Reformation of Religion
and the Reparation of the broken Fortunes of the Church: The Complaints were
many, the Abuses great, the Causes of the Church vastly numerous, but as fast
as they were brought in, so fast they were by the Lord Deputy referred back to
Dr. Bramhall, who by his indefatigable Pains, great Sagacity, perpetual
Watchfulness, daily and hourly Consultations, reduced things to a more
tolerable condition then they had been left in by the Schismatical principles
of some, and the unjust Prepossessions of others, form any years before. For at
the Reformation the Popish Bishops and Priests seemed to conform, and did so,
that keeping their Bishoprics they might enrich their Kindred and dilapidate
the Revenues of the Church; which by pretended Offices, false Informations,
Fee-farms at contemptible Rents, and ungodly Alienations, were made low as
Poverty it self, and unfit to minister to the needs of them that served the
Altar, or the noblest purposes of Religion. For Hospitality decayed, and the
Bishops were easy to be oppressed by those that would; and they complained,
but for a long time had no helper, till God raised up that glorious Instrument
the Earl of Strafford, who brought over with him as great affections to the
Church and to all public Interests, and as admirable Abilities, as ever before
his time did invest and adorn any of the Kings Vicegerents: and God fitted his
hand with an Instrument good as his skill was great. For the first Specimen of
his Abilities and Diligence in recovery of some lost Tithes being represented
to His late Majesty of blessed and glorious memory, it pleased His Majesty upon
the death of Bishop Downham to advance the Doctor to the Bishopric of D^r^y;
which he not only adorned with an excellent spirit and a wise Government, but
did more then double the Revenue, not by taking any thing from them to whom it
was due, but by resuming something of the Churches Patrimony, which by undue
means was detained in unfitting hands.

But his care was beyond his Diocese, and his zele broke out to warm all his
Brethren; and though by reason of the Favor and Piety of King James the
escheated Counties were well provided for their Tithes, yet the Bishoprics
were not so well till the Primate, then Bishop of Derry, by the favor of the
Lord Lieutenant and his own incessant and assiduous labor and wise conduct,
brought in diverse Impropriations, cancelled many unjust Alienations, and did
restore them to a condition much more tolerable; I say much more tolerable; for
though he raised them above contempt, yet they were not near to envy; but he
knew there could not in all times be wanting too many that envied to the Church
every degree of prosperity: so Judas did to Christ the expense of Ointment, and
so Dyonisius told the Priest, when himself stole the golden Cloak from Apollo,
and gave him one of Arcadian homespun, that it was warmer for him in Winter
and cooler in Summer. And forever, since the Church by God's blessing and the
favor of Religious Kings and Princes, and Pious Nobility, has been endowed
with fair Revenues; inimicus homo, the Enemy has not been wanting by pretenses
of Religion to take away God's portion from the Church, as if his Word were
intended as an instrument to rob his Houses. But when the Israelites were
governed by a (...), and God was their King, and Moses his Lieutenant, and
things were of his management, he was pleased by making great Provisions for
them that ministered in the service of the Tabernacle to consign this truth for
ever, That Men, as they love God, at the same rate are to make provisions for
his Priests. For when himself did it, he not only gave the 48. Cities, with a
mile of Glebe round about their City every way, and yet the whole Country was
but 140. miles long, or thereabouts, from Dan to Beersheba; but besides this
they had the tithe of all increase, the first fruits, offerings, vows,
redemptions, and in short, they had 24. sorts of Dues, as Buxtorf relates; and
all this either brought to the Barn home to them without trouble, or else, as
the nature of the thing required, brought to the Temple; the first to make it
more profitable, and the second to declare that they received it not from the
People but from God, not the Peoples kindness but the Lords inheritance;
insomuch that this small Tribe of Levi, which was not the 40th. part of the
People, Numb. 1. 46. 3. 39.
as the Scripture computes them, had a Revenue almost treble to any of the
largest of the Tribes. I will not insist on what Villalpandus observes, ^^ld.
Hist. of ^ithes, c. 2.
it may easily be read in the 45. of Ezekiel concerning that portion which God
reserves for himself and his service, but whatsoever it be this I shall say,
that it is confessedly a Prophecy of the Gospel; ^e Philo. (...).
but this I add, that they had as little to do, and much less than a Christian
Priest, and yet in all the 24. courses the poorest Priest amongst them might be
esteemed a Rich man. I speak not this to upbraid any man or any thing but
Sacrilege and Murmur, nor to any other end but to represent upon what great and
Religious grounds the then Bishop of Derry did with so much care and assiduous
labor endeavor to restore the Church of Ireland to that splendour and fullness;
which as it is much conducing to the honor of God and of Religion, God himself
being the Judge, so it is much more necessary for you than it is for us, and so
this wise Prelate rarely well understood it; and having the same advantage and
blessing as we now have, a Gracious King, and a Lieutenant Patron of Religion,
and the Church, he improved the deposita pietatis, as Origin calls them, the
Gages of Piety, Tract. 25. in St. Matthew.
which the Religion of the ancient Princes and Nobles of this Kingdom had
bountifully given to such a comfortable competency, that though there be place
left for present and future Piety to enlarge it self, yet no man has reason to
be discouraged in his duty; insomuch that as I have heard from a most worthy
hand, that at his going into England he gave account to the Archbishop of
Canterbury of 30000 l. a year, in the recovery of which he was greatly and
principally instrumental. But the goods of this World are called waters by
Solomon. Stolen waters are sweet, and they are too unstable to be stopped: some
of these waters did run back from their proper chanel, and return to another
course than God and the Laws intended, yet his labors and pious Counsels were
not the less acceptable to God and good men, and therefore by a thankful and
honorable recognition the Convocation of the Church of Ireland has
transmitted in Record to posterity their deep resentment of his singular
services and great abilities in this whole affair. And this honor will for
ever remain to that Bishop of Derry; he had a Zerubbabel who repaired the
Temple and restored its beauty, but he was the Ioshuah, the High Priest, who
under him ministered this blessing to the Congregations of the Lord.

But his care was not determined in the exterior part only, and Accessaries
of Religion; he was careful, and he was prosperous in it, to reduce that Divine
and excellent Service of our Church to public and constant Exercise, to Unity
and Devotion; and to cause the Articles of the Church of England to be accepted
as the Rule of public confessions and persuasions here, that they and we might
be Populus unius labii, of one heart and one lip, building up our hopes of
heaven on a most holy Faith; and taking away that Shibboleth which made this
Church lisp too undecently, or rather in some little degree to speak the speech
of Ashdod, and not the language of Canaan; and the excellent and wise pains he
took in this particular no man can dehonestate or reproach, but he that is not
willing to confess that the Church of England is the best Reformed Church in
the world. But when the brave Roman Infantry under the Conduct of Manlius
ascended up to the Capitol to defend Religion and their Altars from the fury of
the Gauls, they all prayed to God, Us quemadmodum ipsi ad defendendum templum
ejus concurrissent, ita ille virtutem e^rum numine suo tueretur: That as they
came to defend his Temple by their Arms, so he would defend their Persons and
that Cause with his Power and Divinity. And this excellent man in the Cause of
Religion found the like blessing which they prayed for; God by the prosperity
of his labors and a blessed effect gave testimony not only of the Piety and
Wisdom of his purposes, but that he loves to bless a wise Instrument when it is
vigorously employed in a wise and religious labor. He overcame the difficulty
in defiance of all such pretenses as were made even from Religion it self to
obstruct the better procedure of real and material Religion.

These were great things and matter of great envy, and like the fiery eruptions
of Vesuvius might with the very ashes of Consumption have buried another man.
At first indeed, as his blessed Master the most holy Jesus had, so he also had
his Annum acceptabilem. At first the product was nothing but great admiration
at his stupendous parts, and wonder at his mighty diligence and observation of
his unusual zele in so good and great things; but this quickly passed into the
natural daughters of Envy, Suspicion and Detraction, the spirit of Obloquy and
Slander. His zele for recovery of the Church-revenues was called Oppression and
Rapine, Covetousness and Injustice; his care of reducing Religion to wise and
justifiable principles was called Popery and Arminianism, and I know not what
names, which signify what the Authors are pleased to mean, and the People to
conster and to hate. The intermedial prosperity of his Person and Fortune,
which he had as an Earnest of a greater reward to so well-meant labors, was
supposed to be the production of Illiberal Arts and ways of getting; and the
necessary refreshment of his wearied spirits, which did not always supply all
his needs, and were sometimes less then the permissions even of prudent
charity, they called Intemperance: Dederunt enim malum M^telli Naevio poetae;
their own surmises were the Bills of Accusation, and the splendor of his great
(...), or Doing of good works, was the great probation of all their Calumnies.
But if Envy be the accuser, what can be the defenses of Innocence? Saucior
invidiae morsu, quaerenda medela est,
Dic quibus in terris sentiet aeger opem?
Our B.S. knowing the unsatisfiable angers of men if their Money or Estates
were meddled with, refused to divide an Inheritance amongst Brethren; it was not
to be imagined that this great person (invested, as all his Brethren were, with
the infirmities of Mortality, and yet employed in dividing and recovering and
apportioning of Lands) should be able to bear all that reproach which Jealousy
and Suspicion, and malicious Envy, could invent against him. But (...), said
Sophocles: And so did he; the Affrightments brought to his great Fame and
Reputation made him to walk more warily, and do justly, and act prudently, and
conduct his affairs by the measures of Laws, as far as he understood, and
indeed that was a very great way: but there was Aperta justitia, Clausa manus,
Justice was open, but his Hand was shut; and though every Slanderer could tell
a story, yet none could prove that ever he received a Bribe to blind his eyes
to the value of a Pair of Gloves. It was his own Expression, when he gave glory
to God who had preserved him innocent. But because every man's Cause is right in
his own eyes, it was hard for him so to acquit himself, that in the Intriques
of Law and difficult Cases some of his Enemies should not seem (when they were
heard alone) to speak reason against him. But see the greatness of Truth and
Prudence, and how greatly God stood with him. When the numerous Armies of vexed
people, Turba gravis paci, placidaeque inimica quieti, heaped up Catalogues of
Accusations, when the Parliament of Ireland imitating the violent procedures of
the then disordered English, when his glorious Patron was taken from his head,
and he was disrobed of his great defenses; when Petitions were invited and
Accusations furnished, and Calumny was rewarded and managed with art and power,
when there were above 200. Petitions put in against him, and himself denied
leave to answer by word of mouth; when he was long imprisoned, and treated so
that a guilty man would have been broken into affrightment and pitiful and low
considerations; yet then he himself standing almost alone, like Callimachus at
Marathon invested with enemies and covered with arrows, defended himself beyond
all the powers of guiltiness, even with the defenses of Truth and the bravery
of Innocence, and answered the Petitions in writing, sometimes twenty in a day,
with so much clearness, evidence of truth, reality of Fact and Testimony of
Law, that his very Enemies were ashamed and convinced; they found they had done
like AEsops Viper, they licked the file till their tongues bled; but himself
was wholly invulnerable. They were therefore forced to leave their musterrolls
and decline the particulars, and fall to their (...), to accuse him for going
about to subvert the fundamental Laws; the way by which great Strafford and
Canterbury fell; which was a device, when all reasons failed, to oppress the
Enemy by the bold affirmation of a Conclusion they could not prove, they did
like those Gladiatores whom the Romans called Retiaries, when they could not
stab their Enemies with their daggers, they threw nets over him, and covered
him with a general mischief. But the Martyr King Charles the First, of most
glorious and Eternal Memory; seeing so great a Champion likely to be oppressed
with numbers and despair, sent what rescue he could, his Royal Letter for his
Bail, which was hardly granted to him, and when it was, it was upon such hard
terms, that his very delivery was a persecution. So necessary it was for them,
who intended to do mischief to the public, to take away the strongest pillars
of the house. This thing I remark to acquit this great man from the tongue of
slander, which had so boldly spoken, that it was certain something would stick,
yet was so impotent and unarmed, that it could not kill that great same which
his greater worthiness had procured him. It was said of Hippasus the
Pythagorean, that being asked how and what he had done: He answered, Nondum
nihil, neque enim adhuc mihi invidetur; I have done nothing yet, for no man
envies me. He that does great things, cannot avoid the tongues and teeth of
Envy; but if calumnies must pass for evidences, the bravest Hero's must always
be the most reproched Persons in the World.

Nascitur AEtolicus, pravum ingeniosus ad omne;
Qui facere assuerat, patriae non degener artis,
Candida de nigris, and de candentibus atra.
Every thing can have an ill name and an ill sense put upon it; but God, who
takes care of reputations as he does of lives, by the orders of his providence
confutes the slander, ut memoria justorum sit in benedictionibus, that the
memory of the righteous man might be embalmed with honor: And so it happened to
this great man; for by a public Warranty, by the concurrent consent of both
Houses of Parliament, the Libellous Petitions against him, the false Records
and public Monuments of injurious shame were cancelled, and he was restored in
integrum to that fame where his great labors and just procedures had first
estated him; which, though it was but justice, yet it was also such honor,
that it is greater then the virulence of tongues, which his worthiness and
their envy had armed against him.

But yet the great scene of the troubles was but newly opened. I shall not
refuse to speak yet more of his troubles, as remembering that St. Paul, when he
discourses of the glories of the Saints departed, he tells more of their
sufferings than of their prosperities, as being that Laboratory and Crysable in
which God makes his Servants vessels of honor to his glory. The storm quickly
grew high; and transitum est a linguis ad gladios, and that was indeed (...),
Iniquity had put on arms; when it is armata nequitia, then a man is hard put to
it. The Rebellion breaking out the Bishop went to his charge at Derry, and,
because he was within the defense of Walls, the execrable Traitor Sir Phelim ^
Neale laid a snare to bring him to a dishonorable death. For he wrote a Letter
to the Bishop, pretended Intelligence between them, desired that according to
their former agreement such a Gate might be delivered to him. The messenger was
not advised to be cautious, not at all instructed in the art of Secrecy, for it
was intended that he should be searched, intercepted and hanged for ought they
cared: but the Arrow was shot against the Bishop, that he might be accused for
base Conspiracy, and die with shame and sad dishonor. But here God manifested
his mighty care of his Servants; he was pleased to send into the heart of the
messenger such an affrightment, that he directly ran away with the Letter, and
never durst come near the Town to deliver it. This story was published by Sir
Phelim himself, who added, That if he could have thus ensnared the Bishop, he
had good assurance the Town should have been his own: Sed bonitas Dei
praevalitura est super omnem malitiam hominis, The goodness of God is greater
then all the malice of Men; and nothing could so prove how dear that sacred
Life was to God, as his rescue from the dangers. Stantia non poterant tecta
probare Deos: To have kept him in a warm house had been nothing, unless the
roof had fallen upon his head, that rescue was a remark of Divine favor and
Providence. But it seems Sir Phelim's Treason against the Life of this worthy
Man had a Correspondent in the Town; and it broke out speedily; for what they
could not effect by malicious stratagem, they did in part by open force; they
turned the Bishop out of the Town, and upon trifling and unjust pretenses
searched his Carriages, and took what they pleased, till they were ashamed to
take more: they did worse then divorce him from his Church, for in all the
Roman Divorces they said, Tuas tibi res babeto, Take your goods and be gone;
but Plunder was Religion then. However, though the usage was sad, yet it was
recompensed to him by his taking Sanctuary in Oxford, where he was graciously
received by that most incomparable and divine Prince; but having served the
King in Yorkshire by his Pen, and by his Counsels, and by his Interests,
returned back to Ireland, where under the excellent conduct of his Grace the
now Lord Lieutenant, he ran the risque and fortune of oppressed Virtue.

But God having still resolved to afflict us, the good man was forced into the
fortune of the Patriarchs, to leave his Country and his Charges, and seek for
safety and bread in a strange Land; for so the Prophets were used to do,
wandering up and down in sheeps-clothing, but poor as they were the world was
not worthy of them; and this worthy man, despising the shame, took up his Cross
and followed his Master. Exilium causa ipsa jubet sibi dulce videri,
Et desiderium dulce levat patriae.
He was not ashamed to suffer where the Cause was honorable and glorious; but
so God provided for the needs of his banished, and sent a man who could
minister comfort to the afflicted, and courage to the persecuted, and
resolutions to the tempted, and strength to that Religion for which they all
suffered.

And here this great man was indeed triumphant; this was one of the last and
best scenes of his life: Pindar.
(...), The last days are the best witnesses of a man. But so it was, that he
stood up in public and brave defense for the Doctrine and Discipline of the
Church of England; First, by his Sufferings and great Example, for Verbis
tantum philosophari non est Doctoris sed Histrionis, To talk well and not to do
bravely is for a Comedian, not a Divine: But this great man did both; he
suffered his own Calamity with great courage, and by his wise Discourses
strengthened the hearts of others.

For there wanted not diligent Tempters in the Church of Rome, who (taking
advantage of the Afflictions of His Sacred Majesty, in which state Men commonly
suspect every thing, and like men in sickness are willing to change from side
to side, hoping for ease and finding none) flew at Royal Game, and hoped to
draw away the King from that Religion which His most Royal Father, the best Man
and the wisest Prince in the world, had sealed with the best Blood in
Christendom; and which Himself sucked in with His Education, and had confirmed
by Choice and Reason, and confessed publicly and bravely, and has since
restored prosperously. Millitie^e was the man, witty and bold enough to attempt
a zealous and a foolish undertaking, and addressed himself with ignoble indeed
but witty arts to persuade the King to leave what was dearer to Him then His
Eyes. It is true, it was a Wave dashed against a Rock, and an Arrow shot
against the Sun, it could not reach him; but the Bishop of Derry turned it
also, and made it to fall upon the shooters head; for he made so ingenious, so
learned and so accute Reply to that book, he so discovered the Errors of the
Roman Church, retorted the Arguments, stated the Questions, demonstrated the
Truth, and shamed their Procedures, that nothing could be a greater argument of
the Bishops Learning, great Parts, deep Judgment, Quickness of Apprehension,
and Sincerity in the Catholic and Apostolic Faith, or of the Follies and
Prevarications of the Church of Rome. He wrote no Apologies for himself; though
it were much to be wished that, as Iunius wrote his own Life, or Moses his own
story, so we might have understood from himself how great things God had done
for him and by him; but all that he permitted to God, and was silent in his own
Defenses; Gloriosius enim est injuriam tacendo fugere, quam respondendo
superare. But when the Honor and Conscience of his King; and the Interest of a
true Religion, was at stake, the fire burned within him, and at last he spoke
with his tongue; he cried out like the son of Croesus, (...), Take heed and
meddle not with the King; His Person is too sacred, and Religion too dear to
Him to be assaulted by Vulgar hands. In short, he acquitted himself in this
affair with so much Truth and Piety, Learning and Judgment, that in those
Papers his memory will last unto very late succeeding Generations.

But this most Reverend Prelate found a nobler adversary and a braver scene for
his contention. He found that the Roman Priests being wearied and baffled by
the wise Discourses and pungent Arguments of the English Divines, had
studiously declined any more to dispute the particular Questions against us,
but fell at last upon a general Charge, imputing to the Church of England the
great crime of Schism; and by this they thought they might with most
probability deceive unwary and unskilful Readers; for they saw the Schism, and
they saw we had left them, and because they considered not the Causes, they
resolved to outface us in the Charge. But now it was that dignum nactus
argumentum, having an Argument fit to employ his great abilities, Consecrat hic
praesul calamum calamlque labores
Ante aras Domino laeta trophaea suo;
the Bishop now dedicates his labors to the service of God and of his Church,
undertook the Question, and in a full Discourse proves the Church of Rome, not
only to be guilty of the Schism by making it necessary to depart from them, but
they did actuate the Schisms, and themselves made the first separation in the
great point of the Popes Supremacy, which was the Palladium for which they
principally contended. He made it appear that the Popes of Rome were Usurpers
of the rights of Kings and Bishops, that they brought in new Doctrines in every
Age, that they imposed their own devices upon Christendom as Articles of Faith,
that they prevaricated the Doctrines of the Apostles, that the Church of
England only returned to her Primitive purity, that she joined with Christ and
his Apostles, that she agreed in all the Sentiments of the Primitive Church. He
stated the questions so wisely, and conducted them so prudently, and handled
them so learnedly, that I may truly say, they were never more materially
confuted by any man, since the questions have so unhappily disturbed
Christendom. Verum hoc eos male ussit: and they finding themselves smitten
under the fifth rib, set up an old Champion of their own, a Goliath to fight
against the Armies of Israel; the old Bishop of Chalcedon, known to many of us,
replied to this excellent Book; but was so answered by a Rejoinder made by the
Lord Bishop of Derry, in which he so pressed the former Arguments, refuted the
Cavils, brought in so many impregnable Authorities and Probations, and added so
many moments and weights to his discourse, that the pleasures of reading the
Book would be the greatest, if the profit to the Church of God were not
greater. Flumina tum lactis, tum flumina nectaris ibant,
Flavaque de viridi stillabant ilice mella.
For so Sampson's riddle was again expounded; Out of the strong came meat, and
out of the eater came sweetness; his Arguments were strong, and the Eloquence
was sweet and delectable; and though there start up another combatant against
him, yet he had only the honor to fall by the hands of Hector: still haeret
lateri lethalis arundo; the headed arrow went in so far, that it could not be
drawn out, but the barbed steel stuck behind. And whenever men will desire to
be satisfied in those great questions, the Bishop of Derry's book shall be his
Oracle.

I will not insist upon his other excellent writings; but it is known every
where with what Piety and acumen he wrote against the Manichean Doctrine of
Fatal necessity, which a late witty man had pretended to adorn with a new
Vizor; but this excellent person washed off the Cerusse and the meretricious
Paintings, rarely well asserted the economy of the Divine Providence, and
having once more triumphed over his Adversary, plenus victoriarum and
trophaeorum betook himself to the more agreeable attendance upon Sacred
Offices, and having usefully and wisely discoursed of the sacred Rite of
Confirmation, imposed hands upon the most Illustrious Princes, the Dukes of
York and Gloucester, and the Princess Royal, and ministered to them the promise
of the holy Spirit, and ministerially established them in the Religion and
Service of the holy Jesus. And one thing more I shall remark, that at his
leaving those Parts upon the Kings Return, some of the Remonstrant Ministers of
the Low Countries coming to take their leaves of this great man, and desiring
that by his means the Church of England would be kind to them, he had reason to
grant it, because they were learned men, and in many things of a most excellent
belief; yet he reproved them, and gave them caution against it, that they
approached too near and gave too much countenance to the great and dangerous
errors of the Socinians.

He thus having served God and the King abroad, God was pleased to return to
the King and to us all, as in the days of old, and we sung the song of David.

In convertendo captivitatem Sion: When King David and all his servants
returned to Jerusalem, this great person having trod in the Wine Press was
called to drink of the Wine, and as an honorary Reward of his great services
and abilities was chosen Primate of this National Church: In which time we are
to look upon him, as the King and the Kings great Vicegerent did, as a person
concerning whose abilities the World had too great testimony ever to make a
doubt. It is true, he was in the declension of his age and health; but his very
Ruins were goodly; and they who saw the broken heaps of Pompey's Theater, and
the crushed Obelisks, and the old face of beauteous Philaenium, could not but
admire the disordered glories of such magnificent structures, which were
venerable in their very dust.

He ever was used to overcome all difficulties, only Mortality was too hard
for him; but still his Virtues and his Spirit was immortal, he still took great
care, and still had new and noble designs, and proposed to himself admirable
things. He governed his Province with great justice and sincerity; Unus amplo
consulens pastor gregi,
Somnos tuetur omnium solus vigil.
And had this remark in all his Government, that as he was a great hater of
Sacrilege, so he professed himself a public enemy to Nonresidence, and often
would declare wisely and religiously against it, allowing it in no case but of
Necessity or the greater good of the Church. There are great things spoken of
his Predecessor S. Patrick, that he founded 700. Churches and Religious
Convents, that he ordained 5000. Priests, and with his own hands consecrated
350. Bishops. How true the story is I know not; but we were all witnesses that
the late Primate, whose memory we now celebrate, did by an extraordinary
contingency of Providence in one day consecrate two Archbishops and ten
Bishops; and did benefit to almost all the Churches in Ireland, and was greatly
instrumental to the Reendowments of the whole Clergy; and in the greatest
abilities and incomparable industry was inferior to none of his most glorious
Antecessours.

Since the Canonization of Saints came into the Church, we find no Irish Bishop
canonized, except S. Laurence of Dublin, and S. Malachias of Down; indeed
Richard of Armagh's Canonization was propounded, but not effected; but the
Character which was given of that learned Primate by Trithemius does exactly
fit this our late Father; De scriptor. Eccles.
Vir in Divinis Scripturis eruditus, secularis Philosophiae jurisque Canonici
non ignarus, clarus ingenio, sermon scholasticus, in declamandis sermonibus ad
populum excellentis industriae: He was learned in the Scriptures, skilled in
secular Philosophy, and not unknowing in the Civil and Canon Laws, (in which
studies I wish the Clergy were with some carefulness and diligence still more
conversant) he was of an excellent spirit, a scholar in his discourses, an
early and industrious Preacher to the people. And as if there were a more
particular sympathy between their souls, our Primate had so great a Veneration
to his memory, that he purposed, if he had lived, to have restored his Monument
in Dundalke, which Time, or Impiety, or Unthankfulness had either omitted or
destroyed. So great a lover he was of all true and inherent worth, that he
loved it in the very memory of the dead, and to have such great Examples
transmitted to the intuition and imitation of posterity.

At his coming to the Primacy he knew he should at first espy little besides
the Ruins of Discipline, a Harvest of Thorns, and Heresies prevailing in the
hearts of the People, the Churches possessed by Wolves and Intruders, Men's
hearts greatly estranged from true Religion; and therefore he set himself to
weed the fields of the Church; he treated the Adversaries sometimes sweetly,
sometimes he confuted them learnedly, sometimes he rebuked them sharply. He
visited his Charges diligently, and in his own person, not by Proxies and
instrumental Deputations: Quaerens non nostra, sednos, and quae sunt Jesus
Christi; he designed nothing that we knew of but the Redintegration of
Religion, the Honor of God and the King, the Restoring of collapsed
Discipline, and the Renovation of Faith and the Service of God in the Churches.
And still he was indefatigable, and, even as the last scene of his life,
intended to undertake a a Regal Visitation. Quid enim vultis me otiosum a
Domino comprehendi? said one; he was not willing that God should take him
unimployed: But, good man, he felt his Tabernacle ready to fall in pieces, and
could go no further, for God would have no more work done by that hand; he
therefore espying this, put his house in order, and had lately visited his
Diocese, and done what he then could to put his Charge in order; for he had a
good while since received the sentence of death within himself, and knew he was
shortly to render an account of his stewardship; he therefore upon a brisk
alarm of death, which God sent him the last January, made his Will; in which,
besides the prudence and presence of spirit manifested in making just and wise
settlement of his Estate, and provisions for his Descendants; at midnight, and
in the trouble of his sickness and circumstances of addressing death, still
kept a special sentiment and made confession of Gods admirable mercies, and
gave thanks that God had permitted him to live to see the blessed Restoration
of His Majesty and the Church of England, confessed his Faith to be the same as
ever, gave praises to God that he was born and bred up in this Religion, and
prayed to God and hoped he should die in the Communion of this Church, which he
declared to be the most pure and Apostolical Church in the whole world.

He prayed to God to pardon his frailties and infirmities, relied upon the
mercies of God and the merits of Jesus Christ, and with a singular sweetness
resigned up his soul into the hands of his Redeemer.

But God, who is the great Choragus and Master of the Scenes of Life and Death,
was not pleased then to draw the Curtains; there was an Epilogue to his Life
yet to be acted and spoken. He returned to actions and life, and went on in the
methods of the same procedure as before; was desirous still to establish the
affairs of the Church, complained of some disorders which he purposed to
redress, girt himself to the work; but though his spirit was willing, yet his
flesh was weak; and as the Apostles in the Vespers of Christ's Passion, so he in
the Eve of his own Dissolution was heavy, not to sleep, but heavy unto death,
and looked for the last warning, which seized on him in the midst of business;
and though it was sudden, yet it could not be unexpected, or unprovided by
surprise, and therefore could be no other then that (...) which Augustus used
to wish unto himself, a civil and wellnatur'd death, without the amazement of
troublesome circumstances, or the great cracks of a falling house, or the
convulsions of impatience. Seneca tells that Bassus Aufidius was wont to say,
Epist. 30.
Sperare se nullum dolorem esse in illo extremo anhelitu, si tamen esset,
habere aliquantum in ipsa brevitate solatii: He hoped that the pains of the
last Dis^olution were little or none; or if they were it was full of comfort
that they could be but short. It happened so to this excellent Man; his Passive
Fortitude had been abundantly tried before, and therefore there was the less
need of it now; his active Graces had been abundantly demonstrated by the great
and good things he did, and therefore his last scene was not so laborious, but
God called him away something after the manner of Moses, which the Jews express
by Osculum oris Dei, The Kiss of Gods mouth; that is, a death indeed
foresignified, but gentle, and serene, and without temptation.

To sum up all; He was a wise Prelate, a learned Doctor, a just Man, a true
Friend, a great Benefactour to others, a thankful Beneficiary where he was
obliged himself. He was a faithful Servant to his Masters, a Loyal Subjest to
the King, a zealous Assertor of his Religion against Popery on one side, and
Fanaticism on the other. The practice of his Religion was not so much in Forms
and exterior Ministries, though he was a great observer of all the public
Rites and Ministries of the Church, as it was in doing good for others. He was
like Myson, whom the Scythian Anarchasis so greatly praised, (...), he governed
his family well, he gave to all their due of maintenance and duty, he did great
benefit to mankind; he had the fate of the Apostle S. Paul, he passed through
evil report and good report, as a deceiver and yet true. He was a man of great
business and great resort: Semper aliquis in Cydonis domo, as the Corinthian
said; There was always somebody in Cydon's house. Synes. ep. 57.
He was (...), he divided his life into labor and his book; he took care of
his Churches when he was alive, and even after his death, having left 500 l.
for the Repair of his Cathedral of Armagh and S. Peter's Church in Drogheda. He
was an excellent Scholar, and rarely well accomplished; first instructed to
great excellency by natural parts, and then consummated by study and
experience. Melanchthon was used to say that himself was a Logician, Pomeranus
a Grammarian, Iustus Jonas an Orator, but that Luther was all these. It was
greatly true of him, that the single perfections which make many men eminent,
were united in this Primate and made him illustrious. At, at, Quintilium
perpetuus sopor
Urget: cui pudor and justitiae soror
Incorrupta fides, nudaque veritas
Quando ullum invenient ^arem?


It will be hard to find his Equal in all things: Fortasse tanquam Phoenix anno
quingentosimo naseitur, (that I may use the words of Seneca) nec est mirum ex
intervallo magna generari mediocria and in turbam nascentia saepe fortuna
producit: eximia vero ipsa raritate commendat. For in him was visible the great
lines of Hooker's Judiciousness, of Iewel's Learning, of the Accuteness of
Bishop Andrews. He was skilled in more great things then one; and, as one said
of Phidias, he could not only make excellent statues of Ivory, but he could
work in Stone and Brass. He showed his Equanimity in Poverty, and his Justice
in Riches; he was useful in his Country, and profitable in his Banishment;
for, as Paraeus was at Anvilla, Luther at Wittenburg, S. Athanasius and S.
Chrysostom in their Banishment, S. Hierom in his Retirement at Bethlehem, they
were Oracles to them that needed it; so was he in Holland and France, where he
was abroad; and, beside the particular endearments which his friends received
from him, for he did do relief to his brethron that wanted, and supplied the
Soldiers out of his store in Yorkshire, when himself could but ill spare it;
but he received public thanks from the Convocation of which he was President,
and public Justification from the Parliament where he was Speaker; so that
although, as one said, Miraculi instar vitae iter, si longum, sine offensione
percurrere; yet no man had greater enemies, and no man had greater
justifications.

But God has taken out Elijah from our heads this day. I pray God that at
least his Mantle may be left behind, and that his spirit may be doubled upon
his Successor; and that we may all meet together with him at the right hand of
the Lamb, where every man shall receive according to his deeds, whether they be
good or whether they be evil. I conclude with the words of Caius Plinius,
Equidem beatos puto quibus Deorum munere datum est, aut facere scribenda, aut
scribere legenda. He wrote many things fit to be read, and did very many things
worthy to be written; which if we wisely imitate, we may hope to meet him in
the Resurrection of the just, and feast with him in the eternal Supper of the
Lamb, there to sing perpetual Anthems to the honor of God the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, to whom be all honor, etc.

THE END.

