A SERMON PREACHED at the Funeral of that worthy Knight Sr. GEORGE DALSTON of
DALSTON in Cumberland, September 28. 1657.

By I. T. D. D.

LONDON, Printed for John Martin, James Allestrye, and Thomas Dicas. 1658.

1 Cor. 15. 19. If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men
most miserable.
WHen God in his infinite and eternal wisdom had decreed to give to man a life
of labor and a body of mortality, a state of contingency and a composition of
fighting elements; and having designed to be glorified by a free obedience,
would also permit sin in the world, and suffer evil men to go on in their
wickedness, to prevail in their impious machinations, to vex the souls, and
grieve the bodies of the righteous, he knew that this would not only be very
hard to be suffered by his servants, but also be very difficult to be
understood by them who know God to be a Lawgiver as well as a Lord, a Judge as
well as a King, a Father as well as a Ruler; and that in order to his own
glory, and for the manifestation of his goodness he had promised to reward his
servants, to give good to them that did good: therefore to take off all
prejudices and evil resentments and temptations which might trouble those good
men who suffered evil things, he was pleased to do two great things which might
confirm the faith, and endear the services, and entertain the hopes of them
who are indeed his servants, but yet were very ill used in the accidents of
this world.

1. The one was that he sent his son into the world to take upon him our
nature, and him being the Captain of our salvation he would perfect through
sufferings; that no man might think it much to suffer, when God spared not his
own son; and every man might submit to the necessity when the Christ of God was
not exempt; and yet that no man should fear the event which was to follow such
sad beginnings, when it behoved even Christ to suffer, and so to enter into
glory.

2. The other great thing was, that God did not only by revelation and the
Sermons of the Prophets to his Church, but even to all mankind competently
teach, and effectively persuade that the soul of man does not die; but that
although things were ill here, yet they should be well hereafter; that the
evils of this life were short and tolerable, and that to the good who usually
feel most of them, they should end in honor and advantages. And therefore
Cicero had reason on his side to conclude, that there is to be a time and place
after this life wherein the wicked shall be punished and the virtuous well
rewarded, when he considered that Orpheus and Socrates, Palamedes and Thraseas,
Lucretia and Papinian were either slain or oppressed to death by evil men. But
to us Christians (...) (as Platoes expression is) we have a necessity to
declare and a demonstration to prove it, when we read that Abel died by the
hands of Cain, who was so ignorant, that though he had malice and strength, yet
he had scarce art enough to kill him; when we read that John the Baptist,
Christ himself and his Apostles and his whole army of martyrs died under the
violence of evil men; when virtue made good men poor, and free speaking of
brave truths made the wise to lose their liberty; when an excellent life
hastened an opprobrious death, and the obeying God destroyed our selves; it was
but time to look about for another state of things where justice should rule
and virtue find her own portion: where the men that were like to God in mercy
and justice should also partake of his felicity: and therefore men cast out
every line, and turned every stone, and tried every argument, and sometimes
proved it well, and when they did not, yet they believed strongly, and they
were sure of the thing even when they were not sure of the argument.

Thus therefore would the old Priests of the Capitol, and the Ministers of
Apollo, and the mystic persons at their Oracles believe, when they made
Apotheoses of virtuous and braver persons, ascribing every braver man into the
number of their gods: Hercules and Romulus, Castor, and Pollux, Liber Pater,
him that taught the use of Vines, and her that taught them the use of Corn.
For they knew that it must needs be, that they who like to God do excellent
things, must like to God have an excellent portion.

This learning they also had from Pherecydes the Syrian, from Pythagoras of
Samos, and from Zamolxis the Get, from the Neighbors of Euphrates, and the
inhabitants by Ister who were called (...) Immortalists, because in the midst
of all their dark notices of things they saw this clearly, (...) (...) (...);
that virtuous and good men do not die, but their souls do go into blessed
regions where they shall enjoy all good things: and it was never known that
ever any good man was of another opinion. Hercules and Themistocles,
Epaminondas and Cicero, Socrates and Cimon, Ennius and Phidias, all the flower
of mankind have preached this truth. (...) (...) (...) The discoursings and
prophesyings of Divine men are much more proper and excellent then of others,
because they do equal and good things until the time comes that they shall hear
well for them, (...) (...) (...). And this is the sign that when we die we have
life and discerning, because though the wicked care not for believing it, yet
all the Prophets and the Poets, the wise and the brave Heroes say so; they are
the words of Plato. For though that which is compounded of elements returns to
its material and corruptible principles, yet the soul which is a particle of
the Divine breath returns to its own Divine original, where there is no death
or dissolution: and because the understanding is neither hot nor cold, it has
no moisture in it and no dryness, it follows that it has nothing of those
substances concerning which alone we know that they are corruptible. There is
nothing corruptible that we know of, but the four elements and their Sons and
Daughters: nothing dies that can discourse, that can reflect in perfect circles
upon their own imperfect actions; nothing can die that can see God and converse
with spirits, that can govern by laws and wise propositions. For fire and water
can be tyrannical but not govern; they can bear every thing down that stands
before them and rush like the people, but not rule like Judges, and therefore
they perish as tumults are dissolved. (...) (...): says Aristotle. But the
soul only comes from abroad, from a Divine principle (for so says the
Scripture) God breathed into Adam the spirit of life, and that which in
operation does not communicate with the body shall have no part in its
corruption.

Thus far they were right; but when they descended to particulars they fell
into error. That the rewards of virtue were to be hereafter, that they were
sure of: that the soul was to survive the calamities of this world and the
death of the body; that they were sure of; and upon this account they did
bravely and virtuously: and yet, they that thought best amongst them believed
that the souls departed should be reinvested with other bodies according to the
dispositions and capacities of this life.

Thus Orpheus who sang well should transmigrate into a Swan, and the soul of
Thamyris who had as good a voice as he, should wander till it were confined to
the body of a Nightingal; Ajax to a Lion, Agamemnon to an Eagle, Tyrant princes
into wolvs and Hawks, the lascivious into Asses and Goats, the Drunkards into
Swine, the Crafty Statesmen into bees and pismires, and Thersites to an Ape.
This fancy of theirs prevailed much amongst the common people, and the
uninstructed amongst the Jews: for when Christ appeared so glorious in miracle,
Herod presently fancied him to be the soul of John the Baptist in another body,
and the common people said he was Elias, or Ieremias, or one of the old
Prophets. And true it is, that although God was pleased in all times to
communicate to mankind notices of the other world sufficient to encourage
virtues, and to contest against the rencontres of the world, yet he was ever
sparing in telling the secrets of it; and when St. Paul had his rapture into
Heaven, he saw fine things and heard strange words, but they were (...), words
that he could not speak, and secrets that he could not understand, and secrets
that he could not communicate. For as a man staring upon the broad eye of the
Sun at his noon of Solstice, feels his heat and dwells in light, and loses the
sight of his eyes and perceives nothing distinctly, but the Organ is confounded
and the faculty amazed with too big a beauty: So was S. Paul in his ecstasy; he
saw that he could see nothing to be told below, and he perceived the glories
were too big for flesh and blood, and that the beauties of separate souls were
not to be understood by the soul in Conjunction; and therefore after all the
fine things that he saw, we only know what we knew before, viz. that the soul
can live when the body is dead; that it can subsist without the body; that
there are very great glories reserved for them that serve God; that they who
die in Christ shall live with him; that the body is a prison and the soul is in
fetters while we are alive; and that when the body dies the soul springs and
leaps from her prison and enters into the first liberty of the sons of God. Now
much of this did rely upon the same argument upon which the wise Gentiles of
old concluded the immortality of the soul; even because we are here very
miserable and very poor: we are sick and we are afflicted; we do well and are
disgraced; we speak well and we are derided; we tell truths and few believe us;
but the proud are exalted and the wicked are delivered, and evil men reign over
us, and the covetous snatch our little bundles of money from us, and the Fiscus
gathers our rents, and every where the wisest and the best men are oppressed;
but therefore because it is thus, and thus it is not well, we hope for some
great good thing hereafter. For if in this life only we had hope, then we
Christians, all we to whom persecution is allotted for our portion, we who must
be patient under the Cross, and receive injuries and say nothing but prayers,
we certainly were of all men the most miserable.

Well then! in this life we see plainly that our portion is not: here we have
hopes, but not here only, we shall go into another place, where we shall have
more hopes: our faith shall have more evidence, it shall be of things seen afar
off; and our hopes shall be of more certainty and perspicuity, and next to
possession; we shall have very much good, and be very sure of much more. Here
then are three propositions to be considered.

1. The Servants of God in this world are very miserable, were it not for their
hopes of what is to come hereafter. 2. Though this be a place of hopes, yet we
have not our hopes only here. If in this life only we had hopes (says the
Apostle) meaning, that in another life also we have hopes; not only
metonymically, taking hopes for the things we hope for, but properly and for
the acts, objects and causes of hope. In the state of separation the godly
shall have the vast joys of a certain intuitive hope, according to their
several proportions and capacities. 3. The consummation and perfection of their
felicity, when all their miseries shall be changed into glories, is in the
world to come, after the resurrection of the dead; which is the main thing
which S. Paul here intends.
1. The servants of God in this life are calamitous and afflicted; they must
live under the Cross. He that will be my Disciple, let him deny himself and
take up his Cross and follow me (said our Glorious Lord and Master.) And we see
this Prophetic precept, (for it is both a Prophecy and a Commandment, and
therefore shall be obeyed whether we will or no) but I say, we see it verified
by the experience of every day. For here the violent oppress the meek and they
that are charitable shall receive injuries. The Apostles who preached Christ
crucified were themselves persecuted and put to violent deaths; and
Christianity it self for three hundred years was the public hatred; and yet
then it was that men loved God best, and suffered more for him; then, they did
most good, and least of evil. In this world men thrive by villainy, and lying
and deceiving is accounted just, and to be rich is to be wise, and tyranny is
honorable, and though little thefts and petty mischiefs are interrupted by the
laws, yet if a mischief become public and great, acted by Princes and effected
by armies, and robberies be done by whole fleets, it is virtue and it is glory:
it fills the mouths of fools that wonder, and imployes the pens of witty men
that eat the bread of flattery. How many thousand bottles of tears, and how
many millions of sighs does God every day record, while the oppressed and the
poor pray unto him, worship him, speak great things of his holy Name, study to
please him, beg for helps that they may become gracious in his eyes, and are
so, and yet never sing in all their life, but when they sing Gods praises out
of duty with a sad heart and a hopeful spirit, living only upon the future,
weary of to day, and sustained only by the hope of to morrows event? and after
all, their eyes are dim with weeping and looking upon distances as knowing they
shall never be happy till the new Heavens and the new Eearth appear.

But I need not instance in the miserabili in them that dwell in dungeons and
lay their head in places of trouble and disease: take those servants of God who
have greatest plenty, who are incircled with blessings, whom this world calls
prosperous, and see if they have not fightings within and crosses without,
contradiction of accidents and perpetuity of temptations, the Devil assaulting
them and their own weakness betraying them; fears incompassing them round about
lest they lose the favor of God, and shame sitting heavily upon them when they
remember how often they talk foolishly, and lose their duty, and dishonor
their greatest relations and walk unworthy of those glories which they would
fain obtain; and all this is besides the unavoidable acc^dents of mortality,
sickly bodies, troublesome times, changes of Government, loss of interests,
unquiet and peevish accidents round about them: so that when they consider to
what they are primarily obliged; that they must in some instances deny their
appetite, in others they must quit their relations, in all they must deny
themselves when their Natural or Secular danger tempts to sin or danger; and
that for the support of their wills and the strengthening their resolutions
against the arguments and solicitation of passions they have nothing but the
promises of another world; they will easily see that all the splendor of their
condition which fools admire and wise men use temperately and handle with
caution as they try the edge of a rasor, is so far from making them recompense
for the sufferings of this world, that the reserves and expectations of the
next is that conjugation of aids by which only they can well and wisely bear
the calamities of their present plenty.

But if we look round about us and see how many righteous causes are oppressed,
how many good men are reproached, how religion is persecuted, upon what strange
principles the greatest princes of the world transact their greatest affairs,
how easily they make wars and how suddenly they break leagues, and at what
expense and vast pensions they corrupt each others officers, and how the
greatest part of mankind watches to devour one another, and they that are
devoured are commonly the best, the poor and the harmless, the gentle and
uncrasty, the simple and religious; and then how many ways all good men are
exposed to danger, and that our scene of duty lies as much in passive graces as
in active, it must be confessed that this is a place of wasps and insects, of
Vipers and Dragons, of Tigres and Bears; but the sheep are eaten by men or
devoured by Wolves and Foxes, or die of the rot; and when they do not, yet
every year they redeem their lives by giving their fleece and their milk, and
must die when their death will pay the charges of the knife.

Now from this I say, it was that the very Heathen, Plutarch and Cicero,
Pythagoras and Hierocles, Plato and many others did argue and conclude that
there must be a day of recompenses to come hereafter which would set all right
again: And from hence also our B. Savior himself did convince the Sadduces in
their fond and pertinacious denying of the resurrection: For that is the
meaning of that argument which our B. Lord did choose as being clearly and
infallibly the aptest of any in the old Testament to prove the resurrection,
and though the deduction is not at first so plain and evident, yet upon nearer
intuition, the interpretation is easy and the argument excellent and proper.

For it is observed by the learned among the Jews that when God is by way of
particular relation and especial benediction appropriated to any one, it is
intended that God is to him a Rewarder and Benefactor, (...); for that is the
first thing and the last that every man believes and feels of God; and
therefore St. Paul sums up the Gentiles Creed in this compendium; He that
comes to God must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him. [Heb. 11. 6.] And as it is in the indefinite expression,
so it is in the limited; as it is in the absolute so also in the Relative. God
is the rewarder; and to be their God is to be their rewarder, to be their
Benefactor and their Gracious Lord. Ego ero Deus vester, I will be your God,
that is, I will do you good says Aben Esra: and Philo, (...), (...). The
Everlasting God, that is, as if he had said, one that will do you good; not
sometimes some, and sometimes none at all, but frequently and for ever: And
this we find also observed by St. Paul: Wherefore God is not ashamed to be
called their God; [Heb. 11. 16.] and that by which the Relative appellative is
verified is the consequent benefit; He is called their God [for he has
provided for them a city.

Upon this account the argument of our B. Savior is this, God is the God of
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; that is, the gracious God, the Benesactor, the
Rewarder; and therefore Abraham is not dead, but is fallen asleep, and he shall
be restored in the resurrection to receive those blessings and rewards, by the
title of which God was called the God of Abraham. For in this world Abraham had
not that harvest of blessings which is consigned by that glorious appellative;
he was an exile from his Country, he stood far off from the possession of his
hopes, he lived an ambulatory life, he spent most of his days without an heir,
he had a constant piety, and at the latter end of his life one great blessing
was given him; and because that was allayed by the anger of his wife, and the
expulsion of his handmaid, and the ejection of Ishmael, and the danger of the
lad; and his great calamity about the matter of Isaac's sacrifice; and all his
faith and patience and piety was rewarded with nothing but promises of things a
great way off; and before the possession of them he went out of this world; it
is undeniably certain that God who after the departure of the Patriarchs did
still love to be called [ Their God] did intend to signify that they should be
restored to a state of life and a capacity of those greatest blessings which
were the foundation of that title and that relation. God is not the God of the
dead, but of the living, but God is the God of Abraham and the other
Patriarchs; therefore they are not dead; dead to this world, but alive to God;
that is, though this life be lost, yet they shall have another and a better; a
life in which God shall manifest himself to be their God to all the purposes of
benefit and eternal blessings.

This argument was summed up by St. Peter, and the sense of it is thus rendered
by St. Clement the Bishop of Rome, as himself testifies: si Deus est juslus,
animus est immortalis, which is perfectly rendered by the words of my text; if
in this life only we have hope, then are we of all men the most miserable; but
because this cannot be that God who is just and good should suffer them that
heartily serve him to be really and finally miserable, and yet in this world
they are so, very frequently; therefore in another world they shall live to
receive a full recompense of reward.

Neither is this so to be understood, as if the servants of God were so wholly
forsaken of him in this world, and so permitted to the malice of evil men, or
the asperities of fortune, that they have not many refreshments and great
comforts and the perpetual festivities of a holy Conscience: for God my Maker
is he that gives songs in the night, said Elihu; [Iob 35. 10.] that is, God as
a reward gives a cheerful spirit, and makes a man to sing with joy, when other
men are sad with the solemn darkness and with the affrights of conscience, and
the illusions of the night. But God who intends vast portions of felicity to
his children does not reckon these little joys into the account of the portion
of his elect. The good things which they have in this world are not little, if
we account the joys of religion and the peace of conscience amongst things
valuable; yet whatsoever it is; all of it, all the blessings of themselves, and
of their posterity, and of their Relatives for their sakes are cast in for
intermedial entertainments; but their good, and their prepared portion shall be
hereafter. But for the evil it self which they must suffer and overcome, it is
such a portion of this life as our B. Savior had; injuries and temptations,
care and persecutions, poverty and labor, humility and patience: it is well;
it is very well; and who can long for, or expect better here; when his Lord and
Savior had a state of things so very much worse then the worst of our
calamities: but bad as it is; it is to be chosen rather then a better; because
it is the high way of the cross; it is Jacobs ladder upon which the Saints and
the King of the Saints did descend and at last ascend to heaven it self; and
bad as it is, it is the method and the inlet to the best; it is a sharp, but it
is a short step to bliss: for it is remarkable in the parable of Dives and
Lazarus, that the poor man, the afflicted Saint died first, Dives being
permitted to his purple and fine linen, to his delicious fare, and (which he
most of all needed) to a space of repentance; but in the mean time the poor man
was rescued from his sad portion of this life and carried into Abraham's bosom;
where he who was denied in this world to be feasted even with the portion of
dogs was placed in the bosom of the Patriarch, that is, in the highest room,
for so it was in their discubitus or lying down to meat, the chief guest, the
most beloved person did lean upon the bosom of the Master of the feast, so S.
John did lean upon the breast of Jesus; and so did Lazarus upon the breast of
Abraham; or else (...) sinus Abrahae may be rendered, [ the bay of Abraham,]
alluding to the place of rest where ships put in after a tempestuous and
dangerous Navigation; the storm was quickly over with the poor man; and the
Angel of God brought the good man's soul to a safe port, where he should be
disturbed no more: and so says the spirit; Blessed are the dead which die in
the Lord; for they rest from their labors.

But this brings me to the second great inquiry. If here we live upon hopes,
and that this is a place of hopes, but not this only; what other place is there
where we shall be blessed in our hope, where we shall rest from our labor and
our fear and have our hopes in perfection; that is, all the pleasures which can
come from the greatest and the most excellent hope?

Not in this life only] so my Text. Therefore hereafter: as soon as we die: as
soon as ever the soul goes from the body, it is blessed. Blessed I say, but
not perfect; it rejoices in peace and a holy hope: here we have hopes mingled
with fear; there our hope is heightened with joy and confidence; it is all the
comfort that can be in the expectation of unmeasurable joys: it is only, Not
fruition, not the joys of a perfect possession; but less then that, it is
every good thing else.

But that I may make my way plain; I must first remove an objection which seems
to overthrow this whole affair. S. Paul intends these words of my text as an
argument to prove the resurrection; we shall rise again with our bodies; for if
in this life only we had hopes, then were we of all men most miserable;
meaning, that unless there be a resurrection, there is no good for us any where
else; but if they that dye in the Lord were happy before the resurrection; then
we were not of all men most miserable though there were to be no resurrection;
for the godly are presently happy. So that one must fail; either the
resurrection or the intermedial happiness: the proof of one relies upon the
destruction of the other: and because we can no other ways be happy, therefore
there shall be a resurrection.

To this I answer, that if the godly instantly upon their dissolution had the
vision beatifical, it is very true, that they were not most miserable though
there be no resurrection of the dead, though the body were turned into its
original nothing: for the joys of the sight of God would in the soul alone
make them infinite recompense for all the sufferings of this world. But that
which the Saints have after their dissolution, being only the comforts of a
holy hope, the argument remains good: for these intermedial hopes being nothing
at all but in relation to the resurrection, these hopes do not destroy, but
confirm it rather; and if the resurrection were not to be, we should neither
have any hopes here, nor hopes hereafter. And therefore the Apostles word is [
if here only we had hopes] that is, if our hopes only related to this life; but
because our hopes only relate to the life to come, and even after this life we
are still but in the regions of an enlarged hope, this life and that interval
are both but the same argument to infer a resurrection; for they are the
hopes of that state, and the joys of those, hopes, and it is the comfort of
that joy which makes them blessed who die in the love of God, and the faith and
obedience of the Lord Jesus. And now to the proposition it self. In the state
of separation the souls departed perceive the blessing and comfort of their
labors; they are alive after death, and after death immediately they find
great refreshments. Iustorum animae in manu Dei sunt, and non tanget illos
tormentum mortis. [Wisd. 3.] The torments of death shall not touch the souls of
the righteous because they are in the hands of God. And fifteen hundred years
after the death of Moses we find him talking with our Blessed Lord in his
transfiguration upon the Mount Tabor: and as Moses was then, so are all the
Saints immediately after death, praesentes apud Dominum, they are present with
the Lord, and to be so, is not a state of death, and yet of this it is, that S.
Paul affirms it to be much better then to be alive. And this was the undoubted
sentence of the Jews before Christ and since,and therefore our Blessed Savior
told the converted thief that he should that day be with him in Paradise. Now
without peradventure he spoke so as he was to be understood; meaning by
Paradise that which the Schools and Pulpits of the Rabbis did usually speak of
it. By Paradise till the time of Esdras it is certain, the Jews only meant that
Blessed Garden in which God once placed Adam and Eve: but in the time of Esdras
and so downward when they spoke distinctly of things to happen after this life,
and began to signify their new discoveries and modern Philosophy by Names,
they called the state of souls expecting the resurrection of their bodies by
the name of (...) the garden of Eden. Hence came that form of comprecation and
blessing to the soul of an Israelite Sit anima ejus in horto Eden Let his soul
be in the garden of Eden;] and in their solemn prayers at the time of their
death they were wont to say [ let his soul rest, and let his sleep be in peace
until the Comforter shall come; open the gates of Paradise unto him] expressly
distinguishing Paradise from the state of the Resurrection. And so it is
evident in the intercourse on the Cross between Christ and the converted
thief. That day both were to be in Paradise: but Christ himself was not then
ascended into heaven, and therefore Paradise was no part of that region where
Christ now and hereafter the Saints shall reign in glory. For (...) did by use
and custom signify any place of beauty and pleasure. So the LXX. read Eccles.
2. 5. I made me gardens and orchards, I made me a Paradise, so it is in the
Greek; and Cicero having found this strange word in Zenophon renders it by [
agrum conseptum ac diligenter consitum:] a field well hedged and set with
flowers and fruits. Vivarium, Gellius renders it, a place to keep birds and
beasts alive for pleasure. Pollux says this word was Persian by its original;
yet because by traduction it became Hebrew, we may best learn the meaning of it
from the Jews who used it most often, and whose sense we better understand.
Their meaning therefore was this; that as Paradise or the Garden of Eden was a
place of great beauty, pleasure and tranquillity; so the state of separate
souls was a state of peace and excellent delights. So Philo, allegorically does
expound Paradise. (...) (...), (...). For the trees that grow in Paradise are
not like ours, but they bring forth knowledge and life, and immortality. It is
therefore more then probable, that when the converted thief heard our Blessed
Savior speak of Paradise or Began Eden, he who was a Jew and heard that on that
day he should be there, understood the meaning to be that he should be there
where all the good Jews did believe the souls of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob to be
placed. As if Christ had said; Though you only ask to be remembered when I come
into my Kingdom, not only that shall be performed in time, but even to day
thou shall have great refreshment; and this the Hellenist Jews called (...),
the rest of Paradise, and (...) the comfort of Paradise, the word being also
warranted from that concerning Lazarus (...) He is comforted.

But this we learn more perfectly from the raptures of S. Paul. He knew a man
(meaning himself) rapt up into the third heaven. And I knew such a man how that
he was caught up into Paradise. [2 Cor. 2. 3.] The raptures and visions were
distinct; for S. Paul being a Jew and speaking after the manner of his Nation
makes Paradise a distinct thing from the third Heaven. For the Jews deny any
orbs to be in Heaven; but they make three regions only; the one of clouds, the
second of stars, and the third of Angels. To this third or supreme Heaven was
S. Paul wrapped; but he was also born to Paradise; to another place, distinct and
separate by time and station. For by Paradise, his Countrymen never understood
the Third Heaven; but there also it was that he heard (...) (...) unspeakable
words, great glorifications of God, huge excellencies, such which he might not,
or could not utter here below. The effect of these considerations is this, that
although the Saints are not yet admitted to the blessings consequent to a happy
resurrection, yet they have the intermedial entertainments of a present and a
great joy.

To this purpose are those words to be understood. [ To him that overcomes will
I give to eat of the tree of life which is in the midst of the Paradise of
God: [Revel. 2. 7.] that is, if I may have leave to expound these words to mean
what the Jews did about that time understand by such words; (...), the Tree of
life does signify the principle of peace and holiness, of wisdom and comforts
for ever. Philo expounding it calls it (...). The worship of God, the greatest
of all virtues by which the soul is made to live for ever; as if by eating of
this tree of life in the Paradise of God they did mean, that they who die well,
shall immediately be feasted with the deliciousness of a holy Conscience: which
the spirit of God expresses by saying They shall walk up and down in white
garments and their works shall follow them; their tree of life shall germinate;
they shall then feel the comforts of having done good works; a sweet
remembrance and a holy peace shall caresse and feast them; and there they shall
walk up and down in white, [Revel. 3. 4, 5. and 14. 13.] that is, as candidates
of the resurrection to immortality.

And this allegory of the Garden of Eden and Paradise was so heartily pursued
by the Jews to represent the state of separation, that the Essens describe that
state by the circumstances and ornaments of a blessed garden. (...), (...) a
region that is not troubled with clouds or shours, or storms, or blasts, (...)
(...), but a place which is perpetually refreshed with delicious breaths. This
was it which the Heathens did dream concerning the Elysian fields: for all the
notices (...) concerning the regions of separate souls came into Greece from
the Barbarians (says Diodorus Siculus) and Tertullian observes; although we
call that Paradise which is a place appointed to receive the souls of the
Saints, and that this is separated from the notices of the world by a wall of
fire, a portion of the torrid zone (which he supposes to be meant by the
flaming sword of the Angel placed at the gates of Paradise) yet (says he) the
Elysian fields have already possessed the faith and opinions of men. All comes
from the same fountain; the doctrine of the old Synagogue confirmed by the
words of Christ and the commentaries of the Apostles; viz. that after death
before the day of judgment there is a Paradise for Gods servants, a region of
rest, of comfort and holy expectations. And therefore it is remarkable that
these words of the Psalmist, Nerapias me in medio dierum meorum. [Psal. 102. v.
25.] Snatch me not away in the midst of my days, in the Hebrew it is, Ne
facias me ascendere, Make me not to ascend or to go upwards, meaning, to the
supernatural regions of separate souls, who after death are in their beginnings
of exaltation. For to them that die in the Lord, death is a preferment; it is a
part of their great good fortune; for death has not only lost the sting; but
it brings a coronet in his hand which shall invest and adorn the heads of
Saints till that day comes in which the Crown of righteousness shall be brought
forth to give them the investiture of an everlasting Kingdom.

But that I may make up this proposition useful and clear,
I am to add some things by way of supplement.
1. This place of separation was called Paradise by the Jews, and by Christ,
and after Christ's ascension, by S. John: because it signifies a place of
pleasure and rest; and therefore by the same analogy the word may be still used
in all the periods of the world, though the circumstances, or though the state
of things be changed. It is generally supposed that this had a proper Name, and
in the Old Testament was called Abraham's bosom; that is, the region where
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob did dwell till the coming of Christ. But I suppose my
self to have great reason to dissent from this common opinion; for this word
of Abraham's bosom, being but once used in both the Testaments, and then
particularly applied to the person of Lazarus, must needs signify the eminence
and privilege of joy that Lazarus had; for all that were in the blessed state
of separation were not in Abraham's bosom, but only the best and the most
excellent persons; but they were (...) with Abraham; and the analogy of the
phrase to the manner of the Jewish feastings, where the best guest did lie in
the bosom of the Master, that is, had the best place, makes it most reasonable
to believe that Abraham's bosom does not signify the general state of
separation, even of the blessed; but the choicest place in that state, a
greater degree of blessedness. But because he is the father of the faithful,
therefore to be with Abraham, or to sit down with Abraham (in the time of the
old Testament) did signify the same thing as to be in Paradise; but to be in
Abraham's bosom signifies a great eminence of place and comfort, which is
indulged to the most excellent and the most afflicted.

2. Although the state of separation may now also and is by S. John called
Paradise; because the Allegory still holds perfectly, as signifying comfort and
holy pleasures; yet the spirits of good men are not said to be with Abraham's
but to be with Christ; and as being with Abraham was the specification of the
more general word of Paradise in the old Testament; so being with Christ is the
specification of it in the New. So S. Stephen prayed, Lord Jesus receive my
spirit; and S. Paul said, I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ: which
expression S. Polycarp also used in his Epistle to the Philippians (...) (...)
they are in the place that is due to them, they are with the Lord, that is, in
the hands, in the custody of the Lord Jesus; as appears in the words of S.
Steven and S. Paul. So S. Jerome. Scimus Nepotianum nostrum esse cum Christo
and sanctorum mixtum choris, we know that our Nepotian is with Christ, mingled
in the quires of Saints. Upon this account (and it is not at all unreasonable)
the Church has conjectured, that the state of separate souls since the
glorification of our Lord is much bettered and advanced and their comforts
greater: because as before Christ's coming the expectation of the Saints that
slept, was fixed upon the revelation of the Messiah in his first coming; so now
it is upon his second coming unto judgment, and in his glory. This improvement
of their condition is well intimated by their being said to be under the Altar,
that is, under the protection of Christ, under the powers and benefits of his
Priesthood, by which he makes continual intercession both for them and us.
This place some of the old Doctors understood too literally, and from hence
they believed that the souls of departed saints were under their material
Altars; which fancy produced that fond decree of the Council of Eliberis (Can.
3. 4.) [that wax lights should not by day be burnt in coemeteries inquietandi
enim spiritus sanctorum non sunt] left the spirits of Saints should by the
light of the diurnal tapers be disquieted: This reason, though it be trifling
and impertinent, yet it declares their opinion, that they supposed the souls to
be near their relics which were placed under the altars * But better then
this, their state is described by S. John in these words [ therefore they are
before the throne of God, and serve him night and day in his Temple, and he
that sits upon the throne shall dwell among them] with which general words, as
being modest bounds to our inquiries, enough to tell us it is rarely well, but
enough also to chastise all curious questions, let us remain content, and
labor with faith and patience, with hope and charity to be made worthy to
partake of those comforts, after which when we have long inquired, when at last
we come to try what they are, we shall find them much better and much
otherwise then we imagine.

3. I am to admonish this also, that although our Blessed Savior is in the
Creed said to descend (...) into hell (so we render it) yet this does not at
all prejudice his other words [ this day shall thou be with me in Paradise] for
the word (...) signifies indefinitely the state of separation whether blessed
or accursed; it means only the invisible place, or the region of darkness
whither who so descends shall be no no more seen. For as among the Heathens the
Elysian fields and Tartara are both (...): so amongst the Jews and Christians
Paradisus and Gehenna are the distinct states of Hades. Of the first we have a
plain testimony in Diphilus. (...)
(...).
In Hades there are two ways, one for just men, and another for the impious.
Of the second we have the testimony of Josephus, who speaking of the Sadduces,
says, (...) (...), they take away or deny the rewards and punishments
respectively which are in Hades, or in the state of separation: so that if
Christ's soul was in Paradise, he was in Hades. In vain therefore does S.
Augustine torment himself to tell, how Christ could be in both places at once;
when it is no harder then to tell how a man may be in England and at London at
the same time.

4. It is observable that in the mentions of Paradise by S. John, he twice
speaks of the tree of life, but never of the tree of knowledge of good and
evil: because this was the Symbol of secular knowledge, of prudence and skill
of doing things of this world which we can naturally use; we may smell and taste
them, but not feed upon them, that is, these are no part of our enjoyment, and
if we be given up to the study of such notices and be immerged in the things of
this world, we cannot attend to the studies of religion and of the Divine
service. But these cares and secular divertisements shall cease when our souls
are placed in Paradise: there shall be no care taken for raising portions for
our children, nor to provide bread for our tables, no cunning contrivances to
be safe from the crafty snares of an enemy, no amazement at losses, no fear of
slanderings, or of the gripes of Publicans, but we shall feed on the tree of
life, love of God, and longings for the coming of Christ. We are then all
spirit and our employment shall be symbolical, that is, spiritual, and holy,
and pleasant.

I have now made it as evident as questions of this Nature will bear, that in
the state of separation the spirits of good men shall be blessed and happy
souls: they have an antepast or taste of their reward: but their great reward
it self, their crown of righteousness shall not be yet; that shall not be,
until the day of judgment: and this was the third proposition I undertook to
prove; the consummation and perfection of the Saints felicity shall be at the
resurrection of the dead.

(...); at his coming; so S. John expresses the time, that we may not then be
ashamed. For now we are the sons of Gods, but it does not yet appear what we
shall be. But we know that when he shall appear we shall be like unto him and
see him as he is. [1 John 2. 28. 1 John 3. 4.] At his glorious appearing, we
also shall appear glorious; we shall see him as he is; but till then, this
beatific vision shall not be at all; but for the interval, the case is
otherwise. Tertullian affirms puniri et foveri animam interim in inferis sub
expectatione utriusque judicii, in quadam usurpatione et candida ejus; [lib. de
anima, e. lib. adv. Marcion.] the souls are punished or refreshed in their
regions expecting the day of their judgment and several sentences: habitacula
illa, animarum promptuaria nominavit scriptura (says S. Ambrose,) [de bono
mortis cap. 10.] The Scripture calls these habitations, the promptuaries, or
repositories of souls. There is comfort, but not the full reward; a certain
expectation supported with excellent intervals of joy: Refrigerium, so the
Latins call it, a refreshment. Donec consummatio rerum resurrectionem omnium
plenitudine mercedis expungat tune apparitura coelesti promissione, says
Tertullian, until the consummation of all things points out the resurrection,
by the fullness of reward and the appearing of the heavenly promise. So the
Author of the questions ad Orthodoxos [quaest. 75.] Immediately after death,
presently there is a separation of the just from the unjust; for they are born
by Angels (...) (...) into the places they have deserved; and they are in those
places (...) (...) kept unto the day of resurrection and retribution. But what
do they in the mean time? How is it with them? (...), says Nazianzen. [orat.
funebr. Caesar. fratris.] They rejoice and are delighted in a wonderful joy.
They see Angels and Archangels, they converse with them, and see our B. Savior
Jesus in his glorified humanity; so Justin Martyr. [ubi supra] But in these
great joys they look forgreater. They are now In Paradiso; but they long that
the body and soul may be in heaven together; but this is the glory of the day
of judgment, the fruit of the resurrection. And this whole affair is agreeable
to reason, and the analogy of the whole dispensation as it is generally and
particularly described in Scripture.

For when the greatest effect of the Divine power, the mightiest promise, the
hardest thing to Christan faith, that impossible thing to Gentile Philosophy,
the expectation of the whole world, the New Creation, when that shall come to
pass, viz. that the souls shall be reinvested with their bodies, when the ashes
of dissolved bones shall stand up a new and living frame, to suppose that then
there shall be nothing done in order to Eternity, but to publish the salvation
of Saints of which they were possessed before, is to make a great solemnity for
nothing, to do great things for no great end, and therefore it is not
reasonable to suppose it.

For if it were a good argument of the Apostle, that the Patriarks and Saints
of the old Testament received not the promises signified by Canaan and the land
of promise, because God had provided some better thing for us, that without us
they should not be made perfect; it must also conclude of all alike; that they
who died since Christ must stay till the last day, that they and we and all may
be made perfect together. And this very thing was told to the spirits of the
Martyrs who under the Altar cried How long O Lord etc. [ Rev. 6. 10.] that they
should rest yet for a little season, until their fellow servants also shall be
fulfilled.

Upon this account it is that the day of judgment is a day of recompense: So
said our Blessed Lord himself [ Thou shall be recompensed at the resurrection
of the just] (Luke 14. 14.) and this is the day in which all things shall be
restored: for [the Heavens must receive Jesus till the time of restitution of
all things] [ Acts 3. 7.] and till then the reward is said to be laid up. So S.
Paul. Henceforth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the
righteous Judge shall give me in that day: and that you may know he means the
resurrection and the day of judgment; he adds [ and not to me only, but to all
them that love his coming: 2 Timothy 4. 8.] of whom it is certain many shall be
alive at that day; and therefore cannot before that day receive the crown of
righteousness: and then also, and not till then, shall be his appearing; but
till then it is a depositum. The sum is this. In the world we walk and live
by faith: In the state of separation we live by hope: and in the resurrection
we shall live by an eternal charity. Here we see God as in a glass darkly: In
the separation we shall behold him; but it is afar off: and after the
resurrection we shall see him face to face, in the everlasting comprehensions
of an intuitive beatitude. In this life we are warriors: In the separation we
are conquerors: but we shall not triumph till after the resurrection.

And in proportion to this is also the state of Devils and damned spirits. Art
thou come to torment us before the time, said the Devils to our B. Savior;
there is for them also an appointed time; and when that is, we learn from S.
Iud. 6. They are reserved in chains under darkness unto the judgment of the
great day. Well therefore did S. James affirm, That the Devils believe and
tremble; and so do the damned souls, with an insupportable amazement fearing
the revelation of that day. They know that day will come, and they know they
shall find an intolerable sentence on that day; and they fear infinitely, and
are in amazement and confusion, feeling the worm of conscience, and are in the
state of Devils who fear God and hate him; they tremble but they love him not;
and yet they die because they would not love him; because they would not with
all their powers and strengths keep his Commandments.

This doctrine though of late it has been laid aside upon the interest of the
Church of Rome and for compliance with some other Schools, yet was it
universally the doctrine of the Primitive Church; as appears out of Justin
Martyr who in his dialogues with Tryphon reckons this amongst the (...) errors
of some men who say there shall be no resurrection of the dead; but that as
soon as good men are dead (...) (...) their souls are taken up immediately into
heaven; and the writer of the questions ad Orthodoxos asks, [ qu. 76. q, 60. q.
75.] whether before the resurrection there shall be a reward of works? because
to the thief Paradise was promised that day. He answers, it was fit the thief
should go to Paradise and there perceive what things should be given to the
works of faith; but there he is kept (...) (...) until the day of resurrection
and reward. But in Paradise the soul has an intellectual perception both of
her self and of those things which were under her.

Concerning which I shall not need to heap up testimonies; this only: It is the
doctrine of the Greek Church unto this day, and was the opinion of the greatest
part of the Ancient Church both Latin and Greek; and by degrees was in the
West eaten out by the doctrine of Purgatory and invocation of Saints; and
rejected a little above two hundred years ago in the Council of Florence; and
since that time it has been more generally taught that the souls of good men
enjoy the beatific vision before the resurrection; even presently upon the
dissolution. According to which new opinion it will be impossible to understand
the meaning of my text, and of diverse other places of Scripture which I have
now alleged and explicated; or at all to perceive the Economy and
dispensation of the day of judgment; or how it can be a day of discerning; or
how the reapers, the Angels shall bind up the wicked in bundles and throw them
into the unquenchable fire; or yet how it can be useful or necessary or prudent
for Christ to give a solemn sentence upon all the world; or how it can be that
that day should be so formidable and full of terrors, when nothing can affright
those that have long enjoyed the beatific presence of God; and no thunders or
earthquakes can affright them who have upon them the biggest evil in the world,
I mean, the damned who according to this opinion have been in hell for many
ages: and it can mean nothing but to them that are alive; and then it is but a
particular, not an universal judgment; and after all, it can pretend to no
piety, to no Scripture, to no reason; and only can serve the ends of the Church
of Rome; who can no way better be consuted in their invocation of Saints then
by this truth, that the Saints do not yet enjoy the beatific vision; and though
they are in a state of ease and comfort, yet are they not in a state of power
and glory, and kingdom till the day of judgment.

This also perfectly does overthrow the doctrine of Purgatory. For as the
saints departed are not perfect, and therefore certainly not to be invocated
not to be made our Patrons and advocates: so neither are they in such a
condition as to be in torment; and it is impossible that any wise man should
believe, that the souls of good men after death should endure the sharp pains
of hell, and yet at the same time believe those words of Scripture, Blessed are
the dead that die in the Lord; from henceforth; yea says the spirit that they
may rest from their labors, and their works do follow them. (Rev. 24. 13.) If
they can rest in beds of fire, and sing hymns of glory in the torments of the
damned; if their labors are done when their pains are almost infinite, then
these words of the spirit of God, and that doctrine of Purgatory can be
reconciled; else, never to eternal ages. But it is certain, they are words that
cannot deceive us, Non tanget eos tormentum mortis: Torment in death shall
never touch them.

But having established the proposition and the intended sense of the text, let
us a while consider,

1. That God is our God when we die, if we be his servants while we live; and
to be our God signifies very much good to us. He will rescue us from the powers
of hell; the Devil shall have no part nor portion in us; we shall be kept in
safe custody, we shall be in the hands of Christ, out of which all the powers
of hell shall never snatch us, and therefore we may die with confidence, if we
die with a good conscience: we have no cause of fear, if we have just grounds
to hope for pardon. The Turks have a saying, that the Christians do not
believe themselves when they talk such glorious things of Heaven and the state
of separation: for if they did, they would not be so afraid to die; but they do
not so well consider that Christians believe all this well enough, but they
believe better then they live; and therefore they believe and tremble, because
they do not live after the rate of going to heaven: they knew that for good men
glorious things are prepared; but Tophet is prepared for evil Kings, and unjust
Rulers; for vicious men, and degenerate Christians: there is a hell for
accursed souls; and men live without fear of it so long, till their fear as
soon as it begins, in an instant passes into despair and the fearful groans of
the damned. It is no wonder to see men so unwilling to die; to be impatient of
the thought of death; to be afraid to make their will, to converse with the
solemn scarcrow: He that is fit to die must have long dwelt with it, must
handle it on all sides, must feel whether the sting be taken out; he must
examine whether he be in Christ, that is, whether he be a new creature. And
indeed I do not so much wonder that any man fears to die, as when I see a
careless and a wicked person descend to his grave with as much indifferency as
he goes to sleep, that is, with no other trouble then that he leaves the world;
but he does not fear to die; and yet upon the instant of his dissolution he
goes into the common receptacle of souls where nothing can be addressed to him
but the consequence of what he brings along with him, and he shall presently
know whether he shall be saved or damned.

We have read of some men who by reading or hearing strange opinions have
entered into desperate melancholy, and diverse who have perfectly despaired of
the Divine mercy; who feeling such horrid convulsions in their souls, such
fearful expectations of an Eternal curse that not finding themselves able to
bear so intolerable a fear have hanged or drowned themselves; and yet they only
thought so or feared it; and might have altered it if they would have hoped and
prayed: but then let it be considered; when the soul is stripped of the cloud
her body, when she is entered into strange regions and converses only with
spirits, and sees plainly all that is within her, when all her sins appear in
their own natural ugliness and set out by their aggravating circumstances; then
she remembers her filthy pleasures and hates them infinitely as being such
things to which she then can have no appetite: when she perceives she shall
perish for that which is not, for that whose remembrance is intolerable; when
she sees many new secrets which she understood not before, and has stranger
apprehensrons of the wrath of God then ever could be represented in this life;
when she has the notices of a spirit, and an understanding pure enough to see
essences and rightly to weigh all the degrees of things; when (possibly) she is
often affrighted with the alarums and conjectures of the day of judgment; or
if she be not, yet certainly knows, not only by faith and fear, but by a clear
light and proper knowledge, that it shall certainly come, and its effects shall
remain for ever, then she has time enough to bewail her own folly and
remediless infelicity; if we could now think seriously that things must come to
that pass, and place our selves by holy meditation in the circumstances of that
condition, and consider what we should then think, how miserably deplore our
folly, how comfortless remember our ill gotten wealth; with how much asperity
and deep sighing we should call to mind our foolish pride, our trifling
swearing, our beastly drinkings, our unreasonable and brutish lusts, it could
not be but we must grow wiser on a sudden, despise the world, betake our selves
to a strict religion, reject all vanity of spirit, and be sober and watch unto
prayer. *If any of us had but a strange dream, and should in the fears of the
night but suppose our selves in Hell, and be affrighted with those
circumstances of damnation which we can tell of, and use in our imperfect
notices of things, it would effect strange changes upon a ductile and malleable
spirit. A frequent, severe meditation can do more then a seldom and a
phantastic dream; but an active faith can do more then all the arts and
contingencies of fancy or discourse.

Now it is well with us, and we may yet secure it shall be well with us for
ever: but with in an hour it may be otherwise with any of us all, who do not
instantly take courses of security. But he that does not, would in such a
change soon come to wish that he might exchange his state with the meanest,
with the miserablest of all mankind; with gallislaves and miners, with men
condemned to tortures for a good conscience. Sed cum pulchra minax succidet
membra securis.
Quam velles spinas tunc habuisse meas. Avianus.
In the day of felling timber the shrub and the bramble are better then the
tallest fur or the goodliest Cedar: and a poor Saint whose soul is in the
hand of Jesus, placed under the altar, over which our high Priest like the
Cherubim over the propitiatory intercedes perpetually for the hastening of his
glory, is better then the greatest Tyrant, who if he dies, is undone for ever.
For in the interval there shall be rest and comfort to the one, and torment and
amazement and hellish confusion to the other: and the day of judgment will
come, and it shall appear to all the world, that they whose joys were not in
this world, were not of all men most miserable, because their joys and their
life were hid with Christ in God, and at the resurrection of the just shall be
brought forth and be illustrious beyond all the beauties of the world.

I have now done with my text, and been the expounder of this part of the
Divine oracle: but here is another text and another Sermon yet. Ye have heard
Moses and the Prophets: now hear one from the dead; whose life and death would
each of them make an excellent Sermon, if this dead man had a good interpreter:
for he being dead yet speaks, and calls upon us to live well, and to live
quickly, to watch perpetually, and to work assiduously; for we shall descend
into the same shadows of death Linquenda tellus, et domus, et placens Vxor
atque harum quas colis arborum
Te praeter in visas Cupressos Nulla brevem Dominum sequetur.
Thou must leave thy rich land, and thy well built house, and thy pleasing
wife, and of all the trees of thy Orchard or thy wood, nothing shall attend
thee to thy grave, but oak for thy Coffin, and Cypress for thy funeral: It
shall not then be inquired how long thou have lived but how well! None below
will be concerned whither thou were rich or poor; but all the spirits of light
and darkness shall be busy in the scrutiny of thy life; for the good Angels
would fain carry thy soul to Christ, and if they do the Devils will follow and
accuse thee there; and when thou appearest before the righteous judge, what
will become of thee unless Christ be thy advocate and God be merciful and
appeased, and the Angels be thy guards and a holy conscience be thy comfort.
There will to every one of us come a time when we shall with great passion and
great interest inquire, how have I spent my days, how have I laid out my money,
how have I employed my time, how have I served God, and how repented me of my
sins: and upon our answers to these questions depends a happy or an unhappy
Eternity: and blessed is he who concerning these things takes care in time;
and of this care I may with much confidence and comfort propound to you the
example of this good man whose relics lie before you: Sir George Dalston, of
Dalston in Cumberland; a worthy man, beloved of his Country, useful to his
friends, friendly to all men, careful of his religion, and a true servant of
God.

He was descended of an Ancient and a worthy house in Cumberland; and he
adorned his family and extraction with a more worthy comportment; for to be of
a worthy family and to bring to it no stock of our proper virtue is to be
upbraided by our family; and a worthy Father can be no honor to his Son, when
it shall be said; behold the difference; this crab descended from a goodly
apple tree; but he who beautifies the eschutcheon of his Ancestors by worthy
achievements, by learning or by wisdom, by valor and by great employments,
by a holy life and an useful converlation; that man is the parent of his own
fame, and a new beginner of an Ancient family: for as conversation is a
perpetual creation; so is the progression of a family in a line of worthy
descendants, a daily beginning of its honor and a new stabiliment.

He was bred in learning; in which Cambridge was his tiring room, and the Court
of Queen Elizabeth was his stage in which he first represented the part of a
hopeful young man: but there he stayed not; his friends not being desirous that
the levities of youth should be fermented by the liberties of a rich and
splendid Court, caused him to lie in the restraints and to grow ripe in the
sobrieties of a Country life and a married state: In which as I am informed he
behaved himself with so great worthiness, thiness, and gave such probation of
his love of justice, popular regards of his Countries good, and abilities to
serve them; that for almost 40. years together his Country chose him for their
Knight to serve in all the intervening parliaments: Magistratus indicatorium;
employment shows the man; he was a leading man in Parliaments; prevailing there
by the great reputation of his justice and integrity; and yet he was not
unpleasant and hated at Court: for he had well understood that the true
interest of Courts and Parliaments were one; and that they are like the humors
of the body, if you increase one beyond its limit, that destroys all the rest
and it self at last; and when they look upon themselves as enemies and that hot
and cold must fight; the prevailing part is abated in the conflict, and the
vanquished part is destroyed: but when they look upon themselves as varieties
serving the differing aspects and necessities of the same body, they are for
the allay of each others exorbitances and excesses, and by keeping their own
measures they preserve the man: this the good man well understood; for so he
comported himself that he was loud in Parliaments and valued at Court: he was
respected in very many Parliaments; and was worthily regarded by the worthy
Kings: which without an Orator commends a man: Gravissimi principis judicium in
minoribus etiam rebus consequi pulchrum est; said Rliny. To be approved though
but in lesser matters by the judgment of a wise Prince is a great ornament to
the man. For as King Theodoric in Cassiodore said, Nequen. dignus est a quopiam
redargui, qui nostro judicio meretur absolvi: No man ought to reprove him whom
the King commends.

But I need no artifices to represent him worthy; his arguments of probation
were within in the magazines of a good heart and represented themselves by
worthy actions. For, God was pleased to invest him with a marvailous sweet
Nature; which is certainly to be reckoned as one half of the grace of God:
because a good nature being the relics and remains of that ship wrack which
Adam made, is the proper and immediate disposition to holiness, as the
corruption of Adam was to disobedience and peevish Councels. A good nature will
not upbraid the more imperfect persons, will not deride the ignorant, will not
reproach the erring man: will not smite sinners on the face, will not despise
the penitent. A good Nature is apt to forgive injuries, to pity the miserable,
to rescue the oppressed, to make every ones condition as tolerable as he can:
and so would he. For as when good Nature is heightened by the grace of God, that
which was natural becomes now spiritual; so these actions which proceeded from
an excellent nature and were pleasing and useful to men, when they derive from
a new principle of grace they become pleasant in the eyes of God: then
obedience to laws is duty to God; justice is righteousness, bounty becomes
graciousness, and alms is charity.

And indeed this is a grace in which this good man was very remarkable, being
very frequent and much in alms; tender hearted to the poor; open handed to
relieve their needs; the bellies of the poor did bless him, he filled them with
food and gladness; and I have heard that he was so regular, so constant, so
free in this duty, that in these late unhappy wars being in a garrison and near
the suffering some rude accidents, the beggars made themselves his guard and
rescued him from that trouble, who had so often rescued them from hunger.

He was of a meek and gentle spirit; but not too soft; he knew how to do good,
and how to put by an injury; but I have heard it told by them that knew his
life, that being by the unavoidable trouble of a great estate engaged in great
suits at law, he was never Plaintiff, but always upon the defensive part; and
that he had reason on his side and justice for him, I need allege no other
testimony, but that the sentence of his Judges so declared it.

But that in which I propound this good man most imitable was in his religion,
for he was a great lover of the Church, a constant attender to the Sermons of
the Church; a diligent hearer of the prayers of the Church, and and an obedient
son to perform the commands of the Church. He was diligent in his times and
circumstances of devotion; he would often be at Church so early that he was
seen to walk long in the Churhyard before prayers; being as ready to confess
his sins at the beginning, as to receive the blessing at the end of prayers.
Indeed he was so great a lover of Sermons, that though he knew how to value
that which was the best, yet he was patient of that which was not so; and if he
could not learn any thing to improve his faith, yet he would find something to
exercise his patience; and something for charity; yet this his great love of
Sermons could not tempt him to a willingness of neglecting the prayers of the
Church; of which he was a great lover to his dying day. Oves meae exaudiunt
vocem meam (says Christ) my sheep hear my voice; and so the Church says: my
sheep hear my voice, they love my words, they pray in my forms, they observe my
orders, they delight in my offices, they revere my Ministers, and obey my
constitutions: and so did he; loving to have his soul recommended to God, and
his needs represented, and his sins confessed, and his pardon implored in the
words of his Mother in the voice and accent of her that nursed him up to a
spiritual life, to be a man in Christ Jesus.

He was indeed a great lover and had a great regard for Gods Ministers, ever
remembering the words of God, keep my rest, and reverence my Priests, he
honored the calling in all; but he loved and revered the persons of such who
were conscientious keepers of their depositum, that trust which was committed
to them; such which did not for interest quit their conscience, and did not to
preserve some parts of their revenue, quit some portions of their religion, He
knew that what was true in 1639. was also true in 1644. and so to 57. and shall
continue true to eternal ages: and they that change their persuasions by force
or interest did neither believe well nor ill upon competent and just grounds;
they are not just, though they happen on the right side. Hope of gain did by
chance teach them well; and fear of loss abuses them directly. He pitied the
persecuted, and never would take part with persecutors, he prayed for his
Prince and served him in what he could: he loved God, and loved the Church; he
was a lover of his Countries liberties, and yet an observer of the laws of his
King.

Thus he behaved himself to all his superior relatives; to his equals and
descendants he was also just, and kind and loving. He was an excellent friend,
laying out his own interest to serve theirs; sparing not himself that he might
serve them; as knowing society to be the advantage of man's nature; and
friendship the ornament of society, and usefulness the ornament of friendship:
and in this he was known to be very worthy. He was tender and careful of his
children, and so provident and wife, so loving and obliging to his whole
family, that he justly had that love and regard, that duty and observance from
them, which his kindness and his care had merited. He was a provident and
careful conductor of his estate; but far from covetousness; as appeared
toward the evening of his life; in which that vice does usually prevail amongst
old men, who are more greedy when they have least need and, and load their
sumpters so much the more, by how much nearer they are to their journeys end:
but he made a demonstration of the contrary; for he washed his hands and heart
of the world, gave up his estate long before his death or sickness to be
managed by his only son whom he left since, but then first made and saw him his
heir; he emptied his hands of secular employment; meddled not with money but for
the uses of the poor, for piety, for justice and religion.

And now having divested himself of all objections and in his conversation with
the world, quitting his affections to it, he wholly gave himself to religion
and devotion: He wakened early and would presently be entertained with reading;
when he rose, still he would be read to and hear some of the Psalms of David:
and excepting only what time he took for the necessities of his life and
health, all the rest he gave to prayer, reading, and meditation; save only that
he did not neglect, or rudely entertain the visits and kind offices of his
neighbors.

But in this great vacation from the world; he espied his advantages; he knew
well according to that saying of the Emperor Charles 5. oportet inter vitae
negotia and diem mortis spatium aliquod intercedere; there ought to be a valley
between two such mountains, the businesses of our life and the troubles of our
death; and he stayed not till the noise of the bridegrooms coming did awaken
and affright him; but by daily prayers twice a day constantly with his family,
besides the piety and devotion of his own retirements, by a monthly communion,
by weekly Sermons and by the religion of every day he stood in precincts, ready
with oil in his lamp watching till his Lord should call.

And indeed when he was hearing what God did speak to him of duty, he also
received his summons to give his account. For he was so pertinacious an
attendant to Gods holy word and the services of the Church, that though he
found himself sick, he would not off, but stay till the solemnity was done; but
it pleased God at Church to give him his first arrest, and since that time I
have often visited him; and found him always doing his work with the greatest
evennes and indifferency of spirit as to the event of life and death that I
have observed in any. He was not unwilling to live; but if he should, he
resolved to spend his life wholly in the service of God; but yet neither was he
unwilling to die; because he then knew he should weep no more, and he should
sin no more. He was very confident, but yet with great humility and great
modesty, of the pardon of his sins; he had indeed lived without scandal, but he
knew he had not lived without error; but as God had assisted him to avoid the
reproach of great crimes, so he doubted not but he should find pardon for the
less: and indeed I could not but observe that he had in all the time of his
sickness a very quiet conscience; which is to me an excellent demonstration of
the state of his life, and of his state of grace and pardon. For though he
seemed to have a conscience tender and nice if any evil thing had touched it,
yet I could not but apprehend that his peace was a just peace, the mercy of
God, and the price and effect of the blood of Jesus.

He was so joyful, so thankful, so pleased in the Ministeries of the Church,
that it gave in evidence where his soul was most delighted, what it did
apprehend the quickest, where it did use to dwell, and what it did most
passionately love. He discoursed much of the mercies of God to him, repeated
the blessings of his life, the accidents and instruments of his trouble, he
loved the cause of his trouble and pardoned them that neither loved it nor him.

When he had spent great portions of his time of sickness in the service of God
and in expectation of the sentence of his life or death, at last he understood
the still voice of God, and that he was to go where his soul loved to be; he
still increased his devotion; and being admonished as his strength failed him,
to supply his usual forms, and his want of strength and words, by short
exercise of virtues, of faith and patience and the love of God; he did it so
willingly, so well, so readily, making his eyes, his hands, and his tongue as
long as he could the interpreters of his mind, that as long as he was alive we
would see what his soul was doing. He doubted not of the truth of the promises,
nor of the goodness of God, nor the satisfaction of Christ, and the merits of
his death, nor the fruit of his resurrection, nor the prevalency of his
intercession, nor yet doubted of his own part in them, but expected his portion
in the regions of blessedness with those who loved God and served him heartily
and faithfully in their generations.

He had so great a patience in his sickness and was so afraid lest he should
sin at last; that his piety out-did his nature, and though the body cannot feel
but by the soul, yet his soul seemed so little concerned in the passions of the
body, that I neither observed, nor heard of him that he in all his sickness so
much as complained with any semblance of impatience.

He so continued to pray, so delighted in hearing Psalms sung, which I wish
were made as fit to sing by their numbers, as they are by their weight, that so
very much of his time was spent in them, that it was very likely when his Lord
came, he would find him so doing, and he did so; for in the midst of prayers
he went away, and got to Heaven as soon as they; and saw them (as we hope)
presented to the throne of grace; he went along with them himself, and was his
own messenger to heaven; where although he possibly might prevent his last
prayers, yet he would not prevent Gods early mercy; which as we humbly hope,
gave him pardon for his sins, ease of his pain, joy after his sorrow, certainty
for his fears, heaven for earth, innocence and impeccability instead of his
infirmity. Ergo Quintilium perpetuus sopor Urget cui pudor and justitiae soror,
Incorrupta fides, Nudaque veritas, Quando ullum inveniet parem?
Faith and justice, modesty and pure righteousness, made him equal to the
worthiest examples he was (...), a good man, loving and humble, meek and
patient, he would be sure to be the last in contention, and the first at a
peace; he would injure no man, but yet if any man was displeased with him, he
would speak first and offer words of kindness; If any did dispute concerning
priority, he knew how to get it even by yielding and compliance; walking
profitably with his neighbors and humbly with his God, and having lived a life
of piety, he died in a full age, an honorable old age, in the midst of his
friends, and in the midst of prayer. And although the events of the other world
are hidden to us below that we might live in faith, and walk in hope and die
in charity, yet we have great reason to bless God for his mercies to this our
Brother, and endeavor to comport our selves with a strict religion, and a
severe repentance, with an exemplar patience and an exemplar piety, with the
structures of a holy life, and the solemnities of a religious death, that we
also may, as our consident and humble hope is this our Brother does by the
conduct of Angels pass into the hands and bosom of Jesus, there to expect the
most merciful sentence of the right hand, Come ye blessed Children of my
Father, receive the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world.
Amen Lord Jesus, Amen.

Grant this Eternal God for Jesus Christ his sake; to whom with thee O Father,
and the Holy Spirit, be all glory and honor, service and dominion, love and
obedience, be confessed due, and ever paid by all Angels, and all men, and all
the creatures this day, henceforth and for evermore.

Amen.
FINIS.

