The Second Part OF THE DISSUASIVE FROM POPERY: In Vindication of THE FIRST
PART And further REPROOF and CONVICTION OF THE ROMAN ERRORS.

By Jer. Tailor Chaplain in Ordinary to King CHARLES the First, and late Lord
Bishop of Down and Conner.

Curavimus Babylonem and non est Sanata.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, at the Angel in S. Bartholomew's Hospital, MDCLXVII.

DIEV ET MON DROIT^
SOIT ^ QVI ^ MAL ^ Y ^ PE^^^^


A Table of the SECTIONS.
The Introduction in Answer to J. S.

The first Book contains Eleven Sections.
SECTION I.
OF the Church: showing, That the Church of Rome relies upon no certain
foundation for their faith. Page 1 Sect. II. Of the sufficiency of Scriptures
to Salvation 63 Sect. III. Of Traditions 102 Sect. IV. That there is nothing of
necessity to be believed which the Apostolical Churches did not believe 144
Sect. V. That the Church of Rome pretends to a power of introducing into the
Confessions of the Church new Articles of Faith, and endeavors to alter and
suppress the old Catholic Doctrine 171 Sect. VI. Of the Expurgatory Indices in
the Roman Church 192 Sect. VII. The uncharitableness of the Church of Rome in
her judging of others 205 Sect. VIII. The insecurity of the Roman Religion 222
Sect. IX. That the Church of Rome does teach for Doctrines the Commandments of
Men 236 Sect. X. Of the Seal of Confession 239 Sect. XI. Of the imposing
Anricular Confession upon Consciences without authority from God 249
The Second Book contains Seven Sections.
SECTION I.
OF Indulgences Page 1 Sect. II. Of Purgatory 13 Sect. III. Of
Transubstantiation 56 Sect. IV. Of the half Communion 86 Sect. V. Of Service in
an unknown Tongue 98 Sect. VI. Of the worshipping of Images 106 Sect. VII. Of
Picturing God the Father, and the Holy Trinity 145
IMPRIMATUR

THO. TOMKINS R. Rmo. in Christo Patri ac Domino Dno. GILBERTO Divina
Providentia Archi-Episcopo Cantuariensi a Sacris Domesticis.
Junii 290 1667. Ex Aedibus Lambethanis.
THE INTRODUCTION BEING An Answer to the fourth Appendix to J. S. his Sure
Footing; intended against the General way of procedure in the Dissuasive from
Popery.
WHen our Blessed Savior was casting out the evil spirit from the poor
Daemoniac in the Gospel, he asked his name; and he answered, My name is legion,
for we are many. Legion is a Roman word, and signifies an Army, as Roman
signifies Catholic; that is, a great body of men which though in true speaking
they are but a part of an Imperial Army, yet when they march alone, they can do
mischief enough, and call themselves an Army Royal. A Squadron of this legion
has attempted to break a little Fort or Outwork of mine, they came in the
dark, their names concealed, their qualities unknown, whether Clergy or Laity
not to me discovered, only there is one pert man amongst them, one that is
discovered by his sure footing. The others I know not, but this man is a man
famous in the new science of controversy (as he is pleased to call it) I mean
in the most beauteous and amiable part of it, railing and calumny; The man I
mean is the (...), the Confident, the man of principles, and the son of
demonstration; Dr. H. H.
and though he had so reviled a great Champion in the Armies of the living God,
that it was reasonable to think he had cast forth (...), all the fiery darts of
the wicked one; yet I find that an evil fountain is not soon drawn dry, and he
has indignation enough and reviling left for others, amongst whom I have the
honor not to be the least sufferer and sharer in the persecution. He thought
not fit to take any further notice of me but in an Appendix; The fourth
appendix to sure footing.
the Viper is but little, but it is a Viper still, though it has more tongue
than teeth. I am the more willing to quit my self of it, by way of
introduction, because he intends it as an Organum Catholicum against the
General way of the procedure which I have used in the Dissuasive; and therefore
I suppose the removing this, might (...) make my way smoother in the following
discourses.

I will take no other notice of his evil language, his scorn and reproach, his
undervaluing and slighting the person and book of the Dissuader, (as he is
pleased sometimes to call me) but I shall answer to these things as S. Bernard
did to the tempation of the Devil endeavoring to hinder his preaching by
tempting to vanity; I neither began for you, nor for you will I make an end:
but I shall look on those Rhetorical flowers of his own but as a fermentum, his
spirit was troubled, and he breathed forth the froth as of an enraged Sea; and
when he has done, it may be he will be quiet, if not, let him know God will
observe that which is to come, and require that which is past.

But I will search and see what I can find of matter that is to be considered,
and give such accounts of them as is necessary, and may be useful for the
defense of my Book, and the justification of my self against all ruder charges.
And after I have done so, I shall proceed to other things which I shall esteem
more useful.

The first thing I shall take notice of, is his scornful and slight speaking of
Scripture, affirming that he is soonest beaten at this weapon, that it is
Sampsons hair; it is the weakest part in the man: And yet if it be the weakest,
it is that which S. Paul calls the weakness and foolishness of preaching, more
strong and more wise than all the wisdom of man: When the Devil tempted our
Blessed Savior, he used Scripture; but Christ did not reprove his way of
arguing, but in the same way discovered his fraud. Scriptum est said the
Tempter; yea, but scriptum est said Christ, to other purposes than you intend;
and so would I. S. have proceeded if he had been at all in love with the way.
But he thinks he has a better; and the wonder is the less that the Gentleman
does not love the Scriptures, or at least gives too much suspicion that he does
not; for he has not yet proved himself by his writings to be so good a
Christian as to love his enemies, or his reprovers: But however he is pleased
to put a scorn on Scripture expressions, it were much better if he and his
Church too would use them more, and express their articles they contend for,
and impose them on the Christian world in the words and expressions of
Scripture, which we are sure express the mind of God with more truth and
simplicity, than is done by their words of art and expressions of the Schools.
If this had been observed, Christendom at this day had had fewer controversies,
and more truth, and more charity, we should not have been puzzled to unriddle
the words of transubstantiation, and hyperdulia, and infallibility, and
doctrines ex Cathedra, and fere de fide, and next to heresy, and temerarious,
and ordo ad spiritualia, and S. Peter's chair, and supremacy in spirituals, and
implicit faith, and very many more profane or unhallowed novelties of speech,
which have made Christianity quite another thing than it is in it self, or then
it was represented by the Apostles and Apostolic men at first, as the plain way
of salvation to all succeeding ages of the Church for ever.

But be it as it will; for he will neither approve of Scripture language, nor
is he pleased that I use any handsome expressions, for that is charged upon me
as part of my fault; only to countenance all this, he is pleased to say that
all these are but division upon no grounds; and therefore to grounds and first
principles I must be brought, and by this way he is sure to blow up my errors
from the foundation; that is his expression, being a Metaphor I suppose taken
from the Gunpowder treason, in which indeed going upon Popish grounds they
intended to blow up [something or other that was very considerable] from it is
very foundations.

To perform this effect I. S. has eight several mines, all which I hope to
discover without Guido Faux his Lanthorn.

The First Way.
HIS first Way is, That I have not one first or self evident principle to begin
with, on which I build the Dissuasive; but he has, that is, he says he has;
for he has reproved that oral tradition, on which he and his Church relies, is
such a principle; He thought (it may be) he had reason then to say so; but the
Scene is altered, and until he has sufficiently confuted his adversaries who
have proved his self evident principle to be an evident and pitiful piece of
Sophistry, his boasting is very vain. However, though he has failed in his
undertaking, yet I must acquit my self as well as I can. I shall therefore tell
him that the truth, fullness, and sufficiency of Scripture in all matters of
faith and manners, is the principle that I and all Protestants rely upon. And
although this be not a first and self-evident principle, yet it is resolved
into these that are. 1. Whatsoever God has said is true. 2. Whatsoever God
has done is good. 3. Whatsoever God intends to bring to pass, he has
appointed means sufficient to that end. Now since God has appointed the
Scriptures to instruct us, and make us wise unto salvation, and to make the man
of God perfect, certain it is, that this means must needs be sufficient to
effect that end. Now that God did do this, to this end, to them that believe
the Scriptures to be the Word of God, is as evident as any first principle. And
let these Scriptures be weighed together, and see what they do amount to. John.
5. 39.
Search the Scriptures for therein ye think to have eternal life. The Jews
thought so, that is, they confessed and acknowledged it to be so; and if they
had been deceived in their thought, besides that it is very probable Christ
would have reproved it, so it is very certain he would not have bidden them to
have used that means to that end. And if Christ himself and the Apostles did
convince the Jews out of the Scriptures of the old Testament, proving that
Jesus was the Christ: if Christ himself and the Apostles proved the
resurrection, and the passion, and the supreme Kingdom of Christ out of the
Scriptures, if the Apostle proved him to be the Messiah, and that be ought to
suffer and to rise again the third day by no other precedent topic, and that
upon these things Christian religion relied as upon it is entire foundation, and
on the other side the Jewish Doctors had brought in many things by tradition,
to which our Blessed Savior gave no countenance, but reproved many of them,
and made it plain that tradition was not the first and self evident principle
to rely upon in religion, but a way by which they had corrupted the Commandment
of God: It will follow from hence, that the Scriptures are the way that Christ
and his Apostles walked in, and that oral tradition was not. But then to this
add what more concerns the N. T. when S. Luke wrote his Gospel, in the preface
he tells us, That many had taken in hand to set forth in order a declaration of
those things, which are most surely believed amongst us [Christians,] and that
he having perfect understanding of all things (viz. which Christ did and
taught) from the very first did write [this Gospel] that Theophilus might know
the certainty of those things in which he had been instructed: Now here (if we
believe S. Luke) was no want of any thing; he was fully instructed in all
things; and he chose to write that book, that by that book Theophilus might
know the truth, yea, the certainty of all things. Now if we be Christians and
believe. S. Luke to be divinely inspired, this is not indeed a first but an
evident principle; that a book of Scripture can make a man certain and
instructed in the whole Gospel of Jesus Christ. To the same purpose is that of
S. John These things are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the
Christ the Son of God, John. 20. 31.
and that believing ye might have life through his name. The end is salvation
by Jesus Christ; the means of effecting this, was this writing the Gospel by S.
John; and therefore it is a sure principle for Christians to rely upon, the
word of God written by men divinely inspired, such as Christians believe and
confess S. Luke and S. John to be. Hear S. Luke again, Acts 1.
The former treatise have I made O Theophilus of all that Jesus began both to
do and teach until the day he was taken up. No man then can deny but all
Christ's doctrine and life was fully set down by these Evangelists and Apostles;
whether it were to any purpose or no, let I. S. consider, and I shall consider
with him in the sequel. But first let us hear what S. Paul says in an Epistle
written as it is probable not long before his death; but certainly after three
of the Gospels, and diverse of the Epistles were written, and consequently
related to the Scriptures of the old and new Testament. [Continue thou in the
things which thou have learned and have been assured of, 2 Timothy 5. 14.
knowing of whom thou have learned them: And that from a child thou have known
the holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation, through
faith which is in Christ Jesus. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God,
and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all
good works.] Now I demand; Does I. S. believe these words to be true? Are the
Scriptures able to make us wise unto salvation? Are they profitable to all
intents and purposes of the spirit, that is, to teach, to reprove, to correct,
to instruct? Is the end of all this Economy, to make a Christian man, yea a
Christian Bishop perfect? Can he by this dispensation be thoroughly furnished
unto all good works, and that by faith in Jesus Christ? If so, then this is the
true principle, the Apostolical way, the way of God, the way of salvation: And
if Scriptures, [the books written by the finger of God, and the pen of
Apostles] can do all this, then they are something more than Ink varied into
diverse figures, unsensed characters, and I know not what other reviling
Epithets I. S. is pleased to cast upon them.

Yea, but all this is nothing, unless we know that Scriptures are the word of
God, that they were written by the Apostles; and of this, the Scriptures cannot
be a witness in their own behalf: And therefore oral tradition must supply
that, and consequently is the only first and self-evident principle. To this I
answer; that it matters not by what means it be conveyed to us that the
Scriptures are the Word of God. Oral tradition is an excellent means; but it is
not that alone by which it is conveyed. For if by oral tradition he means the
testimony of the Catholic Church; it is the best external ministry of
conveyance of this, being a matter of fact, and of so great concernment. To
which the testimony of our adversaries Jews and Heathens adds no small moment;
and the tradition is also conveyed to us by very many writings. But when it is
thus conveyed, and that the Church does believe them to be the Word of God,
then it is that I inquire, whether the Scriptures cannot be a witness to us of
it is own design, fullness, and perfection. Certainly no principle is more
evident than this, none more sure and none before it; Whatever God has said is
true, and in Scripture God did speak, and speak this; and therefore this to us
is a first, at least an evident principle.

Yea, but if this proposition, that the Scriptures are the Word of God, is
conveyed to us by oral tradition, this must needs be the best and only
principle; for if it be trusted for the whole, why not for every particular.
This Argument concludes thus. This is the gate of the House, therefore this is
all the house. Every man enters this way; and therefore this is the Hall and
the Cellar, the Pantry and Dining room, the Bedchambers and the Cocklofts. But
besides the ridiculousness of the argument, there is a particular reason why
the argument cannot conclude: The reason in brief is this, because it is much
easier for any man to carry a letter, than to tell the particular errand; It is
easier to tell one thing, than to tell ten thousand; to deliver one thing out
of our hand, than a multitude out of our mouths; one matter of fact, than very
many propositions; as it is easier to convey in writing all Tullies works, than
to say by heart with truth and exactness any one of his Orations. That the
Bible was written by inspired men, God setting his seal to their doctrine,
confirming by miracles what they first preached, and then wrote in a book, this
is a matter of fact, and is no otherwise to be proved (unless God should
proceed extraordinarily and by miracle) but by the testimony of wise men, who
saw it with their eyes, and heard it with their ears, and felt it with their
hands. This was done at first, then only consigned, then witnessed, and thence
delivered. And with how great success, and with the blessing of how mighty a
providence, appears it in this; because although as S. Luke tells us, many did
undertake to write Gospels, or the declaration of the things so surely believed
amongst Christians; and we find in S. Clement of Alex. Origin, S. Irenaeus,
Athanasius, Chrysostom and S. Hierom mention made of many Gospels, as that of
the Hebrews, the Egyptians, Nazarenes, Ebionites, the Gospel of James, Philip,
Bartholomew, Thomas and diverse more, yet but four only were transmitted and
consigned to the Church; because these four only were written by these whose
names they bear; and these men had the testimony of God, and a spirit of truth,
and the promise of Christ, that the spirit should bring all things to their
minds, and he did so: Now of this we could have no other testimony but of those
who were present, who stopped the first issue of the false Gospels, and the
sound of the other four went forth into all the world, according to that of
Origin, Ecclesia cum quatuor tantum Evangelii libros habet, per universum
mundum Evangeliis redundat; heresies cum multa habeant, unum non habent. Those
which heretics made are all lost, or slighted, those which the spirit of God
did write by the hands of men divinely inspired, these abide, and shall abide
for ever. Now then this matter of fact how should we know, but by being told it
by credible persons who could know, and never gave cause of suspicion that they
should deceive us. Now if I. S. will be pleased to call this Oral tradition, he
may; but that which was delivered by this Oral tradition was not only preached
at first, but transmitted to us by many writings, besides the Scriptures, both
of friends and enemies. But suppose it were not; yet this book of Scriptures
might be consigned by Oral tradition from the Apostles and Apostolic men, and
yet tradition become of little or no use after this consignation and delivery.
For this was all the work which of necessity was to be done by it; and indeed
this was all that it could do well.

1. This was all which was necessary to be done by Oral tradition; because the
wisdom of the divine spirit having resolved to write all the doctrine of
salvation in a book, and having done it well and sufficiently in order to his
own gracious purposes, (for who dares so much as suspect the contrary) there
was now no need that Oral tradition should be kept up with the jointure of
infallibility, since the first infallibility of the Apostles was so
sufficiently witnessed, that it convinced the whole world of Christians; and
therefore was enough to consign the Divinity and perfection of this book for
ever. For it was in this as in the doctrine it self contained in the
Scriptures, God confirmed it by signs following; that is by signs proving that
the Apostles spoke the mind of God, the things which they speak were proved
and believed for ever; but then the signs went away, and left a permanent and
eternal event. So it is in the infallible tradition delivered by the Apostles
and Apostolic age, concerning the Scriptures being the word of God; what they
said was confirmed by all that testimony, by which they obtained belief in the
Church, to their persons and doctrines; but when they had once delivered this,
there needed no remaining miracle, and intail of infallibility in the Church,
to go on in the delivery of this; for by that time that all the Apostles were
dead, and the infallible spirit was departed, the Scriptures of the Gospels
were believed in all the world, and then it was not ordinarily possible ever
any more to detract faith from that book; and then for the transmitting this
book to after ages, the Divine providence needed no other course, but the
ordinaary ways of man, that is, right reason, common faithfulness, the interest
of souls, believing a good thing, which there was and could be no cause to
disbelieve; and an Uniuersal consent of all men, that were any ways concerned
for it, or against it, and this not only preached upon the house tops, but set
down also in very many writings. This actually was the way of transmitting this
book, and the authority of it, to after ages respectively.

These things are of themselves evident, yet because I. S. still demands we
should set down some first and self evident principle, on which to found the
whole procedure, I shall once more satisfy him; And this is a first and self
evident principle, whatsoever can be spoken can be written; and if it he plain
spoken, it may be as plain written. I hope I need not go about to demonstrate
this; for it is of it self evident, that God can write all that he is pleased
to speak; and all good scribes can set down in writing whatsoever another tells
them; and in his very words too if he please, he can as well transcribe a word
spoken, as a word written. And upon this principle it is, that the Protestants
believe that the words of Scripture can be as easily understood after they are
written in a book, as when they were spoken in the Churches of the first
Christians; and the Apostles and Evangelists did write the life of Christ, his
doctrines, the doctrines of faith, as plain as they did speak them, at least as
plain as was necessary to the end for which they were written, which is the
salvation of our souls. And what necessity now can there be, that there should
be a perpetual miracle still current in the Church, and a spirit of
infallibility descendant to remember the Church of all those things, which are
at once set down in a book, the truth and authority of which was at first
proved by infallible testimony, the memory and certainty of which is preserved
amongst Christians by many unquestionable records, and testimonies of several
natures.

2. As there was no necessity that an infallible Oral tradition should do any
more but consign the books of Scripture; so it could not do any more, without a
continual miracle. That there was no continued miracle is sufficiently proved,
by proving it was not necessary it should; for that also is another first and
self-evident principle, that the All wise God does not do any thing, much less
such things as miracles, to no purpose, and for no need. But now if there be
not a continued miracle, then Oral tradition was not fit to be trusted, in
relating the particulars of the Christian Religion. For if in a succession of
Bishops and Priests from S. Peter down to P. Alexander the seventh, it is
impossible for any man to be assured that there was no nullity in the
ordinations, but insensibly there might intervene something to make a breach in
the long line, which must in that case be made up as well as they can, by tying
a knot on it: It will be infinitely more hard to suppose, but that in the
series and successive talkings of the Christian religion, there must needs be
infinite variety, and many things told otherwise, and somethings spoken with
evil purposes, by such as preached Christ out of envy; and many odd things
said, and doctrines strangely represented by such as creep into houses, and
lead captive silly women: It may be the Bishops of the Apostolical Churches did
preach right doctrines for diverse ages; but yet in Jerusalem, where fifteen
Bishops in succession were circumcised, who can tell how many things might be
spoken in justification of that practice, which might secretly undervalue the
Apostolical doctrine. And where was the Oral tradition then of this
proposition; If ye be circumcised Christ shall profit you nothing. But however,
though the Bishops did preach all the doctrine of Christ; yet these Sermons
were told to them that were absent, by others who it may be might mistake
something, and understand them to other senses than was intended. And though
infallibility of testifying might be given to the Church, that is, to the chief
Rulers of it, (for I hope I. S. does not suppose it subjected in every single
Christian man or woman) yet when this testimony of theirs is carried abroad,
the reporters are not always infallible: And let it be considered, that even
now since Christianity has been transmitted so many ages, and there are so
many thousands that teach it, yet how many hundreds of these thousands
understand but very little of it, and therefore tell it to others but pitifully
and imperfectly; so that if God in his Goodness had not preserved to us the
surer word of the prophetical and Evangelical Scriptures, Christianity would by
this time have been a most strange thing, litera scripta manet. As to the
Apostles while they lived it was so easy to have recourse, that error durst
not appear with an open face, but the cure was at hand: so have the Apostles
when they took care to leave something left to the Churches to put them in
mind of the precious doctrine; they put a sure standard, and fixed a rule in
the Church, to which all doubts might be brought to trial, and against which
all heresies might be dashed in pieces. But we have lived to see the
Apostolical Churches rent from one another, and teaching contrary things, and
pretending contrary traditions, and abounding in several senses, and
excommunicating one another; and it is impossible (for example) that we should
see the Greeks going any whither, but to their own superior and their own
Churches to be taught Christian Religion; and the Latins did always go to their
own Patriarch, and to their own Bishops and Churches, and it is not likely it
should be otherwise now, than it has been hitherto, that is, that they follow
the religion that is taught them there, and the tradition that is delivered by
their immediate superiors. Now there being so vast a difference, not only in
the Great Churches, but in several ages, and in several Dioceses, and in single
Priests, every one understanding as he can, and speaking as he please, and
remembering as he may, and expressing it accordingly, and the people also
understanding it by halves, and telling it to their Children, sometimes ill,
sometimes not at all, and seldom as they should; and they who are taught,
neglecting it too grosely, and attending to it very carelessly, and forgeting it
too quickly; and which is worse yet, men expounding it according to their
interests, or their lusts, out of faction, or as they are mislead, and then
report it accordingly: These and a thousand things more, convince us of the
easiness of being deceived by Oral tradition of doctrines, which can insensibly
and unavoidably be changed in great differences and mistakes; but can never
suffer any considering Person to believe, that mouth delivery is a better way
of keeping records than writing in a book.

So that now I wonder that I. S. is pleased to call traditions certainty, the
first principle of controversy; the pretense of it is indeed the mother and
nurse of controversy; for in the world there is not any thing more uncertain
than the report of men's words. How many men have been undone by mistaken words?
And it is well remembered that in the last unhappy Parliament, a Gentleman was
called to the Bar for speaking words of truth and honesty, 1641.
but against the sense of the House: The words were spoken in a great assembly,
before many witnesses; curious and malicious observers spoken at that very
time; and yet when the words were questioned, they could not agree what they
were; and consequently the sense of them might be strangely altered, since a
word, the misplacing of a word, an accent, a point, any ambiguity, any mistake
might change the sense; well upon this accident the Speaker called to a
Gentleman whom he had observed to write the words; and to him they appealed,
and he told them that which I supposed was said, but wholly differing from them
that speak it, the traditionary part of the Parliament.

All the rest which I. S. says in his first Way, is nothing but a strange and
arrogant bragging, which as it is inconsistent with the modesty of a Christian,
so it is an ill sign of a sober and wise conviction; for if he had demonstrated
the certainty of Oral tradition, he needed no such noises; they that speak
truest, make the least stir, and when they are at peace in the truth of the
thing, they are pleased it is well, and so they leave it to prevail by it is
native strengths.

But after all this noise made by I. S. why is he so fierce to call me to first
and self evident principles? Does any school of Philosophy do so in their
Systems and discourses? Are there not in every Science diverse praecognita,
things to be presupposed and believed before we can prove any thing? Is it
reasonable when I reprove any vicious person for dishonouring God, and dissuade
him from his wicked courses, that he should tell me he will not be dissuaded by
my fine words, but if I will go to principles and first grounds, he will hear
me; and I must first prove what dishonouring is, and how God can be
dishonored, and whether it be only by fiction of law, (...), and by way of
condescension it is so said; and yet after all this, I must prove that God does
care at all whether the Man say such things or no, or lastly I must prove that
there is a God, before he can suffer me to reprove him upon such ungrounded
discourses. Theology, and the Science of the Scriptures supposes diverse grounds
laid down before and believed; and therefore it were a wild demand, that in
every book we should make a Logical systeme, or a formal analysts of all our
discourses, and make a map describing all the whole passage from the first
truth, to the present affirmative.

But if I. S. will but consider what the Design of the Dissuasive was, and that
the purpose of it was to prove, that the doctrine of Popery as such, is wholly
an Innovation, neither Catholic, nor Apostolic; there was no need of coming to
any other first grounds, but to show the time when the Roman propositions were
not Catholic doctrines, and when they began to be esteemed so. These things are
matters of fact, and need no reduction to any other first principles, but the
credible testimony of men fit to be believed. But yet because I will humor. I.
S. for this once; even here also the Dissuasive relies upon a first and self
evident principle as any is in Christianity; and that is, Quod primum verum.
And therefore if I prove that the Roman doctrines now controverted were not at
first, but came in afterward, then I have built the Dissuasive aright; and now
I have pointed it out, and have already in part, and in the following book have
more largely done it; therefore I hope I. S. will be as good as his word and
yield himself absolutely confuted. But because there are some other reasons
inclining me to think he will not perform his promise, and particularly because
of the ill naturedness of [his own] principles, (that I may use his own
expression in in his postscript) yet if I have failed in my proofs, it is not
for want of clear and evident principles, but of right deductions from them;
and therefore he is mistaken in his first way of mining, and whether there be
any defect in any thing else, will be put to trial in the sequel; In the mean
time, the Lion is not so terrible as he is painted.

The second Way.
IN the next place I shall try his second mine; and believe I shall find it
big with a brutum fulmen, and that it can do no hurt but make a noise, and
scare the boys in the neighborhood.

For now though in the first way he blamed me for relying upon no first and
self evident principle; in the second he excludes me from all right of using
any, unless I will take his. He says, I have no right to allege Scriptures or
Fathers, Councils, or reason, history or instances. But why, I pray? It Is done
thus: All discourse supposes that certain upon which it builds. That is his
first proposition; what he makes of it afterward we shall see; In the mean
time, he may consider that though all his discourses suppose that certain on
which they build, because his Geese are Swans, and his arguments are
demonstrations, yet there are many wiser discourses which rely upon probable
arguments: And so does a moral demonstration; and such a great wit of France,
Mr. Silhon supposed to be his best way of proving the immortality of the soul.
Now this is nothing but a coacervation of many probabilities, which according
to the subject matter (as not being capable of any other way of probation)
amounts to the effect of a demonstration. And however this Gentleman looks big
upon it, the infallibility of the Church of Rome is by the wisest of his own
party acknowledged to rely but upon prudential motives; and he is a mad man
says Artistotle, who in some cases (in which yet a man may discourse wisely
enough) looks for any more than arguments of a high probability. But what does
I. S. think of arguments ad hominem? do they suppose that certain which they
build upon? or if they do not, can there be no good discourses made upon them?
what are the wise consultations of States and Councils? do they always
discourse foolishly when they proceed and argue, but upon probabilities? Nay
what does I. S. think of General Councils who are fallible in their premises
though right in their Conclusions? do their conclusions suppose their
premises, upon which they build their conclusions to be certain? If not, then
I. S. has affirmed weakly, that all discourse supposes that certain upon which
it builds.

Well! but how does he build upon this rotten foundation, who has already in
this very procedure confuted his following discourse, as being such which does
not, I am sure ought not (as appears by the reasons I have brought against it)
suppose that certain on which it is built: Thus, if tradition or the way of
conveying down matters of fact by the former ages testifying can fail, none of
these (viz. Scripture, reason, history, Fathers, Councils, yea instances) are
certain. This is his assumption; and this besides that it is false, is also to
none of his purposes. 1. It is false, For suppose tradition be not certain, how
must all reason therefore fail? for first there must be some reason
presupposed, before the certainty of tradition can be established; and if there
be not, why does I. S. offer at a demonstrative reason to prove the certainty
of tradition: (though if there be no better reasons for it, than he has yet
shown, his reason and tradition fail together) 2. Supposing tradition should
fail, yet there may be reasons given for the excellency of Christianity, which
as they confirm Christians in their faith, and beget love to the articles, so
they may be sufficient to invite even the wiser heathens to consider it, and
choose it.

But then suppose that these things should be uncertain upon the supposal of
the uncertainty of tradition of matters of fact, yet it will avail I. S.
nothing; for it will only follow that then those things which only rely upon
that matter of fact are not demonstratively certain; but though it may fail in
some things, it may be right in others, and we may have reason for one, and not
for another, and then either those things must be proved some other way, or
else they can be believed but only so far as the first topic will extend; which
yet though so uncertain as not to be infallible or demonstrative, may be
certain enough to make men believe, and live and dye accordingly. For if we
have no better, God requires no better, and by these things will bring his
purposes to pass; and if this were not true what will become of the Laity, and
many the ignorant Priests of his own Church, who do not rely upon the certainty
of Universal tradition, but the single testimony of their Parents or their
Parish Priest? But of this afterward.

But to come closer to the thing? suppose tradition of fact be certain (for so
it is in many instances, and if it be Universal, it will be allowed to be so in
all) yet it is but so certain, that yet there is a natural possibility that it
should be false; and it is possible that what the Generality of one sort of men
do jointly testify, may yet be found false, or at least uncertain; as the
burial of Mahomet in Mecha, and his being attracted by a Loadstone, of which
the Mahumetans have a long and general tradition, at least we in Christendom
are made to believe so; and if it be not so, yet it is naturally possible that
they should all believe and teach a lie, and they actually do so; yet I will
allow Ecclesiastical Catholic tradition speaking morally to be certain and
indubitable; and that if this should fail, much of our comfort and certainty of
adherence to Christian Religion would fail with it; but then it is to be
considered, that the certainty of tradition which is allowed, is but in matters
of fact, not in doctrines, because the fact may be one, the doctrines many;
that soon remembered, these soon forgotten; that perceived by sense, these
mistaken and misunderstood; And though it is very credibly reported and easily
believed that Julius Caesar was killed in the Senate, yet all that he said that
day, and all the unwritten orders he made, and all his orations will not,
cannot so easily be trusted upon Oral tradition. So that Oral tradition is a
good ministry of conveying a record, but is not the best record; and the
principle office of Oral tradition is done when the record is verified by it,
when the Scripture is consigned; and though still it is useful, yet it is not
still so necessary: For when by tradition or Oral testimony we are assured that
the Bible is the word of God, and the great record of salvation, then we are
sure that God who gave it, will preserve it, or not require it, and he that
designed it to such an end, will make and keep it sufficient to that end, and
that he has done so already is therefore notorious, because God has been
pleased to multiply the copies, and enwrap the contents of that book with the
biggest interests of mankind; that it is made impossible to destroy that divine
repository of necessary and holy doctrines; And when the Christians were by
deaths and tortures assaulted to cause them to deliver up their Bibles, that
they might be destroyed, the persecutors prevailed not; they might with as much
success have undertaken to drink up the sea. And that providence which keeps
the whole from destruction, will also keep all it is necessary parts from
corruption, lest the work of God become insufficient to the end of it is
designation; And he that will look for better security, than we can have from
the certain knowledge and experience of the infallibility of the Divine
providence and never failing goodness, must erect a new office of assurance.

The effect of this discourse is this; that Oral tradition may be very certain,
and in some case, is the best evidence we have in matters of fact, unless where
we are taught by sense or revelation, and if it were not certain, we should be
infinitely to seek for notices of things that are past; but this is but a moral
certainty, though it be the best we have; and this is but in matters of fact,
not in doctrines and orations, or notions delivered in many words; and after
all this, when tradition has consigned an instrument or record, a writing or a
book, it may then leave being necessary, and when the providence of God
undertakes to supply the testimony of man, the change is for our advantage.

Well! now having considered this second proposition, let us see what his
Conclusion is; for that also has something of particular consideration, as
having in it something more than was in the premises. The Conclusion is this.
[Therefore a Protestant or a renouncer of tradition cannot with reason pretend
to discourse out of any of these] To which I shall reply these things. 1. This
Gentleman wholly mistakes us Protestants, as he did the Protestant Religion
when he weakly forsook it. Protestants are not renouncers of tradition; for we
allow all Catholic traditions that can prove themselves to be such; but we
finding little or nothing (excepting this, that the Bible is the word of God,
and that the Bible contains all the will of God for our salvation, all
doctrines of faith and life) little or nothing else, I say, descending to us by
an Universal tradition, therefore we have reason to adhere to Scripture, and
renounce (as I. S. is pleased to call it) all pretense of tradition of any
matters of faith not plainly set down in the Bible.

But now since we renounce no tradition but such as is not and cannot be proved
to be competent and Catholic, I hope with the leave of I. S. we may discourse
out of Scriptures and Councils, Fathers and reason, history and instances. For
we believe tradition when it is credible, and we believe what two or three
honest men say upon their knowledge, and we make no scruple to believe that
there is an English Plantation in the Barbados, because many tell us so, who
have no reason to deceive us; so that we are in a very good capacity of making
use of Scriptures and Councils, etc. But I must deal freely with Mr. S. though
we do believe these things upon credible testimony, yet we do not think the
testimony infallible, and we do believe many men who yet pretend not to
infallibility: And if nothing were Credible but what is infallible, then no man
had reason to believe his Priest or his Father: We are taught by Aristotle that
that is credible, Quod pluribus, quod sapientibus, quod omnibus videtur; and
yet these are but degrees of probability, and yet are sufficient to warrant the
transaction of all humane affairs, which (unless where God is pleased to
interpose) are not capable of greater assurance. Even the miracles wrought by
our Blessed Savior though they were the best arguments in the world to prove
the Divinity of his person and his mission, yet they were but the best argument
we needed and understood; but although they were infinitely sufficient to
convince all but the malicious, yet there were some so malicious who did not
allow them to be demonstrations, but said, that he did cast out Devils by
Beelzebub. Here we live by faith and not by knowledge, and therefore it is an
infinite goodness of God to give proofs sufficient for us, and fitted to our
natures, and proportioned to our understanding; but yet such as may neither
extinguish faith, nor destroy the nature of hope, which although it may be so
certain and sure as to be a steadfast anchor of the soul, yet it may have in it
something of Natural uncertainty; and yet fill us with all comfort and hope in
believing: So that we allow tradition to be certain if it be universal, and to
be credible according to the degrees of its Universality and disinterested
simplicity; and therefore we have as much right to use the Scriptures and
Fathers as I. S. and all his party: and all his following talk in the sequel of
this second way, relying upon a ground which I have discovered to be false,
must needs fall of it self, and signify nothing. But although this point be
soon washed off, yet I suppose the charge which will recoyle upon himself will
not so easily be put by. For though it appears that Protestants have right to
use Fathers and Councils, Scriptures and reason, yet I. S. and his little
convention of four or five Brothers of the tradition have clearly disintitled
themselves to any use of these. For if the oral tradition of the present Church
be the infallible and only rule of faith, then there is no Oracle but this one;
and the decrees of Councils did bind only in that age they were made, as being
part of the tradition of that age; but the next age needed it not, as giving
testimony to it self, and being it is own rule. And therefore when a question is
to be disputed, you can go no whither to be tried but to the tradition of the
present Church, and this is not to be proved by a series and order of records
and succession; but if you will know what was formerly believed, you must only
ask, what is believed now; for now rivers run back to their springs, and the
Lamb was to blame for troubling the Wolf by drinking in the descending river,
for the lower is now higher, and you are not to prove by what is past, that the
present is right, but by the present you prove what was past, and Harry the
seventh is before Harry the sixth, and Children must teach their Parents, and
therefore it is to be hoped in time may be their Elders. But by this means,
Fathers and Councils are made of no use to these Gentlemen who have greatly
obliged the world by telling us a short way to Science; and though our life be
short, yet art is shorter, especially in our way, in Theology; Concerning which
there needs no labor, no study, no reading, but to know of the present Church
what was always believed, and taught, and what ought to be so; Nay what was
done, or what was said, or what was written is to be told by the present
Church, which without further trouble can infallibly assure us. And upon this
account the Jesuits have got the better of the Jansenists; for though these men
weakly and fondly deny such words to be in Jansenius, yet the virtual Church
can tell better, whether they be or no in Jansenius, or rather it matters not
whether they be or no; for it being the present sense of the Pope, he may
proceed to condemnation.

But I. S. offers at some reason for this: For (says he) Fathers being eminent
witnesses to immediate posterity or children of the Churches doctrine received,
and Councils representatives of the Church; their strengths as proofs, nay
their very existence is not known till the notion of the Church be known, which
is part of their definition, and to which they relate. This is but part of his
argument, which I yet must consider apart, because every proposition of his
argument has in it something very untrue; which when I have remarked I shall
consider the whole of it altogether.

And here first I consider that it is a strange proposition to say that the
existence of the Fathers is not known till the notion or definition of the
Church be known. For who is there of any knowledge in any thing of this nature
that has not heard of S. Austin, S. Jerome, S. Ambrose, or S. Gregory. The
Spaniards have a proverb, There was never good Oglio without Bacon, nor good
Sermon without S. Austin; and yet I suppose all the people of Spain that hear
the name of S. Austin it may be five hundred times every Lent, make no question
of the Existence of S. Austin, or that there was such a man as he; and yet I
believe, not very many of them can tell the definition of the Church. Thousands
of the people and the very boys see the pictures of S. Austin sold in Fairs and
Markets, and yet are not so wise as to know the notion or nature of the Church;
and indeed many wiser people both among them and us will be very much to seek
in the definition, when your learned men amongst your selves dispute what that
nature or definition is.

But it may be though I. S. put Fathers and Councils into the same proposition,
yet he means it of Councils only, and that it is the existence of Councils
which is not to be had without the notion or definition of Church, and this is
as false as the other; for what tradesman in Germany, Italy, France or Spain is
not well enough assured that there was such a thing as the Council of Trent;
and yet to the knowing of this, it was not necessary that they should be told
how Church is to be defined. Indeed they can not know what it is to be
Church-Councils, unless they know as much of Church as they do of Councils. But
what think we? Could not men know there was a Council at Ariminum more numerous
than that at Nice, unless they had the notion of Church? Certainly the Church
was no part of the definition of that Council, nor did it relate, save only as
enemies are relatives to each other; and if they be, yet it is hard to say they
are parts of each others definition. But it may be I. S. means this saying of
good and Catholic Councils; yet they also may be known to have been, without
skill in definitions. Definitions do not tell An sit, but quid sit; the first
is to be supposed before any definition is to be inquired after.

Well! but how shall the being or nature of Church be known? that is his second
proposition, and tells us a pretty thing, [Nor is the being or nature of Church
known till it be certainly known who are faithful or have true faith, who not;
which must be manifested by their having or not having the true Rule of faith.]
Why, but does the having the true rule of faith make a man faithful? Cannot a
man have the true rule of faith, and yet forsake it, or not make use of it, or
hide the truth in unrighteousness? Does the having the best antidote in the
world make a man healthful, though he live disorderly, and make no use of it?
But to let that pass among the other (...). That which is more remarkable, is,
That the being or Nature of Church is not known, till it be certainly known who
are faithful or have true faith. I had thought that the way in the Church of
Rome of pronouncing men faithful, or to have true faith, had been their being
in the Church, and that adhering to the Church (whose being and truth they must
therefore be presupposed to believe) had been the only way of pronouncing them
faithful; which I supposed so certain amongst them, that though they have no
faith at all, but to believe as the Church believes, had been a sufficient
declaration of the faith of ignorant men. But it seems the Tables are turned.
It is not enough to go to the Church; but first they must be assured that they
are faithful and have true faith, before they know any thing of the Church.

But if the testimony of the present Church be the only rule of faith (as I. S.
would fain make us believe) then it had been truer said; a man can not know the
being or nature of faith, till he be well acquainted with the Church. And must
the Rule of faith be tried by the Church, and must the Church be tried by the
rule of faith? Is the testimony of the Church the measure and touchstone of
faith, and yet must we have the faith before we have any knowledge whether
there be a Church or no? Are they both first, and both prove one another, and
is there here no circle? But however I am glad that the evidence of truth has
brought this Gentleman to acknowledge that our way is the better way; and that
we must first choose our religion and then our Church; and not first choose our
Church, and then blindly follow the religion of it whatsoever it be. But then
also it will follow that I. S. has destroyed his main hypothesis, and the oral
tradition of the present Church is not the Rule of faith; for that must first
be known before we can know whether there be such a thing as the Church or no;
whose rule that is pretended to be.

And now follows his conclusion, which is naught upon other accounts;
[Wherefore (says he) since the properties of the Rule of Faith do all agree to
Tradition our Rule, and none of them to theirs, it follows the Protestant or
Renouncer of Tradition knows not what is either right Scripture, Father or
Council, and so ought not to meddle with either of them.] To this I have
already answered, and what I. S. may do hereafter when he happens to fall into
another fit of demonstration I know not, but as yet he has been very far from
doing what he says he has done, that is, evidently proved what he undertook in
this question. And I suppose I have in a following Section of this book
evidently proved that Tradition, such I mean as the Church of Rome uses in this
inquiry, leads into error or may do, as often as into truth; and therefore
though we may and do use tradition as a probable argument in many things, and
some as certain in one or two things to which in the nature of the thing it is
apt to minister, yet it is infinitely far from being the rule of faith, the
whole Christian faith.

But I wonder why I. S. says that for want of Tradition, we cannot know either
right Scripture, Fathers or Councils. I do not think that by tradition they do
know all the books of Scriptures. Do they know by Universal or Apostolical
Tradition that the Epistle to the Hebrews is Canonical Scripture? The Church of
Rome had no tradition for it for above four hundred years, and they received it
at last from the tradition of the Greek Church; and then they, not the Roman
Church are the great conservers of tradition, and they will get nothing by
that. And what universal tradition can they pretend for those books which are
rejected by some Councils; as particularly that of Laodicea (which is in the
Code of the Universal Church, and some of the Fathers,) which yet they now
receive; certainly in that age which rejected them, there was no Catholic
tradition for them and those Fathers, which as (I. S. expresses it) were
eminent witnesses to their immediate posterity or children of the Churches
doctrine received, in all likelihood did teach their posterity what themselves
professed; and therefore it is possible the Fathers in that Council and some
others of the same sentiment might join in saying something which might deceive
their posterity, and consequently the very ground of I. S. his demonstration is
dug up, for it was very possible the Fathers might teach something that
contradicts the present oral tradition of the Church; because when they were
alive they believed the contradictory.

But further yet, can I S. affirm that by the oral tradition of the present
Church we can be infallibly taught which books were written by the Fathers, and
which not? If he can, how haps it that the Doctors of his Church are not agreed
about very many of them, some rejecting that as spurious, which others quote as
Genuine. If he cannot, then we may have a title to make use of the Fathers
though we did renounce tradition; because by tradition certain and infallible
they do not know it; and then if either they do not know it at all, or know it
any others ways than by tradition, we may know it that way as well as they, and
therefore have as good a title to make use of them as themselves.

But the good man proceeds, Since pretended instances of traditions failing
depend on history, and historical certainty cannot be built upon dead
characters, but on living sense in Men's hearts delivered from age to age that
those passages are true, that is, on Tradition, it follows that if the way of
tradition can fail, all history is uncertain, and consequently, all instances
as being matters of fact depending on history. To this I answer; that it is
true that there are many instances in which it is certain that tradition has
failed, as will appear in the following Section; and it is as true, that the
record of these instances is kept in books, which are very Ancient and written
by Authors so credible, that no man questions the truth of these instances: Now
I grant that we are told by the words delivered by our Forefathers* that these
books were written by such men; but then it may be our Forefathers though they
kept the books safe, yet knew not what was written in them; and if all the
contents of the book had been left only to rely upon the living sense in their
hearts, and the hearts of their posterity, we should have had but few books,
and few instances of the failing of tradition, only one great one would have
been left, that is, the losing of almost all, that that is now recorded would
have been a fatal sign that Traditions fail was the cause of so sad a loss. It
is well, tradition has helped us to the dead characters; they bear their
living sense so within themselves, that it is quickly understood when living
men come to read them. But now I demand of I. S. whether or no historical
certainty relies only on certain and indefectible tradition? If it does not,
then a man may be certain enough of the sacred history, though there be no
certain oral tradition built on living sense in men's hearts delivered from age
to age. If he does, then I must ask whether I. S. does believe Tacitus, or that
there was such a man as Agricola, or that the Senate decreed that Nero should
be punished more majorum. If he does believe these stories, and these persons,
then he must also conclude that there is an Oral indefectible tradition that
Tacitus wrote this book, and that every thing in that book was written by him,
and it remains at this day as it was at first, and that all this was not
conveyed by dead and unfens'd characters, but by living sense in our hearts.
But now it will be very hard for any man to say that there is such an
infallible Tradition delivering all that Roman story which we believe to be
true. No man pretends that there is; and therefore, 1. History may be relied on
without a certain indefectible oral tradition. And 2. The tradition that
consigns history to after ages may be, and is so most commonly, nothing but of
a fame that such a book was written by such a famous person who lived in that
age, and might know the truth of what he wrote, and had no reason to lie, but
was in all regards a very worthy and a credible person. Now here is as much
certainty as need to be; the thing it self will bear no more; and almost all
humane affairs are transacted by such an Economy as this; and therefore it is
certain enough, and is so esteemed, because it does all it is intentions, and
loses no advantage, and persuades effectually, and regularly engages to all
those actions and events, which history could do, if the certainty were much
greater. For the certainty of persuasion, and prevailing upon the greatest
parts of mankind, may be as great by history, wisely and with great probability
transmitted, as it can be by any imaginary certainty of a tradition that any
dreamer can dream of. Nay, it may be equal to a demonstration, I mean, as to
the certainty of prevailing: For a little reason to a little understanding as
certainly prevails, as a greater to a deep and inquisitive understanding; and
mankind does not need demonstrations in any case, but where reason is puzzled
with an aequilibrium, and that there be great probabilities hinc inde. And
therefore in these cases where is a probability on one side and no appearance
of reason to the contrary; that probability does the work of a demonstration.
For a reason to believe a thing, and no reason to disbelieve it, is as proper a
way to persuade and to lead to action as that which is demonstrated. And this
is the case of history, and of instances; which though they cannot (no not by
an Oral tradition) be so certain, as that the thing could not possibly have
been otherwise; yet when there is no sufficient cause of suspicion of fraud and
imposture, and great reason from any topic to believe that it is true, he is a
very fool that will forbear to act upon that account, only because it is
possible that that instance might have been not true, though he have no reason
to think it false. And yet this foolish sophisme runs mightily along in I. S.
his demonstrations, he cannot for his life distinguish between credible and
infallible; Nothing by him can make faith unless it demonstrate; that is,
nothing can make faith but that which destroys it, by turning it into Science.

His last argument for his second way of mining is so like the other that it is
the worse for it: [Since reasons are fetched from the Natures of things, and
the best nature in what it is (abstracting from disease and madness)
unalterable, is the ground of the humane part of Christian tradition, and most
incomparable strength is supperadded to it as it is Christian, by the
supernatural assistances of the Holy Ghost. It is a wild conceit to think any
piece of nature or discourse built on it can be held certain, if Tradition
(especially Christian tradition) may be held uncertain.]

In this Jargon, for I know not what else to call it, there are a pretty
company of nothings put together; that indeed they are ink varied in diverse
figures, and unsensed characters, they are nothing else. For 1. It is false
that all reason (for so he must mean, if he would speak to any purpose) is
fetched from the natures of things; some rely upon Concessions and
presuppositions only; some upon the state of exterior affairs, and introduced
Oeconomies, or accidental mesnage of things; some upon presumptions, and some
even upon the weaknesses of men, upon contingencies; and some which pretend to
be reasons rely upon false grounds, and such are I. S. his demonstrations.

But suppose they did, as indeed the best reasons do, what then? Why then, the
best nature, that is, I suppose he means (the humane) unalterable (abstracting
from disease and madness) is the ground of the humane part of Christian
tradition. This proposition has in it something that is false, and something
that is to no purpose. That which is false is, that the nature of man unless he
be mad, or diseased in his brain, is Unalterable. As if men could not be
changed by interest or ambition, pride or prejudice, by weakness and false
Apostles, mistake or negligence. And by any of these a man, that naturally has
faculties to understand, and capacity of learning, and speaking truth may be so
changed, that he is very alterable from good to bad, from wise to foolish, from
the knowledge of the truth to believe a lie, and be transported by illusions of
the Devil: Every man naturally loves knowledge, that is his nature; and it is
the best nature; but yet it is so alterable, that some men who from the
principles of this best nature are willing to learn, and they are ever
learning, yet they are so altered, that they never come to the knowledge of
truth.

But supposing that this best nature is the ground of the humane part of
tradition, yet it is not the ground of the humane part of tradition as it is
unalterable; but as it has a defectible understanding, and a free and a
changeable will, and innumerable weaknesses, for these are so in this best
nature, that it can never be without them. And therefore because this ground
may be slippery, there will be no sure footing here: Especially since it is but
the ground of the humane part of tradition, for which cause it can be no more
ground of truth in religion, than the Roman story, than Plutarch or Livy is of
infallible indefectible truth in history; and therefore I. S. does very wisely
add to this, the incomparable strengths of the supernatural assistances of the
Holy Ghost. But these alone can be sufficient, if they could be proved to be
given infallibly, absolutely, and without the altering condition of our making
right use of them, without grieving the Holy Spirit; of which because there is
no promise, and no experience, it is no wild Conceit to think tradition may be
uncertain, and yet our discourses in Religion by other principles be certain
enough. But now I perceive that I. S. is no such implacable man, for all the
seeming fierceness of his persuasion in his new mode of Oral tradition, but
that in time he may be reduced to the old way of this Church; and ground (as he
does mainly here) her infallibility not upon new demonstrations taken from the
nature of things, but upon the continual assistances and helps of the only
infallible spirit of God. That indeed is a way possible, if it were to be had;
but this new way has neither sense nor reason: And therefore in this place he
wisely puts the greatest stress upon the other. I should have proceeded a
little further, if I could have understood what I. S. means, by [any piece of
nature built on Tradition;] and if he had not here put in the phrase of a wild
Conceit, I should have wanted a name for it; but because it is no other, I
shall now let it alone, and dig into the other mines, and see if they be more
dangerous than these Bugbears.

The third Way.
THe third Way I must needs say is a fine one, He offers to prove my Dissuasive
to be no Dissuasive, no nor can it be a Dissuasive. And why? because to
Dissuade, is to unfix the understanding from what it held before; which
includes to make it hold or assent, that what it held before certain, is false
or at least uncertain. And here before I proceed further, it is fit we
acknowledge, that we owe to I. S. the notice of these two mysteries. 1. What is
meant by Dissuading, and that it is making a man to change his opinion, an
unfixing of his mind: And the second, That this unfixing the mind makes the
mind to shake, or to be changed, to be uncertain or to think the proposition
fit to be held: we being thus instructed in these grounds of some new designed
demonstration, may the surer proceed: For wisely he adds a conjecture, that
surely by my Dissuasive from Popery, I intend to oblige men to assent to the
contrary. I do believe indeed I did; but my first aim was to dissuade, that is
to unfixe them, and afterward to establish them in the contrary. Well! thus
far we are agreed; but for all this, The thing I intend cannot be done by me; I
cannot dissuade; because I have no peculiar method of my own; but I use those
means which others use to prove errors by, and if the way I take be common to
truth and error, It is good for nothing, error shall pretend to it as well as
truth: I must have a particularity of method above what is in others. Now this
is strange, that I should be so severely dealt with; why is more required of me
than of others? I take the same way that the writers of books of controversy
used to take; I quote Scriptures, and Fathers, and Histories, and instances,
and I use reason as well as I can: I find that Bellarmine and Baronius, Card.
Perron and Gregory de Valentia, Stapleton and Heart, Champian and Reynolds use
the same Dull way as I do; and yet they hope to persuade and Dissuade according
to the subject matter, and why my penny should not be as good silver as theirs
I know not; but I hope I shall know by and by, why, the true reason why I
cannot Dissuade, and that I miscall my book a Dissuasive is, because the method
which I take is common to those discourses which have in them power to satisfy
the understanding, and those who have no such power. But herein is a wonderful
thing, my book cannot dissuade; because I take a way which is taken in
discourses which can satisfy the understanding. For if some discourses
proceeding my way can satisfy the Understanding, as I. S. here confesses, then
it is to be hoped, so may mine; at least there is nothing in my method to
hinder it, but it may: yea, but this method is also used in Discourses which
have no such power, well! and what then? Is not therefore my method as good a
method as can be, when it is the method that all men use; they that can
satisfy the Understanding and they that cannot. And is there any thing more
ignorant than to think a method, or way of proof is naught, because some men
use it to good purposes, and some to bad? And is not light a glorious covering,
because the evil spirit sometimes puts it on? Was not our Saviors way of
confuting the Devil by Scripture very good, because the Devil used the same
way, and so it was a way common to discourses, that have in them the power to
satisfy the understanding, and those which have no such power. Titius is sued
by Sempronius for a farm which he had long possessed and to which Titius proves
his title by indubitable records and laws and patents. Sempronius pretends to
do so too; and tells the Judge that he ought not to regard any proof of
Titius's offering, because he goes upon grounds which himself also goes upon;
and so they are not apt to be a ground of determining any thing, because they
are Common to both sides. The Judge smiles, and inquires who has most right to
the pretended grounds, but approves the method of proceeding, because it is
common to the contrary pretender: And this is so far from being an argument
against my method, that in the world nothing can be said greater in allowance
of it; even because I proved upon principles allowed by both sides, that is, I
dispute upon principles, upon which we are agreed to put the cause to trial.
Did the primitive Fathers refuse to be judged by, or to argue from Scriptures,
because the heretics did argue from thence too? Did not the Fathers take from
them their armor in which they trusted? And did not David strike with the
sword of Goliath, because that was the sword which his Enemy had used? David
proved that way apt to prevail by cutting off the Giants head. But what
particularity of method would I. S. have me to use? shall I use reason? To that
all the world pretends, and it is the sword that cuts on both sides, and it is
used in discourses that can, and that cannot satisfy. Shall I use the
Scriptures? in that I. S. is pleased to say, the Quakers outdo me? Shall I use
the Fathers? The Smectymnuans bring Fathers against Episcopacy. What shall I
bring? I know not what yet, but it ought to be something very particular;
that is certain. Shall I then bring Tradition? will Oral tradition do it? I hope
I. S. will for his own and his three or four friends sake like that way. But if
I should take it, I. S: might very justly say, that I take a method that is
common to those discourses, which have in them power to satisfy the
understanding, and those which have no such power: Whether this method is used
or no in discourses satisfactory, let I. S. Speak; but I am sure it is used of
late in some discourses, which are not satisfactory, and the name of one of
them is Sure footing. And do not the Greeks pretend tradition against the Roman
doctrine of Purgatory, the procession of the Holy Ghost, the supremacy of the
Bishop of Rome? whether right or wrong I inquire not here, but that they do so
is evident; and therefore neither is it lawful for me to proceed this way, or
even then to call my book a Dissuasive. For it is plain to common sense, that
it can have in it no power of moving the understanding one way or other, unles
there be some particularity in the method above what is in others; which it is
certain can never be, because there is no method, but some or other have
already taken it. And therefore I perceive plainly, my book is* not any more to
be called a Dissuasive, till I can find out some new way and method which as
yet was never used in Christendom. And indeed I am to account my self the more
unsuccessful in my well meant endeavors, because I. S. tells us that he sees
plainly that in the pursuit of truth, Method is in a manner All; I. S. has a
method new enough, not so old as Mr. White, and he desires me to get such
another; but nobis non licet esse tam beatis; and I am the less troubled for
it, because I. S. his Method is new, but not right, and I prove it from an
argument of his own; For (says he) it is impossible any controversy should
hover long in debate, if a right method of concluding evidently were carefully
taken, and faithfully held to. Now because I see that I. S. his method or new
way has made a new controversy, but has ended none, but what was before and
what is now is as likely as ever, still to hover in debate; I. S. must needs
conclude, that either he has not faithfully held to it, or his way is good for
nothing.

Other things he says here, which though they be rude and uncivil, yet because
he repeats them in his Sixth way, I shall there consider them altogether, if I
find cause.

The fourth Way.
THis fourth mine has (as good luck would have it) nothing of demonstration,
nor is his reason founded upon the nature of the thing (as before he boasted)
but only ad hominem. But such as it is, it must be considered. The argument is
this, That though I produce testimony from Fathers, yet I do not allow them to
be infallible, nor yet my self in interpreting Scripture; nor yet do I with any
infalliable certainty see any proposition, I go about to deduce by reason, to
be necessarily consequent to any first or self evident principle, and therefore
I am certain of nothing I allege in my whole book. The sum is this, No man is
certain of any thing, unless he be infallible. I confess I am not infallible,
and yet I am certain this must be his meaning, or else his words have no sense;
and if I say true in this, then fallibility and certainty are not such
incompossible and inconsistent things. But what does I. S. think of himself? is
he infallible? I do not well know what he will answer, for he seems to be very
near it, if we may guess by the glorious opinion he has of himself; but I will
suppose him more modest than to think he is, and yet he talks at that rate, as
if his arguments were demonstrations, and his opinions certainties. Suppose his
grounds he goes upon are as true, as I know they are false; yet is he
infallible in his reasoning, and deducing from those principles such feat
conclusions, as he offers to obtrude upon the world? If his reason be
infallible, so it may be, mine is for ought. I know, but I never thought it so
yet; and yet I know no reason to the contrary, but it is as infallible as his:
but if his be not, it may be all that he says is false, at least he is not sure
any thing of it is true; and then he may make use of his own ridiculous speech
he made for me [I know not certainly that any thing I say against your religion
is true, Page 258.
etc.] All the men that tell us that Cardinal Chigi is now Pope, are fallible,
they may be deceived and they may deceive; and yet I suppose Mr. White, though
he also be fallible, is sufficiently certain he is so; and if he did make any
doubt, if he would sail to Italy, he would be infallibly assured of it by the
Executioners of the Popes Censures, who yet are as fallible as any the officers
of Montfalcon.

But I. S. however says, I ought to confess that I ought not to dissuade from
any thing, in case neither the Fathers nor my self be infallible in any saying
or proof of theirs. For the infallibility of the Fathers, I shall have a more
convenient time to consider it under his eighth way. But now I am to consider
his reason for this pretty saying, which he says he evinces thus. Since to be
infallible in none, hic and nunc (taking in the whole complexion of assisting
circumstances) is the same as to be hic and nunc fallible in all or each; and
if they be fallible, or may be deceived in each, they can be sure of none, it
follows that who professes the Fathers and himself (though using all the means
he can to secure him from error) fallible in each, must, if he will speak out
like an honest man, confess he is sure of none.] This is the evident
demonstration, and indeed there are in it some things evidently demonstrative.
The first is, That to be infallible in none, is the same as to be fallible in
all. Indeed I must needs say, that he says true and learnedly, and it being a
self evident Principle he might according to his custom have afforded
demonstrations enough for this, but I shall take it upon his own word at this
time, and allow him the honor of first communicating this secret to the
ignorant world; that he that is not infallible is fallible. Another deep note
we have here; his words laid plain without their Parentheses, can best declare
the mystery [If they be infallible, or may be deceived in each, they can be
sure of none; it follows that they that profess they are fallible in each, must
confess they are sure of none. If I. S. always write thus subtly, no man will
ever be able to resist him: For indeed this is a demonstration, and therefore
we hope it may be aeternae veritatis, for it relies upon this first and self
evident principle, idem per idem semper facit idem. Now having well learned
these two deep notes out of the school, and deep discourses of I. S. let us see
what the man would be at for himself: and though we find it in his Parentheses
only, yet they could not be left out, and sense be entire without them.

When he talks of being infallible, if the notion be applied to his Church,
then he means an infallibility, antecedent, absolute, unconditionate, such as
will not permit the Church ever to err. And because he thinks such an
infallibility to be necessary, for the settling the doubting minds of men; he
affirms roundly, if infallibility be denied, then no man can be sure of any
thing. But then when he comes to consider the particulars, and cannot but see,
a man may be certain of some things, though he have not that antecedent
infallibility, that quality and permanent grace; yet because he will not have
his Dear notion lost, that infallibility and certainty live and dye together,
he has now secretly put in a changeling in the place of the first, and has
excogitated an infallibility consequent, conditionate, circumstantiate, which
he calls hic and nunc, taking in the whole complexion of assisting
circumstances; Now because the first is denied by us to be in any man or
company of men, and he perceives that to be uncertain in every thing, will not
be consequent to the want of this first sort, he secretly slides into the
second, and makes his consequent to rely upon this deceitfully. And if the
argument be put into intelligible terms, it runs thus: If when a whole
complexion of assisting circumstances are present; that is, a proposition truly
represented, apt to be understood, necessary to be learned, and attended to by
a person desirous to learn, when it is taught by sufficient authority, or
proved by evidence, or confirmed by reason; when a man has his eyes and his
wits about him, and is sincerely desirous of truth, and to that purpose,
himself considers, and he confers with others and prays to God; and the thing
it self is also plain and easy; then if a man can be deceived, he is sure of
nothing: And this is infallibility hic and nunc. But this is not that which he
and his parties contend to be seated in his Church; for such a one as this we
allow to her, if she does her duty, if she prays to God, if she consider as
well as she can, and be no way transported with interest or partiality; then in
such propositions which God has adopted into the Christian faith, and which
are plain and intended to be known and believed by all, there is no question
but she is infallible, that is, she is secured from error in such things. But
then every man also has a part of this infallibility. Some things are of their
own nature so plain, that a man is infallible in them, as a man may infallibly
know, that two and two make four. And a Christian may be infallibly sure that
the Scriptures say, that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and that there shall
be a resurrection from the dead, and that they who do the works of the flesh
shall not inherit the kingdom of God; And as fallible as I, or any Protestant
is, yet we cannot be deceived in this; if it be made a question whether
fornication be a thing forbidden in the New Testament we are certain and
infallibly so, that in that book it is written, flee fornication. An
infallibility hic and nunc, if that will serve I. S. his turn, we have it for
him; and he cannot say, that we Protestants affirm that we are fallible when we
do our duty, and when all the assisting circumstances, which God has made
sufficient and necessary, are present: we are as certain as infallibility it
self, that among the ten Commandments, one is, Thou shall not worship any
graven Images: and another, Thou shall not commit adultery: and so concerning
all the plain sayings in Scripture, we are certain that they carry their
meaning on their forehead, and we cannot be deceived, unless we please not to
make use of all the complexion of assisting circumstances. And this certainty
or circumstantiate infallibility we derive from self evident principles; such
as this, God is never wanting to them that do the best they can, and this, In
matters which God requires of us, Deus neminem deserit nisi prius deserentem.
if we fail not in what is on our part, God will not fail on his. And this
infallibility is just like to what is signified by what God promised to Joshua,
I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, Josh. 1. 5. 7.
only be thou strong and very courageous, that thou may observe to do
according to all the law. Nothing was more certain than that Joshua should be
infallibly conducted into the land of promise, and yet it was required of him
to be courageous, and to keep all the Law of Moses; and because Joshua did so,
the promise had an infallibility, hic and nunc: And so it is in the finding out
the truths of God, so said our Blessed Savior, If ye love me keep my
Commandments, and I will pray to the Father, Joh. 14. 15, 16, 17.
and he shall give you another Comforter that he may abide with you for ever,
the Spirit of truth whom the world cannot receive. If we open our eyes, if we
suffer not a Vail to be over them, if we inquire with diligence and simplicity,
and if we live well, we shall be infallibly directed, and upon the same terms
it is infallibly certain that every man shall be saved. And the Gospel is not
hid, but to them that are lost (says the Apostle) in whom the God of this
world has blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto them. So
that it is certain that in things necessary, a man need not be deceived unless
he be wanting to himself; and therefore hic and nunc he is infallible: But if a
man will lay aside his reason and will not make use of it, if he resolves to
believe a proposition in defiance of all that can be said against it; if when
he sees reason against his proposition, he will call it a temptation, which is
like being hardened by miracles, and slighting a truth, because it is too well
proved to him; if he will not trust the instruments of knowledge that God gives
him, if he sets his face against his reason, and think it meritorious to
distrust his sense, and seeing will not see, and hearing he will not
understand, (And all this is every day done in the Church of Rome) then there
is nothing so certain, but it becomes to him uncertain; and it is no wonder if
he be given over to believe a lie. It is not confidence that makes a man
infallibly certain, for then I. S. were the most infallible person in the
world; but the way to make our calling and election sure, is to work out our
salvation with fear and trembling. Modesty is the way to knowledge, and by how
much more a man fears to be deceived, by so much the more will he walk
circumspectly and determine warily, and take care he be not deceived; but he
that thinks he cannot be deceived, but that he is infallible, as he is the more
liable to error, because by this supposed infallibility he is tempted to a
greater inconsideration, so if he be deceived, his recovery is the more
desperate. And I desire that it be here observed, that it is one thing to say,
I cannot be deceived, and another to say, I am sure I am not deceived. For the
first no man can say; but the latter every wise and good man may say if he
please; That every man is certain of very many things is evident by all the
experience of mankind; and in many things this certainty is equivalent to an
infallibility, that is, hic and nunc: And that relys upon this ground (for I
must be careful to go upon grounds for fear of I. S. his displeasure) Quicquid
est, quamdiu est, necesse est esse; while a truth prevails, and is invested
with the whole complexion of assisting circumstances, it is an actual
infallibility, that is, such a certainty, cui falsum subesse non potest; for
else no man could tell certainly and infallibly, when he is hungry or thirsty,
awake or weary; when he has committed a sin against God, or when he has told
a lie: and he that says a fallible Christian is not infallibly certain, that it
is a good thing to say his prayers, and to put his trust in God, and to do good
works, knows not what he says.

But besides this, it were well if I. S. would consider what kind of certainty
God requires of us in our faith; for I hope I. S. will then require no more.
Our faith is not Science, and yet it is certainty; and if the assent be
accoring to the whole design of it, and effects all it is purposes and the
intention of God, it cannot be accepted though the ways of begetting that
faith be not demonstrative arguments. There had but five or six persons seen
Christ after his resurrection, and yet he was pleased to reprove their
unbelief, because the Disciples did not believe those few who said they had
seen him alive. Faith is the foundation of good life; and if a man believes so
certainly that he is willing to live in it, and die for it, God requires no
more, and there is no need of more; and if a little thing did not do that, what
shall become of those innumerable multitudes of Christians, who believe upon
grounds which a learned man knows are very weak, but yet are to those people as
good as the best, because they are not only the best they have, but they are
sufficient to do their work for them. Nay God is so good, and it is so
necessary in some affairs to proceed so, that a man may be certain he does
well, though in the proposition or subject matter he be deceived. Is not a
Judge infallibly certain, that he does his duty, and proceeds wisely, if he
gives sentence Secundum allegata and probata, though he be not infallibly
certain that the witnesses depose truth. Was not S. Paul in the right, and
certainly so, when he said it was better for the present necessity, if a Virgin
did not marry; and yet he had no revelation, and no oral infallible tradition
for it; this speak I (says he) not the Lord; and he did not talk confidently
of his grounds, but said modestly, I think I have the Spirit of God; and yet
all Christians believe that what he then said was infallibly enough true. We
see here through a glass darkly, says the Apostle, and yet we see; and what we
see we may be certain of, I mean, we Protestants may, indeed the Papists may
not, for they denying what they see, call bread a God: so that they do not so
much as see darkly, they see not at all, or what is as bad, they will not
believe the thing to be that which their eyes, and three senses more tell them
that it is. But is a wonder that they who dare not trust their senses, should
talk of being infallible in their argument.

And now to apply this to the charge I. S. lays on me, Because I do not profess
to be infallible, I am certain in nothing, and without an infallible oral
tradition, it is impossible I should be certain of any thing. In answer to
this, I demand why I may not be as certain of what I know or believe, as Mr.
White or I. S.? Is the doctrine of Purgatory fire between death and the day of
judgment, and of the validity of the prayers and Masses said in the Church of
Rome to the freeing of souls from Purgatory long before the day of judgment, is
this doctrine (I say) delivered by an infallible oral tradition, or no? If no,
then the Church of Rome either is not certain it is true, or else she is
certain of it by some other way than such a tradition. If yea, then how is Mr.
White certain that he speaks true in his book de statu animarum, where he
teaches that prayers of the Church do no good, and free no souls before the day
of judgment, for he has no oral tradition for his opinion; for two oral
traditions cannot be certain and infallible, when they contradict one another;
and if the traditions be not infallible, as good for these men that they be
none at all. So that either Mr. White cannot be certain of any thing he says,
by not relying on oral tradition, or the Church of Rome cannot be certain; and
therefore he or she may forbear to persuade their friends to any thing. And for
my present adversary I. S. who also affirms, that oral tradition of the present
Church is the whole rule of faith, how can he trust himself or be certain of
any thing, or teach any thing, when his Church says otherwise than he says, and
makes tradition to be but a part of the rule of faith, as is to be seen in the
Council of Trent it self in the first decree of the fourth Session.
Perspiciensque hanc verita tem, and disciplinam contineri in libris scriptis
and sine scripto traditionibus -- omnes libros tamveteris quam N. T. nec non
Traditiones ipsa^, etc. pari pietatis affectu ac reverentia suscipit and
veneratur.
So that in effect here are two rules of faith, and therefore two Churches; Mr.
I. S.'s is the traditionary Church, so called from relying solely on tradition,
the other (what shall we call it for distinction sake) the Purgatorian Church
from Purgatory, or if you will, the imaginary Church from worshipping images:
And since they do not both follow the same rule of faith, the one making
tradition alone to be the ground, the other not so; it will follow by Mr. I. S.
his argument, that either the one or the other missing the true ground of
faith, cannot be certain of any thing that they say. And now when he has
considered these things, let him reckon the advantage which his Catholic faith
gains by the opposition from her adversaries if they be rightly handled, (as
Mr. S. has handled them, and brought to his grounds) But however the
opposition which I have now made, has it is advantages upon the weakness of Mr.
Whites grounds, and I. S.'s demonstrations, yet I shall without relation to
them, but upon the account of other grounds which his wiser and more learned
brethren of the other Church do lay, make it appear that there is indeed in the
Church of Rome no sure footing, no foundation of faith upon which a man can
with certainty rely, and say, Now I am infallibly sure that I am in the right.

The fifth Way.
THe fifth way I. S. says is built on the fourth, which being proved to be a
ruinous foundation, I have the less need to trouble my self about that which
will fall of it self, but because he had no reason to trust that foundation,
for all his confidence he is glad to build his fifth way on the Protestants
voluntary Concession, for they granting they have no demonstration for the
ground of their faith, must say they have only probability. But I pray who told
I. S. that we grant we have no demonstration for the ground of our faith? Did
ever any Protestant say that there is no moral demonstration of his faith? or
that it cannot be proved so certain, so infallible, that the gates of hell
shall never prevail against it? If I. S. will descend so low as to look upon
the book of a Protestant, besides many better, Book 1. chap. page 124.
he may find in my Cases of Conscience a demonstration of Christian Religion;
and although it consists of probabilities, yet so many, so unquestioned, so
confessed, so reasonable, so uncontradicted pass into an argument of as much
certainty, as humane nature without a Miracle is capable of; as many sands
heaped together make a bank strong enough to resist the impetuosity of the
raging sea. But I have already shown upon what certainties our faith relies,
and if we had nothing but high probabilities, it must needs be as good as their
prudential motives; and therefore I shall not repeat any thing, but pass on to
consider what it is he says of our high probabilities, if they were no more: If
there be probabilities on both sides, then the greatest must carry it, so he
roundly professes, never considering that the latter Casuists of his Church, I
mean those who wrote since Angelus, Silvester, Cordubensis and Cajetan, do
expressly teach the contrary, viz. that of two probabilities the less may be
chosen; and that this is the common and more received opinion. But since I. S.
is in the right, let them and he agree it, as we do, if they please. I hope he
relates this only to the Questions between us, and Rome, and not to the
Christian Faith; well, but if the matter be only between us, I am well enough
content, and the greater probability, that is, the better argument shall carry
it; and I will not be asking any more odd Questions, as why, I. S. having so
clearly demonstrated his religion by grounds firm as the land of Delos or O
Brasile, he should now be content to argue his cause at the bar of probability?
Well, but let us see what he says for his party: That there is no probability
for our side (says I. S.) is very hard to be said, since the whole world sees
plainly we still maintain the field against them, nay dare pretend without
fearing an absolute baffle, which must needs follow (had we not at least
probabilities to befriend us) that our grounds are evidently and demonstrably
certain.] Here I. S. seems to be afraid again, of his probabilities, that he
still runs to covert under his broad shield of demonstration: but his
postulatum here is indeed very modest; he seems to desire us to allow that
there are some probable things to be said for his side, and indeed he were very
hard hearted that should say, there are none at all; some probabilities we
shall allow, but no grounds evidently and demonstratively certain: good Sir,
And yet let me tell you this, There are some of your propositions for which
there is probable reason or fair pretense in the world: Nothing that can
handsomely or ingeniously deceive a man: Such as is your half Communion,
worship of images, prayers not understood and some others: And therefore you
may be ashamed to say, you still maintain the field against us, for if you do
not, why do you say you do? but if you still maintain the field, you may be
more ashamed, for why will you stand in a falsehood, and then call your selves
equal combatants, if not Conquerors. But you may if you please look after
victory, I am only in the pursuit of truth.

But to return, It seems he knows my mind for this, and in my liberty of
prophesying, my own words will beyond all confute evince it, that they have
probabilities, and those strong ones too. But now (in my Conscience) this was
unkindly done, that when I had spoken for them what I could, and more than I
knew that they had ever said for themselves, and yet to save them harmless from
the iron hands of a tyrant and unreasonable power, to keep them from being
persecuted for their errors and opinions, that they should take the arms I had
lent them for their defense, and throw them at my head. But the best of it is,
though I. S. be unthankful, yet the weapons themselves are but wooden daggers,
intended only to represent how the poor men are cosen'd by themselves, and that
under fair and fraudulent pretenses even pious well meaning men, and men wise
enough in other things may be abused: And though what I said was but tinsel and
pretense, imagery and whipped Cream, yet I could not be blamed to use no better
than the best their cause would bear; yet if that be the best they have to say
for themselves, their probabilities will be soon out-ballanc'd by one Scripture
testimony urged by Protestants; and Thou shall not worship any graven images
will out weigh all the best and fairest imaginations of their Church. But since
from me they borrow their light armor which is not Pistol proof, from me if
they please they may borrow a remedy to undeceive them, and that in the same
kind and way of arguing: If I. S. please to read a letter or two of mine to a
Gentlewoman not long before abused in her religion by some Roman Emissaries,
there he shall see so very much said against the Roman way, and that in
instances evident and notorious, that I. S. may if he please (he has my leave)
put them in balance against one another, Collection of Polemical and moral
discourses, Page 703,
and try which will preponderate. They are printed now in one Volume, and they
are the easier compared. But then I. S. might if he had pleased have
considered, that I did not intend to make that harangue, to represent, that the
Roman Religion had probabilities of being true, but probabilities that the
religion might be tolerated, or might be endured, that is, as I there
expressed it, whether the Doctrines be commenced upon design, and managed with
impiety, and have effects not to be endured; and concerning these things I
amassed a heap of considerations, by which it might appear probable, that they
were not so bad as to be intolerable; and if I was deceived, it was but a well
meant error, hereafter they shall speak for themselves, only for their comfort
this they might have also observed in that book, that there is not half so much
excuse for the Papists, as there is for the Anabaptists; and yet it was but an
excuse at the best, as appears in those full answers I have given to all their
arguments, in the last edition of that book, amongst the Polemical discourses
in folio.

I shall need to say no more for the spoiling this Mine, for I. S. has not so
much as pretended that the probabilities urged for them can outweigh or come
to equal what is said against them; and I humbly suppose that the difficulties
will be increased by the following book.

The sixth and seventh Ways.
THE sixth mine is most likely at the worst to prove but a squib. I. S. says I
should have made a preface, and before hand have proved that all the arguments
I used were unanswerable, and convictive, which indeed were a pretty way of
making books; to make a preface to make good my book, and then my book cannot
but in thankfulness make good the preface; which indeed is something like the
way of proving the Scriptures by the Church, and then back again proving the
Church by the Scriptures. But he adds that I was bound to say, That they were
never pretended to be answered, or could not, or that the Protestants had the
last word. But on the contrary I acknowledge, that the evidences on both sides
have been so often produced, that it will seem almost impossible to bring in
new matter, or to prevail with the old. This is the great charge, the sum of
which is truly this. I have spoken modestly of my own undertaking, and yet I
had so great reason to deplore the obstinacy of the Roman Priests, their
pertinacy and incorrigible resolution of seeming to say something, when they
can say nothing to the purpose, that I had cause to fear, the event would not
be so successful as the merit of our cause, and the energy of the arguments
might promise. I confess I did not rant as I. S. does, and talk high of
demonstrations, and unmistakable grounds, and scientifical principles, and
Metaphysical nothings; but according as my undertaking required, I proceeded
upon principles agreed on both sides. If Scripture and Fathers, Councils and
reasons, the analogy of faith, and the Doctrines of the Primitive Church (from
which I proved, and shall yet more clearly prove the Church of Rome has
greatly revolted) will not prevail, I have done; I shall only commit the cause
to God and the judgment of wise and good men, and so sit down in the peace of
my own persuasions, and in a good Conscience, that I have done my endeavor to
secure our own people from the temptation, and to snatch others as brands from
the fire.

Only I wish here I had found a little more worthiness in I. S. than to make me
speaking that I have brought nothing but common objections, or nothing new: I
suppose they that are learned know this to be a Calumny; and by experience they
and I find, that whether the objections be new or old, it is easier to rail at
them all, than answer any. To this as it is not needful to say any more, so
there cannot any thing else well be said, unless I should be vain, like the man
whom I now reprove, and go about to commend my self, which is a practice I have
neither reason nor custom for.

But the seventh Way is yet worse. For it is no thing but a direct declamation
against my book, and the quotations of it, and having made a ridiculous Engine
of Corollaries in his Sure-footing against the quotations in Dr. P. his Sermon,
without meaning my book, for that came out a pretty while after; he does like
the two penny Almanackmakers, though he calculated it for the meridian of the
Court Sermon (as he calls it) yet without any sensible error it may serve for
Ireland: It may be I. S. had an oral tradition, for this way of proceeding,
especially having followed so authentic a president for it as the Author of the
two Sermons called the Primitive rule before the reformation, who goes upon the
same infallible and thrifty way, saying [These two tracts as they are named
Sermons are an answer to Dr. Pierce, but as they may better be styled two
common places, so they are a direct answer to Dr. Taylon. So that here are two
things which are Sermons and no Sermons, as you please not Sermons, but common
places; and yet they are not altogether common places, but they in some sense,
are Sermons; unless Sermon and common place happen to be all one; but how the
same thing should be an answer to Dr. P. as he gives them one name, and by
giving them another name, to the same purpose should be a direct answer to me,
who speak of other matters, and by other arguments, and to other purposes, and
in another manner, I do not yet understand. But I suppose it be meant as in I.
S. his way, and that it relies upon this first and a self evident principle,
That the same thing when called by another name is apt to do new and wonderful
things. It is a piece of Mr. White's and I. S. his new Metaphysics which we
silly men have not the learning to understand. But it matters not what they
say, so they do but stop the mouths of the people, that call upon them to say
something to every new book, that they may without apparent lying, telling them
the book is answered. For to answer to confute, means nothing with them but to
speak the last word.

Well! but so it is, I. S. has ranged a great many of my quotations under
heads, and says, so many are confuted by the first Corollary, and so many by
the second, and so on to the ninth and tenth, and some of them are raw and
unapplyed, some set for show, and some not home to the point, and some wilfully
represented, and these come under the second or third head, and perhaps of
diverse of the others. To all this I have one short answer; that the quotations
which he reduces under the first head, or the second, or the third might for
ought appears be ranked under any other as well as these: For he has proved
none to belong to any; but Magisterially points with his finger and directs
them to their several stations of confutation. Thus he supposes I am confuted,
by an argument of his, next to that of Mentiris Bellarmine. And indeed in this
way it were easy to confute Bellarmines three Volumes with the labor of three
pages writing. But this way was most fit to be taken by him, who quotes the
Fathers by oral tradition, and not ocular inspection; however if he had not
particularly considered these things, he ought not generally to have condemned
them, before he tried. But this was an old trick, and noted of some by S.
Cyprian, Corneli^ Fr. epist. 42. edit.
Viderint autem qui vel furori suo, Rigalt. Paris, 1648.
vel libidini servientes and divinae legis ac sanctitatis immemores, jactitare
interim gestiunt quae probare non possunt, and cum innocentiam destruere atque
expugnare non valiant, satis habent fama mendacii and falsorum ore maculas
inspergere. I have neither will nor leisure to follow him in this extravagancy;
it will I hope be to better purpose, that in the following Sections I shall
justify all my quotations, against his, and the calumnies of some others; and
press them and others beyond the objections of the wiser persons of his Church,
from whence these new men have taken their answers, and made use of them to
little purposes; and therefore I shall now pass over the particulars of the
quotations referring them to their places, and consider if there be any thing
more material in his eighth Way, by which he pretends to blow up my grounds and
my arguments derived from reason.

The eighth Way.
THe eighth Way is to pick out the principles I rely on, and to show their
weakness. It is well this eighth Way is a great distance off from his first
way; or else I. S. would have no excuse for forgetting himself so palpably;
having at first laid to my charge that I went upon no grounds, no principles.
But I perceive, principles might be found in the Dissuasive if the man had a
mind to it: nay maine and fundamental principles, and self evident to me. And
yet such is his ill luck, that he picks out such which he himself says I do not
call so; And even here also he is mistaken too; for the first he instances is
Scripture; and this, not only I but all Protestants acknowledge to be the
foundation of our whole faith. But of this he says we shall discourse
afterward.

The second principle I rely upon, at least, he says I seem to do so, is, [We
all acknowledge that the whole Church of God kept the faith entire, and
transmitted faithfully to after ages the whole faith.] Well what says he to
this principle? He says, this principle as to the positive part is good, and
assertive of tradition: It is so of the Apostolical tradition; for they
delivered the doctrine of Christ to their Successors, both by preaching and by
writing. And what has I. S. got by this? Yes, give him but leave to suppose
that this delivery of the doctrine of Christ was only by oral tradition for the
three first ages, (for he is pleased so to understand the extent of the
primitive Church) and then he will infer that the third age could deliver it to
the fourth, and that to the fifth; and so to us: If they were able, there is no
question but they were willing, for it concerned them to be so, and therefore
it was done. Though all this be not true, for we see by a sad experience, that
too few in the world are willing to do, what it concerns them most to do: Yet
for the present I grant all this. And what then? therefore oral tradition is
the only rule of faith. Soft and fair, therefore the third age delivered it to
the fourth, and so on, but not all the particulars by oral tradition, but by
the holy Scriptures, as I shall largely prove in the proper place. But to I. S.
the Bells ring no tune, but Whittington.

A third principle he says is this, The present Roman doctrines which are in
difference were invisible and unheard of in the first and best antiquity.] I
know not why he calls this one of my principles, unless all my propositions be
principles, as all his arguments are demonstrations. It is indeed a conclusion
which I have partly, and shall in the sequel largely make good. In the mean
time whether it be principle or conclusion, let us see what is objected against
it, or what use is made of it: For I. S. says it is an improved and a main
position. But then he tells us, the reason of it is, because No heretic had
arisen in those days denying those points, and so the Fathers set not
themselves to write expressly for them, but occasionally only.] Let us consider
what this is, no heretic had arisen in those days denying these points: True,
but many Catholics did, and the reason why no heretics did deny those things
was, because neither Catholic nor heretic ever affirmed them. Well! but
however, the Roman controvertists are frequent for citing them for diverse
points. Certainly not for making vows to Saints; not for the worship of images;
nor for the half Communion, for these they do not frequently cite the Fathers
of the first 300. years: It may be not, but for the ground of our faith, the
Churches voice or tradition they do, to the utter overthrow of the Protestant
cause. They do indeed sometimes cite something from them for tradition; and
where ever the word tradition is in Scripture, or the Primitive Fathers, they
think it is an argument for them, just as the Covenanters in the late wars,
thought all Scripture was their plea, where ever the word Covenant was named.
But to how little purpose they pretend to take advantage of any of the
primitive Fathers speaking of tradition, I shall endeavor to make apparent in
an inquiry made on purpose. Sect. 3. In the mean time it appears, that this
conclusion of mine was to very good purpose, and in a manner, confessed to be
true in most instances; and that it was so in all, was not intended by me.

Well! but however it might be in the first three ages, yet he observes that I
said, that in the succeeding ages secular interest did more prevail, and the
writings of the Fathers were vast and voluminous, and many things more, that
both sides eternally and inconfutably shall bring sayings for themselves
respectively. And is not all this very true? He cannot deny it; but what then?
why then he says, I may speak out and say, all the Fathers after the first
three hundred years are not worth a straw in order to decision or controversy;
and the Fathers of the first three hundred years spoke not of our points in
difference, and so there is a fair end of all the Fathers and of my own
Dissuasive too; for that part which relies on them, which looks like the most
authoritative piece of it: There is no great hurt in this, If the Fathers be
gone, my Dissuasive may go too; it cannot easily go in better company, and I
shall take the less care of it, because I have I. S. his word, that there is a
part of it, which relies upon the Fathers. But if the Fathers be going, it is
fit we look after them, and see which way they go: For if they go together (as
in many things they do) they are of very good use in order to decision of
controversy; if they go several ways, and consequently that Controvertists may
eternally and irrefutably bring sayings out of them against one another, who
can help it? No man can follow them all; and then it must be tried by some
other topic which is best to follow; but then that topic by it self would have
been sufficient to have ended the Question. Secondly, If a disputer of this
world pretends to rely upon the authority of the Fathers, he may by them be
confuted, or determined. The Church of Rome pretends to this, and therefore if
we perceive the Fathers have condemned doctrines, which they approve of, or
approve what they condemn, which we say in many articles is the case of that
Church, then the Dissuasive might be very useful, and so might the Fathers too,
for the condemnation of such doctrines, in which the Roman Church are by that
touchstone found too blame.

And where as I. S. says, that the first three ages of Christianity meddled not
with the present controversies; it is but partly true, for although many things
are now adays taught, of which they never thought, yet some of the errors which
we condemn were condemned then, very few indeed by disputation, but not a few
by positive sentence, and in explications of Scripture, and rational
discourses, and by parity of case, and by Catechetical doctrines. For rectum
est Index sui and obliqui; they have without thinking of future controversies
and new emergent heresies, said enough to confute many of them when they shall
arise. The great use of the Fathers, especially of the first three hundred
years is to tell us what was first, to consign Scripture to us, to convey the
Creed, with simplicity and purity to preach Christ's Gospel, to declare what is
necessary and what not: And whether they be fallible or infallible, yet if we
find them telling and accounting the integrity of the Christian faith, and
treading out the paths of life; because they are persons whose conversation,
whose manner and time of living, whose fame and Martyrdom, and the venerable
testimony of after-ages have represented to be very credible, we have great
reason to believe that alone to be the faith, which they have described, and
consequently that whatever comes in afterward and is obtruded upon the world,
as it was not their way of going to heaven, so it ought not to be ours. So that
here is great use of the Fathers writings, though they be not infallible, and
therefore I wonder at the prodigious confidence (to say no worse) of I. S. to
dare to say; that [as appears by the Dissuader the Protestants neither
acknowledge them infallible, nor useful, Nay that this is my fourth Principle.]
He that believes Transubstantiation, can believe any thing; and he that says
this, dares say every thing; for as that is infinitely impossible to sense and
reason, so this is infinitely false in his own Conscience and experience. And
the words, which in a few lines of his bold assertion he has quoted out of my
book, confute him but too plainly. [He tells us, (so says I. S.) the Fathers
are a good testimony of the doctrine delivered from their Forefathers down to
them, of what the Church esteemed the way of salvation.] Do not I also (though
he is pleased to take no notice of it) say, that although we acknowledge not
the Fathers as the Authors and finishers of our faith, yet we own them as
helpers of our faith, and heirs of the doctrine Apostolical: That we make use
of their testimonies as being (as things now stand) to the sober and the
moderate, the peaceable and the wise, the best, the most certain, visible and
tangible, most humble and satisfactory to them that know well how to use it.
Can he that says this, not acknowledge the Fathers useful? I know not whether
I. S. may have any credit as he is one of the Fathers, but as he is a witness,
no man has reason to take his word.

But to the thing in question, Whatever we Protestants think or say; yet I. S.
says [our constant and avowed doctrine (meaning of the Church of Rome) is,
that the testimony of Fathers speaking of them properly as such is infallible.
If this be the avowed doctrine of the Roman Church, then I shall prove, that
one of the avowed doctrines of that Church is false. And secondly, I shall also
prove that many of the most eminent Doctors of the Church, are not of that
mind, and therefore it is not the constant doctrine, as indeed amongst them few
doctrines are.

1. It is false that the Testimony of the Fathers speaking of them properly as
such is infallible. For God only is true, and every man a liar; and since the
Fathers never pretended to be assisted by a supernatural miraculous aid, or
inspired by an infallible spirit; and infallibility is so far beyond humane
nature, and industry, that the Fathers may be called Angels much rather than
infallible; for if they were assisted by an infallible spirit, what hinders but
that their writings might be Canonical Scriptures? And if it be said they were
assisted infallibly in some things and not in all, it is said to no purpose;
for unless it be infallibly known where the infallibility resides, and what is
so certain as it cannot be mistaken, every man must tread fearfully, for he is
sure the Ice is broken in many places, and he knows not where it will hold. It
is certain S. Austin did not think the Fathers before him to be infallible,
when it is plain that in many doctrines, as in the damnation of infants dying
Unbaptiz'd, and especially in questions occurring in the disputes against the
Pelagians about free will, and predestination, without scruple he rejected the
doctrines of his predecessors. And when in a question between himself and S.
Hierom about S. Peter, and the second chapter to the Galatians, he was pressed
with the authority of six or seven Greek Fathers; he roundly answered, that he
gave no such honor to any writers of books, but to the Scriptures, only as to
think them not to have erred; Ep. S. Aug. ad Hierom. qu^ est. 19. Inter oper^
Hierom. 97. and multi^ ^liis locis.
other Authors he read so as to believe them if they were proved by Scriptures,
or probable reason. Not because they thought so, but because he thought them
proved. And he appeals to S. Hierom, whether he were not of the same mind
concerning his own works. And for that S. Hierom has given satisfaction to the
world in diverse places of his own writings. S. Hierom. l. 2. apelog. contr.
Ruff Epist. 62. ad Theoph. Alex Epist. 65 ad Pammach. and Ocean. and Epist. 76.
ad Tranquil. epist. 13. ad Paulinum. and praefat. in lib. de Hebr. nomin.
I suppose Origin is for his learning to be read as Tertullian, Novatus,
Arnobius, Apollinarius, and some writers Greek and Latin, that we choose out
that which is good and avoid the contrary. So that it is evident the Fathers
themselves have no conceit of the infallibility of themselves or others (the
Prophets, and Apostles, and Evangelists only excepted,) and therefore if this
be an avowed doctrine of the Roman Church, there is no oral tradition for it,
no first and self evident principle to prove it; and either the Fathers are
deceived in saying they are fallible, or they are not: If they be deceived in
saying so, then that sufficiently proves that they can be deceived, and
therefore that they are not infallible; but if they be not deceived in saying
that they are fallible; then it is certain that they are fallible, because they
say they are, and in saying so are not deceived. But then, if in this the
Fathers are not deceived, then the Church of Rome in one of her avowed
doctrines is deceived, saying otherwise of the Fathers than is true and
contrary to what themselves, said of themselves.

But 2. If it be the avowed doctrine of the Church of Rome, (as I. S. says it
is) yet I am sure it is not their constant doctrine. Certain it is S. Austin
was not infallible, for he retracted some things he had said; and in Gratians
time, neither S. Austin nor any of the Fathers were esteemed infallible, and
this appears in nine chapters together of the ninth distinction of Gratians
decree, Did. 9. Decret. cap. Nolo meis.
but because this truth was too plain to serve the interest of the following
ages; the gloss upon cap. Nolo meis, tells us plainly, that this was to be
understood according to those times, when the works of S. Austin and of the
other holy Fathers were not authentic, but now all of them are commanded to be
held to the last title; and a marginal note upon the gloss says, Scripta
Sanctorum sunt ad unguem observanda. So that here is plain variety, and no
constant oral tradition from S. Austins time downwards, that his and the
fathers writings were infallible, till Gratians time it was otherwise, and
after him, till the gloss was written. It is as Solomon says, There is a time
for every thing under the Sun. There is a time in which the writings of the
Fathers are authentic, and a time in which they are not: But then this is not
settled, no constant business. Now I would fain know whether Gratian spoke the
sense of the Church of his age or no? If no, then the Fathers were of one mind,
and the Church of his age of a contrary; and then which of them was infallible?
But if yea, then how comes the present Church to be of another mind now? And
which of the two ages that contradict each other has got the ball, which of
them carries the infallibility? Well! however it come to pass; yet the truth
is, I. S. does wrong to his own Church, and they never decreed or affirmed the
Fathers to be infallible. And therefore the Glossator upon Gratian was an
ignorant man, and his gloss ridiculous, Ecce quales sunt decretorum
glossatores, quibus tanta fides adhibetur; said A. Castor, and Duns Scotus gave
a good character of them; Mittunt and remittunt and tandem nihil ad propositum.
But the mistake of this ignorant Glossator is apparent to be upon the account
of the words of Gelasius in did. 15. cap. Sancta Romans Eccl. where when he had
reckoned diverse of the Fathers writings, which the Church receives; he has
these words, Item Epistola B. Leonis Papae ad Flavianum Episcopum C. P.
destinatum, cujus textum aut unum iota si quisquam idiota disputaverit, and non
eam in omnibus venerabiliter acceperit, anathema fit Now although this reaches
not near to infallibility, but only to a non disputare, and a venerabiliter
accipere, and that by idiots only, and therefore can do I. S. no service, yet
this which Gelasius speaks of S. Leo's Epistle to Flavianus the Glossator
falsely applies to all the works of the Fathers, against the mind of the Fathers
themselves quoted by Gratian in the ninth distinction, and against the sense of
Gelasius himself in that very chapter which he refers to in the fifteenth
distinction. It may be I. S. had not so much to say for his bold proposition as
this it self comes to, which if he had ever seen, he must needs have seen in
the same place very much to the contrary. But that not only the Fathers
themselves have taught him to speak more modestly of them than he does, and
that diverse leading men of his Church have reproved this foolish affirmative of
his, he may be satisfied if he please to read Aquinas Authoritatibus Canonicae
Scripturae utitur sacra doctrina ex necessitate argumentando, Prima part q. 1.
part. 8. ad 2. arg.
authoritatibus autem aliorum Doctorum Ecclesiae quasi arguendo ex propriis sed
probabiliter. Now I know not what hopes of escaping I. S. can have by his
restrictive terms [the testimony of Fathers speaking of them properly as such]
for besides that the words mean nothing, and the testimony of Fathers is the
testimony of Fathers as such, or it is just nothing at all: Besides this I say,
that Aquinas affirms that their whole authority (and therefore of Fathers as
such) is only probable, and therefore certainly not infallible. But this is so
fond a proposition of I. S. that I am ashamed to speak any more of it; and if
he were not very ignorant of what his Church holds, Lib. 1. adv. haeres. c. 7.
he would never have said it. Lib. 7. loc. Theol c. 3. n. 4. etc.
But for his better information, I desire the Gentleman to read Alphonsus a
Castro, Melehior Canus and Bellarmine. De verb. Dei lib. 3. c. 10. Sect. Dices.


It is not therefore the constant doctrine of the Romanists, that the Fathers
are infallible; for I never read or heard any man say it but I. S. and neither
is it the avowed doctrine of that Church, unless he will condemn all them for
heretics that deny it; some of which I have already named, and more will be
added upon this occasion.

Well! but how shall we know that the Fathers testimony, is a testimony of
Fathers speaking properly as such? for this doughty Question we are to inquire
after in the pursuit of I. S. his mines and crackers: He says in two cases they
speak as Fathers. 1. When they declare it the doctrine of the present Church of
their time. 2. When they write against any man as an heretic, or his Tenet as
heresy. It seems then in these the Fathers testimony is infallible. Let us try
this, 1. All or any thing of this may be done by Fathers supposed such, but
really, not so: and if it be not infallibly certain which are and which are not
the writings of the Fathers; we are nothing the nearer though it were agreed,
that the true Fathers testimony is infallible. Or 2. If the book alleged was
the book of the Father pretended, and not of an obscure or heretical person;
yet it may be the words are interpolated, or the testimony some way or other
corrupted; and then the testimony is not infallible, when there is no absolute
certainty of the witnesses themselves or the records: and what causes there are
of rejecting very many, and doubting more; and therefore in matters of present
interest and Question of Uncertainty and fallibility in too many, is known to
every learned man, and confessed by writers of both sides. 2. It is very seldom
that any of the Fathers do use that expression of saying, This or this is the
doctrine of the Church; and therefore if they speak as Fathers, never but when
these two cases happen; the writings of the Fathers will be of very little use
in I. S.'s way. 3. And yet after all this, if we shall descend to instances I.
S. will not dare to justify what he says. Was Justin Martyr infallible, when
he said that all Christians who were pure believers did believe the Millenary
doctrine? Certainly they were the Church, for the others he says were such as
denied the resurrection. But was Gennadius or else S. Austin fathers; and they
infallible in the book de dogmatibus Ecclesiasticis, in which he intends to
give an account of the doctrine of the Church; I. S. Seems to acknowledge it by
affirming a saying out of that book to have been then de fide; which because it
had been opposed by very many of the fathers, he had no reason to affirm, but
upon the witness of Gennadius putting it into his book of Ecclesiastical
doctrines; and he afterward calls it the testimony of Gennadius delivering the
doctrine of the Catholic Church. Page 315.
It is there said, that all men shall die (Christ only excepted) that death
might reign from Adam upon all. Hanc rationem maxima Patrum turba tradente
suscepimus: This account we have received from the tradition of the greatest
company of the Fathers. If this be a tradition delivered by the greatest number
of the fathers, then 1. Tradition is not a sure rule of says; for this
tradition is false, and expressly against Scripture: and 2. It follows that
Tradition was not then esteemed a sure rule of faith; for although this was a
tradition from so great a troop of fathers (at he says it was) yet there were
in his time, alii aeque Catholici and eruditi viri, others as good Catholics
and as learned, that believed (as S. Paul believed) that we shall not all dye,
but we shall all be changed; and however it be; yet all that troop of fathers
he speaks of, from whence the tradition came, were not infallible, for they
were actually deceived. Now this instance is of great consideration and force,
against I. S. his first and self evident principle concerning oral tradition.
For all that number of fathers if the rule of faith had been only oral
tradition, would horribly have disturbed the pure current of tradition, and of
necessity must have prevailed in I. S. his way, or at least the contrary (which
is the truth, and expressly affirmed in Scripture) could never have had the
irrefragable testimony of oral tradition. But thanks be to God, in this the
Church adhered to the surer word of Prophecy, the Scripture proved the surer
rule of faith. But again S. Austin or Gennadius says, That after Christ's
resurrection the souls of all the Saints are with Christ, and that going forth
from the body, they go to Christ expecting the resurrection of their bodies.
This he delivers as the Ecclesiastical doctrine; and do the Patrons of
Purgatory believe him in this to be infallible? for my part I think S. Austin
is in the right; but I think I. S. will not grant this to be the avowed and
constant doctrine of his Church.

The second case, in which they speak as Fathers, is when they write against
any man as an heretic, or his tenet as heresy. But this is so notoriously
false, as nothing is more; and it is infinitely confuted by all the Catalogues
and books of the fathers reckoning the heresies; where they are pleased to call
all opinions they like not, by the names of heresy. Haeres. 90.
Philastrius writes against them as heretics, and puts them in his black
Catalogue, who expounds that of making man in the image and likeness of God,
spoken of in Genesis, to signify the reasonable soul, and not rather the Grace
of the Holy Spirit. He also accounts them heretics who rejected the LXX, and
followed the translation of Aquila, which in the Ancient Church was in great
reputation. Some there were who said that God hardened the heart of Pharaoh,
Haeres. 77.
and these he calls heretics, and yet this heresy is the very words of
Scripture; Haeres. 71.
and some are reckoned heretics for saying that the Deluge of Deucalion and
Pyrrha was before Noah's flood. But more consider able is that heresy, Haeres.
74.
which affirmed that Christ descended into hell, and there preached to the
detained, that they who would confess him might be saved. Now if Philastrius or
any other writer of heretics, were in this case infallible, what shall become
of many of the Orthodox fathers who taught this now condemned doctrine. So did
Clemens Alexandrinus, Anastasius Sinaita, S. Athanasius, S. Hierom, S. Ambrose,
and diverse others of the most eminent fathers; and S. Austin affirmed that
Christ did save some; but whether all the damned then or no; he could not
resolve Euodius who asked the question Vide Jacob. Vsser* primat. Hibern. cap.
de limbo PP.
.

That it was not lawful for Christians to swear at all upon any account, was
unanimously taught by S. Hilary, and S. Hierom, S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, and
Theophylact, Vide Erasmum in declarat. ad Censuras Facult. Thed. Paris. p. 52.
edit. Froben. A. D. 1532
no not cum exigitur jus-jurandum, aut cum urget necessitas; and that it is
crimen Gehenna dignum, a damnable sin. Whether that was the doctrine of the
Church of Rome in those days, I say not; but if it were, why is the Church of
Rome of a contrary judgment now? If it were not, then a consenting testimony
of many fathers even of the greatest rank, is no irrefragable argument of the
truth, or Catholic tradition; and from so great an union of such an authority,
it was not very hard to imagine, that the opinion might have become Catholic;
from a lesser spring greater streams have issued; but it is more than probable,
that there was no Catholic oral tradition concerning this main and concerning
article; and I am sure I. S. will think, that all these fathers were not only
fallible, but deceived actually in this point.

By these few instances we may plainly see, what little of infallibility there
is in the fathers writings, when they write against heretics or heresies, or
against any article; and how then shall we know that the fathers are at all, or
in any case infallible? I know not from any thing more that is said by I. S.
But this I know, that many chief men of his side do speak so slightly, and
undervalue the fathers so pertly, that I fear it will appear that the
Protestants have better opinion of them, and make better use of the Fathers
than themselves. Praefat. in Pentateuch.
What think we of the saying of Cardinal Cajetan? If you chance to meet with
any new exposition which is agreeable to the Text, etc. although perhaps it
differ from that which is given by the whole current of the Holy Doctors, I
desire the Readers that they would not too hastily reject it. And again, Let no
man therefore reject a new exposition of any passage of Scripture, under
pretense that it is contrary to what the Ancient Doctors gave. In Epiph. p. 244.
What think we of those words of Petavius? There are many things by the most
Holy Fathers scattered, especially S. Chrysostom in his Homilies, which if you
would accommodate to the rule of exact truth, they will seem to be void of good
sense. P. 110.
And again, there is cause why the authority of certain Fathers should be
objected, for they can say nothing but what they have learned from S. Luke;
neither is there any reason, why we should rather interpret S. Luke by them,
than those things which they say by S. Luke. And Maldonate does expressly reject
the exposition which all the Authors, In Matthew. 16. 18.
which he had read except S. Hilary, give of those words of Christ, The gates
of hell shall not prevail against it. De sacr. tom. orig. and continentia apud
Bellar. de Cler. lib. 1. cap. 15. vide etiam hist. Conc. Trident. l. 7.
Michael Nedina accuses S. Hierom as being of the Aerian heresy, in the Qu. of
Episcopacy, and he proceeds further to accuse S. Ambrose, S. Austin, Sedulius,
Primasius, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumenius and Theophylact of the same
heresy. And Cornelius Mussus the Bishop of Bitonto, expressly affirms, that he
had rather believe one single Pope, In Epist. ad Romans c. 14.
than a thousand Augustines, Hierom's or Gregory's. I shall not need any
further to instance how the Council of Trent has decreed many things against
the general doctrines of the fathers; as in the placing images in Churches; the
denying of the Eucharist to Infants; the not including the Blessed Virgin Mary
in the general evil of Mankind in the imputation of Adams sin, denying the
Chalice to the Laity, and Priests not officiating, the beatification and Divine
vision of Saints before the day of judgment. If it were not notorious, and
sometimes confessed, that these things are contrary to the sense of a troop of
fathers, there might be some excuse made for them, who give them good words,
and yet reject their authorities so freely, that it sometimes seems to pass
into scorn. But now it appears to be to little purpose, Sess. 4.
that the Council of Trent enjoins her Clergy, that they offer not to expound
Scripture against the unanimous consent of the fathers; for (though this
amounts not to the height of I. S. his saying, it is their avowed and constant
doctrine, that they are infallible, but ad coercenda petulantia ingenia) the
contrary is done and avowed every day. And as the fathers proved themselves
fallible, both as such in writing against heretics, and in testifying
concerning the Churches doctrine in their age; so in the interpretations of
Scripture, in which although there be no Universal consent of Fathers in any
interpretation of Scripture, concerning which questions moved; so the best and
most common consent that is, men of great note recede from it with the greater
boldness, by how much they hope to raise to themselves the greater reputation
for wit and learning. Sess. 11.
And therefore although in the sixth General Council, the Origenists were
condemned, for bringing in interpretations differing from those that went
before them; and in the Synod in Trullo Canon. 19. ex divina scriptura
Colligentes intelligentias.
, all Curates of souls were commanded to interpret Scriptures, so as not to
transgress the bounds and tradition of the fathers; and the same was the way
taken in the Council of Vienna, and commanded since in the Lateran under Leo
the tenth, and at last in Trent, yet all this was but good advice, which when
the following Doctors pretended to follow, they nevertheless still took their
liberty, and went their own way, and if they followed some of the Fathers, they
receded from many others; for none of them esteemed the way infallible; but
they that did not think their own way better, left their own reason and
followed their authority. But of late, knowledge is increased, at least many
writers think so; and though the Ancient interpretations were more honored, In
Epist. ad Romans 5 disp. 51 p. 468.
than new; yet Salmeron says plainly, that the younger Doctors are better
sighted and more perspicacious. And the Question being about the conception of
the Blessed Virgin, without original sin; against which a multitude of fathers
are brought: the Jesuit answers the argument with the words in Exodus 23. Thou
shall not follow a multitude to sin. And to the same purpose S. Austin answered
the Donatists. L. ^^ntr. Donat.
But of this I shall afterward have occasion to speak more particularly. In
the mean time it must needs be acknowledged, that the Protestants cannot more
slight the Fathers, than the Jesuits do, and diverse other Doctors of the
Church of Rome; though I think both of them do equally think them to be
fallible.

Well! but at last, of what use are the Fathers to Protestants in their
writings? And what use do I or can I make of them in my Dissuasive? First for
the Protestants, the Church of England can very well account by her Canon, in
which she follows the Council in Trullo, and the sixth General Synod, and ties
her Doctors, as much as the Council of Trent does, to expound Scriptures
according to the sense of the Ancient Fathers; and indeed it is the best way
for most Men, and it is of great use to all men so to do. For the Fathers were
good men and learned; and interest, and partiality, and error had not then
invaded the world so much, as they have since done. The Papacy, that great
fountain of error and servile learning, had not so debaucht the world, and all
that good which can be supposed could be ministered by the piety and learning of
so many excellent persons, all that we can use, and we do make use of it upon
all just occasions. They speak reason and religion in their writings, and when
they do so, we have reason to make use of the good things, which by their
labors God intended to convey to us. They were better than other men, and
wiser than most men, and their Authority is not at all contemptible, but in
most things highly to be valued: And is at the worst a very probable
inducement. Are not the books of the Canonists and Casuists in a manner little
else than a heap of quotations out of their predecessors writings? Certainly we
have much more reason to value the authority of the Ancient Fathers.

And now since I. S. requires an account from me in particular, and thinks I
have no right to use them; Page 312.
I shall render him an account of this also. But first let us see what his
charge is. He says indeed I tell him, that the Fathers are a good testimony of
the doctrine delivered from their Forefathers down to them of what the Church
esteemed the way of salvation. I did tell them so indeed; and in the same place
I said, that we admit the Fathers, as admirable helps for the understanding of
the Scriptures. I told them both these things together; and therefore I. S. may
blush with shame for telling us, that it appears by the Dissuader that the
Protestants do not acknowledge the Fathers infallible or useful. But then in
what degree of usefulness the Fathers are admitted by us, we may perceive by
the instances, of which the one being the interpretation of Scriptures, it is
evident, because of their great variety and contrariety of interpretations, we
do not admit them as infallible, but yet of admirable use; so in the testimony
which they give of the doctrines of their forefathers concerning the way of
salvation, we give as great credit as can be due to any relator, except him
that is infallible. -- Pro magno test vetustas
Creditur, ^vid.
acceptam parce movere fidem.


Nay we go something further; for although in asserting and affirming, in
teaching and delivering positively, we do believe them with great veneration,
but not without liberty and inquiry; yet when we make use of them in a negative
way, we find use of them, much nearer to infallibility, than all the
demonstrations of surefooting. For the argument lies thus: Chap. 1. Sect. 1:
Dissuasive.
In the ages succeeding the three first, secular interest did much prevail, the
writings of the Fathers were vast and voluminous, full of controversy and
ambiguous senses, fitted to their own times and questions, full of proper
opinions and such variety of sayings, that both sides eternally and
inconfutably shall bring sayings for themselves respectively. This ground I lay
of the ensuing argument, and upon this I build immediately; That things being
thus, that is, in the ages succeeding the first three (the primitive and
purest) the case being so vastly changed, the books so vast, the words so many,
the opinions so proper, the contrariety so apparent; it is very possible that
two litigants shall from them pretend words serving their distinct hypothesis,
especially when they come to wrangle about the interpretations of ambiguous
sayings, and of things so disputed there can be no end, no determination. And
therefore it will be impossible for the Roman Doctors to conclude from the
sayings of a number of Fathers, (viz. in the latter and succeeding ages of the
Church; for of them only the argument does treat) that their doctrine which
they would prove thence was the Catholic doctrine of the Church. And the reason
of this is derived from the ground I laid for the argument, because these
Fathers are oftentimes gens contra gentem; and sometimes one man against
himself, and sometimes changing his doctrine, and sometimes speaking in heat,
and disputing fiercely, and striving by all means to prevail and conquer
heretics; and therefore a testimony of many of them consenting, is not a
sufficient argument to prove a doctrine Catholic; unless all consent in this
case, the major part will not prove a doctrine Catholic: Of this I have given
diverse instances already, and shall add more in the Section of Tradition; for
the present I shall only recite the words of the Bishop of the Canaries (a
great Man amongst them) to attest what I say. Melch. (...) loc. Theol. lib. 7.
cap. 3. n. 8.
Tertia Conclusio. Plurium sanctorum authoritas, reliquis licet paucioribus
reclamantibus firma argumenta Theologo sufficere and praestare non valet. If
the Major part of Fathers consenting be not a sufficient argument, as Canus
here expressly says, then no argument from the authority of Fathers can prove it
Catholic, unless it be Universal. Not that it is required, that each single
point be proved by each single Father, as I. S. most weakly would infer; for
that indeed is morally impossible; but that when the Fathers of the later ages
of whom we speak are divided in sentence and interest, neither from the lesser
number nor yet from the greater can you conclude any Catholic consent. Ecclesia
Universalis nunquam errat quia nunquam tota errat; it is not to be imputed to
the Universal Church, unless all of it agree, and by this Abulensis asserts the
indefectibility of the Church of God; Abulens. praef. in Matthew. q. 3.
it never erres because all of it does never err.

And therefore here is wholly a mistake; for to prove a point de fide from the
authority of the Fathers, we require an Universal consent. Not that it is
expected that every man's hand that writes should be at it, or every man's vote
that can speak should be to it, for this were unreasonable; but an Universal
consent is so required, that is, that there be no dissent by any Fathers
equally Catholic and reputed. Reliquis licet paucioribus reclamantibus; if
others though the fewer number do dissent, then the Major part is not testimony
sufficient. And therefore when Vincentius Lirinensis and Thomas of Walden
affirmed, that the consent of the Major part of Fathers from the Apostles
downwards is Catholic; Canus expounds their meaning to be, in case that the few
Dissentients have been condemned by the Church, then the Major part must carry
it; Thus when some of the Fathers said that Melchisedeck was the Holy Ghost,
here the Major part carried it, because the opinion of the Minor part was
condemned by the Church. But let me add one caution to this, that it may pass
the better. Unless the Church of that age, in which a Minor part of Fathers
contradicts a greater, do give testimony in behalf of the Major part, (which
thing I think never was done, and is not indeed easy to be supposed) though
the following ages reject the Minor part, it is no argument that the doctrine
of the Major part was the Catholic doctrine of that age. It might by degrees
become Universal, that was not so at first; and therefore, unless the whole
present age do agree, that is, unless of all that are esteemed Orthodox there
be a present consent, this broken consent is not an infallible testimony of the
Catholicism of the doctrine. And this is plain in the case of S. Cyprian and
the African Fathers, I. S. p. 3. 4.
denying the baptism of heretics to be valid: Supposing a greater number of
Doctors did at that time believe the contrary; yet their testimony is no
competent proof, that the Church of that age was of their judgment; No,
although the succeeding ages did condemn the opinion of the Africans; for the
question now is not whether S. Cyprians doctrine be true or no, but whether it
was the Catholic doctrine of the Church of that age. It is answered, it was
not, because many Catholic Doctors of that age were against it, and for the
same reason, neither was their doctrine the Catholic, because as wise and as
learned men opposed them in it; and it is a frivolous pretense to say, that the
contrary (viz. to S. Cyprians doctrine) was found and defined to be the faith
and the sense of the Church; for suppose it was, but then it became so by a new
and later definition, not by the oral tradition of that present age; and
therefore this will do I. S. no good, but help to overthrow his fond
hypothesis. This or that might be a true doctrine, but not the doctrine of the
then Catholic Church, in which the Catholics were so openly and with some
earnestness divided. And therefore it was truly said in the Dissuasive, That
the clear saying of one or two of those Fathers, truly alleged by us to the
contrary, will certainly prove that what many of them (suppose it) do affirm,
and which but two or three as good Catholics do deny, was not then a matter of
faith or a doctrine of the Church: If it had, these dissentients publicly
owning and preaching that doctrine, would have been no Catholics but Heretics.

Against this I. S. has a pretty sophism, or if you please let it pass for one
of his demonstrations. Ibid.
If one or two denying a point, which many (others) affirm, argues that it is
not of faith; then a fortiori, if one or two affirm it to be of faith, it
argues it is of faith, though many others deny it. This consequent is so far
from arising from the antecedent, that in the world nothing destroys it more.
For, because the denial of one or two argues a doctrine is not Catholic though
affirmed by many, therefore it is impossible that the affirmation of one or two
(when there be many dissentients) should sufficiently prove a doctrine to be
Catholic. The antecedent supposes that true which therefore concludes the
consequent to be false; for therefore the affirming a thing to be Catholic, by
two or three, or twenty, does not prove it to be so, unless all consent,
because the denying it to be Catholic (which the antecedent supposes) by two or
three, is a good testimony that it is not Catholic. I. S. his argument is like
this; If the absence of a few makes the company not full, then the presence of
a few when more are absent, a fortiori makes the company to be full. But
because I must say nothing but what must be reduced to grounds, I have to show
the stupendous folly of this argument, a self evident Principle, and that is,
Bonum, and so, Verum, is ex integra causa, malum ex qualibet particulari; and a
cup is broken, if but one piece of the lip be broken; but it is not whole,
unless it be whole all over. And much more is this true, in a question
concerning the Universality of consent, or of tradition. For I. S. does
praevaricate in the Question, which is, whether the testimony be Universal if
the particulars be not agreed; and he instead of that thrusts in another word
which is no part of the Question: for so he changes it, by saying, the dissent
of a few does not make but that the article is a point of faith; for though it
cannot be supposed a point of faith, when any number of the Catholic Fathers do
profess to believe a proposition contrary to it; yet possibly it will by some
of his side be said to be a point of faith upon other accounts; as upon the
Churches definition, or the authority of plain Scriptures, but this will be
nothing to I. S. his hypothesis; for if a part of the Catholic Fathers did
deliver the contrary, there was no irrefragable, Catholic, Oral tradition of
the Church, when so considerable a part of the Church delivered the contrary as
their own doctrine, which is not to be imagined they would have done, if the
consent of the Church of that age was against it. And if we can suppose this
case that one part of the Fathers should say, this is the doctrine of the
Church, when another part of the Fathers are of a contrary judgment, either
they did not say true, and then the Fathers testimony, speaking as witnesses of
the doctrine of the Church of their age, is not infallible, or if they did say
true, yet their testimony, was not esteemed sufficient; because the other
Fathers who must needs know it, if it was the Catholic doctrine of the Church
then, do not take it for truth or sufficient. And that Maxim which was
received in the Council of Trent, that a Major part of voices was sufficient
for decreeing in a matter of reformation; but that a decree of faith could not
be made, if a considerable part did contradict, relies upon the same reason;
faith is every man's duty, and every man's concern, and every man's learning; and
therefore it is not to be supposed that any thing can be an article of faith,
in which a number of wise and good men are at difference, either as Doctors, or
as witnesses. And of this we have a great testimony from Vincentius Lirinensis.
Common. c. 3.
In ipsa item Ecclesia magnopere curandum est, ut id teneamus quod ubique, quod
semper, quod ab omnibus creditum est: hoc est enim vere proprieque Catholicum.
Not that which a part of the Fathers, but that which is said every where,
always, and by all, that is truly and properly Chatholic; and this (says he) is
greatly to be taken care of in the Catholic Church.

From all these premises it will follow, that the Dissuasive did, or might to
very good purpose, make use of the Fathers; and if I did there or shall in the
following Sections make it appear, that in such an age of the Ancient Church,
the doctrines which the Church of Rome at this day imposes on the world as
articles of faith, were not then accounted articles of faith, but either were
spoken against, or not reckoned in their Canon and Confessions, it will follow
that either they can make new articles of faith, or at least cannot pretend
these to be articles of faith upon the stock of Oral Catholic tradition; for
this cannot be at all, if the Catholic Fathers were (though Unequally) divided
in their testimony.

The rest of I. S. his last Way or Mine is but bragging, and indeed this whole
Appendix of his is but the dregs of his sure-footing, and gives but very little
occasion of useful and material discourse. But he had formerly promised that he
would give an account of My relying on Scripture, and here was the place
reserved for it; but when he comes to it, it is nothing at all, but a reviling
of it, calling of it a bare letter Unsens't, outward characters, Ink thus
figured in a book; but whatsoever it is, he calls it my main, most fundamental,
and in a manner my only principle; though he according to his usual method of
saying what comes next, had said before that I had no Principle, and that I had
many Principles. All that he adds afterward is nothing but the same talk over
again concerning the Fathers, of which I have given an account I hope full
enough; and I shall add something more when I come to speak concerning the
justification of the grounds of the Protestant and Christian religion. Only
that I may be out of I. S. his debt, I shall make it appear that he and his
party are the men that go upon no grounds, that in the Church of Rome there is
no sure-footing, no certain acknowledged rule of faith; but while they call for
an assent above the nature and necessity of the thing, they have no warrant
beyond the greatest Uncertainty, and cause their people to wander (that I may
borrow I. S. his expression) in the very sphere of contingency.

THE SECOND PART OF The Dissuasive from Popery.
The first Book.
SECTION I.
Of the Church: showing that, The Church of Rome relies upon no certain
foundation for their faith.
THat the Scriptures are infallibly true, though it be acknowledged by the
Roman Church, yet this is not an infallible rule to them, for several reasons:
1. Because it is imperfect and insufficient (as they say) to determine all
matters of Faith. 2. Because it is not sufficient to determine any that shall
be questioned: not only because its authority and truth is to be determined by
something else that must be before it; but also because its sense and meaning
must be found out by something after it. And not he that writes or speaks, but
he that expounds it, gives the Rule; so that Scripture no more is to rule us,
then matter made the world: until something else gives it form and life, and
motion and operative powers, it is but iners massa, not so much as a clod of
earth. And they, who speak so much of the obscurity of Scripture, of the
seeming contradictions in it, of the variety of readings, and the
mysteriousness of its manner of delivery, can but little trust that obscure,
dark, intricate, and at last, imperfect book, for a perfect clear Rule. But I
shall not need to drive them out of this Fort, which they so willingly of
themselves quit. If they did acknowledge Scripture for their Rule, all
Controversies about this, would be at an end, and we should all be agreed: but
because they do not, they can claim no title here.

That which they pretend to be the infallible Judge, and the measure of our
faith, and is to give us our Rule, is the Church; and she is a rock; the pillar
and ground of truth, and therefore here they fix. Now how little assurance they
have by this Confidence, will appear by many considerations.

1. It ought to be known and agreed upon, what is meant by this word Church, or
Ecclesia. For it is a (...); and the Church cannot be a Rule or Guide if it be
not known what you mean when you speak the word. (...), said Suidas. His body,
viz. mystical, Christ calls his Church: Among the Greeks it signifies, a
Convention or Assembly met together for public employment, and affairs; (...),
so Aristophanes understands it. (...); Is there not a Convocation or an
Assembly called for this Plutus? Now by Translation this word is used amongst
Christians to signify all them who out of the whole mass of mankind are called
and come, and are gathered together by the voice and call of God, to the
worship of God through Jesus Christ, and the participation of eternal good
things to follow: So that, The Church is a Company of men and women professing
the saving doctrine of Jesus Christ. This is the Church in sensu forensi, and
in the sight of men; But because glorious things are spoken of the city of God;
the Professors of Christ's Doctrine are but imperfectly and inchoatively the
Church of God; but they who are indeed holy and obedient to Christ's laws of
faith and manners; that live according to his laws, and walk by his example;
these are truly and perfectly the Church, and they have this signature, God
knows who are his. These are the Church of God in the eyes and heart of God.
For the Church of God are the body of Christ; but the mere profession of
Christianity makes no man a member of Christ; Nither circumcision nor
uncircumcision avails any thing in Christ Jesus, nothing but a new creature;
nothing but a faith working by love; and keeping the Commandments of God. Now
they that do this are not known to be such, by Men; but they are only known to
God; and therefore it is in a true sense the invisible Church; not that there
are two Churches, or two Societies, in separation from each other; or that one
can be seen by men, and the other cannot: for then either we must run after the
Church, whom we ought not to imitate; or be blind in pursuit of the other that
can never be found; and our eyes serve for nothing but to run after false
fires. No, these two Churches are but one Society; the one is within the other,
They walk together to the house of God as friends, they take sweet Counsel
together, and eat the bread of God in common: but yet though the men be
visible, yet that quality and excellency by which they are constituted Christ's
members and distinguished from mere Professors and outsides of Christians,
this, I say, is not visible. All that really and heartily serve Christ in
abdito, do also profess to do so; they serve him in the secret of the heart,
and in the secret chamber, and in the public Assemblies, unless by an
intervening cloud of persecution they be for a while hid, and made less
conspicuous: but the invisible Church ordinary and regularly is part of the
visible, but yet that only part that is the true one; and the rest but by
denomination of law, and in common speaking are the Church: not in mystical
union, not in proper relation to Christ, they are not the House of God, not the
Temple of the Holy Ghost, not the members of Christ; and no man can deny this.
Hypocrites are not Christ's servants, and therefore not Christ's members, and
therefore no part of the Church of God, but improperly and equivocally, as a
dead man is a man; all which is perfectly summed up in those words of S.
Austin, De doctr. Christ. lib. 3. cap 22
saying, that the body of Christ is not bipartitum, it is not a double body.
Non enim revera Domini corpus est, quod cum illo non erit in aeternum, All that
are Christ's body shall reign with Christ for ever.] And therefore they who are
of their father the Devil, are the synagogue of Satan, and of such is not the
Kingdom of God: and all this is no more then what S. Paul said, Romans 9. 6.
They are not all Israel, who are of Israel: Romans 2. 28, 29.
and, He is not a Jew that is one outwardly, but he is a Jew that is one
inwardly. Now if any part of mankind will agree to call the universality of
Professors by the title of the Church, they may if they will; any word, by
consent, may signify any thing: but if by Church we mean that Society which is
really joined to Christ, which has received the holy Spirit, which is heir of
the Promises, and the good things of God, which is the body of which Christ is
head; then the invisible part of the visible Church, that is, the true servants
of Christ only are the Church; that is, to them only appertains the spirit,
and the truth, the promises, and the graces, the privileges and advantages of
the Gospel: to others they appertain, as the promise of pardon does; that is,
when they have made themselves capable.

For since it is plain and certain, that Christ's promise of giving the spirit
to his Apostles was merely conditional, Joh. 14. 15, 16.
If they did love him, If they did keep his Commandments: Since it is plainly
affirmed by the Apostle, that by reason of wicked lives men and women did turn
Apostates from the faith, since nothing in the world does more quench the
spirit of wisdom and of God than an impure life; it is not to be supposed that
the Church, as it signifies the Professors only of Christianity, can have an
infallible spirit of truth. If the Church of Christ have an indefectibility,
then it must be that which is in the state of grace, and the Divine favor.
They whom God does not love, cannot fall from Gods love; but the faithful only
and obedient are beloved of God: others may believe rightly; but so do the
Devils who are no parts of the Church, but Princes of Ecclesia Malignantium;
and it will be a strange proposition which affirms any one to be of the Church
for no other reason but such as qualifies the Devil to be so too. For there is
no other difference between the Devils faith and the faith of a man that lives
wickedly; but that there is hopes the wicked man may by his faith be converted
to holiness of life, and consequently be a member of Christ and the Church;
which the Devils never can be. To be converted from Gentilism, or Judaism to
the Christian faith is an excellent thing; but it is therefore so excellent,
because that is Gods usual way by that faith to convert them unto God, from
their vain conversation unto holiness. That was the Conversion which was
designed by the preaching of the Gospel; of which, to believe merely, was but
the entrance and introduction.

Now besides the evidence of the thing it self and the notice of it in
Scripture; Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
let me observe, that this very thing is in it self a part of the article of
faith; for if it be asked What is the Catholic Church? the Apostles Creed
defines it; it is Communio Sanctorum, I believe the holy Catholic Church, that
is, the Communion of Saints, the conjunction of all them who heartily serve God
through Jesus Christ; the one is indeed exegetical of the other, as that which
is plainer is explicative of that which is less plain; but else they are but
the same thing: which appears also in this, that in some Creeds the latter
words are left out, and particularly in the Constantinopolitan, as being
understood to be in effect but another expression of the same Article. To the
same sense exactly Clemens of Alexandria defines the Church to be, Clem. Alex.
strom. lib. page 715. edit. Paris. A. D. 1629.
the Congregation of the Elect. (...). By the Church, I do not mean the place,
but the gathering, or heap of the Elect; for this is the better Temple for the
receiving the greatness of the dignity of God. For that living thing which is
of great price, to him who is worthy of all price, yea to whose price nothing
is too great, (...), is consecrated by the excellency of holiness]. But more
full is that of Saint Austin, De Papt contr. Donatist. lib. ^. cap 51. and 52.
who spends two chapters in affirming, that only they who serve God faithfully
are the Church of God. [The temple of God is holy, which Temple ye are. For
this is in the good and faithful, and the holy servants of God, scattered every
where, and combined by a spiritual union in the same communion of Sacraments,
whether they know one another by face or no. Others it is certain are so said
to be in the House of God, that they do not pertain to the structure of the
house, nor to the society of fructifying and peacemaking justice, but are as
chaff in the wheat. For we cannot deny that they are in the house, the Apostle
Paul saying, That in a great house there are not only vessels of gold and
silver, but wood and earth, some for honor and some for dishonor.] And a
little before [I do not speak rashly, when I say, Some are so in the house of
God, that they also are that very house of God, which is said to be built upon
a rock, which is called the only dove, the fair spouse without spot or
wrinkle, the garden shut up, a fountain sealed, a pit of living water, a
fruitful paradise. This is the house which has received the Keys, and the
power of loosing and binding; whosoever shall despise this house (reproving and
correcting him, he says) let him be as an heathen and a Publican.] And then he
proceeds to describe who are this house, by the characters of sanctity, S. Aug.
lib. 2. c^nt^. Cres^n. cap. 21. vide eund. lib. ^. contr. Pet^. cap. ult. l. ^.
de bapt. cap. 3. l. 6. c. 3.
of charity, and unity. Propter malam pollutamque conscientiam damnati a
Christo, jam in corpore Christi non sunt, quod est Ecclesia, quoniam non potest
Christus habere damnata membra, Those who are condemned by Christ for their
evil and polluted consciences are not in Christ's body which is the Church; for
Christ has no damned members.

And this, besides that it is expressly taught in the Augustan Confession; Mali
quidem sunt in Ecclesi^, sed non de Ecclesia; quia mali non su^t de regn^^ ei,
sed de regn Diaboli. Vide etiam Gregor. M. lib. 28. Moral. c 9.
it is also the Doctrine of diverse Roman Doctors; that wicked men are not true
members of the body of the Church, but equivocally. So Alexander of Hales,
Hugo, and Aquinas, as they are quoted by Turrecremata; so Petrus a Soto,
Melchior Canus, Lib. 1. cap. 57. apud B. ll. l. 3. cap. 9. De Ecclesia
mil^tante.
and others, as Bellarmine himself confesses; so that if it be said that evil
men are in the Church, it is true, but they are not of the Church, as S. John's
expression is, for if they had been of us, they would have tarried with us:
which words seem to be of the same sense with those Fathers, who affirm the
Church to be, The number of the predestinate, whom God loves to the end. But
however, the wicked are only in the body of the Church, Tract. 3. in Epist.
Johan Bellar. ubi supra. Sect. Idem Augustinus.
as peccant humors, and excrements, and hair, and putrefaction; so said S.
Austin as Bellarmine quotes him: and the same thing in almost the same words is
set down by Coster. ap. logpro part 3^. Enchirid. c. 12. Sect. Qui non.
Coster the Jesuit: and when Bellarmine attempts to answer this saying of S.
Austin; he says, he means that the wicked are not in the Church in the same
manner as the godly are; that is, not as living members: which though it be put
in the place of an Answer to amuse the young fellows that are captivated with
the admirable method of Ob. and Sol. yet it plainly confesses the point in
question; viz. that the wicked are not members of Christ's body; and if they be
not, then to them belong not the Privileges and Promises which God gave and
promised to his Church: for they were given for the sake of the Saints only,
Ibid. Sect. Respondeo, Augusti^um.
says S. Austin; and Bellarmine confesses it. But I need not be digging the
Cisterns for this truth; Christ himself has taught it to us very plainly; Joh.
15. 14. and Joh. 14. 21.
Ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I command you:] not upon any other
terms; and I hope none but friends are parts of Christ's mystical body, members
of the Church whereof he is head; and the only condition of this, ver. 15.
is, if we do whatsoever Christ commands us. And that this very blessing and
promise of knowing and understanding the will of God appertains only to the
godly, Christ declares in the very next words; Henceforth I call you not
servants, for the servant knows not what his Lord does; but I have called you
friends, for all things I have heard from my Father I have made known unto
you.] So that, being the friends of God, is the only way to know the will of
God; None are infallible but they that are holy; and they shall certainly be
directed by Christ, and the Spirit of Christ. Joh. 7* 17.
If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine whether it be of
God, or whether I speak of my self, said our Blessed Lord. And S. John 1 John
2. 27.
said; Ye have received the unction from above, and that anointing teaches you
all things. The Spirit of God is the great teacher of all truth to the Church;
but they that grieve the holy Spirit of God, they that quench the Spirit, they
that defile his Temple, from these men he will surely depart: That he shall
abide with men unto the end of the world, is a promise not belonging to them,
but to them that keep his Commandments: The external parts of Religion may be
ministered by wicked persons, and by wicked persons may be received; but the
secrets of the Kingdom, the spiritual excellencies of the Gospel, that is,
truth and holiness, a saving and an unreprovable faith, and an indefectible
love, to be United to Christ, and to be members of his body; these are the
portions of Saints, not of wicked persons, whether Clergy or Laity. The mouth
of the just brings forth wisdom, Prove. 10. 31.
and the lips of the righteous know what is acceptable, said Solomon: but when
we consider those men who detain the Faith in Unrighteousness, it is no wonder
that God leaves them and gives them over to believe a Lie, and delivers them to
the spirit of Illusion; and therefore it will be ill to make our Faith to rely
upon such dangerous foundations. As all the Principles and graces of the Gospel
are the propriety of the Godly; so they only are the Church of God, of which
glorious things are spoken, and it will be vain to talk of the infallibility of
God's Church: the Roman Doctors either must confess it Subjected here, that is,
in the Church in this sense, or they can find it no where. In short; This is
the Church (in the sense now explicated) which is the pillar and ground of
truth; but this is not the sense of the Church of Rome, and therefore from
hence they refusing to have their learning, can never pretend wisely, that they
can be Infalliby directed.

We have seen what is the true meaning of the Church of God, according to the
Scriptures, and Fathers, and sometimes Persons formerly in the Church of Rome:
In the next place, let us see what now a days they mean by the Church, with
which name or word they so much abuse the world.

1. Therefore, by Church sometimes they mean the Greges pastoribus adunatos,
Priest and People, Bishops and their Flocks, all over the world, upon whom the
name of Christ is called, whether they be dead in sins, or alive in the spirit,
whether good Christians or false hypocrites: but all the number of the
Baptized, except Excommunicates that are since cut off, make this body.

Now the word Church, I grant may and is given to them, by way of supposition
and legal presumption; as a Jury of twelve men, are called, Good men and true:
that is, they are not known to be otherwise, and therefore presumed to be such:
And they are the Church in all humane accounts; that is, they are the
Congregation of all that profess the name of Christ; of whom every particular
that is not known to be wicked, is presumed to be good; and therefore is still
part of the External Church, in which are the wheat and the tares: and they are
bound up in Common by the Union of Sacraments and external rites, De doctr.
Christ. lib. 3. c. 32.
name, and profession, but by nothing else. This Doctrine is well explicated by
S. Austin [ That is not the body of Christ which shall not reign with him for
ever. And yet we must not say it is bipartite; but it is either true or mixed,
or it is either true, or counterfeit; or some such thing. For not only in
eternity, but even now, hypocrites are not to be said to be with Christ,
although they may seem to be of his Church. But the Scripture speaks of those
and these as if they were both of one body, propter temporalem commixtionem and
communionem Sacramentorum: they are only combined by a temporal mixtion, and
united by the common use of the Sacraments.] And this, to my sense, all the
Churches of the world seem to say; for when they excommunicate a person, then
they throw him out of the Church; meaning, that all his being in the Church of
which they could take cognizance, is but by the Communion of Sacraments and
external society. Imped ri non debet fides aut charitas nostra, ut, quoniam
zizania esse in Ecclesia cernimus, ipsi de Ecclesia recedamus. ^. Cypr. lib. 3.
ep. 3. ad Maximum.
Now out of this society no man must depart; because although a better union
with Christ and one another is most necessary, yet even this cannot, ought not,
to be neglected; for by the outward, the inward is set forward and promoted:
and therefore to depart from the external communion of the Church upon pretense
that the wicked are mingled with the godly, is foolish and unreasonable; for by
such departing, Scil. ep. 51. edit. Rigaltianae.
a man is not sure he shall depart from all the wicked, but he is sure he shall
leave the communion of the good, who are mingled in the common Mass with the
wicked, or else, all that which we call the Church is wicked. And what can such
men propound to themselves of advantage, when they certainly forsake the
society of the good, for an imaginary departure from the wicked; and after all
the care they can take, they leave a society in which are some intemperate, or
many worldly men, and erect a Congregation, for ought they know, of none but
hypocrites?

So that which we call the Church is permixta Ecclesia, as S. Austin is content
it should be called, a mixed Assembly; Vbi supra.
and for this mixture sake, under the cover and knot of external communion, the
Church, that is, all that company, is esteemed one body; and the appellatives
are made in common, and so are the addresses, and offices and ministeries:
because, of those that are not now, some will be good; and a great many that
are evil, are undiscernably so; and in that communion are the ways, and
ministeries, and engagements of being good; and above all, in that society are
all those that are really good; therefore it is no wonder, that we call this
Great mixtion by the name of Ecclesia, or the Church: But then, since the
Church has a more sacred Notion, it is the spouse of Christ, his dove, his
beloved, his body, his members, his temple, his house in which he loves to
dwell, and which shall dwell with him for ever; and this Church is known, and
discerned, and loved by God, and is United unto Christ: therefore although,
when we speak of all the acts and duties, of the judgments and nomenclatures,
of outward appearances and accounts of law, we call the mixed Society by the
name of the Church. Yet when we consider it in the true, proper, and primary
meaning, by the intention of God, and the nature of the thing, and the
Entercourses between God and his Church; all the promises of God, the Spirit of
God, the life of God, and all the good things of God are peculiar to the Church
of God, in God's sense, in the way in which he owns it, that is, as it is holy,
United unto Christ, like to him and partaker of the Divine nature. The other
are but a heap of men keeping good Company, calling themselves by a good name,
managing the external parts of Union and Ministry; but because they otherwise
belong not to God, the promises no otherwise belong to them, but as they may,
and when they * In Ecclesia non est macula aut ruga; quia peccatores, donec non
poenitet eos vitae prioris, n^n sunt in Ecclesia; cum autem poenitel, jam sani
sunt. Pacian ep. 3. ad Symp onium.

Idem a^t S. Hieron. comment. in Ephesians. c. 5. Macula^i ab ea [Ecclesia] alieni
esse censentur* nisi rursum per poenitentiam fuerint expurgati.


do, return to God. Here then are two senses of the word Church, God's sense
and Man's sense: The sense of Religion, and the sense of Government; common
rites, and spiritual union.

II. Having now laid this foundation, that none but the true servants of Christ
make the true Church of Christ, and have title to the promises of Christ, and
particularly of the Spirit of truth; and having observed that the Roman Church,
relies upon the Church under another notion and definition: the next inquiry is
to be, What certainty there is of finding truth in this Church, and in what
sense and meaning it is, that in the Church of God we shall be sure to find it.

Of the Church in the first sense, 1 Timothy 3. 15, ^6.
S. Paul affirms; it is the pillar and ground of truth. He spoke it of the
Church of Ephesus, or the Holy Catholic Church over the world; for there is
the same reason of one and all; if it be, as S. Paul calls it, Ecclesia Dei
vivi, if it be united to the head Christ Jesus, every Church is as much the
pillar and ground of truth, as all the Church; which that we may understand
rightly, we are to consider that what is commonly called the Church, is but
Domus Ecclesiae verae, as the Ecclesia vera is Domus Dei: it is the School of
Piety, the place of institution and discipline. Good and bad dwell here; but
God only and his Spirit dwells with the good. They are all taught in the
Church; but the good only are (...) taught by God, by an infallible Spirit,
that is, by a Spirit which neither can deceive nor be deceived, and therefore
by him the good, and they only, are lead into all saving truth; and these are
the men that preserve the truth in holiness; without this society, the truth
would be hidden and held in Unrighteousness; so that all good men, all
particular Congregations of good men, who upon the foundation Christ Jesus
build the superstructure of a holy life, are the pillar and ground of truth;
that is, they support and defend the truth, they follow and adorn the truth;
which truth would in a little time be suppressed, or obscured, or varied, or
concealed, and mis-interpreted, if the wicked only had it in their conduct.
That is: Amongst good men we are most like to find the ways of peace and truth,
all saving truth, and the proper spiritual advantages and loveliness of truth.
Now then, this does no more relate to all Churches, then to every Church, God
will no more leave or forsake any one of his faithful servants, then he will
forsake all the world. And therefore here the Notion of Catholic is of no use;
for the Church is the Communion of Saints, wherever it be, or may be; and
that this Church is Catholic, it does not mean by any distinct existence; but
by comprehension and actual and potential enclosure of all Communions of holy
people in the unity of the spirit, and in the band of peace; that is, both
externally and internally: Externally means the common use of the Symbol and
Sacraments; for they are the band of peace; but the unity of the Spirit is the
peculiar of the Saints, and is the internal confederation and conjunction of
the members of Christ's body in themselves, and to their head. And by the Energy
of this state, wherever it happens to be, all the blessings of the Spirit are
entailed; every man has his share in it, he shall never be left or forsaken,
and the Spirit of God will never depart from him; as long as he remains in, and
is of the Communion of Saints. But this promise is made to him only as he is
part of this Communion, that is, of the body of Christ; Membrum divulsum, if a
limb be cut off from the union of the body, it dies. No man belongs to God but
he that is of this Communion; but therefore the greater the Communion is, the
more abundance of the Spirit they shall receive; as there is more wisdom in
many wise men, than in a few: and since every single Church or Convention
receives it in the virtue of the whole Church, that is, in conjunction with the
body of Christ; it is the whole body to whom this appellative belongs, that she
is the pillar and ground of truth. But as every member receives life and
nourishment, and is alive, and is defended and provided for, by the head and
stomach, as truly and really as the whole body: so it is in the Church; every
member preserves the saving truth, and every member lives unto God, and so long
as they do so they shall never be forsaken by the Spirit of God; and this is to
every man as really as to every Church; and therefore every good man has his
share in this appellative; Apud Eusebius. Eccles. hist. lib. 5. c. 1.
and the Saints of Vienna and Lions called Attalus the Martyr, a pillar and
ground of the Churches; and truly he seems to have been a man that was fully
grounded in the truth, one that has built his house upon a rock, one with whom
truth dwells, to whom Christ the fountain of truth will come and dwell with him;
for he has built upon the foundation, Christ Jesus being the chief
cornerstone; and thus Attalus was a pillar, one upon whose strength others
were made more confident, bold and firm in their persuasion; he was one of the
Pillars that helped to Pu^o quod convenienter hi qui Episcopa^um been
administrant in Ecclesia, Trabes dici possunt quibus sustentatur and tegitur
omne aedifici^m. Origin. homil. in Cantica.
support the Christian faith, and Church; and yet no man supposes that Attalus
was infallible; but so it is in the case of every particular Church as really
as of the Catholic, that is, as to all Churches; for that is the meaning of
the word Catholic; not that it signifies a distinct being from a particular
Church; and if taken abstractly, nothing is effected by the word; but if taken
distributively, then it is useful, and material, for it signifies, that in
every Congregation where two or three are gathered in the name of Christ, God
is in the midst of them with his blessing and with his Spirit; it is so in all
the Churches of the Saints, and in all of them, (as long as they remain such)
the truth and faith is certainly preserved. But then that in the Apostolical
Creed the Church is recommended under the notion of Catholic, it is of great
use and excellent mystery, for by it we understand that in all ages there is,
and in all places there may be a Church or Collection of true Christians; and
this Catholic Church cannot fail; that is, all particular Churches shall not
fail; for still it is to be observed, there is no Church Catholic really
distinct from all particular Churches; and therefore there is no promise made
to a Church in the capacity of being Catholic or Universal; for that which
has no distinct Being can have no distinct Promises, no distinct capacities,
but the promises are made to all Churches and to every Church: only there is
this in it, if any Church of one denomination shall be cut off, other branches
shall stand by faith and still be in the vine: The Church of God cannot be
without Christ their head, and the head will not suffer his body to perish.
Thus I understand the meaning of the Churches being the pillar and ground of
truth. Just as we may say, Humane understanding, and the experience of mankind,
is the pillar and ground of true Philosophy: but there is no such abstracted
Being as Humane understanding, distinct from the understanding of all
individual men. Every Universal is but an intentional or notional Being: so is
the word Catholic relating to the Church, if it be understood as something
separated from all particular Churches; and I do not find that it is any other
ways used in Scripture than in the distributive sense. So S. Paul, The care of
all the Churches is upon me: that is, he was the Apostle of the Catholic
Church of the Gentiles: And so I teach in all the Churches of the Saints: And
in this sense it is, that I say, the Apostles have in the Creed comprehended
all the Christian world, all the the congregations of Christ's servants, in the
word Catholic.

But then 2. It is to be considered that this Epithet of the Church to be the
pillar and ground of truth is to be understood, to signify in opposition to
all Religions that were not Christian. The implied Antithesis is not of the
whole to its parts, but of kind to kind; it is not so called to distinguish it
from conventions of those who disagree in the house of God, but from those that
are out of the house; meaning that whatever pretenses of Religion the Gentile
Temples, or the Jewish Synagogues could make, truth could not be found among
them; but only in those who are assembled in the name of Christ, who profess
his faith, and are of the Christian Religion: for they alone can truly pretend
to be the conservers of truth; to them only now are committed the Oracles of
God, and if these should fail, Truth would be at a loss, and not be found in
any other Assemblies. In this sense S. Paul spoke usefully and intelligibly;
for if the several conventions of separated and disagreeing Christians should
call themselves, as they do and always did, the Church; the question would be,
which were the Church of God; and by this rule you were never the nearer to
know where truh is to be found: for if you say, In the Church of God; several
pretend to it, who yet do not teach the truth: and then you must find out what
is truth, before you find the Church. But when the Churches of Christians are
distinguished from the Assemblies of Jews, and Turks, and Heathens; she is
visible and distinguishable, and notorious: and therefore they that love the
truth of God, the saving truth that makes us wise unto salvation, must become
Christians; and in the Assemblies of Christians they must look for it as in the
proper repository, and there they shall find it.

3. But then it is also considerable, What truth that is, of which the Church
of the living God is the pillar and ground? It is only of the saving truths of
the Gospel, that whereby they are made members of Christ, the house of God, the
temples of the Holy Spirit. For the Spirit of God being the Churches teacher;
he will teach us to avoid evil and to do good, to be wise and simple, to be
careful and profitable, to know God, and whom he has sent Jesus Christ, to
increase in the knowledge and love of them, to be peaceable and charitable, but
not to entertain our selves and our weak Brethren with doubtful disputations,
but to keep close to the foundation, and to superstruct upon that a holy life;
that is, God teaches his Church the way of salvation, that which is necessary,
and that which is useful (...), that which will make us wise unto salvation.
But in this School we are not taught curious questions, Unedifying notions, to
unty knots which interest and vanity, which pride and covetousness have
introduced; these are taught by the Devil, to divide the Church, and by busying
them in that which profits not, to make them neglect the wisdom of God and the
holiness of the Spirit. And we see this truth by the experience of above 1500
years. The Churches have troubled themselves with infinite variety of
questions, and divided their precious unity, and destroyed charity, and instead
of contending against the Devil and all his crafty methods, they have contended
against one another, and excommunicated one another, and anathematized and
damned one another; and no man is the better after all, but most men are very
much the worse; and the Churches are in the world still divided about questions
that commenced twelve or thirteen ages since; and they are like to be so for
ever till Elias come; which shows plainly, that God has not interested himself
in the revelations of such things; and that he has given us no means of ending
them, but Charity, and a return to the simple ways of Faith. And this is yet
the more considerable, because men are so far from finding out a way to end the
questions they have made, that the very ways of ending them which they
propounded to themselves are now become the greatest questions; and
consequently themselves, and all their other unnecessary questions, are
indeterminable: their very remedies have increased the disease. And yet we may
observe, that God's ways are not like ours, and that his ways are the ways of
truth and Everlasting; he has by his wise providence preserved the plain
places of Scripture, and the Apostles Creed in all Churches to be the rule and
measure of that faith by which the Churches are saved, and which is only that
means of the unity of Spirit, which is the band of peace in matters of belief.
And what have the Churches done since? To what necessary truths are they, after
all their clampers, advanced since the Apostles left to them that (...) that
sound form of words and doctrine? What one great thing is there beyond this, in
which they all agree, or in which they can be brought to agree? He that wisely
observes the ways of God, and the ways of man, will easily perceive that God's
goodness prevails over all the malice and all the follies of mankind; and that
nothing is to be relied upon as a rule of truth, and the ways of peace, but
what Christ has plainly taught, and the Apostles from him; for he alone is the
Author and Finisher of our Faith; he began it, and he perfected it: and unless
God had mightily preserved it, we had spoiled it.

Now to bring all this home to the present Inquiry. The event and intendment of
the premises is this. They, who slighting the plain and perfect rule of
Scripture, rely upon the Church as an infallible guide of faith, and judge of
questions; either by the Church mean the Congregation and Communion of Saints,
or the outward Church mingled of good and bad: and this is intended either to
mean a particular Church of one name; or by it they understand the Catholic
Church. Now in what sense soever they depend upon the Church for decision of
questions, expecting an infallible determination and conduct; the Church of
Rome will find she relies upon a Reed of Egypt, or at least a staff of wool.
If by the Church they mean the Communion of Saints only; though the persons of
men be visible, yet because their distinctive cognizance is invisible, they can
never see their guide; and therefore they can never know whether they go right
or wrong. Lib. 3. de Eccl. milit. cap 10.
And the sad pressure of this argument Bellarmine saw well enough. Sect. Ad
hoc, necesse est.
It is necessary (says he) it should be infallibly certain to us which
Assembly of men is the Church. For, since the Scriptures, traditions, and
plainly all Doctrines depend on the testimony of the Church, unless it be most
sure which is the true Church, all things will be wholly uncertain. But it
cannot appear to us which is the true Church, if internal faith be required of
every member or part of the Church.] Now how necessary true saving Faith, or
holiness is (which Bellarmine calls internal faith,) I referr my self to the
premises. It is not the Church, unless the members of the Church be members of
Christ, living members; for the Church is truly Christ's living body. And yet
if they by Church mean any thing else, they cannot be assured of an infallible
guide; for all that are not the true servants of God have no promise of the
abode of the Spirit of truth with them: so that the true Church cannot be a
public Judge of questions to men, because God only knows her numbers and her
members; and the Church in the other sense, if she be made a Judge, she is very
likely to be deceived her self, and therefore cannot be relied upon by you; for
the promise of an infallible Spirit, the Spirit of truth was never made to any
but to the Communion of Saints. 3. If by the Church you mean any particular
Church, which will you choose; since every such Church is esteemed fallible? But
if you mean the Catholic Church; then if you mean her an abstracted separate
Being, from all particulars, you pursue a cloud and fall in love with an Idea,
and a child of fancy: but if by Catholic you mean all particular Churches is
the world; then though truth does infallibly dwell amongst them, yet you can
never go to school to them all to learn it; in such questions which are curious
and unnecessary, and by which the salvation of Souls is not promoted, and on
which it does not rely: not only because God never intended his Saints and
servants should have an infallible Spirit, so to no purpose; but also because
no man can hear what all the Christians of the world do say; no man can go to
them, nor consult with them all; nor ever come to the knowledge of their
opinions and particular sentiments. And therefore in this inquiry to talk of
the Church in any of the present significations, is to make use of a word that
has no meaning serving to the end of this great Inquiry.

The Church of Rome, to provide for this necessity, Phenomenon: and by Church
they mean the Representation of a Church; The Church representative is this
infallible guide; The Clergy they are the Church; the teaching and the judging
Church. And of these we may better know what is truth in all our Questions; for
their lips are to preserve knowledge; and they are to rule and feed the rest;
and the people must require the law from them; and must follow their faith.
Heb. 13. 7.
Indeed this was a good way once, even in the days of the Apostles, who were
faithful stewards of the mysteries of God. And the Apostolical men, the first
Bishops who did preach the Faith, and lived accordingly, these are to be
remembered, that is, their lives to be transscribed, their faith and
perseverance in faith is to be imitated: To this purpose is that of S. Irenaeus
to be understood. Tantae ostensiones cum sint, Lib. 3. cap. 3. in principis.
non oportet adhuc quaerere apud alios veritatem, quam facile est ab Ecclesia
sumere; cum Apostoli quasi in repositorium dives plenissime in ea contulerint
omnia quae sint veritatis, ubi omnis quicunque velit sumat ex ea potum vitae.
Haec est enim vitae introitus. Omnes autem reliqui fures sunt and latrones,
propter quod oportet devitare quidem illos. As long as the Apostles lived, as
long as those Bishops lived, who being their Disciples, did evidently and
notoriously teach the doctrine of Christ, and were of that communion; so long
they, that is, the Apostolical Churches, were a sure way to follow; because it
was known and confessed, These Clergy-guides had an infallible Unerring spirit.
But as the Church has decayed in Discipline, and Charity has waxen-cold, and
Faith is become interest and disputation, this Counsel of the Apostle, and
these words of S. Irenaeus come off still the fainter. But now here is a new
question, viz. Whether the Rulers of the Church be the Church, that Church
which is the pillar and ground of truth; whether, when they represent the
diffusive Church, the Promises of an indeficient faith, and the perpetual abode
of the Holy Spirit, and his leading into all truth, and teaching all things,
does in propriety belong to them? For if they do not; then we are yet to seek
for an Infallible Judge, a Church on which our Faith may rely with certainty
and infallibility.

In answer to which I find that in Scripture the word Ecclesia or Church is
taken in contradistinction from the Clergy; but never that it is used to
signify them alone. Act. 15. 22.
Then it pleased the Apostles and the Elders with the whole Church to choose
men of their own company, etc. And the Holy Ghost has made you overseers to
feed the Church of God. Act. 20. 28.
And Hilarious Diac. observes, that the Apostle to the Church of Coloss sent by
them a message to their Bishop: In Col. 4. 16.
Praepositum illorum per eos ipsos commonet ut sit sollicitus de salute
ipsorum, and quia plebis solius scribitur epistola, ideo non ad rectorem
ipsorum destinata est, sed ad Ecclesiam: observing that the Bishop is the Ruler
of the Church, but his Flock is that which he intended only to signify by the
Church. The Clergy in their public capacity are not the Church, but the Rulers
of the Church; Ecclesiastici, but not Ecclesia; they are denominatives of the
Church; Bishops and Pastors of the Church: and in their personal capacity are
but parts and members of the Church; and are never in the New Testament called
the Church indefinitely; and this is so notorious and evident in Scripture that
it is never pretended otherwise, but in 18 of S. Matthew, Dic Ecclesiae; If thy
Brother offend thee, rebuke him; and then, before two or three; and, if he
neglect them, tell it unto the Church, that is, to the Rulers of the Church,
say the Roman Doctors. But this cannot be directly so, for Ecclesia or Church
is, the highest degree of the same ascent; first in private, to one of the
Church surely, for they had no society with any else, especially in the matter
of fraternal correption: then in the company of some few [of the Church still;]
for not to heathens: and at last, of the whole Church, that is, of all the
Brethren in your public Assembly: this is a natural Climax; and it is made
more then probable by the nature of the punishment of the incorrigible; they
become as Heathen, because they have slighted the whole Church; and therefore
are not to be reckoned as any part of the Church: And then lastly, this being
an advice given to S. Peter and the other Apostles; that they in this case
should tell the Church; by the Church must be meant something distinct from the
Clergy, who are not here commanded to tell themselves alone, but the whole
Congregation of Elders and Brethren, that is, of Clergy and people. It is not
to be denied but every National Church, whereof the King is always understood
to be the supreme Governor, may change their form of Judicature, in things (I
mean) that are without; that is, such things which are not immediately by
Christ, entrusted to the sole conduct of the Bishops and Priests, such as are
the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments; and the immediate cure of Souls.
Concerning other things S. Paul gave order to the Corinthians that in the cases
of law, and matters of secular division upon interest, which the Apostle calls
(...), 1 Cor. 6. 2, 3, 4.
those who are least esteemed in the Church should be appointed to judge
between them by way of reference; But, by the way, this does not authorize the
Rulers of Churches, the Pastors and Bishops to intermeddle; for they are most
esteemed, that is, the Principals in the Church: but then this very thing
proves that the (...) or the duty and right of judging is in the whole Church
of the Saints; (...); Know ye not that the Saints shall judge the world; that
is, the Church has the power of judging; and it is yet more plain, because he
calls upon the Church of Corinth to delegate this judicature, this (...) this
little, this least Judgment, though now it is esteemed the Greatest; but
little or great, (...), do you appoint the Judges; those that are least
esteemed. And for other things they may appoint greater Judges, and put their
power in execution by such ministeries which are better done by one or by a few
persons, than by a whole multitude; who in the declension of piety would rather
make Tumults than wise Judgments. And upon this account, though for a long
time the people did interest themselves in public Judicatures, and even in
elections of Bishops, which were matters greater then any of the (...), and
this S. Cyprian said was their due by Divine right, Vide S. Cypr. ep. 68. 32.
28.
(let him answer for the expression) yet in these affairs the people were also
conducted, and so ought to be by their Clergy-guides, who by their abilities to
persuade and govern them were the fittest for the execution of that power. But
then that which I say is this, that this word Ecclesia or Church signifying
this Judicatory, does not signify the Clergy, as distinct from their flocks;
and there is not any instance in the New Testament to any such purpose; and yet
that the Clergy may also reasonably, but with a Metonymie, be represented by
the word Church, is very true; but this is only by the change of words and
their first significations. They are the fittest to order and conduct the
(...), the whole Ecclesiastical Judicature. Vt omnis actus Ecclesiae per
Praepositos gubernetur, Epist. 27.
it is S. Cyprian's expression; That whatever act the Church intends to do, it
should be governed by their Rulers; viz. by consent, by preaching, by
exhortation, by reason and experience, and better knowledge of things: but the
people are to stand or fall at these Judicatories, not because God has given
them the judgment of an infallible Spirit, more than to the whole Church or
Congregation; but because they are fittest to do it, and for many other great
reasons. And this appears without contradiction true, because even the Decrees
of General Councils bind not but as they are accepted by the several Churches
in their respective Districts and Dioceses: of which I am to give an account in
the following Periods.

But if this thing were otherwise; yet if by the Church they understand the
Clergy only, it must be all the Clergy that must be the judge of spiritual
questions; for no example is offered from the N. T. no instance can be produced
that by Ecclesia is meant the Clergy, and by Clergy is meant only a part of the
Clergy; these cannot in any sense be the Catholic Church; and then, if this
sense were obtained by the Church of Rome, no man were the better, unless all
the Bishops and Priests of the world were consulted in their Questions.

They therefore think it necessary to do as God did Gideon's Army; they will
not make use of all, but send away the multitude, and retain the 10000; and yet
because these are too many to overthrow the Midianites, they Reduce them to
300. The Church must have a representative; but this shall be of a select
number; a few, but enough to make a Council: A General Council is the Church
Representative, and it is pretended here, they can set their foot, and stand
fast upon infallibity; for all the promises made to the Church, are crowded
into the tenure and possession of a General Council: Archidiac: in cap.
Praecipu. 11. q. 3.
and therefore Dic Ecclesiae is, Tell it to the Council, that is the Church,
said a great Expositor of the Canon Law.

This indeed is said by very many of the Roman Doctors, but not by all; and
therefore this will at first seem but a trembling foundation, and themselves
are doubtful in their confidences of it; and there is an insuperable prejudice
laid against it, by the title of the first General Council that ever was; Acts
15. 4.
that, I mean, of Jerusalem, where the Apostles were presidents, and the
Presbyters were assistants, but the Church was the body of the Council [When
they were come to Jerusalem they were received of the Church, 22.
and of the Apostles and Elders: And again; Then it pleased the Apostles and
Elders with the Church to send chosen men:] 23.
and they did so, they sent a Decretal, with this style; The Apostles, and
Elders, and Brethren, send greeting to the Brethren which are of the Gentiles.
Now no man doubts but the Spirit of Infallibility was in the Apostles; and yet
they had the consent of the Church in the Decree; which Church was the company
of the converted Brethren; and by this it became a Rule: certainly, it was the
first precedent, and therefore ought to be the measure of the rest, and this
the rather because from hence the succeeding Councils have derived their
sacramental sanction, of Visum est Spiritui sancto and nobis: now as it was the
first, so it was the only precedent in Scripture; and it was managed by the
Apostles, and therefore we can have no other warrant of an Authentic Council,
but this; and to think that a few of the Rulers of Churches should be a just
representation of the Church, for infallible determination of all questions of
Faith is no way warranted in Scripture: and there is neither here, nor any
where else, any word or commission that the Church ever did or could delegate
the Spirit to any representatives, or pass Infallibility by a Commission or
Letter of Attorney: and therefore to call a General Council the Church, or to
think that all the privileges and graces given by Christ to his Church is
there in a part of the Church, is wholly without warrant or authority.

But this is made manifest by matter of fact; and the Church never did intend
to delegate any such power, but always kept it in her own hand; I mean the
supreme Judicature, both in faith and discipline. I shall not go far for
instances, but observe some in the Roman Church it self, which are therefore
the more remarkable, because in the time of her Reign, General Councils were
arrived to great heights, and the highest pretensions. Clement the 7th. calls
the Council of Ferrara, Vide edit. Roman. Actorum Generalis octavae Syn^di per
Anton. Bladrum 1516.
the Eighth General Synod, in his Bull of the 22th. of April, 1527. directed to
the Bishop of Fernaesia, who it seems had translated it out of Greek into
Latin: yet this General Council is not accepted in France; but was expressly
rejected by King Charles the 7th. and the instance of the Cardinals who came
from P. Eugenius, to desire the acceptance of it, was denied. This Council, A.
D. 1431.
was it seems, begun at Basil; and though the King did then, and his Great
Council and Parliament, and the Church of France then assembled at Bruges,
accept it; yet it was but in part: for of 45 Sessions of that Council, France
has received only the first 32. and those not entirely as they lie, but with
certain qualifications, Aliqua simpliciter ut jacent, alia vero cum certis
modificationibus and formis; as is to be seen in the pragmatick Sanction. To
the same purpose is that which happened to the last Council of Lateran, which was
called to be a countermine to the second Council of Pisa, and to frustrate the
intended Reformation of the Church in head and members: This Council
excommunicated Lewis the XII th. of France, repealed the Pragmatical Sanction,
and condemned the second Council of Pisa. So that here was an end of the
Council of Pisa, by the Decree of the Lateran; and on the other side, the
Lateran Council had as bad a Fate; for, besides that it was accounted in
Germany, and so called by Paulus Langius a Monk of Germany, In Chron.
Sitizensi, A. D. 1513.
A pack of Cardinals; it is wholly rejected in France: and an appeal to the
next Council put in against it by the University of Paris. And as ill success
has happened to the Council of Trent; which it seems could not oblige the Roman
Catholic countries without their own consent: But therefore there were many
pressing instances, messages, petitions, and artifices to get it to be
published in France. First to Charles the IX th. by Pius Quartus, An. Dom.
1563. than by Cardinal Aldobrandino the Pope's Nephew 1572: then by the French
Clergy 1576 in an Assembly of the States at Blois, Peter Espinac Arch Bishop of
Lions being Speaker for the Clergy; after this, by the French Clergy at Melun
1579. the Bishop of Bazas making the Oration to the King; and after him, the
same year they pressed it again, Nicolas Angelier the Bishop of Brien being
Speaker. After this, by Renald of Beaune, Archbishop of Bruges 1582. Vide
Thuan. hist. lib. 105. and revieu du Concile de Trent. lib. 1.
and the very next year by the Pope's Nuncio to Henry the 3d. And in An. Dom.
1583. and 88. and 93. it was pressed again and again; but all would not do: By
which it appears, that even in the Church of Rome, the Authority of General
Councils is but precarious; and that the last resort is to the respective
Churches, who did or did not send their delegates to consider and consent. Here
then is but little ground of confidence in General Councils; whom surely the
Churches would absolutely trust, if they had reason to believe them to be
infallible.

But there are many more things to be considered. For there being many sorts of
Councils; General, Provincial, Gratian did. 3. ca^. P^rre.
National, Diocesan; the first inquiry will be which of all these, or whether
all of these, will be an infallible guide, and of necessity to be obeyed. I
doubt not, but it will be roundly answered; that only the General Councils are
the last and supreme Judicatory, and that alone which is infallible. But yet
how Uncertain this Rule will be, Vbi supra. act. 3.
appears in this, that the gloss of the Canon Law * says, Non videtur,
Metropolitanos posse condere Canones in suis Conciliis; at least not in great
matters, imo non licet: yet the VII th. Synod allows the Decrees, Decistones
localium Conciliorum, the definitions of local Councils. But I suppose it is in
these as it is in the General: they that will accept them, may; and if they
will approve the Decrees of Provincial Councils, they become a Law unto
themselves; and without this acceptance, General Councils cannot give Laws to
others.

2. It will be hard to tell, which are General Councils, Lib. 1. c. 4. de
Council. and Eccles. Sect. Vocuntur enim.
and which are not; for, the Roman Councils under Symmachus, all the world
knows can but pretend to be local or provincial, consisting only of Italians,
and yet they bear Universal in their Style; and it is always said (as
Bellarmine * confesses) Symmachus Concilio Generali praesidens, and the 3d.
Council of Toledo, in the 18th Chapter, uses this mandatory form, Praecipit
haec sancta and Vniversalis Synodus.

3, But if we will suppose a Catachresis in this style; and that this title of
Universal, means but a Particular, that is, an Universal of that place; though
this be a hard expression; because the most particular or local Councils are or
may be universal to that place; yet this may be pardoned; since it is like the
Catholic Roman style, that is, the manner of speaking in the Universal
particular Church; but after all this, it will be very hard in good Earnest to
tell which Councils are indeed Universal, or General Councils. Bellarmine
reckons eighteen from Nicene to Trent inclusively; so that the Council of
Florence is the sixteenth; and yet Pope Clement the seventh calls it the eighth
General; and is reproved for it by Surius, who, for all the Pope's
infallibility, pretended to know more than the Pope would allow. The last
Lateran Council, viz. the fifth, is at Rome esteemed a General Council; In
Germany and France it passes for none at all, but a faction and pack of
Cardinals.

4. There are diverse General Councils, that, though they were such, yet they
are rejected by almost all the christian world. It ought not to be said, that
these are not General Councils, because they were conventions of heretical
persons; for if a Council can consist of heretical persons (as by this instance
it appears it may) then a General Council is no sure rule or ground of faith.
And all those Councils which Bellarmin calls reprobate are as so many proofs of
this. For what ever can be said against the Council of Ariminum; yet they
cannot say but it consisted of DC* Bishops: and therefore it was as general as
any ever was before it, but the faults that are found with it, prove indeed
that it is not to be accepted; but then they prove two things more, First, That
a General Council binds not till it be accepted by the Churches; and therefore
that all its authority depends on them; and they do not depend upon it. And
secondly, that there are some General Councils which are so far from being
infallible, that they are directly false, schismatical, and heretical. And if
when the Churches are divided in a question, and the communion, like the
Question, is in flux and reflux; when one side prevails greatly they get a
General Council on their side, and prevail by it; but lose as much, when the
other side play the same game in the day of their advantages. And it will be to
no purpose to tell me of any Collateral advantages that this Council has more
than another Council; for though I believe so, yet others do not; and their
Council is as much a General Council to them as our Council is to us. And
therefore if General Councils are the rule and law of faith in those things
they determine, then all that is to be considered in this affair, is, Whether
they be General Councils. Whether they say true or no, is not now the question,
but is to be determined by this, viz. whether are they General Councils or no;
for relying upon their authority for the truth, if they be satisfied that they
are General Councils; that they speak and determine truth will be consequent
and allowed. Now then if this be the question, then since diverse General
Councils are reprobated, the consequent is, that although they be General
Councils, yet they may be reproved. And if a Catholic producing the Nicene
Council be r'encontred by an Arian producing the Council of Ariminum which was
far more numerous; here are aquilis aquilae and pila minantia pilis; but who
shall prevail? If a General Council be the rule and guide they will both
prevail; that is, neither. And it ought not to be said by the Catholic; Yea,
but our Council determined for the truth, but yours for error; for the Arian
will say so too. But whether they do or no; yet it is plain, that they may both
say so: and if they do, then we do not find the truth out by the conduct and
decision of a General Council; but we approve this General, because upon other
accounts we believe that what is there defined is true. And therefore S.
Austin's way here is best; Neque ego Nicenum Concilium, neque tu Ariminense,
etc. both sides pretend to General Councils: that which both equally pretend
to, will help neither; therefore let us go to Scripture. But there are amongst
many others two very considerable instances, by which we may see plainly at
what rate Councils are declared General. A. D. 755.
There was a Council held at C. P. under Constantinus Copronymus of 338
Bishops. It was in that unhappy time when the question of worshipping or
breaking images was disputed. A D. 786. aut 789.
This Council commanded images to be destroyed out of Churches; and this was a
General Council: and yet 26, or, as some say, 31 years after, this was
condemned by another General Council, viz. the second at Nice which decreed
images to be worshipped; not long after, about five years, this General Council
of Nice, for that very reason was condemned by a General Council of Francford,
and generally by the Western Churches. Now of what value is a General Council
to the determination of questions of faith, when one General Council condemns
another General Council with great liberty, and without scruple. And it is to
no purpose to allege reasons or excuses why this or that Council is condemned;
for if they be General, and yet may without reason be condemned, then they have
no authority; but if they be condemned with reason, then they are not
infallible. The other instance is in those Councils which were held when the
dispute began between the Council and the Pope. The Council of Constance
consisting of almost a thousand Fathers first and last, defined the Council to
be above the Pope; the Council of Florence, and the fifth Council in the
Lateran, have condemned this Council so far, as to that article. The Council of
Basil, all the world knows how greatly they asserted their own Authority over
the Pope; but therefore though in France it is accepted, yet in Italy and Spain
it is not.

But what is the meaning, that some Councils are partly approved and partly
condemned, the Council of Sardis, that in Trullo, those of Francfort,
Constance, and Basil? but that every man, and every Church accepts the General
Councils, as far as they please, and no further? The Greeks receive but seven
General Councils, the Lutherans receive six, the Eutychians in Asia receive but
the first three, the Nestorians in the East receive but the first two, the
Anti-trinitarians in Hungary and Poland receive none. The Church of England
receives the four first Generals as of highest regard, not that they are
infallible; but that they have determined wisely and holily. Pro captu lectoris
habent sua fata -- It is as every one likes: for the Church of Rome that
receives sixteen, are divided; and some take-in others, and reject some of
these, as I have shown.

5. How can it be known which is a General Council, and how many conditions are
required for the building such a great House? The question is worth the asking,
not only because the Church of Rome teaches us to rely upon a General Council
as the supreme Judge and final determiner of questions; but because I perceive
that the Church of Rome is at a loss concerning General Councils. A. D. 1409.
de^^o^cil. and Eccles. l. ^. c. 8.
The Council of Pisa, Bellarmine says, is neither approved, nor reproved; for
Pope Alexander the 6th approved it, because he acknowledged the Election of
Alexander the 5th, who was created Pope by that Council: and yet Antoninus
called it Conciliabulum illegitimum, an unlawful Conventicle. But here
Bellarmine was a little forgetful; for the fifth Lateran Council which they in
Rome will call a General, has condemned this Pisan, with great interest and
fancy; and therefore it was both approved and reproved.

But it is fit that it be inquired, How we shall know which, or what, is a
General Council; and which is not. 1. If we inquire into the number of the
Bishops there present, we cannot find any certain Rule for that: but be they
many or few, the parties interested will, if they please, call it a General
Council. And they will not, dare not, I suppose at Rome, make a quarrel upon
that point; when in the sixth Session of Trent, as some printed Catalogues 1546.
inform us, they may remember there were but 38 persons in all, at their first
sitting down, of which number some were not Bishops: and at last, there were
but 57 Archbishops and Bishops in all. In the first Session were but three
Archbishops, and twenty three Bishops; and in all the rest about sixty
Archbishops and Bishops was the usual number till the last; and yet there are
some Councils of far greater antiquity who are rejected, although their number
of Bishops very far surpass the numbers of Trent: In Nice, were 318 Bishops; in
that of Chalcedon were 600; and in that of Basil were above 400 Bishops, and in
that of Constance were 300, besides the other Fathers (as they call them.) But
this is but one thing of many; though it will be very hard to think that all
the power and energy, the virtual faith, and potential infallibility of the
whole Christian Church should be in 80 or 90 Bishops taken out of the
neighbour-Countreys.

6. But then if we consider upon what pitiful pretenses the Roman Doctors do
evacuate the Authority of Councils; we shall find them to be such, that by the
like, which can never be wanting to a witty person, the authority of every one
of them may be vilified, and consequently, they can be infallible security to
no man's faith. Charles the 7th of France, and the French Church assembled at
Bruges, rejected the latter Sessions of the Council of Basil; because they
deprived P. Eugenius, and created Felix the 5th; and because it was doubtful
whether that Assembly did sufficiently represent the Catholic Church. But
Bellarmine says, that the former Sessions of the Council of Basil, are invalid
and null; because certain Bishops fell off there, and were faulty. Now if this
be a sufficient cause of nullity; then if ever there be a schism, or but a
division of opinions, the other party may deny the Authority of the Council;
and especially, if any of them change their opinion, and go to the prevailing
side; the other has the same cause of complaint: but this ought not at all to
prevail, till it be agreed how many Bishops must be present; for if some fail,
if enough remain there is no harm done to the Authority. But because any thing
is made use of for an excuse; it is a sure sign they are but pretended more
than regarded, but just when they serve men's turns. The Council of C. P. under
Leo Isaurus is rejected by the Romanists; because there was no Patriarch
present but S. German; though all the world knows, the reason is because they
decreed against images. But if the other were a good Reason; then it is
necessary that all the old Patriarchs should be present; and if this be true,
then the General Council of Ephesus is null; because all the Patriarchs were
not present at it; and particularly the Patriarch of Antioch; and in that of
Chalcedon there wanted the Patriarch of Alexandria. And the first of C. P.
could not have all the Patriarchs, nether could it be Representative of the
whole Church; because at the same time there was another Council at Rome: and,
which is worse to the Romanists than all that, the Council of Trent upon this,
and a 1000 more is invalid; because themselves reckon but three Patriarchs
there present; one was of Venice, another of Aquileia, and the third was only a
titular of Jerusalem; none of which were really any of the old Patriarchs,
whose Authority was so great in the Ancient Councils.

7. It is impossible as things are now that a General Council should be a sure
Rule or Judge of Faith, Bellarm. lib. 1. de Council. and Eccles. cap. 15.
since it can never be agreed who of necessity are to be called, and who have
decisive voices in Councils. Sect. At ath^licorum.
At Rome they allow none but Bishops to give sentence, and to subscribe: and
yet anciently not only the Emperors and their Ambassadors did subscribe; but
lately at Florence, Lateran, and Trent, Cardinals and Bishops, Abbots and
Generals of Orders did subscribe; and in the Council of Basil, Priests had
decisive voices, and it is notorious that the ancient Councils were subscribed
by the Archimandrites who were but Abbots, not Bishops: L ^b. 2. de Council.
act. 6.
and Cardinal Jacobatius affirms, that sometimes Laymen were admitted to
Councils, to be Judges between those that disputed some deep Questions. Nay,
Gerson says, that Controversies of Faith were sometimes referred to Pagan
Philosophers, who though they believed it not, yet, supposing it such, they
determined what was the proper consequent of such Principles; which the
Christians consented in: and he says, Socrat. l. ^. c 5. Eccles. hist.
it was so in the Council of Nice, as is left unto us upon record. * And
Eutropius a Pagan, was chosen Judge between Origin and the Marcionites; and
against these he gave sentence, and in behalf of Origin. Certain it is, that
the States of Germany in their Diet at Noremberg propounded to Pope Adrian the
VI th that Laymen might be admitted as well as the Clergy and freely to
declare their judgments without hindrance. And this was no new matter; for it
was practiced in all Nations; in Germany, France, England, and Spain it self;
as who please may see in the 6th 8th and 12th Councils of Toledo. So that it is
apparent that the Romanists, though now they do not, yet formerly they did; and
were certainly in the right: Vide Marsil. Patav. in defens: pacis.
and if any man shall think otherwise, he can never be sure that they were in
the wrong: Part. 2. c. 20.
especially when he shall consider that the Council of the Apostles, not only
admitted Presbyters, but the Laity; who were parties in the Decree: as is to be
seen in the Cap. 15. V. 22. 23.
Acts of the Apostles: And that for this there was also a very great Precedent
in the Old Testament in a case perfectly like it; when Elijah appealed to the
people to Judge between God and Baal, 1 Kings 18.
which of them was the Lord, by answering by fire.

8. But how if the Church be divided in a Question which has caused so great
disturbances that it is thought fit to call a Council: here will be an Eternal
Uncertainty. If they call both sides, they will never agree. If they call but
one, then they are Parties and Judges too. Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 16.
In the General Council of Sardis, by command of the two Emperors Constans and
Constantius, Sozomen. l. 3. c. 10.
all Bishops, Catholic and Arians, were equally admitted; so it was also both
at Ariminum and Seleucia; and so it was at Ferrara, where the Greeks and
Latins sat together. But if one side only, exclude all the adversaries, and
declare them criminals before hand, as it happened at Trent and Dort, how is
that one party a representative of the Church; when so great a part of
Christendom is not consulted, not heard, not suffered?

9. Suppose, a Council being called, the Bishops be divided in their opinion,
how shall the decision be? By the major number of voices, surely. But how much
the major? shall one alone above the equal number carry it? That were strange
that one man should determine the faith of Christendom? Must there be two
thirds, as it was propounded in Trent, in some cases; but if this be, who shall
make any man sure that the Holy Spirit of God shall go over to those two
thirds, and leave the remaining party to themselves? And who can ascertain us
that the major part is the more wise and more holy; or, if they be not, yet
that they shall speak more truth? But in this also, the Doctors are uncertain
and divided; and how little truth is to be given to the major part in causes of
faith, the Roman Doctors may learn from their own Abbot of Panormo, Panorm. in
corp. s ignificasti*de Elect.
and the Chancellor of Paris. The first saying, The opinion of one Godly man
ought to be preferred before the Pope's, if it be grounded upon better
authorities of the Old and New Testament: and the latter saying, Every learned
man may and ought to withstand a whole Council, if he perceive it erres of
malice or ignorance.

10. The world is not yet agreed, in whose power it is to call the Councils;
and if it be done by an incompetent authority, the whole convention is
schismatical; and therefore not to be trusted as a Judge of Consciences and
questions of faith. The Emperors always did it of old; and the Popes of late:
but let this be agreed first, and then let the other questions come before
them; till then, we cannot be sure.

11. Lastly, if General Councils be supposed to be the rule and measure of
Faith; Christendom must needs be in a sad condition and state of doubt for
ever: not only because a Council is not called, it may be, in two or three
Ages; but because no man can be sure that all things are observed which men say
are necessary: neither did the several Churches ever agree what was necessary,
nor did they ever agree to set down the laws and conditions requisite to their
being such: and therefore they have well and wisely comported themselves in
this; that never any General Council did declare that a General Council is
infallible. Indeed Bellarmine labors greatly to prove it out of Scripture: his
best argument is the promise that Christ made, that when two or three are
gathered in my name, I will be in the midst of them; and, I will be with you to
the end of the world. Now to these authorities I am now no other way to answer
but by observing that these arguments do as much prove every Christian-meeting
of any sort of good Christians to be as infallible as a Council, and that a
Diocesan Council is as sure a guide as a General: and it is impossible, from
those, or any other like words of Christ, to prove the contrary; and therefore
gives us no certainty here.

yet the Roman Doctors now at last are come to some certainty; for if the Pope
confirm a Council, then it is right and true, and the Church is a rule which
can never fail, and never can deceive, or leave men in uncertainty; for a
spirit of infallibility is then in the Churches representative, when head and
members are joined together. This is their last stress, and if this cord break
they have nothing to hold them.

Now for this, there are diverse great Considerations which will soon put this
matter to issue. For although this be the new device of the Court of Rome, and
the Pope's flatterers, especially the Jesuits, and that this never was so much
as probably proved; but boldly affirmed and weakly grounded: yet this is not
defined as a doctrine of the Roman Church. Lib. 3. cap. 9 de Council. and
Ecclesia.
For 1. we find Bellarmine reckoning six cases of necessity or utility of
calling General Councils; and four of them are of that nature, that the Pope is
either not in being, or else is a party, the person to be judged: As, 1. if
there be a schism amongst the Popes of Rome, as when there happen to be two or
three Popes together; which happened in the Councils of Constance and Basil. Or
2. if the Pope of Rome be suspected of heresy. Or 3. when there is great
necessity of reformation of manner in head and members; which has been so
notoriously called for above 400 years. Or 4. if the election of the Pope be
questioned. Now in these cases it is impossible that the consent of the Pope
should be necessary to make up the Authority of the Council, since the Pope is
the pars rea, and the Council is the only Judge. And of this there can be no
question: And therefore the Popes authority is not necessary, nor of avail to
make the Council valid.

2. If the Popes approbation of the Council make it to be an infallible guide,
then since without it, it is not Infallible, not yet the supreme Judicatory, it
follows that the Pope is above the Council: which is a thing very uncertain in
the Church of Rome; but it has been denied in diverse General Councils, as by
the first Pisan; by the Council of Constance, the fourth and fifth Sessions; by
the Council of Basil in the second, the sixteenth and eighteenth and 33d
Sessions; by the Council of Bruges under Charles the VIIth, and by the
pragmatick Sanction: all which have declared that [A General Council has its
authority immediately from Christ (and consequently not depending on the Pope)
and that it is necessary that every person in what dignity soever, though
Papal, should be obedient to it, in things that concern faith, the extirpation
of schism, and the reformation of the Church of God both in head and members]
This is the decree of the Council of Constance; which also adds further [That
whosoever shall neglect to obey the commands, statutes, ordinances and decrees
of this or any other General Council lawfully assembled, in the things
aforesaid, or thereunto pertaining [viz. in matters of faith, or manners] made
or to be made, if he do not repent of it, he shall undergo a condign penance;
yea, and with recourse to other remedies of law against him, of what condition,
estate or dignity soever he be, though he be the Pope.] The same was confirmed
in the Council of Lausanna, and the second Pisan in the third Session: so that
here are six General Councils all declaring the Pope to be inferior and
submitted to a Council; They created Popes in some of them; they decreed when
Councils should be called, they Judged Popes, they deposed them, they commanded
their obedience, they threatened to impose penances if they obeyed not, and to
proceed to further remedies in law; and the second Pisan, beside the former
particulars, declared that the Synod neither could nor should be dissolved
without their universal consent; nevertheless, by the common consent it might
be removed to a place of safety, especially with the Pope, if he could be got
to consent thereunto; always provided it be not at Rome. And yet this very
Council was approved and commended by Pope Alexander the 5th, Platina in Alex.
Quinto. Naucl. tom. 2. generat. 47.
as both Platina, and Nauclerus witness: and the Council of Constance was
called by Pope John the 23. He presided in it, and was for his wicked life
deposed by it; and yet Platina in his life, says, he approved it; and after him
so did Pope Martin the 5th (as is to be seen in the last Session of that
Council,) and Eugenius the 4th, Vide 16. c. 18. Session.
and the Council of Basil, and Lausanna was confirmed by Pope Nicolas the 5th,
as is to be seen in his Bull; and not only Pope Martin the 5th, but Pope
Eugenius the 4th, approved the Council of Basil. It were a needless trouble to
reckon the consenting testimonies of many learned Divines and Lawyers, bearing
witness to the Council's superiority over Popes. More material it is that many
famous Universities, particularly that of Paris, Erford, Colein, Vienna,
Cracovia; all unanimously did affirm the power of General Councils over Popes,
and principally for this thing relied upon the Authority of the General
Councils of Constance and Basil.

Now if a General Council, confirmed by a Pope, be a Rule or Judge of Faith and
Manners; then this is an Article of Faith, that the Authority of a General
Council does not depend upon the Pope, but on Christ immediately; and then the
Pope's confirmation does not make it valid, any more than the confirmation or
consent of the other Patriarchs for their respective Provinces. For here are
many Councils, and they confirmed by diverse Popes.

But that it may appear how Uncertain all, De comparatione authoritatis Papae
and Conci. ii.
even the Greatest things are at Rome, Cardinal Cajetan wrote a Book against
this doctrine, and against the Councils of Constance, Basil, and Pisa, and
Gerson the Chancellor of Paris: which book King Lewis the XII th of France,
required the University of Paris to examine; which they did to very good
purpose. And the latter Popes of Rome have used their utmost diligence to
disgrace and nullify all these Councils, and to stifle the voice and
consciences of all men, and to trample General Councils under their feet. Now
how can the Souls of Christian people put their questions and differences to
their determination, who themselves are biting and scratching one another? He
was likely to prove but an ill Physician, who gave advices to a woman that had
gotten a cold, when himself could scarce speak for coughing. I am not concerned
here to say what I think of the question, or whether the Council or the Pope be
in the right; for I think, as to the power of determining matters of Faith
infallibly, they are both in the wrong. But that which I observe, is, That the
Church of Rome is greatly divided about their Judge of Controversies, and are
never like to make an end of it, unless one Party be beaten into a good
compliant belief with the other. I shall only add a conclusion to these
premises in the words of Bellarmine; De Council cuthor. l. 2. c. 24. Sect.
Accedit.
Si Concilia Generalia possent errare, nullum esset in Ecclesia firmum
judicium, quo Controversiae componi, and Vnitas in Ecclesia servari possit, If
a General Council can err, there is no sure judgment in Church for the
composing Controversies, and preserving Unity. I shall not need to take
advantage of these words, by observing that Bellarmine has by them evacuated
all the Authority of the Pope's defining questions in Cathedra for if a General
Council can fail, nothing amongst them can be certain. This is that which I
observe; that since this thing is rendered so Uncertain upon the stock of their
own wranglings, and not agreeing upon which are General Councils; one part
condemning some, which very many others among them acknowledge for such: it is
impossible, by their own Doctrine, that they can have any place where to set
their foot, and say, Here I fix upon a Rock, and cannot be moved. And there
being so many conditions required, and so many ways of failing laid to their
charge, and many more that may be found out; and it being impossible that we
can be infallibly assured that none of them has happened in any General Council
that comes to be questioned: How can any man rely upon the decision of a
Council as infallible, of which he cannot ever be infallibly assured that it
has proceeded Concilialiter (as Bellarmine's new word is,) or that it has in
it nothing that does evacuate or lessen its authority. And after all this,
suppose we are all agreed about any Convention, and allow it to be a General
Council; yet they do not always end the questions when they have defined them;
and the Decrees themselves make a new harvest of Uncertainties: Of this we have
too many witnesses, even all the Questions which in the world are made
concerning the sense and meaning of the Decrees and Canons in the respective
Councils. And when Andreas Vega, and Dominicus a Soto, and Soto, A. D. 1546.
and Catarinus (who were all present at the Council of Trent, and understood
the meaning of the Council as well as any, except the Legates and their secret
Juncto) wrote books against one another, and both sides brought the words of
the Council for themselves, and yet neither prevailed; Sancta Croce the Legate,
who well enough understood that the Council intended not to determine the
truth, yet, to silence their wranglings in the Council, let them dispute
abroad; but the Council would not end it, by clearing the ambiguity. And since
this became the mode of Christendom to do so upon design; it can be no wonder
that things are left Uncertain for all the Decrees of Councils.

It is well therefore that the Church of Rome requires Faith to her
Conclusions, greater than her Premises can persuade. It is the only way of
escaping that is left them, as being conscious that none of their Arguments can
enforce what they would have believed. And to the same purpose it is, that they
teach the Conclusions and definitions of Councils to be infallible, though
their Arguments and Proceedings be fallible, and pitiful and false. If they can
persuade the world to this, they have got the Goal; only it ought to be
confessed by them that do submit to the definition, that they do so, moved to
it by none of their Reasons, but they know not why.

I do not here enter into the particular examination of the matters determined
by many Councils; by which it might largely and plainly appear how greatly
General Councils have been mistaken. This has been observed already by many
very learned men: And the Council of Trent is the greatest instance of it in
the world, as will be made to appear in the procedure of this Book. But the
Romanists themselves by rejecting diverse General Councils have (as I have above
observed) given proof enough of this. That all things are here Uncertain I have
proved; and that if there be error here, there can be no certainty any where
else, Bellarmine confesses: So that I have thus far discharged what I undertook.

But beyond this, there are some other particulars fit to be considered, by
which it will yet further appear that in the Church of Rome, unless they will
rely upon the plain Scriptures, they have no sure foundation: instance in those
several Articles, which some of the Roman Doctors say are de fide; and others
of their own party, when they are pressed with them, say they are not de fide,
but the opinions of private Doctors; That, if a Prince turn Heretic, that is,
be not of the Roman party, he presently loses all right to his temporal
Dominions; That the Pope can change Kingdoms, taking from one, and giving to
another, this is esteemed by the Jesuits a matter of Faith. It is certa,
indubitata, definita virorum clarissimorum sententia; said Creswel the Jesuit
in his Philopater. F. Garnet said more, it is, Totius Ecclesiae and quidem ab
antiquissimis temporibus consensione recepta doctrina. It is received, says
Creswel, by the whole School of Divines and Canon-Lawyers; nay it is Certum and
de fide, It is matter of Faith. I know that the English Priests will think
themselves injured if you impute this Doctrine to them, or say, It is the
Catholic Doctrine: and yet, that this power in Temporals that he can depose
Kings sometimes, is in the Pope, Contr. Barclai. cap. 3.
Non opinio, sed certitudo apud Catholicos est, said Bellarmine, It is more
than an opinion, it is certain amongst the Catholics. Now since this is not
believed by all that call themselves Catholics, and yet by others of greatest
note it is said to be the Catholic Doctrine, to be certain, to be a point of
Faith; I desire to know, Where this Faith is founded, which is the house of
Faith, where is their warrant, their authority and foundation of their Article.
For if an English Scholar in the College at Rome, had, in confession to F.
Parsons, Creswel, Garnet, Bellarmine, or any of their parties, confessed that
he had spoken against the Pope's power of deposing Kings in any case, or of any
pretense of killing Kings: it is certain they could not have absolved him, till
he had renounced his Heresy; and they must have declared that if he had died in
that persuasion, he must have been damned; what rest shall this poor man have,
or hope for? He pretends that the Council of Constance had declared for his
opinion; and therefore that his and not theirs, is certain and matter of Faith:
They, tell him no; and yet for their Article of Faith, have neither Father nor
Council, Scripture nor Reason, Tradition, nor Ancient Precedent; where then is
this foundation upon which the article is built? It lies low, as low as Hell,
but can never be made to appear; and yet amongst them, Articles of faith grow
up without root and without foundation; but a man may be threatened with
damnation amongst them for any trifle, and affrighted with clappers and men of
clouts. If they have a clear and certain rule, why do their Doctors differ
about the points of faith? They say some things are articles of faith, and yet
do not think fit to give a reason of their faith; for indeed they cannot. But
if this be the way of it amongst Roman Doctors, they may have many faiths, as
they have Breviaries in several Churches; secundum usum Sarum, secundum usum
Scholae Romanae; and so, without ground or reason, even the Catholics become
heretics one to another: it is by chance if it happen to be otherwise.

2. What makes a point to be de fide? If it be said, The decision of a General
Council; Then since no General Council has said so; then this proposition is
not de fide? that what a General Council says is true, is to be believed as
matter of faith; for if the authority be not de fide, then how can the
particulars of her determination be de fide? for the conclusion must follow the
weaker part; and if the Authority it self be left in uncertainty, the Decrees
cannot be infallible.

3. As no man living can tell, that a Council has proceeded rightly; so no man
can tell when an Article of faith is firmly decreed, or when a matter is
sufficiently propounded, or when the Pope has perfectly defined an article: of
all this the Canon law is the Greatest testimony in the world, where there is
Council against Council, Pope against Pope; and among so many decrees of faith
and manners it cannot be told what is, and what is not certain. For when the
Popes have sent their rescripts to a Bishop, or any other Prelate, to order an
affair of life or doctrine; either he wrote that with an intent to oblige all
Christendom, or did not. If not, why is it put into the body of the laws; for
what is a greater signature, or can pass a greater obligation then the
Authentic Code of laws? But if these were written with an intent to oblige all
Christendom; how come they to be prejudiced, rescinded, abrogated, by contrary
laws; and desuetude, by change of times and changes of opinion? And in all that
great body of laws registered in the decretum, and the Decretals, Clementins,
and Extravagants, there is no sign or distinctive cognizance of one from
another, and yet some of them are regarded, and very many are not. When Pope
Stephen decreed that those who were converted from heresy should not be
rebaptiz'd; Eusebius. lib. 7. hist. 4. c. 3 and 4. lib. de unico baptis. c. 14.
and to that purpose wrote against S. Cyprian in the Question, and declared it
to be unlawful, and threatened excommunication to them that did it (as S. Austin
tells); S. Cyprian regarded it not, but he and a Council of fourscore Bishops
decreed it ought to be done, and did so to their dying day. Bellarmine admits
all this to be true; but says, that Pope Stephen did not declare this tanquam
de fide; but that after this definition it was free to every one to think as
they list; nay, Bellar. lib. 4. de Pont. Romans c. 7. Sect. Et per hoc.
that though it was plain that S. Cyprian refused to obey the Pope's sentence,
yet non est omnino certum, that he did sin mortally. By all this he has made
it apparent, that it cannot easily be known when a Pope does define a thing to
be de fide, or when it is a sin to disobey him, or when it is necessary he
should be obeyed. Now then since in the Canon law there are so very many
decrees, and yet no mark of difference, of right or wrong, necessary or not
necessary; how shall we be able to know certainly in what state or condition
the soul of every of the Pope's subjects is? especially since without any
cognizance or certain mark all the world are commanded under pain of damnation
to obey the Pope. In the Extravagant de Majoritate and Obedientia are these
words, Dicimus, definimus, pronunciamus absolute necessarium ad salutem omni
humanae creaturae, subesse Romano Pontifici. Now when can it be thought that a
Pope defines any article in Cathedra, if these words, Dicimus, definimus,
pronunciamus, and necessarium ad salutem, be not sufficient to declare his
intention? Now if this be true that the Pope said this; he said true or false.
If false, how sad is the condition of the Romanists, who are affrighted with
the terrible threatenings of damnation for nothing? And if it be true, what
became of the souls of S. Cyprian and the African Bishops, Epist. S. Cyprian.
ad Pompeium.
who did not submit to the Bishop of Rome, but called him proud, ignorant, and
of a dark and wicked mind? Serio praecepit, said Bellarmine; he seriously
commanded it, but did not determine it as necessary: and how in a Question of
faith, and so great Concern this distinction can be of any avail, can never be
known, and can never be proved; since they declare the Pope sufficiently to be
of that faith against S. Cyprian, and the Africans, and that in pursuance of
this his faith he proceeded so far, and so violently. But now the matter is
grown infinitely worse. For 1. the Popes of Rome have made innumerable decrees
in the Decretum, In l. Been a Zeno^e c. de quadrien. praescript.
Decretals, Bulls, Taxes, Constitutions, Clementines, and Extravagants. 2.
They, as Albericus de Rosate, a Great Canonist, affirms, sometimes exalt their
constitutions, and sometimes abase them, according to the times. And yet 3. All
of them are verified and imposed under the same Sanction by the Council of
Trent; Sess. 25. c. 20.
all, I say, which were ever made in favor of Ecclesiastical Persons, and the
Liberties of the Church; which are indeed the greater part of all after
Gratians decree: witness the Decretals of Gregory the 9th, Boniface the 8th,
the Collectio diversarum Constitutionum and literarum Romanorum Pontificum, and
the Decretal Epistles of the Roman Bishops in three Volumes, besides the Ecloga
Bullarum and motuum propriorum. All this is not only an intolerable burden to
the Christian Churches, but a snare to consciences, and no man can tell by all
this that is before him, whether he deserve love or hatred, whether he be in
the state of mortal sin, of damnation, or salvation. But this is no new thing:
More than this was decreed in the Ancient Canon law it self. Decret. did. 19.
c. Sic omnes, C. Eni^vero.
Sic omnes Sanctiones Apostolicae sedis accipiendae sunt tanquam ipsius Divina
voce Petri firmatae. And again, Ab omnibus quicquid statuit, quicquid ordinat,
perpetuo quidem and infragibiliter observandum est. All men must at all times
with all submission observe all things whatsoever are decreed or ordained by
the Roman Church. Nay, licet vix ferendum, although what that holy See imposes,
be as yet scarce tolerable, yet let us bear it, and with holy devotion suffer
it, says the Canon, Ibid.
In memoriam. And that all this might indeed be an intolerable yoke, the Canon,
Nulli fas est, adds the Pope's curse and final threatenings. Sit ergo ruinae
suae dolor prostratus, quisquis Apostolicis voluerit contraire decretis; and
every one that obeys not the Apostolical decrees is majoris excommunicationis
dejectione abjiciendus. The Canon is directed particularly against the Clergy.
And the gloss upon this Canon affirms, that he who denies the Pope's power of
making Canons, (viz. to oblige the Church) is a heretic. Now considering that
the decree of Gratian is Concordantia discordantiarum, a heap or bundle of
Contrary opinions, doctrines and rules; and they agree no otherwise then a
Hyaena and a Dog caught in the same snare, or put into a bag; and that the
Decretals and Extravagants are in very great parts of them nothing but boxes of
tyranny and error, usurpation and superstition; only that upon those boxes
they write Ecclesia Catholica, and that all these are commanded to be believed
and observed respectively; and all gainsayers to be cursed and excommunicated;
and that the twentieth part of them is not known to the Christian world, and
some are rejected, and some never accepted, and some slighted into desuetude,
and some thrown off as being a load too heavy, and yet that there is no rule
to discern these things: it must follow that matters of faith determined and
recorded in the Canon law, and the laws of manners there established, and the
matter of salvation and damnation consequent to the observation or not
observation of them, must needs be infinitely uncertain, and no man can from
their grounds know, what shall become of him.

There are so very many points of faith in the Church of Rome, and so many
Decrees of Councils, which, when they please, make an Article of faith, and so
many are presumptuously by private Doctors affirmed to be de fide which are
not; that, considering that the common people are not taught to rely upon the
plain words of Scripture, and the Apostles Creed, for a sufficient rule of
their faith, but are threatened with damnation, if they do not believe whatever
their Church has determined; and yet they neither do, nor can know it but by
the word of their Parish Priest, or Confessor; it lies in the hand of every
Parish Priest to make the People believe any thing, and be of any religion, and
trust to any Article, as they shall choose and find to their purpose. The
Council of Trent requires Traditions to be added and received equal with
Scriptures; they both, not singly but in conjunction making up the full object
of faith; and so the most learned, and indeed generally their whole Church
understands one to be incomplete without the other: and yet Master White, who I
suppose tells the same thing to his Neighbors, affirms that it is not the
Catholic position, That all its doctrines are not contained in Scripture:
which proposition being tied with the decree of the Council of Trent, gives a
very good account of it, and makes it excellent sense. Thus, Traditions must be
received with equal authority to the Scripture, (says the Council) and wonder
not; for (says Master White) all the Traditions of the Church are in
Scripture. You may believe so, if you please; for the contrary is not a
Catholic doctrine. But if these two things do not agree better; then it will
be hard to tell what regard will be had to what the Council says: the People
know not that, but as their Priest teaches them. And though they are bound
under greatest pains to believe the whole Catholic Religion: yet that the
Priests themselves do not know it, or wilfully mis-report it; and therefore
that the people cannot tell it; it is too evident in this instance, and in the
multitude of disputes which are amongst themselves, about many considerable
Articles in their Catholic religion. Vide Wadding of Immac. oncept. p. 282.
and p. 334. and alibi.
Pius Quintus speaking of Thomas Aquinas calls his doctrine the most certain
rule of Christian religion. And diverse particulars of the religion of the
Romanists are proved out of the revelations of S. Briget, which are
contradicted by those of S. Katherine of Siena. Now they not relying on the way
of God, fall into the hands of men, who teach them according to the interest of
their order, or private fancy, and expound their rules by measures of their
own, but yet such which they make to be the measures of salvation and
damnation. They are taught to rely for their faith upon the Church, and this
when it comes to practice is nothing but their private Priest; and he does not
always tell them the sense of their Church, and is not infallible in declaring
the sense of it, and is not always (as appears in the instance now set down)
faithful in relating of it, but first consens himself by his subtilty, and then
others by his confidence; and therefore in is impossible there can be any
certainty to them that proceed this way, when God has so plainly given them a
better, and requires of them nothing but to live a holy life, as a
superstructure of Christian Faith described by the Apostles in plain places of
Scripture, and in the Apostolical Creed; in which they can suffer no illusion,
and where there is no Uncertainty in the matters to be believed.

IV. The next thing I observe, is, that they all talking of the Church, as of a
charm and sacred Amulet, yet they cannot by all their arts make us certain
where, or how, infallibly to find this Church. I have already in this Section
proved this in the main Inquiry; by showing that the Church is that body, which
they do not rely upon: but now I shall show that the Church which they would
point out, can never be certainly known to be the true Church by those
indications and signs which they offer to the world as her characteristick
notes. S. Austin in his excellent Book De Vnitate Ecclesiae, Lib. de Unit.
Eccles. cap. and cap. 17. Ergo in Scripturis Canonicis eam (Ecclesiam)
requiramus. cap. 3.
affirms, that the Church is no whereto be found, but in Praescripto legis, in
prophetarum praedictis, in Psalmorum cantibus, in ipsius Pastoris vocibus; in
Evangelistarum praedicationibus and laboribus; hoc est, in omnibus Sanctorum
canonicis authoritatibus; in the Scriptures only. And he gives but one great
note of it; and that is, adhering to the head Jesus Christ; for the Church is
Christ's body, who by charity are united to one another, and to Christ their
Head; and he that is not a member of Christ cannot obtain salvation. And he
adds no other mark; but that Christ's Church is not this, or that, viz. not of
one denomination; but (...) dispersed over the face of the earth. The Church of
Rome makes adhesion to the head, Bellarm. de Eccles. Militant lib. 3. cap.
Sect. Nostra autem Sententia.
(not Jesus Christ, but) the Bishop of Rome to be of the essential constitution
of the Church. Now this being the great Question between the Church of Rome,
and the Greek Church, and indeed of all other Churches of the world; is so far
from being a sign to know the Church by, that it is apparent, they have no
ground of their Faith; but the great Question of Christendom, and that which is
condemned by all the Christian world but themselves, is their foundation.

And this is so much the more considerable, because concerning very many Heads
of their Church, it was too apparent that they were not so much as members of
Christ, but the basest of Criminals, and Enemies of all godliness. And
concerning others that were not so notoriously wicked, they could not be
certain that they were members of Christ; or that they were not of their Father
the Devil. The spirit of truth was promised to the Apostles upon condition; and
Judas fell from it by transgression. But the uncertainties are yetgreater.

Adhering to the Pope cannot be a certain note of the Church; because no man
can be certain, who is true Pope. For the Pope, if he be a Simoniac, is ipso
facto no Pope: as appears in the Bull of Julius the 2d. And yet besides that he
himself was called a most notorious Simoniac, Sixtus Quintus gave an obligation
under his hand upon condition that the Cardinal d'Este would bring over his
voices to him and make him Pope, that he would never make Hierom Matthew a
Cardinal; which when he broke, the Cardinal sent his Obligation to the King of
Spain, who intended to accuse him of Simony, but it broke the Pope's heart, and
so he escaped here, and was reserved to be heard before a more Unerring
Judicatory. And when Pius Quartus used all the secret arts to dissolve the
Council of Trent, and yet not to be seen in it, and to that purpose dispatched
away the Bishops from Rome, he forbad the Archbishop of Turris to go, Hist.
Council. Trid. lib. 7, ^. D. 156^.
because he had been too free in declaring his opinion for the Jus Divinum of
the Residence of Bishops; he at the same time durst not trust the Bishop of
Cesena, for a more secret reason; but it was known enough to many. He was a
familiar friend of the Cardinal of Naples, whose Father the Count of Montebello
had in his hand an Obligation, which that Pope had given to the Cardinal for a
sum of money for his Voice in the Election of him to the Papacy. And all the
world have been full of noises and Pasquils, sober and grave, Comical and
Tragical accusations of the Simony of the Popes for diverse ages together; and
since no man can certainly know that the Pope is not Simoniacal, no man can
safely rely on him as a true Pope, or the true Pope for an infallible Judge.

2. If the Pope be a Heretic, he is ipso facto, no Pope; now that this is very
possible Bellarmine supposes, because he makes that one of the necessary cases
in which a General Council is to be called; as I have showed above. And this
uncertainty is manifest in an instance that can never be wiped off; for when
Liberius had subscribed Arianism, and the condemnation of S. Athasius, and the
Roman Clergy had deprived Liberius of his Papacy, S. Felix was made Pope; and
then either Liberius was no Pope, or S. Felix was not; and one was a Heretic,
or the other a Schismatic; and then as it was hard to tell who was their
Churches head, so it was impossible that by adherence to either of them, their
subjects could be proved to be Catholics.

3. There have been many Schisms in the Church of Rome, and many Anti-popes
which were acknowledged for true and legitimate by several Churches and
Kingdoms respectively; and some that were chosen into the places of the deposed
even by Councils, were a while after disowned and others chosen; which was a
known case in the times of the Councils of Constance and Basil. And when a
Council was sitting, and it became a Question, who had power to choose; the
Council, or the Cardinals? What man could cast his hopes of Eternity upon the
adherence to one, the certainty of whose legitimation was determined by power
and interest, and could not, by all the learning and wisdom of Christendom?

4. There was one Pope who was made head of the Church before he was a Priest:
It was Constantine the second; who certainly succeeded not in S. Peter's
Privileges, when he was not capable of his Chair; and yet he was their head of
the Church for a year; but how adherence to the Pope should then be a note of
the Church, I desire to know from some of the Roman Lawyers; for the Divines
know it not. I will not trouble this account with any questions about the
Female-head of their Church; I need not seek for matter, I am pressed with too
much; and therefore I shall omit very many other considerations about the
nullities, and insufficiencies, and impieties, and irregularities of many
Popes; and consider their other notes of the Church, to try if they can fix
this inquiry upon any certainty.

Bellarmine reckons fifteen notes of the Church. It is a mighty hue and cry
after a thing that he pretends is visible to all the world. 1. The very name
Catholic, is his first note: he might as well have said the word Church, is a
note of the Church; for he cannot be ignorant but that all Christians who
esteem themselves members of the Church, think and call themselves members of
the Catholic Church; and the Greeks give the same title to their Churches. Nay
all Conventions of Heretics anciently did so; and therefore I shall quit
Bellarmine of this note by the words of Lactantius, which himself Bellarm. l.
4. de Notis Eccles. cap. 1. Lact. lib. 3. Divinar. institut. cap. ult.
also (a little forgetting himself) quotes. Sed tamen singuli quique
Haereticorum coetus, se potissimum Christianos, and suam esse Catholicam
Ecclesiam putant. 2. Antiquity indeed is a note of the Church, and Salmeron
proves it to be so, from the Example of Adam and Eve, most learnedly. But it is
certain, that God had a Church in Paradise, is as good an argument for the
Church of England and Ireland, as for Rome; for we derive from them as
certainly as do the Italians, and have as much of Adam's religion as they have.
But a Church might have been very ancient, and yet become no Church; and
without separating from a greater Church. The Church of the Jews is the great
example; and the Church of Rome, unless she takes better heed, may be another.
Romans 11. 20, 21.
S. Paul has plainly threatened it to the Church of Rome. 3. Duration is made a
note, now this respects the time past, or the time to come. If the time past,
then the Church of Britain was Christian before Rome was; and blessed be God
are so at this day. If Duration means the time to come; for so Bellarmine says,
Denotis Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 6.
Ecclesia dicitur Catholica, non solum quia semper fuit, sed etiam quia semper
erit: so we have a rare note for us who are alive to discern the Church of Rome
to be the Catholic Church, and we may possibly come to know it by this sign
many ages after we are dead; because she will last always. But this sign is not
yet come to pass; and when it shall come to pass, it will prove our Church to
be the Catholic Church, as well as that of Rome, and the Greek Church as well
as both of us; for these Churches, at least some of them, have begun sooner,
and for ought they, or we know, they all may so continue longer. 4. Amplitude
was no note of the Church when the world was Arian; and is as little now,
because that a great part of Europe is Papal. 5. Succession of Bishops is an
excellent conservatory of Christian doctrine, but it is as notorious in the
Greek Church as in the Roman; and therefore cannot signify which is the true
Church, unless they be both true, and then the Church of England can claim by
this tenure, as having since her being Christian, a succession of Bishops never
interrupted, but, as all others have been, in persecution. 6. Consent in
doctrine with the Ancient Church may be a good sign or a bad, as it happens;
but the Church of Rome has not, and never can prove, the pure and prime
Antiquity to be of her side. 7. Union of members among themselves and with
their head, is very good; if the members be united in truth (for else it may be
a Conspiracy); and if by head be meant Jesus Christ; and indeed this is the
only true sign of the Church: but if by head be meant the Roman Pope, it may
be Ecclesia Malignantium, and Antichrist may sit in the chair. But the
uncertainty of this note, as it relates to this question, I have already
manifested; and what excellent concord there is in the Church of Rome, we are
taught by the Question of supremacy of Councils or Popes; and now also by the
strict and loving concord between the Jansenists and Molinists; and the
abetters of the immaculate conception of the B. Virgin Mother, with their
Antagonists. 8. Sanctity of doctrine is an excellent note of the Church: but
that is the question amongst all the pretenders; and is not any advantage to
the Church of Rome, unless it be a holy thing to worship images, to trample
upon Kings, to reconcile a wicked life with the hopes of heaven at the last
minute, by the charm of external ministeries; to domineer over Consciences, to
impose useless and intolerable burdens, to damn all the world that are not
their slaves, to shut up the fountains of salvation from the people; to be
easier in dispensing with the laws of God, than the laws of the Church; to give
leave to Princes to break their Oaths; as Pope Clement the 7th did to Francis
the first of France to cosen the Emperor; Vid. The Legend of Flamens, and
Revieu. de Concile de Trent. l. ^, ^. 7.
and as P. Julius the second did to Ferdinand of Arragon, sending him an
absolution for his treachery against the King of France; not to keep faith with
heretics; to find out tricks to entrap them that trusted to their letters of
safe conduct; to declare that Popes cannot be bound by their promises: for Pope
Paul the 4th in a Conclave, A. D. 1555. complained of them that said he could
make but four Cardinals, Hist. Council. Trident. lib. 5.
because (forsooth) he had sworn so in the Conclave; saying, This was to bind
the Pope, whose authority is absolute, that it is an Article of faith that the
Pope cannot be bound, much less can he bind himself; that to say otherwise was
a manifest heresy; and against them that should obstinately persevere in
saying so, he threatened the Inquisition. These indeed are holy doctrines taught
and practiced respectively by their Holinesses at Rome, and indeed are the
notes of their Church; if by the doctrine of the head to whom they are bound to
adhere, we may guess at the doctrine of their body. 9. The prevalency of their
doctrine is produced for a good note; and yet this is a greater note of
Mahumetanism, than of Christianity; and was once of Arianism: and yet the
Argument is not now so good at Rome, as it was before Luther's time. 10. That
the chiefs of the Pope's religion lived more holy lives than others, gives some
light that their Church is the true one. But I had thought that their Popes had
been the chiefs of their religion, till now; and if so, then this was a good
note while they did live well; but that was before Popery: Since that time, we
will guess at their Church by the holiness of the lives of those that rule and
teach all; and then if we have none to follow amongst us, yet we know whom we
are to fly amongst them. 11. Miracles were in the beginning of Christianity a
note of true believers; Marc. 16. 17.
Christ told us so. And he also taught us that Antichrist should be revealed in
lying signs and wonders; and commanded us by that token to take heed of them.
And the Church of Rome would take it ill, if we should call them, as S. Austin
did the Donatists, Mirabiliarios Miracle-mongers; concerning which he that
pleases to read that excellent Tract of S. Austin, De Vnitate Ecclesiae, cap.
14. will be sufficiently satisfied in this particular, and in the main ground
and foundation of the Protestant Religion. In the mean time, Tom. 13. p. 193.
it may suffice, that Bellarmine says, Miracles are a sign of the true Church;
and Salmeron says, that they are no certain signs of the true Church; but may
be done by the false. 12. The Spirit of Prophecy is also a pretty sure note of
the true Church, and yet, in the dispute between Israel and Judah, Samaria and
Jerusalem, it was of no force, but was really in both. And at the day of
Judgment Christ shall reject some, who will allege that they prophesied in his
name. I deny that not but there have been some Prophets in the Church of Rome,
Johannes de Rupe seissa. Anselmus Marsicanus; Robert Grosthead, Bishop of
Lincoln, S. Hildegardis, Abbot Joachim; whose prophecies and pictures
prophetical were published by Theophrastus Paracelsus, and John Adrasder, and
by Paschalinus Rigeselmus at Venice 1589; but (as Ahab said concerning Micaiah)
these do not prophesy good concerning Rome, but evil: and that Rome should be
reformed in ore gladii cruentandi was one of the Prophesies; and, Vniversa
Sanctorum Ecclesia abscondetur, that the whole Church of the Saints shall be
hidden, viz. in the days of Antichrist; and that in the days of darkness, the
elect of God shall have that faith, or wisdom to themselves, which they have;
and shall not dare to preach it publicly,] was another prophecy, and carries
its meaning upon the forehead, and many more I could tell; but whether such
prophesies as these be good signs that the Church of Rome is the true Church, I
desire to be informed by the Roman Doctors, before I trouble my self any
further to consider the particulars. 13. Toward the latter end of this
Catalogue of wonderful signs, the confession of adversaries is brought in for a
note; and no question, they intended it so! But did ever any Protestant,
remaining so, confess the Church of Rome to be the true Catholic Church? Let
the man be named, and a sufficient testimony brought, that he was mentis
compos, and I will grant to the Church of Rome this to be the best note they
have. 14. But since the enemies of the Church have all had tragical ends; it is
no question but this signifies the Church of Rome to be the only Church. Indeed
if all the Protestants had died unnatural deaths; and all the Papists, nay if
all the Popes had died quietly in their Beds, we had reason to deplore our sad
calamity, and inquired after the cause; but we could never have told by this:
for by all that is before him, a man cannot tell whether he deserves love or
hatred. And all the world finds, that, As dies the Papist, so dies the
Protestant; and the like event happens to them all: excepting only some Popes
have been remarked by their own Histories, for funest and direful deaths. 15.
And lately, Temporal Prosperity is brought for a note of the true Church; and
for this there is great reason: because the Cross is the highway to Heaven,
and Christ promised to his Disciples for their Lot in this world great and
lasting persecutions, and the Church felt this blessing for 300 years together.
But this had been a better argument in the mouth of a Turkish Mufty, than a
Roman Cardinal.

And now if by all these things we cannot certainly know that the Church of
Rome is the true Catholic Church, how shall the poor Roman Catholic be at
rest in his inquiry? Here is in all this, nothing but uncertainty of truth, or
certainty of error.

And what is needful to be added more? I might tire my self and my Reader, if I
should enumerate all that were very considerable in this inquiry. I shall not
therefore insist upon their uncertainties in their great and considerable
Questions about the number of the Sacraments: which to be Seven is with them an
Article of Faith; and yet since there is not amongst them any authentic
definition of a Sacrament; and it is not, nor cannot be a matter of Faith, to
tell what is the form of a Sacrament; therefore it is impossible it should be a
matter of Faith, to tell how many they are: for in this case they cannot tell
the number, unless they know for what reason they are to be accounted so. The
Fathers and Schoolmen differ greatly in the definition of a Sacrament; and
consequently in the numbering of them. S. Cyprian and S. Bernard reckon washing
the Disciples feet to be a Sacrament; and S. Austin called omnem ritunt cultus
Divini, a Sacrament; and otherwhile, he says, there are but two: and the
Schoolmen dispute whether or no, a Sacrament can be defined. And by the Council
of Trent, Clandestine Marriages are said to be a Sacrament; and yet that the
Church always detested them: which indeed might very well be, for the blessed
Eucharist is a Sacrament, but yet private Masses and Communions the Ancient
Church always did detest, except in the cases of necessity. But then, when at
Trent they declared them to be Nullities, it would be very hard to prove them
to be Sacraments. All the whole affair in their Sacrament of Order, is a body
of contingent propositions. They cannot agree where the Apostles received their
several Orders, by what form of words; and whether at one time, or by parts:
and in the Institution of the Lord's Supper, the same words by which some of
them say they were made Priests, they generally expound them to signify a duty
of the Laity, as well as the Clergy; Hoc facite, which signifies one thing to
the Priest, and another to the People, and yet there is no mark of difference.
They cannot agree where, or by whom, extreme Unction was instituted. They
cannot tell, whether any Wafer be actually transubstantiated, because they
never can know by Divine Faith, whether the supposed Priest be a real Priest,
or had right intention; and yet they certainly do worship it in the midst of
all Uncertainties. But I will add nothing more, but this; what Wonder is it, if
all things in the Church of Rome be Uncertain; when they cannot, dare not,
trust their reason or their senses in the wonderful invention of
Transubstantiation? and when many of their wisest Doctors profess that their
pretended infallibility does finally rely upon prudential motives?

I conclude this therefore with the words of S. Austin. Remotis ergo omnibus
talibus, De Unit. Eccles. cap. 16.
etc. All things therefore being removed, let them demonstrate their Church if
they can, not in the Sermons and Rumors of the Africans [Romans,] not in the
Councils of their Bishops, not in the Letters of any disputers, not in signs
and deceitful Miracles; because against these things, we are warned and
prepared by the word of the Lord: But in the praescript of the Law, of the
Prophets, of the Psalms, of the Evangelists, and all the Canonical authorities
of the Holy Books.] And that is my next undertaking; to show the firmness of the
foundation, and the Great Principle of the Religion of the Church of England
and Ireland; even the Holy Scriptures.

SECTION II.
Of the sufficiency of the Holy Scriptures to Salvation, which is the great
foundation and ground of the Protestant Religion.
THis question is between the Church of Rome and the Church of England; and
therefore it supposes that it is amongst them who believe the Scriptures to be
the Word of God. The Old and New Testament are agreed upon to be the word of
God; and that they are so, is delivered to us by the current descending
testimony of all ages of Christianity: and they who thus are first lead into
this belief, find upon trial great afterproofs by arguments both external and
internal, and such as cause a perfect adhesion to this truth; that they are
Gods Word: an adhesion (I say) so perfect, as excludes all manner of practical
doubting. Now then amongst us so persuaded, the Question is, Whether or no the
Scriptures be a sufficient rule of our faith, and contain in them all things
necessary to salvation? or, Is there any other word of God besides the
Scriptures, which delivers any points of faith or doctrines of life necessary
to salvation? This was the state of the Question till yesterday. And although
the Church of Rome affirmed Tradition to be a part of the object of faith, and
that without the addition of doctrine, and practices delivered by tradition,
the Scriptures were not a perfect rule; but together with tradition they are:
yet now two or three Gentlemen have got upon the Coach-wheel, and have raised a
cloud of dust, enough to put out the eyes even of their own party, Vid. hist.
^oncil. Trident. sub Paul. 3. A. D. 1546.
making them not to see, what till now all their Seers told them; and Tradition
is not only a suppletory to the deficiencies of Scripture, but it is now the
only record of faith. But because this is too bold and impossible an attempt,
and has lately been sufficiently reproved by some learned persons of our
Church; I shall therefore not trouble my self with such a frontless error and
illusion; but speak that truth which by justifying the Scripture's fullness and
perfection will overthrow the doctrine of the Roman Church denying it, and, ex
abundanti, cast down this new mud-wall, thrown into a dirty heap by M. W. and
his under-dawber M. S. who with great pleasure behold and wonder at their own
work, and call it a Marble Building.

1. That the Scripture is a full and sufficient rule to Christians in faith and
manners, a full and perfect Declaration of the will of God, is therefore
certain because we have no other. For if we consider the grounds upon which all
Christians believe the Scriptures to be the word of God, the same grounds prove
that nothing else is. These indeed have a Testimony that is credible as any
thing that makes faith to men, The universal testimony of all Christians: In
respect of which S. Austin said, Evangelio non crederem, etc. I should not
believe the Gospel, if the Authority of the Church, (that is, of the universal
Church) did not move me. The Apostles at first owned these Writings; the
Churches received them; they transmitted them to their posterity; they grounded
their faith upon them; they proved their propositions by them; by them they
confuted heretics; and they made them the measures of right and wrong: all
that collective body of doctrines, of which all Christians consentingly made
public confessions, and on which all their hopes of salvation did rely, were
all contained in them; and they agreed in no point of faith which is not
plainly set down in Scripture. And all this is so certain, that we all profess
our selves ready to believe any other Article which can pretend and prove it
self thus proved, thus descended. For we know, a doctrine is neither more nor
less the word of God for being written or unwritten; that is but accidental and
extrinsecal to it; for it was first unwritten, and then the same thing was
written; only when it was written it was better conserved, and surer
transmitted, and not easily altered, and more fitted to be a rule. And indeed
only can be so: not but that every word of God is as much a rule as any word
of God; but we are sure that what is so written, and so transmitted, is Gods
Word; whereas concerning other things which were not written, we have no
certain records, no evident proof, no sufficient conviction; and therefore it
is not capable of being owned as the rule of faith or life, because we do not
know it to be the Word of God. If any doctrine which is offered to us by the
Church of Rome, and which is not in Scripture, be proved as Scripture is, we
receive it equally: but if it be not, it is to be received according to the
degree of its probation; and if it once comes to be disputed by wise and good
men, if it came in after the Apostles, if it rely but upon a few Testimonies,
or is to be laboriously argued into a precarious persuasion, it cannot be the
true ground of faith; and salvation can never rely upon it. The truth of the
assumption in this argument will rely upon an Induction, of which all Churches
have a sufficient experience, there being in no Church any one instance of
doctrine of faith or life, that can pretend to a clear, universal Tradition and
Testimony of the first and of all ages and Churches, but only the doctrine
contained in the undoubted Books of the Old and New Testament. And in the
matter of good life, the case is evident and certain; which makes the other
also to be like it; for there is no original or primary Commandment concerning
good life, but it is plainly and notoriously found in Scripture: Now faith
being the foundation of good life, upon which it is most rationally and
permanently built; it is strange that Scripture should be sufficient to teach
us all the whole superstructure, and yet be defective in the foundation.

Neither do we doubt but that there were many things spoken by Christ and his
Apostles which were never written; and yet those few only that were written,
are, by the Divine Providence and the care of the Catholic Church of the first
and all descending ages, preserved to us, and made our Gospel. So that as we do
not dispute, whether the words which Christ spoke, and the Miracles he did, and
are not written, be as holy and as true as those which are written; but only
say, they are not our rule and measures, because they are unknown: So there is
no dispute, whether they be to be preferred or relied upon, as the written or
unwritten Word of God; for both are to be relied upon, and both equally; always
provided that they be equally known to be so. But that which we say, is, That
there are many which are called Traditions, which are not the unwritten Word of
God; at least not known so to be; and the doctrines of men are pretended and
obtruded as the Commandments of God; and the Testimony of a few men is made to
support a weight as great as that which relies upon universal Testimony; and
particular traditions are equaled to universal, the uncertain to the certain;
and traditions are said to be Apostolical if they be but ancient; and if they
come from we know not whom, they are said to come from the Apostles; and if
postnate, they are called primitive; and they are argued and laboriously
disputed into the title of Apostolical traditions by not only fallible but
fallacious arguments (as will appear in the following numbers.) This is the
state of the Question; and therefore 1. It proves it self, because there can be
no proof to the contrary; since the elder the tradition is, the more likely it
can be proved, as being nearer the fountain, and not having had a long current;
which, as a long line is always the weakest, so in long descent is most likely
to be corrupted, and therefore a late tradition is one of the worst arguments
in the world; it follows that nothing can now, because nothing of Faith yet
has been sufficiently proved.

2. But besides this consideration; the Scripture it self is the best testimony
of it is own fullness and sufficiency. I have already in the Introduction
against I. S. proved from Scripture, that all necessary things of salvation are
there abundantly contained: that is, I have proved that Scripture says so.
Neither ought it to be replied here; that no man's testimony concerning himself
is to be accepted. For here we suppose that we are agreed, that the Scripture
says true, that it is the word of God, and cannot be deceived; and if this be
allowed, the Scripture then can give testimony concerning it self: and so can
any Man if you allow him to be infallible, and all that he says to be true;
which is the case of Scripture in the present Controversy. And if you will not
allow Scripture to give testimony to it self; who shall give testimony to it?
Shall the Church, or the Pope; suppose which we will? But who shall give
testimony to them? Shall they give credit to Scripture, before it be known how
they come themselves to be Credible? If they be not credible of themselves, we
are not the nearer for their giving their testimony to the Scriptures. But if
it be said, that the Church is of it self credible upon it is own authority;
this must be proved before it can be ad^itted, and then how shall this be
proved? And at least, the Scripture will be pretended to be of it self credible
as the Church. And since it is evident that all the dignity, power, authority,
office, and sanctity it has, or pretends to have, can no other way be proved
but by the Scriptures, a conformity to them in all Doctrines, Laws, and Manners
being the only Charter by which she claims: it must needs be, that Scripture
has the prior right; and can better be primely credible, than the Church, or
any thing else that claims from Scripture. Nay therefore, quoad nos, it is to
be allowed to be primely credible; because there is no Creature besides it that
is so. Indeed God was pleased to find out ways to prove the Scriptures to be
his Word, his immediate Word, by miraculous consignations, and sufficient
testimony, and confession of enemies, and of all men that were fit to bear
witness that these Books were written by such men, who by miracle were proved
to be Divini homines, Men endued with God's Spirit, and trusted with his
Message; and when it was thus far proved by God, it became the immediate and
sole Ministry of entire Salvation, and the whole Repository of the Divine
will; and when things were come thus far, if it inquired whether the Scriptures
were a sufficient institution to salvation, we need no other, we can have no
better testimony than it self, concerning it self. And to this purpose I have
already brought from it sufficient affirmation of the point in Question: in the
preceding answer to I. S. his first Way in his fourth Appendix.

3. It is possible that the Scriptures should contain in them all things
necessary to salvation. God could cause such a Book to be written. And he did
so to the Jews; he caused his whole Law to be written, he engraved in Stones,
he commanded the authentic Copy to be kept in the Ark, and this was the great
security of the conveying it; and Tradition was not relied upon: it was not
trusted with any law of Faith or Manners. Now since this was once done, and
therefore is always possible to be done; why it should not be done now, there
is no pretense of reason, but very much for it. For 1. Why should the Book of
S. Matthew, be called Mark's Book; and S. Luke affirms the design of his Book
is to declare the certainty of the things then believed, and in which his
Friend was instucted, which we cannot but suppose to be the whole Doctrine of
salvation? 2. What end could there be in writing Ascension, and Descent of the
Holy Ghost; nor was it done presently. But then it is to be observed, that
there was a Spirit of infallible Record put into the Apostles, sufficient for
it is publication, and continuance. But before the death of the Apostles, that
is, before this Spirit of infallibility was to depart, all was written, that
was intended; because no thing else could infallibly convey the Doctrine. Now
this being the case of every Doctrine as much as of any, and the case of the
whole, rather than of any part of it; it must follow, that it was highly
agreeable to the Divine wisdom, and the very end of this Economy that all
should be written; and for no other reason could the Evangelists and Apostles
write so many Books.

4. But of the sufficiency of Scripture we may be convinced by the very nature
of the thing. For the Sermons of Salvation being preached to all, to the
learned and unlearned; it must be a common Concern, and therefore fitted to all
capacities; and consequently made easy, for easy learners. Now this design is
plainly signified to us in Scripture by the abbreviatures, the Symbols and
Catalogues of Credenda: which are short and plain, and easy; and to which
salvation is promised. Now if he that believes Jesus Christ to be the Son of
God, 1 John 5. 10.
has eternal life; John 17. 3.
that is, so far as the value and acceptability of believing does extend, this
Faith shall prevail unto salvation; it follows, that this being the affirmation
of Scripture, and declared to be a competent foundation of Faith; the Scripture
that contains much more, even the whole Economy of salvation by Jesus Christ,
cannot want any necessary thing, when the absolute necessities are so narrow.
Christ the Son of God is the great adaequate object of saving Faith; John 17. 3.
to know God, and whom he has sent Jesus Christ; this is eternal life. Now
this is the great design of the Gospel; and is revealed largely in the
Scriptures: so that there is no adaequate object of Faith, but what is there.
2. As to the Attributes of God, and of Christ, that is, all that is known of
them and to be known is set down in Scripture; That God is the rewarder of them
that diligently seek him; that he is the fountain of wisdom, justice, holiness,
power; that his providence is over all, and mercy unto all: And concerning
Christ; all the attributes and qualifications, by which he is capable and
fitted to do the work of redemption for us, and to become our Lord, and the
great King of Heaven and Earth; able to destroy all his Enemies eternally, and
to reward his servants with a glorious and indefectible Kingdom; all this is
declared in Scripture. So that concerning the full object of Faith manifested
in the whole design of the Gospel, the Scriptures are full, and whatever is to
be believed of the attributes belonging to this prime and full object, all that
also is in Scripture fully declared. And all the acts of Faith, the
antecedents, the formal, and the consequent acts of faith, are there expressly
commanded; viz. to know God, to believe in his name and word, to believe in his
Son; and to obey his Son, by the consequent acts of Faith; all this is set down
in Scripture: in which not only we are commanded to keep the Commandments, but
we are told which they are. There we are taught to honor and fear, to love and
obey God, and his Holy Son; to fear and reverence him, to adore and invocate
him, to crave his aid, and to give him thanks; not to trust in, or call upon
any thing that has no Divine Empire over us, or Divine Excellence in it self.
It is so particular in recounting all the parts of Duty, that it descends
specially to enumerate the duties of Kings and subjects, Bishops and people,
Parents and children, Masters and servants; to show love and faithfulness to
our equals; to our inferiors counsel and help, favor and good will, bounty
and kindness, a good word and a good deed: The Scripture has given us
Commandments concerning our very thoughts; to be thankful and hospitable, to be
humble and complying; what ever good thing was taught by any or all the
Philosophers in the world, all that and much more is in the Scriptures, and
that in a much better manner: And that it might appear that nothing could be
wanting, the very degrees and the order of virtues is there provided for. And
if all this be not the high way to salvation, and sufficient to all intents of
God and the souls of men; let any man come forth and say as Christ said to the
young man, Restat adhuc unum, there is one thing wanting yet, and let him show
it. But let us consider a little further.

5. What is, or what can be wanting to the fullness of Scripture? Is not all
that we know of the life and death of Jesus, set down in the writings of the
New Testament? Is there any one Miracle that ever Christ did, the notice of
which is conveyed to us by tradition? Do we know any thing that Christ did or
said but what is in Scripture? Some things were reported to have been said by
Christ secretly to the Apostles, and by the Apostles secretly to some favorite
Disciples; but some of these things are not believed; and none of the other is
known: so that either we must conclude that the Scripture contains fully all
things of Faith and Obedience, or else we have no Gospel at all; for, except
what is in Scripture, we have not a sufficient record of almost one saying, or
one miracle. S. Paul quotes one saying of Christ which is not in any of the
four Gospels, but it is in the Scriptures, It is better to give then to
receive; and S. Hierom records another, Be never very glad, but when you see
your Brother live in charity. If S. Paul had not written the first and
transmitted it in Scripture, we had not known it any more than those many other
which are lost for not being written: and for the quotation of S. Hierom, it is
true, it is a good saying; but whether they were Christ's words or no, we have
but a single testimony. Now then, how is it possible that the Scriptures should
not contain all things necessary to salvation; when of all the words of Christ
in which certainly all necessary things to salvation must needs be contained,
or else they were never revealed; there is not any one saying, or miracle, or
story of Christ in any thing that is material, preserved in any indubitable
record, but in Scripture alone?

6. That the Scriptures do not contain in them all things necessary to
salvation, is the fountain of many great and Capital errors; I instance in the
whole doctrine of the Libertines. Familists, Quakers, and other Enthusiasts,
which issue from this corrupted fountain. For this, that the Scriptures do need
a Suppletory, that they are not perfect and sufficient to salvation of
themselves, is the (...) the great Fundamental both of the Roman religion, and
that of the Libertines and Quakers, and those whom in Germany they call
Spirituales; such as David George, Harry Nicholas, Swenckfeld, Sebastian Franc,
and others. These are the men that call the Scriptures, The letter of the
Scripture, the dead letter, insufficient, inefficacious. This is but the sheath
and the scabberd, the bark and the shadow, a carcass void of the internal
light, not apt to imprint a perfect knowledge in us of what is necessary to
salvation. But the Roman Doctors say the same things. We know who they are that
call the Scriptures, the Outward letter, Ink thus figured in a book, J. S. in
Sure scoting, and in 4. Append.
Unsensed characters, waxen-natur'd words not yet sensed, apt to blunder and
confound, but to clear little or nothing; these are as bad words as the other,
and some of them the same; and all draw a long tail of evil consequents behind
them. 1. From this Principle as it is promoted by the Fanatics, they derive a
wandering, unsettled, and a dissolute religion. For, they supplying the
insufficiency of Scripture by an inward word, which being only within, it is
subject to no discipline, reducible into no order, not submitted to the spirits
of the Prophets, and has no rule by which it can be directed, examined or
judged; Hence comes the infinite variety and contradictions of religion,
commenced by men of this persuasion. A religion that wanders from day to day,
from fancy to fancy, and alterable by every new illusion. A religion in which
some man shall be esteemed an infallible Judge to day; and next week, another:
but it may happen that any man may have his turn, and any mischief may be
believed and acted, if the Devil get into the chair. 2. From this very same
Principle, as it is promoted by the Papists, they derive a religion imperious,
interested, and tyrannical. For, as the Fanatics supply the insufficiency of
Scripture by the word internal; so do the Roman Doctors by the authority of the
Church: but when it comes to practice, as the Fanatic give the supreme power
of teaching and defining to the chief Elder in the love; so do the Papists,
especially the Jesuits, give it to the Pope: and the difference is not, that
the Fanatics give the supreme judgment to some one, and the Papists give it
to the whole Church; for these also give it but to one man, to the Pope, whose
judgment, voice, and definition must make up the deficiencies of Scripture.
But because the Fanatics (as it happens) change their Judge every month,
therefore they have an ambulatory religion: but that of the Roman way
establishes Tyranny; because their Judge being one, not in person but in
succession, and having always the same interest, and having already resolved
upon their way, and can when they list go further upon the stock of the same
Principles, and being established by humane power will unalterably persist in
their right and their wrong, and will never confess an Error, and are impatient
of contradiction; and therefore they impose irremediably, and what they please,
upon Consciences, of which they have made themselves Judges. Now for these
things there is no remedy but from Scripture; which if it be allowed full,
perfect, and sufficient unto all the things of God, then whatsoever either of
these parties say, must be tried by Scripture, it must be showed to be there,
or be rejected. But to avoid the trial there, they tell you the Scripture is
but a dead letter, Unsensed Characters, words without sense, or unsensed; and
therefore, this must be supplied by the inward word (says one;) by the Pope's
word in Cathedra, says the other; and then both the Inward word, and the Pope's
word, shall rule and determine every thing; and the Scriptures will signify
nothing: but as under pretense of the word Internal, every new thing shall pass
for the word of God; so it shall do also under the Roman pretense. For not he
that makes a Law, but he that expounds the Law, gives the final measures of
Good or Evil. It follows from hence that nothing but the Scripture's
sufficiency, can be a sufficient limit to the inundation of evils, which may
enter from these parties relying upon the same false Principle. My Last
argugument is from Tradition it self: For,

7. If we enquire upon what grounds the primitive Church did rely for their
whole Religion, we shall find they knew none else but the Scriptures; Vbi
Scriptum? was their first inquiry: Do the Prophets and the Apostles, the
Evangelists, or the Epistles say so? Read it there, and then teach it; else
reject it: they call upon their Charges in the words of Christ, Search the
Scriptures; they affirm that the Scriptures are full, that they are a perfect
Rule, that they contain all things necessary to salvation: and from hence they
confuted all Heresies.

This I shall clearly prove by abundant testimonies: Of which though many of
them have been already observed by very many learned persons; yet because I
have added others, not so noted, and have collected with diligence and care,
and have rescued them from Elusory answers; I have therefore chosen to
represent them together; hoping they may be of more usefulness than trouble,
because I have here made a trial, whether the Church of Rome be in good earnest
or no, when she pretends to follow Tradition; or how it is that she expects a
tradition shall be proved. For this Doctrine of the Scripture's sufficiency I
now shall prove by a full tradition; therefore, if she believes Tradition, let
her acknowledge this tradition which is so fully proved; and if this do not
amount to a full probation, then it is but reasonable to expect from them, that
they never obtrude upon us any thing for tradition, or any tradition for
necessary to be believed, till they have proved it such; by proofs more, and
more clear, than this Essay concerning the sufficiency and perfection of the
Divine Scriptures.

I begin with S. Irenaeus. Rectissime quidem scientes quia Scripturae quidem
perfectae sunt, quippe a verbo Dei and Spiritu ejus dictae. lib. 2. cap. 47. and
[We know that the Scriptures are perfect, for they are spoken by the word of
God, and by his Spirit. [Therefore] Lib. 4. c. 66. Legite diligentius id quod
ab Apostolis est Evangelium nobis datum, and legite diligentius Prophetas, and
invenietis Vniversam actionem, and omnem doctrinam Domini nostri praedicatam in
ipsis.
read diligently the Gospel, given unto us by the Apostles; and read diligently
the Prophets, and you shall find every action and the whole doctrine, and the
whole passion of our Lord preached in them. [And indeed] we have received the
Economy of our salvation by no other but by those, by whom the Gospel came to
us; which truly they then preached, but afterward by the will of God delivered
to us in the Scriptures, which was to be the pillar and ground to our Faith]
These are the words of this Saint, who was one of the most ancient Fathers of
the Church, a Greek by birth, by his dignity and employment a Bishop in France,
and so most likely to know the sense and rule of the Eastern and Western
Churches.

Next to S. Irenaeus, Strom. lib. 7. P. 757 edit. Par^s 1629.
we have the Doctrine of S. Clemens of Alexandria in these words. He has lost
the being a man of God, and of being faithful to the Lord, who has kicked
against Tradition Ecclesiastical, and has turned to the opinions of humane
Heresies.] What is this Tradition Ecclesiastical; and where is it to be found?
That follows But he, who returning out of Error, obeys the Scriptures, and has
permitted his life to truth, he is of a Man in a manner made a God. For the
Lord is the principle of our Doctrine, who by the Prophets and the Gospel, and
the blessed Apostles at sundry times, and in diverse manners, leads us from the
beginning to the end. He that is faithful of himself is worthy of faith in the
Voice and Scripture of the Lord, which is usually exercised through the Lord to
the benefit of men; for this (Scripture) we use for the finding out of things,
this we use as the rule of judging -- But if it be not enough to speak our
opinions absolutely, but that we must prove what we say, we expect no testimony
that is given by men, but by the voice of the Lord we prove the Question; and
this is more worthy of belief than any demonstration, or rather it is the only
demonstration, by which knowledge they who have tasted of the Scriptures alone,
are faithful.] Afterward he tells how the Scriptures are a perfect
demonstration of the Faith: Perfectly demonstrating out of the Scriptures
themselves, concerning themselves; we (speak or) persuade demonstratively of
the Faith. Although even they that go after Heresies, do dare to use the
Scriptures of the Prophets. But first they use not all, neither them that are
perfect, nor as the whole body and contexture of the Prophecy does dictate: but
choosing out those things which are spoken ambiguously, they draw them to their
own opinion.] Then he tells how we shall best use and understand the Scriptures
[Let every one consider what is agreeable to the Almighty Lord God, and what
becomes him, and in that let him confirm every thing from those things which
are demonstrated from the Scriptures, out of those and the like Scriptures. And
he adds that, It is the guise of Heretics, when they are overcome by showing
that they oppose Scriptures, -- Yet still they choose to follow that which to
them seems evident, rather than that which is spoken of the Lord by the
Prophets, and by the Gospel, and what is proved and confirmed by the testimony
of the Apostles:] and at last concludes, (...). page 755.
they become impious, because they believe not the Scriptures;] and a little
before this, he asks the Heretics, [Will they deny, or will they grant there
is any demonstration? I suppose they will all grant, there is; except those,
who also deny that there are senses. But if there be any demonstration, it is
necessary to descend to Questions, and (...).
from the Scriptures themselves to learn demonstratively, how the Heresies are
fallen; and on the contrary, how the most perfect knowledge is in the truth and
the ancient Church. But again, they that are ready to spend their time in the
best things, will not give over seeking for truth, (...).
until they have found the demonstration from the Scriptures themselves. And
after this, adds his advice to Christians, To wax old in the Scriptures, and
thence to seek for demonstrations. These things he spoke, not only by way of
Caution to the Christians, but also of Opposition to the Gnostics; who were
very busy in pretending ancient traditions. This is the discourse of that
great Christian Philosopher S. Clement; from which, besides the direct
testimony given to the fullness and sufficiency of Scripture in all matters of
Faith, or Questions in Religion; we find him affirming that the Scriptures are
a certain, and the only, demonstration of these things; they are the (...), the
rule of judging the controversies of faith; that the tradition Ecclesiastical,
that is, the whole doctrine taught by the Church of God, and preached to all
men, is in the Scripture; and therefore that it is the plenary and perfect
repository of tradition, that is, of the doctrine delivered by Christ and his
Apostles: and they who believe not these, are Impious. And lest any man should
say that, suppose Scripture do contain all things necessary to Salvation, yet
it is necessary that tradition, or some infallible Church do expound them, and
then it is as long as it is broad, and comes to the same issue; S. Clement
tells us how the Scriptures are to be expounded; saying, that they who rely
upon them, must expound Scriptures by Scriptures, and by the analogy of faith,
Comparing spiritual things with spiritual, one place with another, a part with
the whole, and all by the proportion to the Divine Attributes. This was the way
of the Church in S. Clement' s time; and this is the way of our Churches. But
let us see how this affair went in other Churches and times, and whether there
be a succession and an Universality of this doctrine of the sufficiency of
Scripture in all the affairs of God.

The next is Tertullian, Contr. Hermog. cap. 22.
who writing against Hermogenes that affirmed God made the world not out of
nothing, but of I know not what praeexistent matter; appeals to Scripture in
the Question, whose fullness Tertullian adores; Let the shop of Hermogenes show
that this thing is written. If it be not written, let him fear the Woe
pronounced against them that add to or take from Scripture.] Against this
testimony it is objected, that here Tertullian speaks but of one question: De
verb. Dei, lib 4. c. 11. Sect.
So Bellarmine answers: and from him E. W. and A. L. To which the reply is
easy: Profert undecimo.
For when Tertullian challenges Hermogenes to show his proposition in
Scripture, he must mean that the fullness of the Scripture was sufficient not
only for this, but for all Questions of religion, or else it had been an ill
way of arguing, to bring a negative argument from Scripture, against this
alone. For why was Hermogenes tied to prove this proposition from Scripture
more than any other? Either Scripture was the rule for all, or not for that.
For suppose the heretic had said, It is true, it is not in Scripture; but I
have it from tradition, or it was taught by my forefathers: there had been
nothing to have replied to this; but that, It may be, he had no tradition for
it. Now if Hermogenes had no tradition, then indeed he was tied to show it in
Scripture; but then Tertullian should have said, let Hermogenes show where it
is written, or that it is a tradition: for if the pretending and proving
tradition (in case there were any such pretense in this Question) had been a
sufficient answer; then Tertullian had no sufficient argument against
Hermogenes by calling for authority from Scripture: but he should have said, If
it be not scriptum, or traditum, written or delivered; let Hermogenes fear the
woe to the adders or detracters. But if we will suppose Tertullian spoke wisely
and sufficiently, he must mean, that the Scripture must be the Rule in all
Questions, and no doctrine is to be taught that is not taught there. But to put
this thing past dispute, Tertullian himself extends this rule to an universal
comprehension; And by this instrument declares, that heretics are to be
confuted, [Take from the heretics that which they have in common with the
heathens; viz. (their Ethnic learning), and let them dispute their questions
by Scripture alone, and they can never stand.] By which it is plain, that the
Scripture is sufficient for all faith, because it is sufficient to convince all
heresies and deviations from the faith; For which very reason the heretics
also (as he observes) attempted to prove their propositions by arguments from
Scripture; for indeed, there was no other way; because the Articles of faith
are to be proved by the writings of faith, De Praescript.
that is, the Scripture; that was the Rule: How contrary this is to the
practice and doctrine of Rome at this day, we easily find by their Doctors
charging all heresies upon the Scriptures, as occasioned by them; and
forbidding the people to read them for fear of corrupting their weak heads;
nay, it has been prohibited to certain Bishops to read the Scriptures, lest
they become heretics. And this folly has proceeded so far that Erasmus tells
us of a Dominican, In Epist.
who being urged in a Scholastical disputation, with an argument from
Scripture, cried out, It was a Lutheran way of disputation, and protested
against the answering it: which, besides that it is more than a vehement
suspicion that these men find the Scriptures not to look like a friend to their
propositions; it is also a manifest procedure contrary to the wisdom, religion,
and Economy of the primitive Church.

The next I note, Tract. 5. in Matthew. versus finem.
is Origin: who when he propounded a Question concerning the Angels Guardians
of little children, viz. When the Angels were appointed to them? at their
Birth, or at their Baptism? He adds, [You see, Vide etiam Origin. bomil. 25.
in Matthew. homil. 7. in Ezekiel. hom l. ^. in Jerem. Quos locos citat Bellarm. ubi
supra, Sect. Secundo profert.
he that will discuss both of them warily, it is his part to produce Scripture
for testimony, agreeing to one of them both.] That was the way of the Doctors
then. And Scripture is so full and perfect to all intents and purposes, that
for the confirmation of our discourses, Scripture is to be brought, says
Origin. Jesum Christum scimus Deum: quaeri^us verba quae dicta sunt, juxta
personae exponere dignitatem. Quapropter necesse nobis est Scripturas sanctas
in testimonium vocare: sensus quippe nostri, and enarrationes, sine his
testibus non habent fidem.
We know Jesus Christ is God, and we seek to expound the words which are spoken
according to the dignity of the person. Wherefore it is necessary for us to
call the Scriptures into testimony; for our meanings and enarrations, without
these witnesses have no belief.] To these words Bellarmine answers most
childishly: saying, that Origin speaks of the hardest questions, such as for
the most part traditions are not about. But it is evident that, therefore
Origin requires testimony of Scriptures, not because of the difficulty of
things to be inquired; but because without such testimony, they are not to be
believed. For so are his very words, and therefore whether they be easy or
hard, if they be not in Scripture, the Questions will be indeterminable. That
is the sense of Origen' s argument. In Epist. ad Romans lib 3.
But more plainly yet; [After these things, as his custom is, he will affirm
(or prove) from the holy Scriptures what he had said; and also gives an example
to the Doctors of the Church, that those things which they speak to the people,
they should prove them, not as produced by their own sentences, but defended by
divine testimonies; for if he so great, and such an Apostle, believes not that
the authority of his saying can be sufficient, unless he teaches that those
things which he says are written in the Law, and the Prophets: how much rather
ought we who are the least, observe this thing, that we do not, when we teach,
produce our own, but the sentences of the Holy Ghost:] Add to this what he says
in another place; Tract. 23. in Matthew.
As our Savior imposed silence upon the Sadduces by the word of his Doctrine,
and faithfully convinced that false opinion which they thought to be truth; so
also shall the followers of Christ do, by the examples of Scripture, by which
according to sound Doctrine, every voice of Pharaoh ought to be silent.

The next in order is S. Cyprian; who indeed speaks for tradition: not meaning
the modus tradendi, but the doctrina tradita; for it is such a tradition as is
in Scripture; the doctrine delivered first by word of mouth, and then consigned
in Scripture. Epist. ad Pompeium.
[Let nothing be innovated but that is delivered: Whence is that tradition?
whether descending from the Lord's, and from the Evangelical authority, or
coming from the Commandments and Epistles of the Apostles? For that those
things are to be done which are written, God witnesses, and propounds to Jesus
Nave, saying; The Book of this Law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou
shall meditate in it day and night, that thou may observe to do all things
which are written. Our Lord also sending his Apostles, commands the nations to
be baptized and taught, that they may observe all things whatsoever he has
commanded. If therefore it be either commanded in the Gospel, or in the
Epistles of the Apostles, that they that come from any Heresy, should not be
baptized, but that hands should be imposed upon them unto repentance, then let
even this holy tradition be observ'd] This Doctrine and Counsel of S. Cyprian,
lib. 4. de Bapt. contra Donatist. cap. 3. etc. 5.
Bellarmine says was one of the Errors of S. Cyprian: but S. Austin commends it
as the best way. And this procedure is also the same that the Church in the
descending ages always followed: of which there can in the world be no plainer
testimony given, than in the words of S. Cyril of Jerusalem; and it was in the
High Questions of the Holy and mysterious Trinity; Catech. ^. and 5. and 12.
and 16. and 18. Illuminat. (...). Catech. 4. Illuminat.
concerning which, he advises them to [retain that zeal in their minds, which
by heads and summaries is expounded to you, but, if God grant, shall according
to my strength be demonstrated to you by Scripture. (...).
For it behooveth us not to deliver, no not so much as the least thing of the
holy mysteries of Faith without the holy Scriptures. Neither give credit to me
speaking, unless what is spoken be demonstrated by the Holy Scriptures. For
that is the security of our Faith, not which is from our inventions, but from
the demonstration of the Holy Scriptures.]

To the same purpose in the Dissuasive was produced the Testimony of S. Basil;
S. Basil. moral.
but the words which were not there set down at large, Reg. 8. c. 12. edit.
Paris. 1547. ex officina Carol* ^uillard.
are these. [What's proper for the faithful man? That with a certain fullness of
mind, he believes the force of those things to be true, which are spoken in the
Scripture, and that he rejects nothing, and that he dares not to decree any
thing that is new. For whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin, but Faith is by
hearing, Vide etiam Epist. 80. Stemus itaque arbitratui a Deo inspiratae
Scripturae.] Question erat an dicendum in Deo tres hypostases, and vnam naturam;
apud Bellar. de verbo Dei non scripio lib. 4. cap. 11. Sect. Alium locum.
and hearing by the word of God: without doubt, since whatsoever is without the
Scripture is not of Faith, Vide etiam Reg. 72. c. 1. cum ti^ulo praefixo.
capiti.
it is a Sin.] These words are so plain, as no Paraphrase is needful to
illustrate them, to which may be added those fiercer words of the same Saint.
[It is a manifest defection from the Faith and a conviction of Pride, Homil. de
vera fide. (...), etc.
either to reject any thing of what is written, or to introduce any thing that
is not, since our Lord Jesus Christ has said, My sheep hear my voice; and a
little before he said the same thing: A stranger they will not follow, but will
fly from him; because they know not the voice of strangers.] By which words S.
Basil plainly declares, that the whole voice and words of Christ are set down
in Scripture, and that all things else is the voice of strangers. And therefore
[the Apostle does most vehemently forbid (by an example taken from men) lest
any thing of those which are in Scripture be taken away, or (which God forbid)
any thing be added.] To these words Bellarmine, and his followers that write
against the Dissuasive, answer, that S. Basil speaks against adding to the
Scripture things contrary to it, and things so strange from it, as to be
invented out of their own head: and that he also speaks of certain particular
Heresies. (...) in the Pr^face 2.
Which endeavor to escape from the pressure of these words, is therefore very
vain, because S. Basil was not then disputing against any particular Heresies,
as teaching any thing against Scripture, or of their own head; but he was about
to describe the whole Christian Faith: And that he may do this with
faithfulness and simplicity, and without reproof, he declares he will do it
from the holy Scriptures; for it is infidelity and pride to do otherwise; and
therefore what is not in the Scriptures, if it be added to the faith, it is
contrary to it, as contrary as unfaithfulness or infidelity: and what soever is
not delivered by the Spirit of God, is an invention of man, if offered as a
part of the Christian Faith. And therefore Bellarmine and and his followers,
make here a distinction where there is no difference. S. Basil here declared,
that as formerly he had it always fixed in mind to fly every voice, and every
sentence which is a stranger to the doctrine of the Lord, so now also at this
time.] Ibidem in seq^entibus.
viz. when he was to set down the whole Christian Faith. Neither can there be
hence any escaping by saying Truth will out page 3.
that nothing indeed is to be added to the Scriptures; but yet to the faith
something is to be reckoned, which is not in Scripture. For although the Church
of Rome does that also, putting more into the Canon than was among the Jews
acknowledged, or by the Primitive Church of Christians; yet besides this, S.
Basil having having said, Vbi supra.
Whatsoever is not in the Scriptures, is not of faith, and therefore it is a
sin; he says also by certain consequence, That to add to the Scriptures, is all
one, as to add to the Faith. And therefore he exhorts even the Novices to study
the Scriptures: In Regul. brev. reg. 95. (...).
for to his 95th question, Whether it be fit for Novices presently to learn the
things of the Scripture? he answers, It is right, and it is necessary, that
those things which appertain to use, every one should learn from the
Scriptures, both for the replenishing of their mind with piety, as also that
they may not be accustomed to humane traditions. By which words he not only
declares, that by the Scriptures our minds are abundantly filled with piety;
but that humane traditions (by which he means every thing that is not contained
in Scripture) are not to be received, but ought to be, and are best of all
banished from our minds by entertaining of Scripture. To the same purpose are
his words in his Ethics, Moral. Regul. 26.
[Whatsoever we say or do ought to be confirmed by the testimony of Divinity
inspired by Scriptures, both for the full persuasion of the good, and the
confusion or damnation of evil things.] There Is your rule; that is the ground of
all true faith.

And therefore S. Athanasius speaking concerning the Nicene Council, Epist. ad
Epicte^um Corinthiorum Episc.
made no scruple that the question was sufficiently determined concerning the
proper Divinity of the Son of God, because it was determined, and the faith was
expounded according to the Scriptures; and affirms that the faith so determined
was sufficient for the reproof of all impiety (meaning in the Article of
Christ's Divinity) and for the establishment of the Orthodox faith in Christ.]
De Incarnat.
Nay, he affirms that the Catholic Christians will neither speak, nor endure
to hear any thing in religion that is a stranger to Scripture; it being an evil
heart of immodesty to speak those things which are not written.] Which words I
the rather remark, Idem Athanas. in Exhort. ad Monachos.
because this Article of the Consubstantiality of Christ with the Father, is
brought as an instance (by the Romanists) of the necessity of tradition, to
make up the insufficiency of Scripture. But not in this only, but for the
preaching of the truth indefinitely, Moral. contra Gentiles, in (...).
that is, the whole truth of the Gospel, he affirms the Scriptures to be
sufficient. For writing to Macarius a Priest of Alexandria, he tells him that
the knowledge of true and divine religion and piety, does not much need the
ministry of man; and that he might abundantly draw this forth from the divine
books and letters: for truly the holy and divinely-inspir'd Scriptures are
sufficient for the preaching of the truth; Coloniae ex offic^^ Melc^^^^^
Novefiani. 1548.
ad omnem instructionem veritatis; so the Latin Translation; for the whole
instruction of truth; or the instruction of all truth. But because Macarius
desired rather to hear others teach him this doctrine and true religion, than
himself to draw it from Scripture, S. Athanasius tells him, that there are many
written monuments of the Holy Fathers, and our masters, which if men will
diligently read over, he shall learn the interpretation of Scriptures, and
obtain that notion of truth which he desires.] Which is perfectly the same
advice which the Church of England commands her Sons; that they shall teach
nothing but what the Fathers and Doctors of the Church draw forth from
Scriptures.

The same principal doctrine in the whole is taught frequently by S.
Chrysostom, Homil. 58. (...) Johan.
who compares the Scriptures to a Door, which is shut to hinder the heretics
from entering in, and introduce us to God, and to the knowledge of God.] This
surely is sufficient; if it does this, it does all that we need; and if it does
not, S. Chrysostom was greatly deceived; and so are we, and so were all the
Church of God in all the first ages. But he is constant in the same
affirmative: Homil 9. in 2 Timoth.
[If there be need to learn, or to be ignorant, thence we shall learn it; Idem
in Psalm. 95. versus finem.
if to confute or argue that which is false, thence we shall draw it: if to be
corrected or chastis'd to exhortation; if any thing be wanting for our comfort,
and that we ought to have it, nevertheless from thence (from the Scriptures) we
learn it. That the man be perfect: therefore without it he cannot be perfected.
In stead of me (he says) thou have the Scriptures; if thou desire to learn
any thing, hence thou may. But if he writes these things to Timothy, who was
filled with the holy Spirit, how much more must we think these things spoken to
us? To the same purpose he discourses largely in his eighth Homily on the
Epistle to the Hebrews, Homil. 9. in Coloss. and in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
which is here too long to transcribe. Let no man look for another master.
Homil. 49. in Matthew. 23. oper. imperfecti.
Thou have the Oracles of God; No man teaches thee like to them.] Because ever
since heresy did infest those Churches, there can be no proof of true
Christianity, nor any other refuge for Christians, who would know the truth of
faith, but that of the Divine Scripture: but now by no means is it known by
them, who would know which is the true Church of Christ, but only by the
Scriptures.] De verbo Dei, l. 4. c. 11. Sect. Sexto profert.
Bellarmine, very learnedly, says that these words were put into this book by
the Arians, but because he offers at no pretense of reason for any such
interpolation, and it being without cause to suspect it, though the Author of
it had been an Arian: because the Arians were never noted to differ from the
Church in the point of the Scriptures sufficiency; I look upon this as a
pitiful shift of a man that resolved to say any thing rather than confess his
error. And at last he concludes with many words to the same purpose, [Our Lord
therefore knowing what confusion of things would be in the last days, therefore
commands that Christians, who in Christianity would receive the firmness of
true faith, should fly to nothing but to the Scriptures; otherwise, if they
regard other things, they will be scandalized and perish, not understanding
which is the true Church, and by this shall fall into the abomination of
desolation, which stands in the holy places of the Church.] Idem homil. 41. in
Matthew.
The sum is this, delivered by the same Author, Whatsoever is sought for unto
salvation it is now filled full in the Scriptures. Therefore there is in this
feast, nothing less then what is necessary to the salvation of mankind.] Sixtus
Senensis, though he greatly approves this book, and brings arguments to prove
it to be S. Chrysostom's, and alleges from others, that it has been for many
ages approved by the Commandment of the Church, which among the Divine laws
reads some of these Homilies as of S. Chrysostom; and that it is cited in the
ordinary and authentic glosses, in the Catena's upon the Gospels, in the
decrees of the Popes, and in the Theological sums of great Divine; yet he would
have it purged from these words here quoted (as also from many others.) But
when they cannot show by any probable argument that any heretics have
interpolated these words; and that these are so agreeing to other words of S.
Chrysostom, spoken in his unquestioned works; he shows himself and his party
greatly pinched, and for no other reason rejects the words, but because they
make against him, which is a plain self-conviction and self-condemnation.
Dissuasive in the Preface.
Theophilus Alexandrinus is already quoted in these words, and they are indeed
very severe; It is the part of a Devilish spirit to think any thing divine
without the authority of the holy Scriptures.] Here E. W. and A. L. say, the
Dissuasive left out some words of Theophilus. It is true, but so did a good
friend of theirs before me; for they are just so quoted by Lib. 4. de verbo
Dei, cap. 11. Sect. Profert nono Theophilum.
Bellarmine; who in all reason would have put them in, if they had made way for
any answer to the other words. The words are these as they lie entirely. Truly
I cannot know with what temerity Origin, speaking so many things, In censuris
super Matthew. expositoribus.
and following his own error, not the authority of Scriptures, does dare to
publish such things which will be hurtful. And a little after adds, Sed
ignorans quod demoniaci spiritus esset instinctus, sophismata humanarum mentium
sequi and aliquid extra Scripturarum authoritatem putare Divinum.] Sophisms of
his own mind, and things that are not in Scriptures are explicative one of
another: and if he had not meant it merely diabolical to induce any thing
without the authority of Scripture, he ought to have added the other part of
the rule, and have called it Devilish, to add any thing without Scripture or
tradition, which because he did not, we suppose he had no cause to do; and then
whatsoever is not in Scripture Theophilus calls the sophism of humane minds. He
spoke it indefinitely and universally; Paschal. 11. vide etiam, Paschal. 3.
It is true, it is instanced in a particular against Origin, but upon that
occasion he gives a general rule. And therefore it is a weak subterfuge of
Bellarmine to say, that Theophilus only speaks concerning certain Apocryphal
books, which some would esteem Divine: but, by the way, I know not how well
Bellarmine will agree with my adversaries; for one or two of them say, A. L.
and E. W. page 4.
Theophilus spoke against Origin, for broaching fopperies of his own; and
particularly, that Christ's flesh was consubstantial with the Godhead: and if
they say true, then Bellarmine in his want invented an answer of his own
without any ground of truth. But all agree in this, that these words were
spoken in these cases only: Lib. 4. De verb. Dei, cap. 11.
and it is foolish (says Bellarmine) to wrest that which is spoken of one
thing, to another. But I desire that it may be observed, that to the testimony
of Tertullian, it is answered, He speaks but of one particular. To that of S.
Basil, it is answered, He spoke but against a few particular heresies. And to
one of the testimonies of S. Athanasius, it is answered, He spoke but of one
particular, viz. the heresy of Samosatenus; and to this of Theophilus
Alexandrinus it is just so answered; he spoke likewise but of this particular,
viz. that against Origin: and to that of S. Hierom Cited in the next page.
in 23. Matthew. he only spoke of a particular opinion pretended out of some
apocryphal book; and to another of S. Austin, It is spoken but of a particular
matter; Lib. de bono vid^itatis, c. 1.
the case of widowhood. But if Hermogenes, and Origin, and Samosatenus, and the
heretics S. Basil speaks of, and they in S. Hierom, be all to be confuted by
Scripture, and by nothing else; nay, are therefore rejected, because they are
not in Scripture; if all these Fathers confute all these heresies by a negative
argument from Scripture; then the rule which they establish must be more than
particular. It is fitted to all as well as to any: for all particulars make a
general. This way they may answer 500 testimonies; if 500 Authors should upon
so many several occasions speak general words. But in the world no answer could
be weaker, and no elusion more trifling and less plausible could have been
invented. However, these and other concurrent testimonies will put this
question beyond such captious answers.

S. Hierom was so severe in this Article, that disputing what Zechary it was,
who was slain between the Porch and the Altar, Whether it was the last but one
of the small Prophets, S. Hierom. in 23. Matthew. Hoc quiae de Scripturis non
habet authoritatem, eadem facilitate contemnitur qua pr^batur. Et (...) Epist.
ad Titum. Sine authoritate Scripturarum garrulitas non habet fidem, nisi
viderentur perver sam doctrinam etiam Divi^is testimoniis roborare. Sic
citantur verba apud Bellarm. qui sequutus Kemnitium in objectionibus
responsi^nem de been esse paravit. Non curavit tamen nec metuit ne non recte
cuarentur verba.
or the Father of the Baptist; he would admit neither, because it was not in
the Scriptures; in these words [This because it has not authority from
Scripture, is with the same easiness despised as it is approv'd] And they that
prattle without the authority of Scriptures have no faith, or trust; that is,
none would believe them; unless they did seem to strengthen their perverse
doctrine with Divine testimonies: but most pertinent and material to the whole
inquiry are these words; In c. 1. Aggaei. Sed and alia, quae absque authoritate
and testimoniis Scripturarum quasi traditione Apostolica sponte reperiunt atque
contingunt, percu it gladius Dei.
[Those things which they make and find as it were by Apostlical tradition,
without the authority and testimonies of Scripture, the word of God smites.] By
which words it appears, that in S. Hierom's time it was usual to pretend
traditions Apostolical: and yet that all which was then, so early, called so,
was not so; and therefore all later pretenses, still as they are later, are the
worse: and that the way to try those pretenses, was the authority and testimony
of Scriptures; without which testimony they were to be rejected, and God would
punish them. Adver^ Helvid.
And disputing against Helvidius, in defense of the perpetual Virginity of the
Blessed Virgin. [But as we deny not those things which are written; so, we
refuse those things which are not written: We believe our Lord to be born of a
Virgin, because we read it: We believe not, Mary was married after her
delivery, because we read it not.] And therefore this very point the Fathers
endeavor to prove by Scripture; Ambr. tom. ^.
particularly, Ep. 9. Epiphan. haeres. 78.
S. Epiphanius, S. Ambrose, and S. Austin; August. de haeres. 84. S. Basil* de
human. gen Christi Homil. 25.
though S. Basil believed it not to be a point of faith: and when he offered to
prove it by a tradition concerning the slaying of Zechary upon that account, S.
Hierom rejects the tradition as trifling; as before, I have cited him. And
therefore S. John Damascen going upon the same Principle, Lib. 1. de orthod.
fide cap. 1 (...).
says, We look for nothing beyond these things which are delivered by the Law
and the Prophets, the Apostles and Evangelists.

And after all this, S. Austin, who is not the least amongst the greatest
Doctors of the Church, is very clear in this particular [If any one, Lib. 3.
cont. lit.
concerning Christ, or his Church, Pet^^^ani. c. 6.
or concerning any other thing which belongs to faith, or our life; I will not
say, if we, but (what Paul has added) if an Angel from Heaven shall preach
unto you, Praeter quam in Scripturis legalibus and Evangelicis accepistis,
beside what ye have received in the legal and Evangelical Scriptures, let him
be accursed.] The words Bellarmine quotes, and for an answer to them, says,
that praeter must signify contra; besides, that is, against: and the same is
made use of by Heart the Jesuit, in his Conference; and by the Lovain Doctors.
But if this answer may serve; Non habebis Deos alienos praeter me, may
signify, contra me; and then a man may, Absit mihi gloriari praeterquam in
Cruce Jesu Christi.
for all this Commandment, say, there are two Gods, so one be not contrary to
the other; and the Apostle may glory in any thing else in that sense, in which
he glories in the Cross of Christ; so that thing be not contrary to Christ's
Cross. But S. Austin was a better Grammarian than to speak so improperly.
Praeter, Elegant. lib. 3. cap. 54.
and Praeterquam are all one; as, I am covetous of nothing praeter laudem, vel
praeterquam laudis: Nulli places praeterquam mihi; vel, praeter me. And indeed
Praeterquam, eandem aut prope parem vim obtinet, quam Nisi, said Laurentius
Valla: but to make praeterquam to signify contra quam, is a violence to be
allowed by no Master of the Latin tongue; which all the world knows, S. Austin
was. And if we enquire what signication it has in law; In vocab^lar. utriusque
Juris.
we find it signifies variously indeed, but never to any such purpose. When we
speak of things whose nature is wholly separate, then it signifies Inclusively:
As I give all my vines praeter domum, besides my house; there the house is
supposed also to be given. But if we speak of things which are subordinate and
included in the general, then praeter signifies Exclusively; as I give unto
thee all my Books praeter Augustinum de civitate Dei, besides or except S.
Austin of the City of God: there S. Austins Book is not given: And the reason
of this is, because the last words in this case would operate nothing, S.
August. vocat Scripturas sac^as Divinam stateram. l. 2. contr.
unless they were exclusive; and if in the first they were exclusive, they were
not sense. But that praeterquam should mean only what is contrary; Donat. c. 1^.
is a Novelty taken up without reason, but not without great need. Lib. ^. de
doctr.
But however, that S. Austin did not mean only to reprove them that introduced
into faith and manners, Christ. c. 9. vide eundem l. 1. c. ult. de Consens^
Evangelistarum. [Quicquid Servator de suis factis and dictis nos legere voluit,
hoc scribendum illis tanquam suis manibus imperavit.]
such things which were against Scripture; but such which were besides it, and
whatsoever was not in it, is plain by an established doctrine of his, affirming
that all things which appertain to life and doctrine, are found in those things
which are plainly set down in the Scriptures. And if this be true (as S. Austin
supposed it to be) then who ever adds to this any thing of faith and manners,
though it be not contrary, yet if it be not here, ought to be an anathema,
because of his own he adds to that rule of faith and manners which God (who
only could do it) has made. To this, Lib. 4. de verbo Dei non sc^ipto c. 11.
Bellarmin answers; that S. Austin speaks only of the Creed, and the ten
Commandments: such things which are simply necessary to all. He might have
added, that he speaks of the Lord's Prayer too; and all the other precepts of
the Gospel; and particularly the eight Beatitudes, and the Sacraments. And what
of the infallibility of the Roman Church? Is the belief of that necessary to
all? But that is neither in the Creed, nor the ten Commandments. And what of
the five Precepts of the Church; are they plainly in the Scripture? And after
all this, and much more; if all that belongs to faith and good life be in the
plain places of Scripture; then there is enough to make us wise unto salvation.
And he is a very wise and learned man that is so. For as by faith, S. Austin
understands the whole Christian Faith; so by mores vivendi he understands hope
and charity, as himself in the very place expresses himself. And beyond faith,
hope, and charity, and all things that integrate them, what a Christian need to
know, I have not learned: But if he would learn more yet; there are, in places
less plain, things enough to make us learned unto Curiosity. Briefly, by S.
Austin's doctrine, the Scripture has enough for every one; and in all cases of
necessary Religion; and much more then, what is necessary: nay, there is
nothing besides it that can come into our rule. Lib. de bono vidui^a^. cap. 1.
The Scripture is the consummation or utmost bounded rule of our doctrine that
we may not dare to be wiser than we ought.] And that not only in the Question
of widdow-hood, but in all questions, which belong unto life and manners of
living; as himself in the same place declares. And it is not only for Laics and
vulgar persons, but for all men: and not only for what is merely necessary; 2.
Tim. 3.
but to make us wise, to make us perfect, Salmeron in hun^ locum tom. 15. p.
607. vide plura apud eandem: p. 606.
says the Apostle. And how can this man say, that the Scriptures makes a man
perfect in justice? And he that is perfect in justice, needs no more
revelation: which words are well enlarged by S. Cyril. [The Divine Scripture is
sufficient to make them who are educated in it wise and most approved, Cyril.
Alex. l. 7. contr. Julian.
and having a most sufficient understanding: And to this we need not any
foreign teachers.] But lastly, if in the plain words of Scripture be contained
all that is simply necessary to all; then it is clear, by Bellarmine's
confession, that S. Austin affirmed, that the plain places of Scripture are
sufficient to all Laics and all Idiots, or private persons: and then as it is
very ill done to keep them from the knowledge and use of the Scriptures, which
contain all their duty, both of faith and good life; so it is very unnecessary
to trouble them with any thing else: there being in the world no such treasure
and repository of faith and manners, and that so plain, that it was intended
for all men, and for all such men is sufficient. S. August. ser. 38. ad fratres
in erem^.
[Read the holy Scriptures, wherein you shall find some things to be holden,
and some to be avoided.] This was spoken to the Monks and Brethren in the
Desert, and to them that were to be guides of others, and the pastors of the
reasonable flock; and in that whole Sermon he enumerates the admirable
advantages, fullness and perfection of the Holy Scriptures, out of which
themselves are to be taught, and by the fullness of which they are to teach
others in all things. I shall not be troublesome by adding those many clear
testimonies from other of the Fathers. But I cannot omit that of Anastasius of
Antioch [It is manifest that these things are not to be inquired into, Lib. 8.
anagogic^ contempt. in Hexameron.
which the Scripture has passed over in silence. For the Holy Spirit has
dispensed and administered to us all things which conduce to our profit.] De
voca^. gentium in 2. tem. operum S. Ambros. l. 2. c. 3.
If the Scriptures be silent, who will speak? said S. Prosper: what things we
are ignorant of, from them we learn said Theodoret, In 2. t^m. 3. in illud [ad
docendu^.]
and there is nothing, which the Scriptures deny to dissolve, said Theophylact.
Ibidem.
And the former of these, brings in the Christian, saying to Eranistes. Dial. 1.
Tell not me of your Logisms and Syllogisms; I rely upon Scripture only. But
Rupertus Tuitiensis Commen^. in ^ib. Regum. lib. 3. c. 12.
his words are a fit conclusion to this heap of testimonies [Whatsoever is of
the word of God, whatsoever ought to be known and preached of the Incarnation,
of the true Divinity, and humanity of the Son of God, is so contained in the
two Testaments, that besides these there is nothing ought to be declared or
believed. The whole celestial Oracle is comprehended in these; which we ought
so firmly to know, that besides these, it is not lawful to hear either Man or
Angel.] And all these are nothing else, but a full subscription to, and an
excellent commentary upon, those words of S. Paul, Let no man pretend to be
wise above what is written.

By the concourse of these testimonies of so many Learned, Orthodox, and
Ancient Fathers we are abundantly confirmed in that rule and principle upon
which the whole Protestant, and Christian Religion is established. From hence
we learn all things, and by these we prove all things, and by these we confute
Heresies, and prove every Article of our Faith; according to this we live, and
on these we ground our hope; and whatsoever is not in these, we reject from our
Canon. And indeed, that the Canonical Scriptures should be our only and entire
Rule, we are sufficiently convinced by the title which the Catholic Church
gives, and always has given to the holy Scriptures; for it is (...); the Rule
of Christians for their whole Religion: The word it self, ends this Enquiry;
for it cannot be a Canon if any thing be put to it or taken from it, said lib.
1. contr. Eunom.
S. Basil, (...), S. Chrysostom. Hom. 12. In 3. Philip. Idem dixit Theophyl.
S. Chrysostom, and (...). Varinus.
Varinus.

I hope I have competently proved the tradition I undertook; and by it, that
the holy Scriptures contain all things that are necessary to salvation. The sum
is this, If tradition be not regardable, then the Scriptures alone are: but if
it be regarded, then here is a full Tradition, That the Scriptures are a
perfect rule: for that the Scriptures are the word of God, and contain in them
all the word of God (in which we are concerned,) is delivered by a full consent
of all these, and many other Fathers, and no one Father denies it; which
consent therefore is so great, that if it may not prevail, the topic of
Tradition will be of no use at all to them who would fain adopt it into a part
of the Canon. But this I shall consider more particularly.

Only one thing more I am to add, Concerning the interpretation and finding
out the sense and meaning of the Scriptures. For though the Scriptures be
allowed to be a sufficient repository of all that is necessary to salvation;
yet we may mistake our way, if we have not some infallible Judge of their sense.

To him therefore that shall ask, How we shall interpret and understand the
Scriptures? I shall give that answer which I have learned from those Fathers,
whose testimony I have alleged, to prove the fullness and sufficiency of
Scripture. For if they were never so full, yet if it be fons signatus, and the
waters of salvation do not issue forth, to refresh the souls of the weary, full
they may be in themselves, but they are not sufficient for us, nor for the work
of God, in the salvation of man. But that it may appear that the Scriptures are
indeed written by the hand of God, and therefore no way deficient from the end
of their design, God has made them plain and easy to all people that are
willing and obedient.

So S. Cyril, Lib. 9. contr. Julian.
Nihil in Scripturis difficile est iis qui in illis versantur ut decet. It is
our own fault, our prejudice, our foolish expectations, our carnal fancies, our
interests and partialities make the Scriptures difficult. The Apostles did not,
would not, could not understand their Master and Lord, when he told them of his
being put to death; They looked for some other thing: and by that measure they
would understand what was spoken, and by nothing else. But to them that are
conversant in Scriptures as they ought, nothing is difficult; So S. Cyril: That
is, nothing that is necessary for them to know; nothing that is necessary to
make us wise unto salvation, which is the great end of man. To this purpose are
the words of S. Austin, In Psalm. 8.
Inclinavit Deus Scripturas ad infantium and lactentium Capacitatem. God has
made the Scriptures to stoop to the Capacity of babes and sucklings.] that so
out of their mouths he may perfect praise. Homil. prima in Matthew.
And S. Chrysostom says, that the Scriptures are faciles ad intelligendum, and
prorsus expositae, they are expounded and easy to be understood, to the
servant and the countryman, to the widow and the boy, and to him that is very
unskilful. Homil. 3. in 2 Thessalonians.
Omnia clara sunt and plana in Divinis literis; all things are clear and plain
in the Divine writings; All things, that is, says S. Chrysostom, Omnia
necessaria aperta sunt and manifesta, All that is necessary, is open and
manifest.

2. The Fathers say, that in such things (viz. in which our Salvation is
concerned) the Scriptures need no interpreter; but a man may find them out
himself by himself. Apostoli vero and Prophetae omnia contra fecerunt
manifesta, claraque; quae prodiderunt, exposuerunt nobis veluti communes orbis
Doctores, Homil. 3. de Lazaro, and homil. 3. in 2 Thessalonians.
ut per se quisque discere possit ea, quae dicuntur, ex sola lectione. So S.
Chrysostom, and therefore (says he) what need is there of a Preacher? All
things are clear and plain out of the Divine Scriptures. But ye seek for
Preachers, because you are nice and delicate, and love to have your ears
pleased.] To the same purpose are those words of S. Cyril. Alex. Lib. 7. (...).
Julian.
The Divine Scripture is sufficient to make them who are educated in it, wise
and most approved, and having a most sufficient understanding. And to this we
need not any foreign teachers. There is no question but there are many places
in the Divine Scriptures, mysterious, intricate and secret: but these are for
the learned not the ignorant; for the curious and inquisitive, not for the
busied and employed, and simple: they are not the repositories of salvation;
but instances of labor, and occasions of humility, and arguments of
forbearance, and mutual toleration, and an indearment of reverence and
adoration. But all that by which God brings us to himself is plain and easy.
In S. Paul's Epistles, S. Peter said, there were some things hard to be
understood; but they were but quaedam, some things; there are enough besides
which are very plain and easy, and sufficient for the instruction and the
perfecting the man of God. S. Peter is indeed supposed to say; that in S.
Paul's Epistles some things were hard; yet if we observe it rightly, he does
not relate to S. Paul's writings, and way of expressing himself, but [(...) in
which] relates to the mysterious matters contained in S. Paul's Epistles, 2
Pet. 3. 16.
of which S. Peter also there treats: the mysteries were so deep and sublime,
so far removed from sense and humane experience, that it is very hard for us,
poor ignorants, to understand them without difficulty, and constancy of labor
and observation. But then, when such mysterious points occur, let us be wary
and wise, not hasty and decretory, but fearful and humble, modest and
inquisitive. S. Paul expressed those deep mysteries, of the Coming of Christ to
Judgment, and the conflagration of the world, as plainly as the things would
easily bear; and therefore the difficulty was not in the style, but in the
subject matter; nor there indeed, as they are in themselves, so much as by the
ignorance and instability, or unsetledness of foolish people: and although when
things are easy there needs no interpreter, but the very reading, and
observing; and humility and diligence, simplicity and holiness are the best
expositors in the world; yet when any such difficulty does occur, we have a
guide sufficient to carry us as far as we need or ought to go. Therefore,

3. The way of the Ancient and Primitive Church was to expound the Scriptures
by the Scriptures. So S. Clemens of Alexandria: Stromat. lib. 7. p. 757. and
758.
perfectly demonstrating out of the Scriptures themselves concerning
themselves: (...): Confirming every thing from those things which are
demonstrated from the Scriptures out of those and the like Scriptures. Contr.
Gentil. in initio.
To the same purpose are the words of S. Athanasius [The knowledge of true and
Divine religion and piety does not much need the Ministry of man, and he might
abundantly draw this forth from the Divine books and Letters.] S. Paul's way of
teaching us to expound Scripture, is, that he that prophecies should do it
(...), according to the analogy of faith; the fundamental proportions of faith
are the measures by which we are to exact the sense and meaning of points more
difficult and less necessary. This way S. Clement urges in other expressions.
[Truth is not found in the translation of significations, Ubi supra, page 758.
for so they might overthrow all true doctrine: (...) but in this, that every
one consider what is perfectly agreeable to our Lord the Almighty God, and what
is decent, or fit to be said of him.] If we follow this way close, our
interpretations of Scripture can never be impious, and can never lead into
dangerous error.

4. In pursuance of this, the Ancient Fathers took this way, and taught us to
do so too; to expound difficult places by the plain. Lib. 2. de doctr. Christ.
cap. 6.
So S. Austin: Magnifice and salubriter Spiritus Sanctus, etc. The Holy Spirit
has magnificently, and wholsomly, qualified the Holy Scriptures, that in the
more open (or plainer) places, provision is made for our hunger, (viz. for our
need) and in the obscure there is nothing tedious (or loathsome.) Nihil enim
fere de illis obscuritatibus eruit quod non planissime dictum alibi reperiatur.
For there is scarce any thing drawn from those obscure places, but the same in
other places may be found spoken most plainly.] Bellarmine observes, De verbo
Dei l. 3. cap. 2. Sect. Respondeo i^pimis.
that S. Austin uses the word fere, almost; meaning, that though by plainer
places, most of the obscure places may be cleared; yet not all. And truly it is
very probable, that S. Austin did mean so. But then if there be any obscure
places that cannot be so enlightened; what is to be done with them? S. Austin
says, Lib. de Unit. Ecclesiae c. 16.
that in such places, let every one abound in his own sense, and expound as
well as he can: quae obscure vel ambigue, vel figurate dicta sunt, quae quisque
sicut voluerit interpretetur secundum sensum suum. But yet still he calls us to
the rule of plain places; Talia autem recte intelligi exponique non possunt
nisi prius ea quae apertissime dicta sunt, firma fide teneantur. The plain
places of Scripture are the way of expounding the more obscure, and there is no
other, viz. so apt, and certain.

And after all this; I deny not but there are many other external helps. God
has set Bishops and Priests; Preachers and Guides of our Souls over us; and
they are appointed to teach others as far as they can, and it is to be supposed
they can do it best; but then the way for them to find out the meaning of
obscure places is that which I have now described out of the Fathers, and by
the use of that means they will be best enabled to teach others.

If any man can find a better way than the Fathers have taught us, he will very
much oblige the world by declaring it; and giving a solid experiment that he
can do what he undertakes. But because no man, and no company of men, has yet
expounded all hard places with certainty and without error; it is an
intolerable vanity to pretend to a power of doing that which no charity has
ever obliged them to do for the good of the Church, and the glory of God, and
the rest of inquiring Souls.

I end this tedious discourse, with the words of S. Austin. De Unit. Eccles.
cap. 3.
Nolo humanis documentis, sed Divinis oraculis Ecclesiam demonstrari. If you
enquire where, or which is the Church; from humane teachings you can never find
her: she is only demonstrated in the Divine Oracles.] 1 Pet. 4. 1.
Therefore if any man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God.

SECTION III.
Of Traditions.
TRadition is any way of delivering a thing, or word to another; and so every
doctrine of Christianity, is by Tradition. 1 These. 2. 15.
I have delivered unto you says S. Paul, that Christ died for our sins. (...)
is the same with (...), Sic S. Pasilius lib. 3. contr. Eunomium (...).
and (...) is the same with (...), say the Grammarians; and the (...) in S.
Jude, the faith delivered, is the same which S. Paul explicates by saying
(...), the traditions, that is, the doctrines ye were taught. And S. Lib. 3. c.
4.
Irenaeus calls it a tradition Apostolical that Christ took the Cup, and said
it was his blood; and to believe in one God, and in Christ who was born of a
Virgin, was the old tradition; that is, the thing delivered, and not at first
written; which the Barbarians kept diligently. But Tradition signified either.
Preaching or Writing, as it happened. When it signified Preaching, it was only
the first way of communicating the Religion of Jesus Christ: and until the
Scriptures were written, and consigned by the full testimony of the Apostles,
and Apostolical Churches respectively; they, in the Questions of Religion,
usually appealed to the tradition, or the constant retention of such a doctrine
in those Churches where the Apostles first preached, and by the succession of
Bishops in those Churches, who without variety or change, had still remembered
and kept the same doctrine, which at first was delivered by the Apostles! So
Irenaeus, If the Apostles had not left the Scriptures to us, Ibid.
must not we (viz. in this case) have followed the order of tradition which
they delivered to them, to whom they entrusted the Church; to which ordination
many Nations of Barbarians do assent? And that which was true then, is also
true now; for, if the Apostles had never written at all, we must have followed
tradition; unless God had provided for us some better thing. But it is
observable that Irenaeus says, That this way is only in the destitution of
Scripture. But since God has supplied not only the principal Churches with the
Scriptures; but even all the Nations which the Greeks and Romans called
Barbarous; now to run to Tradition, is to make use of a staff or a wooden Leg,
when we have a good Leg of our own. The traditions at the first publication of
Scriptures were clear, evident, recent, remembered, talked of by all Christians,
in all their meetings, public and private; and the mistaking of them by those
who carefully endeavored to remember them, was not easy; and, if there had
been a mistake, there was an Apostle living, or one of their immediate
Disciples, to set all things right. And therefore until the Apostles were all
dead, Heg^sip. apud Eccles. li^. 38. c. 32. Grec. 26. Latin.
there was no dispute considerable amongst Christians, but what was instantly
determined, or suppressed; and the Heresies that were, did creep and sting
clancularly, but made no great show. But when the Apostles were all dead; then
that Apostasy foretold, began to appear; and Heresies, of which the Church was
warned, began to arise. But it is greatly to be remarked; There was then no
Heresy that pretended any foundation from Scripture; Acts 20. 29. 30.
but from tradition, many: 1 Timothy 4. 1. etc.
for it was accounted so glorious a thing to have been taught by an Apostle, 2 Timothy 3. ^. etc. and 4. 3.
that even good men were willing to believe any thing which their Scholars
pretended to have heard their Masters preach; 2 These. 2. 3.
and too many were forward to say, 2 Pet. 2. ^. etc.
they heard them teach what they never taught; 1 John 2. 18. 19.
and the pretense was very easy to be made by the Contemporaries or Immediate
descendants after the Apostles; Jude. 4. v. etc.
and now that they were dead, it was so difficult to confute them, that the
Heretics found it an easy game to play, to say, They heard it delivered by an
Apostle. Many did so, and some were at first believed, and yet were afterward
discovered; some were cried down at first, and some expired of themselves, and
some were violently thrust away. But how many of those which did descend and
pass on to custom were of a true and Apostolical original, and how many were
not so, it will be impossible to find now; only, because we are sure there was
some false dealing in this matter, and we know there might be much more than we
have discovered, we have no reason to rely upon any tradition for any part of
our faith; any more than we could do upon Scripture, if one Book or Chapter of
it should be detected to be imposture. But there were two cases, in which
tradition was then used: The one was, when the Scriptures had not been written
or communicated, as among diverse nations of the Barbarians. The other was, when
they disputed with persons who received not all the Scriptures; as did the
Carpocratians, of whom Lib. 1. c. 1. etc. 24.
Irenaeus speaks. In these cases tradition was urged, that because they did not
agree about the authority of one instrument, they should be admitted to trial
upon the other. For as Antonius Marinarius said truly and wisely, The Fathers
served themselves of this topic only in case of necessity, never thinking to
make use of it in competition against holy Scripture.

But then it is to be observed, that in both these cases the use of tradition
is not at all pertinent to the Question now in hand. For, first, the Question
was not then, as now it is, between personn who equally account of Scriptures
as the word of God; and to whom the Scriptures have been from many generations
consigned. For they that had received Scriptures at the first, relied upon
them; they that had not, were to use tradition, and the topic of succession,
to prove their doctrine to have come from the Apostles: that is, they were fain
to call Witnesses, when they could not produce a Will in writing. But secondly,
in other cases the old heretics had the same Question as we have now. S.
Irenaeus, l. 1. c. 24.
For besides the Scripture, they said that, Jesus in mystery spoke to his
disciples and Apostles some things in secret and apart, S. August. tract: 97.
in Johan.
because they were worthy. And so Christ said, I have many things to say, but
ye cannot hear them now. For this place of Scripture was to this purpose urged
by the most foolish heretics: Just thus do the Doctors of the Church of Rome
at this day. De verb. Dei, non script. lib. 4. ca. 11. Sect. His notatis.
So Bellarmine [They preached not to the people all things, but those which
were necessary to them, or profitable, but other things they delivered apart to
the more perfect.] Here then is the popish ground of their traditions; they
cannot deny but necessary and profitable things were delivered in public, and
to all: but some secret things were reserved for the secret ones. For the
Scriptures are as the Credential Letters to an Ambassador; but traditions are
as the private Instructions. This was the pretense of the old Heretics, and is
of the modern Papists: who while they say the same thing, pretend for it also
the same authority, saying, that Traditions also are to be received, Page 16.
because they are recommended in Scripture. Of this I shall hereafter give
account: In the mean time,

Concerning this, I remember that a great man of the Roman party falls foul
upon Castellio, Salmeron tom. 15. in 2 Timothy 3. disp. 4. p. ^07.
for saying, The Apostle had some more secret doctrine which he did not commit
to writing, but delivered it to some more perfect persons; and that the word of
God was not sufficient for deciding controversies of religion, however it be
expounded, but that a more perfect revelation is to be expected. Upon which he
has these words, Intolerabile est, ut Paulus, quam accepit reconditiorem
doctrinam, non scripto consignaverit; fuisset enim alioqui infidelis depositi
Minister. And it was most reasonable which Antonius Marinarius, a Friar
Carmelite, did say, If some things were delivered in secret, it was under
secret; because the Apostles might as well have published it as their
disciples: but if it was delivered as a secret, and consequently to be kept as
secret, how came the successors of the Apostles to publish this secret? to
break open the seal, and reveal the forbidden secret? And secondly, If the
secret tradition which certainly was not necessary to all, be made public, how
shall we know which traditions are necessary, and which are not? Certain it is,
the secret tradition could not of it self be necessary; and therefore if it
becomes so by being made public, it is that which the Apostles intended not,
for they would have it secret. And therefore it follows that now no man can
tell that any of their traditions was intended as necessary; because the only
way by which we could know which was and which was not necessary, viz. the
making the one public and keeping the other private, is now destroyed, since
they are all alike common. All that which was delivered to all and in public,
was, by the providence of God ministering apt occasions, and by the Spirit of
God inspiring the Apostles and Evangelists with a will to do it, set down in
writing, that they might remain upon record for ever to all generations of the
Church: So S. Peter promised to the Jews of the dispersion, that he would do
some thing to put them in remembrance of the things he had taught them; and he
was as good as his word, and employed S. Mark to write the Gospel: others also
of the Apostles took the same care; and all were directed by God, and
particular occurrences were concentred in the general design and counsel of
God. Lib. 3. c. 1.
So S. Irenaeus, [The Gospel which the Apostles preached, afterward by the
will of God, they delivered to us in the Scriptures.] It was a Tradition still;
but now the word signified in its primitive and natural sense, not in the
modern and Ecclesiastical. But Irenaeus speaks of the Gospel; Tract. 49. in
Johan.
that is, the whole Gospel of God: not all the particulars that Jesus spoke and
did, S. Augustine. lib. 1. c. 35. de consensu Evangel.
but [What ever Christ would have us to read of his words and works, he
commanded them to write, as if it were by his own hands.] And therefore Electa
sunt quae scriberentur, quae saluti credentium sufficere videbantur. There was
a choice made of such things as were to be written: It was not therefore done
by chance and contingency (as many of the Roman Doctors in disparagement of the
Scriptures sufficiency do object) but the things were chosen, says S. Austin;
it was according to the will of God, said S. Irenaeus; and the choice was very
good; all that sufficed to the salvation of believers: according to the words
of S. John, These things were written that ye might believe that Jesus Christ
is the Son of God, Joh. 20. 30, 31.
and that believing ye might have life through his name. And indeed there
cannot be any probable cause inducing any wise man to believe that the Apostles
should pretend to write the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and that they should insert
many things more then necessary, and yet omit any thing that was, and yet still
call it the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Nicephorus calls the Epistles of S. Paul,
Lib. 2. hist. c. 34.
A summary of what he plainly and explicitly did teach; much more is every
Gospel. But when all the four Gospels, and the Apostolical Acts, and Epistles,
and the Visions of S. John were all tied into a Volume, by the counsel of God,
by the dictate of the Holy Spirit, and by the choice of the Apostles; it cannot
be probable that this should not be all the Gospel of Jesus Christ, all his
Will and Testament. Contre le Roy Jaq. p. 715.
And therefore in vain does the Cardinal Perron strive to escape from this by
acknowledging that the Gospel is the foundation of Christianity, as Grammar is
the foundation of Eloquence; as the Institutions of Justinian, is of the study
of the law; as the principles and institutions of a science are of the whole
profession of it. It is not, in his sense, the foundation of Christian
doctrine, but it contains it all; not only in general, but in special; not
only virtual, but actual; not mediate, but immediate; for a few lines would
have served for a foundation General, virtual and mediate; If the Scripture had
said, The Church of Rome shall always be the Catholic Church, and the
foundation of faith; she shall be infallible, and to her all Christians ought
to have recourse for determination of their Questions; this had been a
sufficient virtual and mediate foundation: But when four Gospels containing
Christ's Sermons and his Miracles, his Precepts and his Promises; the Mysteries
of the Kingdom, and the way of Salvation; the things hidden from the beginning
of the world, and the glories reserved to the great day of light and
manifestation of Jesus; to say, that yet all these Gospels, and all the
Epistles of S. Paul, S. Peter, S. James and S. John, and the Acts and Sermons
of the Apostles, in the first establishing the Church, are all but a foundation
virtual; and that they point out the Church indeed, by saying, she is the
pillar and ground of truth; but leave you to her for the foundation actual,
special and immediate; is an affirmation against the notoreity of fact. Add to
this, that S. Irenaeus spoke these words concerning the Scriptures; Lib. 3.
cap. 2.
in confutation of them, who leaving the Scriptures, did run to Traditions,
pretendedly Apostolical.

And though it be true, that the traditions they relied upon were secret,
Apocryphal, forged and supposed; yet because even at that time there were such
false wares obtruded, and even then the Heretics could not want pretenses
sufficient to deceive, and hopes to prevail; How is it to be imagined, that in
the descent of sixteen ages, the cheat might not be too prevalent? when, if the
traditions be questioned, it will be impossible to prove them; and if they be
false, it will (except it be by Scripture) be impossible to confute them. And
after all; if yet there be any doctrines of faith or manners which are not
contained in Scripture, and yet were preached by the Apostles, let that be
proved, let the traditions be produced, and the records sufficient, primely
credible and authentic, and we shall receive them. So vain a way of arguing it
is, to say, The Traditions, against which S. Irenaeus speaks, were false, but
ours are true; Theirs were secret, but ours were open and notorious: For there
are none such: And Bellarmine himself, acknowledges, that the necessary things
are delivered in Scriptures; and those which were reserved for tradition, were
delivered apart; that is, secretly by the Apostles. Now if they were so on all
sides; what rule shall we have to distinguish the Valentinian Traditions from
the Roman? Vbi supra c. 11. de verb. Dei non Script. l. 4.
and why shall we believe these more than those; since all must be equally
taken upon private testimony at first? And although it will be said, That the
Roman Traditions were received by afterages, and the other were not: yet this
shows nothing else, but that some had the fate to prevail, and others had not.
For it is certain; that some were a long time believed, even for some whole
ages, under the name of Apostolical Tradition; (as the Millenary opinion, and
the Asiatick manner of keeping Easter) which yet came to be dis-believ'd in
their time: and also, it is certain that many which really were Apostolical
Traditions, perished from the memory of men, and had not so long lives, as many
that were not: So that all this is by chance, and can make no difference in the
just authority. And therefore it is vainly said of Cardinal Perron, That the
case is not the same, because theirs are wrong, and ours are right. For this
ought not to have been said, till it were proved; and if it were proved, the
whole Question were at an end: for we should all receive them which were
manifested to be doctrines Apostolical. But in this, there need no further
dispute from the authority of Irenaeus: his words concerning the fullness of
Scripture, as to the whole doctrine of Christ, being so clear and manifest, as
appears in the testimonies brought from him in the foregoing Section. Optatus
compares the Scriptures to the Testator's Will: l. 5. contr. Parmer. biblioth.
Patrum per Binium ^om. 4. Paris. 1589. page 510.
If there be a controversy amongst the descendants of the house, run to the
Scriptures, see the Original will; The Gospels are Christ's Testament; and the
Epistles are the Codicils annexed, and but by these we shall never know the
will of the Testator. But because the Books of Scripture were not all written
at once; nor at once communicated, nor at once received, therefore the Churches
of God at first, were forced to trust their memories, and to try the doctrines,
by appealing to the memories of others; that is, to the consenting report, and
faith delivered and preached to other Churches, especially the chiefest, where
the memory of the Apostles was recent, and permanent. The mysteriousness of
Christ's Priesthood, the perfection of his sacrifice, and the unity of it,
Christ's advocation, and Intercession for us in Heaven, might very well be
accounted traditions, before Saint Paul's Epistle to the Hebrews, was admitted
for Canonical; but now they are written truths: and if they had not been
written, it is likely we should have lost them. But this way could not long be
necessary, and could not not long be safe. Not necessary, because it was
supplied by a better; and to be tied to what was only necessary in the first
state of things, is just as if a man should always be tied to suck milk,
because at first in his infancy, it was fit he should. Not safe, because it
grew worse and worse every day. And therefore in a little while, even the
Traditions themselves were so far from being the touchstone of true doctrine,
that themselves were brought to the stone of trial; And the Tradition would not
be admitted, unless it were in Scripture. By which it appears, that Tradition
could not be a part of the rule of faith, distinct from the Scriptures, but it
self was a part of it; that is, whatsoever was delivered and preached, was
recorded; which they so firmly believed, that they rejected the Tradition,
unless it were so recorded: and 2. It hence also follows, that Tradition was,
and was esteemed, the worse way of conveying propositions and stories; because
the Church required that the Traditions should be proved by Scriptures; that
is, the less certain by the more: Epist. ad Pompeium contra epist. Stephani.
That this was so, S. Cyprian is a sufficient witness. For when Pope Stephen
had said, Let no thing be changed; only that which is delivered, meaning the
old Tradition, that was to be kept; S. Cyprian enquires from whence that
Tradition comes? Does it come from the Gospels, or the Epistles, or the Acts of
the Apostles? So that after the writing and reception of Scriptures, Tradition
meant the same thing which was in Scripture; or if it did not, the Fathers
would not admit it. Damasc. de orthod. fide c. 1.
All things which are delivered to us by the Law and the Prophets, the Apostles
and Evangelists, we receive, and know, and reverence: But we enquire not
further; Apud Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 20. (...).
nothing beyond them. If the Traditions be agreeable to Scripture, (said S.
Irenaeus;) that is, if that which is pretended to be taught at first, be
recorded by them who did teach it, then all is well. And this affair is fully
testified by the words of Eusebius, Lib. 5. cap. 8.
which are greatly conclusive of this Inquiry. [We have (says he) promised
that we would propose the voices of the old Ecclesiastical Presbyters and
Writers; by which they declared the traditions by the authority witnessed and
consigned of the approved Scriptures.] Amongst whom was Irenaeus, says the
Latin version.

But I shall descend to a consideration of the particulars, which pretend to
come to us by tradition, and without it cannot (as it is said) be proved by
Scripture.

1. It is said that the Scripture it self is wholly derived to us by tradition;
and therefore, besides Scripture, Tradition is necessary in the Church. And
indeed no man that understands this Question, denies it: This tradition, that
these books were written by the Apostles, and were delivered by the Apostles to
the Churches as the word of God, relies principally upon Tradition Universal;
that is, it was witnessed to be true by all the Christian world at their first
being so consigned. Now then this is no part of the word of God; but the
notification, or manner of conveying the word of God; the instrument of it is
delivery. So that the tradition concerning the Scripture's being extrinsecal to
Scripture is also extrinsecal to the Question; This Tradition cannot be an
objection against the sufficiency of Scripture to salvation: but must go before
this question. For no man inquires, Whether the Scriptures contain all things
necessary to salvation? unless he believe that there are Scriptures; that these
are they; and that they are the word of God: All this comes to us by Tradition,
that is, by universal undeniable testimony. After the Scriptures are thus
received, there is risen another Question, viz. Whether or no these Scriptures
so delivered to us, do contain all the word of God; or, Whether or no, besides
the Tradition that goes before Scripture, which is an instrumental Tradition
only of Scripture, there be not also something else that is necessary to
salvation consigned by Tradition, as well as the Scripture; and of things as
necessary or useful as what is contained in Scripture, and that is equally the
Word of God as Scripture is? The Tradition of Scripture we receive; but of
nothing else but what is in Scripture. And if it be asked, It is therefore
weakly said by E. W. page 5. If he says, that he impugns all tradition in
General, all doctrine not expressly contained in Scripture; forced he is to
throw away Scripture it self, etc.
Why we receive one, and not the rest: we answer, because we have but one
Tradition of things necessary; that is, there is an Universal Tradition of
Scripture, and what concerns it; but none of other things which are not in
Scripture: And there is no necessity we should have any; all things necessary
and profitable to the salvation of all men, being plainly contained in
Scriptures; and this sufficiency also, being part of that Tradition as I am now
proving.

But because other things also are pretended to be, E. W. ibid. He is forced
not only to throw away Scripture it self, and the Nicene definitions; not only
to disclaim a Trinity of persons in one Divine essence, Baptizing of children,
etc. but every tenet of Protestant religion (as Protestantism,) E. g. The
belief of two Sacraments only, etc.
or are necessary, and yet are said not to be in Scripture, it is necessary
that this should be examined, 1. First, all the Nicene definitions, Trinity of
persons in one Divine essence. This I should not have thought worthy of
considering in the words here expressed, but that a friend, The same also he
says concerning the Nicene and the other three Councils, and S. Athanasius
Creed p. 8.
it seems, of my own, whom I know not, but yet an adversary, as he who should
know him best (that is, himself) assures me, is pleased to use these words in
the objection. To this I answer first, that this Gentleman would be much to
seek if he were put to it, to prove the Trinity of persons in one Divine
essence to be an express Nicene definition; and therefore, if he means that as
an instance of the Nicene definitions, he will find himself mistaken. Indeed at
Nice, the Consubstantiality of the Father and the Son was determined; but
nothing of the Divinity of the holy Ghost, That was the result of
after-Councils. But whatever it was which was there determined, I am sure it
was not determined by tradition, but by Scripture. So S. Athanasius tells us of
the faith which was confessed by the Nicene Fathers; Epist. ad Epictet.
Corinth. Episc.
it was the faith confessed according to the holy Scriptures: and speaking to
Serapion of the holy Trinity, Lib. 3. ad Serap. de Spir. S. Id. de Incarnat.
he says, Learn this out of the holy Scriptures. For the documents you find in
them, are sufficient. And, writing against Samosatenus, he proves the
Incarnation of the Son of God out of the Gospel of S. John, saying, It becomes
us to stick close to the word of God. Theodoret. l. 1. c. 7.
And therefore when Constantine the Emperor exhorted the Nicene Fathers to
concord in the question then to be disputed; they being Divine matters, he
would they should be ended by the authority of the Divine Scriptures. [For,
says he, the books of the Evangelists and Apostles, Et apud Gelas. Cyzicen. in
actis Council. Nicen. l. 2. c. 7.
as also the Oracles of the old Prophets, do evidently teach us what we are to
think of the Deity. Therefore all seditious contention being laid aside, let us
determine the things brought into question by the testimonies of the divinely
inspired Scriptures.] And they did so. And by relying on Scriptures only, we
shall never be constrained to quit these glorious portions of Evangelical
truth, the Incarnation of the eternal Word, and the Consubstantiality of the
Father and the Son. Whatsoever ought to be known of these mysteries is
contained in both Testaments; says Rupertus Tuitiensis, before quoted. And if
the holy Scriptures did not teach us in these mysteries, we should find
Tradition to be but a lame leg, or rather a reed of Egypt. Apud Eusebius. Eccles.
hist. lib. 5. c. 27.
For Artemon, who was the first founder of that error which afterward belched
into Arianism, pretended a tradition from the Apostles, that Christ was a mere
man. And that Tradition descended to the time of Pope Zepherinus, Dial. contr.
Tryph. Jud.
who first gave a stop to it: and Justin Martyr says, that diverse among the
Christians, affirmed Christ to be not God of God, but man of man. Vide etiam
Theodor. l. 1. Eccles. hist. c. 8.
And the Arians offered to be tried by Tradition; and therefore pretended to
it, and therefore, the Catholics did not; at least according to the new
doctrine, That if one pretends Tradition, the other cannot. But (for all that
trifle) S. Athanasius did sometimes pretend to it, though not always; and this
shows that there was no clear, indubitate, notorious, universal Tradition in
the Question; and if there were not such an one, as good none at all; for it
could not be such a foundation as was fit to build our faith upon, especially
in such mysterious articles. But it is remarkable what Eusebius recites out of
an old Author, who wrote against the heresy of Artemon, which afterward
Samosatenus renewed, and Arius made public with some alteration [They all say
(says he) that our Ancestors and the Apostles themselves, Eusebius. Eccles. hist.
lib. 5 c. 27. Lat. 28. Gr.
not only to have received from our Lord those things which they now affirm,
but that they taught it to others; and the preaching or tradition of it run on
to the days of Pope Victor, and was kept entire, but was depraved by Pope
Zepherin. And truly that which was said by them might seem to have in it much
of probability, if the Divine Scriptures did not first of all contradict them,
and that there were writings of some Brethren elder than the times of Victor.
The Brethren, whose writings he names, are, Justin, Militiades, Tatian,
Clemens, Irenaeus, and the Psalms and Hymns of diverse, made in honor of
Christ.] From all which it is evident; that the Questions at Nice, were not,
and could not be determined by tradition. 2. That Tradition might be, and was
pretended on both sides. 3. That when it is pretended by the contradicting
parties with some probability, it can effectually serve neither. 4. That the
Tradition the Samosatenians and Arians boasted of, had in it much probability,
when looked upon in it is own series and proper state. 5. That the Divine
Scriptures were at that time, the best firmament of the Church, and defended
her from that abuse, which might have been imposed upon her, under the title of
Tradition. 6. That even when tradition was opposed to tradition, and the right
to the wrong, yet it was not Oral or Verbal tradition (according to the new
mode) but the writings of the Doctors that were before them. But after all
this, I cannot but observe and deplore the sad consequents of the Roman Doctors
pretention that, This great mystery of Godliness, God manifested in the Flesh,
relies wholly upon unwritten traditions. For the Socinians, knowing that
tradition was on both sides claimed in this Article, please themselves in the
Concession of their adversaries, that this is not to be proved by Scripture. So
they allege the testimony of Eccius, and Cardinal Hosius, one of the Legates,
presiding at Trent; Doctrinam de Trino and Vno Deo, In locis Commun. page 208.
209.
esse dogma Traditionis, and ex Scriptura nulla ratione probari posse. The same
was affirmed by Tanner, and all that were on that side, in the Conference at
Ratisbon, by Hieronymus a S. Hyaeintho, and others. Now they being secured by
their very enemies, that they need not fear Scriptures in this question; and
knowing of themselves that tradition cannot alone do it; they are at peace, and
dwell in confidence in this their Capital Error: and the false peace is owing
to the Roman Doctors; who in Italy help to make Atheists, Confessionis
Christianae ad rogum damnatae and combustae Manium a R. D. Nicolao Cichovio
lacessitorum, sui vindices. Impress. A. D. 1652.
and in Polonia, Socinians: and as a Consequent to all this, I remember they
scorn Cichovius who endeavored to confute them by a hundred arguments from
Scriptures, since his own parties do too freely declare, that not one of those
hundred prove the Question.

2. The next necessary Article pretended to stand upon Tradition, is, The
baptizing Children. Concerning which, I consider either the matter of fact, or
matter of doctrine. The matter of fact is indifferent, if abstracted from the
doctrine. For at the first, they did, or they did not, according as they
pleased; for there is no pretense of Tradition, that the Church in all ages,
did baptize all the Infants of Christian Parents: It is more certain, that they
did not do it always, than that they did it in the first age. S. Ambrose, S.
Hierom, and S. Austin were born of Christian Parents, and yet not baptized
until the full age of a man, and more. But that the Apostles did baptize any
Children, is not at all reported by a primely credible Tradition, or a famous
report: but that they did so is only conjectured at; or if it be more, yet that
more, whatsoever it be, relies upon the testimony of Scripture; as S. Paul's
baptizing the households of Stephanas, and the Jailer. But then if they did, or
if they did not, yet without an appendant doctrine, this passes on by the
voluntary practice of the Church; and might be, or not be, as they pleased; as
it was in the case of confirming them, and communicating them at the same time
they baptized them; Concerning which, because we live to have seen and read of
several Customs of the Church in several ages; it is also after the same manner
in baptism, if we consider it only in the matter of fact.

But then if we consider the doctrine appendant to it, or the cause why it is
pretended they were baptized; even that children should be brought to Christ,
should receive his blessing, should be adopted into the Kingdom of God, should
be made members of the second Adam, and be translated from the death introduced
by the first, to the life revealed by the second, and that they may receive the
Holy Spirit, and a title to the promises Evangelical, and be born again, and
admitted into a state of Covenant, in which they can receive the gift of
eternal life (which I take to be the proper reasons, why the Church baptizes
Infants:) all these are wholly derived to us from Scripture-grounds. But then
as to that Reason, upon which the Church of Rome baptizes Infants, even because
it is necessary, and because without it, children shall not see God; it is
certain there is no Universal, or prime Tradition for that S. Austin was the
hard Father of that doctrine. And if we take the whole doctrine and practice
together without distinction, that it was the custom so to do in some Churches,
and at sometimes, is without all question; but that there is a tradition from
the Apostles so to do, relies but upon two witnesses, Origin, and S. Austin;
and the latter having received it from the former, it relies wholly upon his
single testimony, which is but a pitiful argument to prove a tradition
Apostolical. Secundum Ecelesiae observantiam (a^) in Levit. c. 12. 13. Hom. 8.
quem locum citat Perron: haec autem verba non aiunt, ab Apostolis hanc manasse
observantiam. Lib. de baptis. cap. 18.
He is the first that spoke it; but Tertullian, that was before him, seems to
speak against it; which he would not have done, if it had been a tradition
Apostolical. And that it was not so, is but too certain, if there be any truth
in the words of Ludovicus Vives, In S. August. de civit. Dei l. 1. c. 27.
saying, that anciently none were baptized, but persons of ripe age: which
words I suppose are to be understood (...), and for the most part. But although
the tradition be uncertain, weak, little and contingent; yet the Church of God,
when ever she did it (and she might do it at any time,) did do it upon
Scripture-grounds. And it was but weakly said by Cardinal Perron, Replique a la
response du Roy Jaques. p. 701.
that There is no place of Scripture by which we can evidently, and necessarily
convince the Anabaptists. For 1. If that were true, yet it is more certain,
that by Tradition they will never be persuaded; not only because there is no
sufficient, and full tradition; but because they reject the Topic. 2. Although
the Anabaptists endeavor to elude the arguments of Scripture, yet it follows
not that Scripture is not clear and certain in the Article: for it is an easy
thing, to say something to every thing; but if that be enough against the
argument, then no Heretic can be convinced by Scripture, and there is in
Scripure; no pregnant testimony for any point of faith, for in all questions,
all Heretics prattle something. And therefore, it is not a wise procedure, to
say; The adversaries do answer the testimonies of Scripture; and by Scripture,
cannot be convinced; and therefore choose some other way of probation. For when
that is done, will they be convinced? and cannot the Cardinal satisfy himself
by Scripture, though the Heretic will not confess himself confuted? The
Papists say, They answer the Protestants Arguments from Scripture; but though
they say so to eternal ages, yet in the world nothing is plainer, than that
they only say so; and that, for all that confident and enforced saying, the
Scriptures are still apparently against them. 3. If the Anabaptists speak
probably, and reasonably in their answers; then it will rather follow, that the
point is not necessary, than that it must be proved necessary by some other
Topic. 4. All people that believe Baptism of Infants necessary, think that
they sufficiently prove it from Scripture; and Bellarmine, though he also urges
this point as an argument for Traditions; yet, upon wiser thoughts, he proves
it, (and not Unsuccessfully) by three arguments from Scripture.

3. Like to this, is the pretense of the validity of the Baptism of Heretics:
It is Cardinal Perron's own instance, and the first of the four he alleges for
the necessity of Tradition, This he holds for a doctrine Orthodox, and
Apostolic; and yet (says he) there is no word of it in Scripture. Concerning
this, I think the issue will be short; If there be nothing of it in Scripture,
it is certain, there was no Apostolical tradition for it. For S. Cyprian and
all his Colleagues were of an opinion contrary to that of the Roman Church in
this Article; Epist. ad Pompeium.
and when they opposed against S. Cyprian a Tradition, he knew of no such
thing, and bad them prove their tradition from Scripture. 2. S. Austin, who was
something warm in this point, yet confesses, the Apostles commanded nothing in
it; but then he does almost begus to believe, it came from them. Consuetudo
illa quae opponebatur Cypriano, ab eorum traditione exordium sumpsisse credenda
est; si cut sunt multa quae universa tenet Ecclesia, and ob hoc ab Apostolis
been praecepta traduntur, quanquam scripta non reperiantur: which in plain
meaning is this; We find a Custom in the Church, and we know not whence it
comes; and it is so in this, as in many other things; and therefore let us
think the best, and believe it came by tradition from the Apostles. But it
seems, himself was not sure that so little a foundation could carry so big a
weight, he therefore plainly has recourse to Scripture in this Question.
Contra Donatist. l. 4. c. 14. etc. 17. and 24.
[Whether is more pernicious, not to be baptized, or to be re-baptiz'd, is hard
to judge: nevertheless, having recourse to the standard of our Lord, where the
monuments of this are not estimated by humane sense, but by Divine authority, I
find concerning each of them, the Sentence of our Lord; to wit, in the
Scriptures.] But 3. The Question it self, is not a thing necessary; for S.
Cyprian and the Bishops of Cappadocia and Galatia, and almost two parts of the
known world, whose sentiment was differing from others, yet lived and dyed in
the Communion of those Churches, who believed the contrary doctrine: and so it
might have been still, if things were estimated but according to their
intrinsic value. Lib. 1. de Baptist. cap. 18.
And since, as S. Austin says, they might safely differ in judgment before the
determination of this Question in a Council; it follows evidently, that there
was no clear tradition against them; or, if there were, that was not esteemed a
good Catholic, or convincing argument. For as it is not imaginable, so great
and wise a part of the Catholic Church should be ignorant of any famous
Apostolical tradition; especially when they were called upon to attend to it,
and were urged and pressed by it: so, it is also very certain, there was none
such in S. Cyprian's time, because the sixth general Council approved of the
Canon made in the Council of Carthage, Can. 2.
because in praedictorum praesulum locis and solum secundum traditam eis
consuetudinem servatus est. 4. It had been best, if the Question had never been
moved; and the next best had been to have suppressed and forgotten it
instantly; for as it came in by zeal and partiality in the hands of the
Cappadocian Bishops, so it was fed by pride and faction in the hands of the
Donatists; and it could have no determination, but the mere nature of the thing
it self; all the Apostles and Ministers of Religion were commanded to baptize
in water in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and this was an
admission to Christianity, not to any sect of it; and if this had been
considered wisely, so it had been done by a Christian Minister in matter and
form, there could be no more in it. And therefore the whole thing was to no
purpose: so far was it from being an Article of Faith.

4. The next pretense is, that the Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Father
and the Son, is an Article of our Faith, and yet no where told in Scripture;
and consequently tradition must help to make up the object of our Faith. To
this some very excellent persons have opposed this Consideration, that the
Greeks and Latins differ but in modo loquendi; and therefore both speaking the
same thing in differing words, show, that the Controversy it self is trifling
or mistaken. But though I wish them agreed; yet when I consider, that in all
the endeavors for Union at the Council of Florence, they never understood one
another to purposes of peace; I am apt to believe that those who would
reconcile them, show their piety more than the truth of the thing, and that the
Greeks and Latins differed entirely in this point. But then that on the Latin
side, there should be a tradition Apostolical, can upon no other account be
pretended, but that they could not prove it by Scripture, or show any
Ecclesiastical law or authority for it. Now if we consider that the Greeks
pretend their doctrine, not only from Scripture, but also from immemorial
tradition, that is, that they have not innovated the doctrine which their
Fathers taught them; and on the other side, that the Latins have, contrary to
the Canon of the Council of Ephesus, superadded the clause of Filioque to the
Constantinopolitan-Creed, and that by authority of a little Convention of
Bishops at Gentilly, near to Paris, without the consent of the Catholic
Church; and that by the Confession of Cardinal Perron, Contr. le R^y Jaques. p.
709.
not only the Scripture favors the Greeks, but Reason also; because it is
unimaginable, that the same particular effect should proceed from two
principles in the same kind; and although the three Persons created the world,
yet that production was from the Divine essence, which is but one principle;
but the opinion of the Latius is, that the Holy Ghost proceeds from two
Persons, as Persons, and therefore from two principles, it will be very hard to
suppose, that because all this is against them, therefore it is certain, that
they had this from Apostolical tradition. The more natural consequence is, that
their proposition is either mistaken, or uncertain, or not an article of Faith,
(which is rather to be hoped, lest we condemn all the Greek Churches as
Infidels, or perverse Heretics,) or else that it can be derived from
Scripture; which last is indeed the most probable, and pursuant to the doctrine
of those wiser Latins, who examined things by reason, and not by prejudice. But
Cardinal Perron's argument is no better than this: Titius was accused to have
deserted his station in the Battle, and carried false Orders to the Legion of
Spurinna; He answers, I must either have received Orders from the General, or
else you must suppose me to be a Coward, or a Traitor; for I had no warrant for
what I did from the Book of Military Discipline: Well, what if you be supposed
to be a Coward, or Traitor; what hurt is in that supposition? But must I
conclude, that you had Order from the General, for fear I should think you did
it on your own head, or that you are a Traitor? That Is the case; Either this
proposition is derived to us by Apostolical tradition, or we have nothing else
to say for our selves: well! Nempe hoc Ithacus velit; The Greeks allow the
argument, and will say thus: You had nothing to say for your selves, unless we
grant that to you which is the Question, and which you can never prove, viz.
that there is for this Article, an Apostolical tradition: but because both
sides pretend that, let us try this thing by Scripture. And indeed that is the
only way. And Cardinal Perron's argument may by any Greek be inverted, and
turned upon himself. For he saying, It is not in Scripture; therefore it is a
tradition of the Church: it is as good an argument; It is not delivered to us
by universal Tradition, therefore either it is not at all, or it is derived to
us from Scripture: and upon the account of this, for my part, I do believe it.

5. The last instance of Cardinal Perron, is the observation of the Lord's Day;
but this is matter of discipline and external rite; and because it cannot
pretend to be an article of faith, or essentially necessary doctrine, the
consideration is differnt from the rest. And it is soon at an end; but that the
Cardinal would fain make some thing of nothing, by telling that the Jews
complain of the Christians for changing Circumcision into Baptism, and the
Saturday-sabbath into the Dominical, or Lord's Day: He might as well have
added, They cry out against the Christians for changing Moses into Christ, the
Law into the Gospel, the Covenant of works into the Covenant of faith,
Ceremonies into substances, and rituals into spiritualities. And we need no
further inquiry into this Question, but to consider, Perron ibid. 710.
what the Cardinal says, that God did the Sabbath a special honor by writing
this ceremonial alone into the summary of the moral law. Now I demand, Whether
there be not clear and plain Scripture, for the abolishing of the law of
Ceremonies? If there be, then the law of the Sabbath is abolished. It is part
of the handwriting of ordinances, which Christ nailed to his Cross. Now when
the Sabbath ceases to be obligatory, the Church is at liberty: but that there
should be a time sanctified, or set apart for the proper service of God, I hope
is also very clear from Scripture; and that the circumstances of religion are
in the power of the presidents of religion; and then it will follow from
Scripture, that the Apostles, or their Successors, or whoever did appoint the
Sunday-festival, had not only great reason, but full authority, to appoint
that day; and that this was done early, and continued constantly for the same
reason, and by an equal authority, is no question. But as to the Sabbath, S.
Paul gave express order that no man should be judged by any part of the
ceremonial law, and particularly name's the Sabbath Days, Colos. 2. 16.
saying, They all were a shadow of things to come, but Christ is the substance.
And yet after all this, The keeping of the Lord's Day was no law in Christendom
till the Laodicean-Council; but the Jewish Sabbath was kept as strictly as the
Chrisian Lord's Day; and yet both of them with liberty, but with an intuition
to the avoiding offense, and the interests of religion: and the Lord's Day came
not in stead of the Sabbath, and it did not succeed in the place of the
Sabbath, but was merely a Christian festival, and holy day. But at last; That
the keeping of the Lord's Day be a Tradition Apostolical, I desire it were
heartily believed by every Christian; for though it would make nothing against
the sufficiency of Scriptures in all Questions of faith and rules of manners,
yet it might be an engagement on all men to keep it with the greater religion.

6. At the end of this, it is fit I take notice of another particular offered
by the By, not in justification of Tradition, but in defiance of them that
oppose it. If the Protestants oppose all Tradition in General, E. W. p. 5.
they must quit every Tenet of Protestant religion (as Protestantism:) for
Example sake: The belief of two Sacraments only, etc. The charge is fierce,
and the stroke is little. It was unadvisedly said, That every Protestant
Doctrine qua talis, must be quitted if Scripture be the rule: for this very
Proposition, That Scripture is the rule of our faith, is a main Protestant
doctrine; and therefore certainly must not be quitted: if Scripture be the
rule, that is, if the doctrine be true it must not be forsaken. And although in
the whole progress of this book, Protestant religion will be greatly justified
by Scripture, yet for the present I desire the Gentleman to consider a little
better about giving the Chalice to all Communicants; whether their denying it
to the Laity be by authority of Scripture? and I desire him to consider what
place of the Old or New Testament he has for worshipping and making the images
of God the Father, and the Holy Ghost, or for having their public Devotions in
an unknown tongue. But of these hereafter.

As to the instance of two Sacraments onley, I desire the Gentleman to
understand our doctrine a little better. It is none of the Doctrine of the
Church of England that there are two Sacraments only; But that, of those
Rituals commanded in Scripture which the Ecclesiastical use calls Sacraments
(by a word of art) Two only are generally necessary to Salvation. And although
we are able to prove this by a Tradition much more Universal, than by which the
Roman Doctors can prove seven, yet we rely upon Scripture for our Doctrine: and
though, it may be, I shall not dispute it with this Gentleman that sends his
chartel, unless he had given better proof of his learning and his temper; yet,
I suppose, if he reads this book over, he shall find something first or last to
instruct him, or at least to entertain him in that particular also. But for the
present, lest such an unconcerning trifle be forgotten, I desire him to
consider that he has little reason to concern himself in the just number of
seven Sacraments; for that there are brought in amongst them some new devices,
I cannot call them Sacraments, but something like what they have already
forged, which being but external rites, yet outdo most of their Sacraments.
About the year 1630. there were introduced into Ireland by the Franciscans and
Carmelite Friars three pretty propositions. 1. Whosoever shall die in the habit
of S. Francis shall never be prevented with an unhappy death. 2. Whosoever
shall take the Scapular of the Carmelites, and die in the same, shall never be
damned. 3. Whosoever shall fast the first Saturday after they have heard of the
death of Luissa, a Spanish Nun of the Order of S. Clare, shall have no part in
the second death. Now these external rites promise more grace than is conferred
by their Sacraments; for it promises a certainty of glory, and an intermediat
certainty of being in the state of Grace; which to them is not and cannot be
done (according to their doctrine) by all the other Sacraments and Sacramentals
of their Church. Now these things are derived to them by pretended revelations
of S. Francis, and S. Simon Stoc. And though I know not what the Priests and
Friars in England will think or say of this matter, yet I assure them, in
Ireland they are of great account, and with much fancy, religion and veneration
used at this day. And not long since visiting some of my Churches I found an
old Nun in the Neighborhood, a poor Clare (as I think;) but missing her Cord
about her, which I had formerly observed her to wear, I asked the cause, and
was freely answered, that a Gentlewoman who had lately died had purchased it of
her, to put about her in her grave. And of how great veneration the
Saturday-fast is here, every one knows, but the cause I knew not, till I had
learned the story of S. Luissa; and that Flemming, their Archbishop of Dublin,
had given countenance to it by his example and credulity. But now it may be
perceived that the question of seven Sacraments is outdone by the intervention
of some new ones, which although they want the name, do greater effects, and
therefore have a better title.

But I proceed to more material considerations. Cardinal Perron has chosen no
other instances of matters necessary (as he supposes them;) but there are many
ritual matters, customs, and ceremonies which were (at least it is said so)
practiced by the Apostolical Churches; and some it may be are descended down to
us: but because the Churches practice many things which the Apostles did not;
and the Apostles did and ordained many things, which the Church does not
observe; it will not appertain to the Question, to say, There are, or are not,
in these things Traditions Apostolical. The College of Widows is dissolved;
the Canon of abstaining from things strangled, Vide Ductor. dub tantium, Rule
of Conscience lib. 3. Reg. 11. n. 5. 6.
obliges not the Church: and S. Paul's rule of not electing a Bishop that is a
Novice, or young Christian, is not always observed at Rome; nay S. Paul himself
consecrated Timothy, when he was but twenty five years of age: and the
Regirald. Pra^is sori pae ^i. l. ^. c. 12. Sect. 3. n. 133.
Wednesday and Friday Fast, is pretended to have been a precept from the very
times of the Apostles; and yet it is observed but in very few places: and of
the fifty Canons called Apostolical, very few are observed in the Church at
this day; and of 84 collected by Clement (as was supposed,) de Sacr. him.
conti. l. 5. c. 105. Peers. de tradi^. part. 3. c. de author. Canon. Apost.
Michael Medina says, scarce six or eight are observed by the Latin Church. For
in them many things are contained, says Peresius, which by the corruption of
times are not fully observed; others according to the quality of the matter and
time being obliterated, or abrogated by the Magistery of the whole Church. De
Coron. milit. cap. 3. and ^.
Tertullian speaks of diverse unwritten Customs; of which tradition is the
author, custom is the confirmer, and faith is the observer. Such are the
renunciations in the office of Baptism, trine Immersion, tasting milk and
honey; abstinence from the Bath, for a week after; the receiving the Eucharist
before day, or in the time of their meal from the hand of the presisidents of
Religion; anniversary oblations on birthdays, and for the dead; not to fast,
not to kneel on Sundays; perpetual festivities from Easter to Whitsuntide; not
to endure, without great trouble, bread or drink to fall upon the ground; and
at every motion, to sign the forehead, with the sign of the Cross. Some of
these are rituals, and some are still observed, and some are superstitious and
observed by no body; and some that are not, may be if the Church please: these
indeed were traditions, or customs before his time; but not so much as
pretended to be Apostolical; but if they were, are yet of the same
consideration with the rest. If they be customs of the Church, they are not,
without great reason and just authority, to be laid aside: But are of no other
argument against Scripture, than if all the particular customs of all Churches
were urged. For, if they had come from the Apostles (as these did not,) yet if
the Apostles say, dicit Dominus, they must be obeyed for ever; but if the word
be, dico ego, non Dominus, the Church has her liberty to do what in the
changing times is most for edification. And therefore in these things, let the
Church of Rome pretend what traditions Apostolical she please of this nature,
the Church may keep them, or lay them aside, according to what they judge is
best. For if those Canons and traditions of the Apostles, of which there is no
question, and which are recorded in Scripture, yet are worn out, and laid
aside; those certainly which are pretended to be such, and cannot be proved,
cannot pass into perpetual obligation, whether the Churches will or no.

I shall not need upon this head, to consider any more instances; because all
the points of Popery are pretended to rely upon Tradition. The novelty of
which, because I shall demonstrate in their proper places, proving them to be
so far from being traditions Apostolical, that they are mere Innovations in
Religion: I shall now represent the uncertainty and fallibility of the pretense
of Traditions in ordinary; and the certain deceptions of those who trust them,
and the impossibility of ending many questions by them. I shall not bring the
usual arguments which are brought from Scriptures against traditions; because
although those which Christ condemns in the Pharisees, and the Apostles in
Heretical persons, are not reproved for being Traditions, but for being without
Divine authority; that is, they are either against the Commandment of God, or
without any warrant from God: yet if there be any traditions, real and true;
that is, words of God not written, they (if they could be shown) would be very
good. But then I desire the same ingenuity on the other side; and that the
Roman Writers would not trouble the Question, or abuse their Readers, by
bringing Scriptures to prove their traditions: not by showing they are recorded
in Scripture; 2. These. 2.
but by bringing Scriptures where the word tradition is named. 2. Tim. 2.
For besides that such places cannot be with any modesty pretended, as proofs
of the particular traditions; it is also certain, that they cannot prove that
in General there are, or can be, any unrecorded Scripture, when the whole Canon
should be written, consigned, and entertained. For it may be necessary, that
traditions should be called on to be kept before Scriptures were written, and
yet afterward not necessary; and those things which were delivered and are not
in Scripture, may be lost, because they were not written; and then that may be
impossible for us to do, which at first might have been done. But this being
laid aside, I proceed to Considerations proper to the Question.

1. Tertullian, S. Hierom, and S. Austin are pretended the Great Patrons of
Tradition; and they have given rules by which we shall know Apostolical
Traditions: and it is well they do so; for sand ought to be put into a glass,
and water into a vessel; something to limit the running element, that when you
have received it, you may keep it. A nuncupative record is like figures in the
air, or diagrams in sand; the air and the wind will soon disorder the lines.
And God knowing this, and all things else, would not trust so much as the Ten
words of Moses to oral tradition, but twice wrote them in Tables of Stone with
his own singer. Clem. Alexan. Strom. lib. 1. page 276.
[I know (said S. Clement) that many things are lost by length of time, for
want of writing; and therefore I of necessity make use of memorials, and
collection of Chapters, to supply the weakness of my memory.] And when S.
Ignatius, in his journey toward Martyrdom, confirmed the Churches through
which he passed, by private exhortations, as well as he was permitted; he
exhorted them all, to adhere to the tradition of the Apostles, (meaning that
doctrine which was preached by them in their Churches) and added this advice,
or caution, Eusib lib. 3.
That he esteemed it was necessary, that this Tradition should be committed to
writing, Eccles. hist. c. 35. Graec.
that it might be preserved to posterity: and Reports by word of mouth are
uncertain, that for want of good Records, we cannot tell who was S. Peter's
Successor immediately; whether Clemens, Theo loret. l. r. c. 8. Eccles. hip^.
Linus, or Anacletus; and the subscriptions of S. Paul's Epistles, having no
record but the Uncertain voice of Tradition, are in some things evidently
mistaken, and in some others, very uncertain. And upon the same account, we
cannot tell how many Bishops were convened at Nice: Eusebius says they were
250. S. Athanasius says, they were just 300. Eustratius in Theodoret, Bellar.
de Council. and Eccles. l. 1. c. 5. Sect. De numer^.
says they were above 270. Sozomen says, they were about 310. Epiphanius and
others, say they were 318. And when we consider how many pretenses have been,
and are daily made of Traditions Apostolical, which yet are not so, a wise man
will take heed, lest his credulity and good nature, make him to become a fool.
S. Clemens Alexandrinus says, that the Apostles preached to dead Infidels, and
then raised them to life: and that the Greeks were justified by their
Philosophy; and accounts these among the Ancient Traditions. Epist. ad Episc.
Antioch.
Pope Marcellus was bold to say, that it was an Apostolical Tradition or Canon,
that a Council could not be called but by the authority of the Bishop of Rome:
but the Churches in the first ages practiced otherwise, and the Greeks never
believed it; nor are all the Latin Churches of that opinion, as shall be shown
in the sequel: The second Canon of the Council in Trullo, commands observation
of no less than fourscore and five Canons Apostolical delivered to the Church;
but, besides that no Church keeps them, there are not many who believe that
they came from the Apostles. S. Austin said that the Communicating of Infants
was an Apostolical Tradition; but neither the Protestants, nor the Papists,
believe him in that particular. Stromat. lib. 1. lib. 2. c. 39.
Clemens Alexandrinus said, that Christ preached but one year; S. Irenaeus
confutes that Tradition vehemently, and said it was an Apostolical Tradition,
That Christ was about 50 years of age when he died, and therefore it must be,
that he preached almost 20 years; for the Scripture says, Matthew. 4. 17.
Jesus began to be about 30 years old, Marc. 1. 14.
when he was baptized; and presently after he began to preach. Luc. 3. 23.
Now this story of the great age of Christ, Irenaeus says, That all the old men
that were with Saint John the Disciple of our Lord, say, that S. John did
deliver unto them. Nay, not only so, but some of them heard the same from
others also of the Apostles. There were many more of such traditions; the day
would fail to reckon all the Unwritten Mysteries of the Church, Cap. 29.
said the Author of the last Chapters of the Book de Spiritu Sancto, falsely
imputed to S. Basil: and yet he could reckon but a few; all the rest are lost:
and of those that remain, some are not at all observed in any Church. But there
cannot be a greater instance of the vanity of pretending Traditions, than the
collection of the Canons Apostolical by Clement, Lib. 1. c. 18. C^^h. fide.
which Damascen reckons as parts of the New Testament, that is, equal to
Canonical Writings of the Apostles; but Isidore Hispalensis says, they were
Apocryphal, made by heretics, and published in the name of the Apostles; Apud
Gratian. did. 16. c. Canon^s.
but neither the Fathers nor the Church of Rome did give assent to them: and
yet their authority is received by many in the Church of Rome even at this day.
But it is to be observed, that men accept them, or refuse them, not according
to their authority, which in all the first fifty, at least, is equal: But if
they be for their interest, then they are Apostolical; if against them, then
they are interpolated, and Apocryphal, and spurious, and heretical: as it has
happened in the fifth Canon, and the 8.

But this is yet more manifest, if we consider what Tract. 26. in Matthew.
Oportet cause considerare, ut nec omnia secreta, quae feruntur nomine
Sanctorum, suscipiamus, propter Judae^s, qui forte ad destructionem veritatis
Scripturarum nostrarum quaedam finxerunt confirmantes dogmata falsa; nec omnia
abjiciamus, quae pertinent ad demonstrationem Scripturarum nostrarum: magni
ergo viri est audire and adimplere quod dictum est, Omni probate, quod bonum
est tenere. Tamen propter eos qui non possunt quasi Trapezitae inter verba
discernere, vera hobeantur an falsa, and non possunt semetipsos caute^ servare
ut verum quidem teneant apud se, ab omni autem specie mala abstineant, nemo uti
d^b^t ad confirmationem dogmatum libris qui sunt extra Canonizatas Scripturas]
Origin says, No man ought for the confirmation of doctrines (or opinions) to
use books which are not Canonized Scriptures. Now, for ought appears to the
contrary, many Traditions were two or three hundred years old the first day
they were born; and it is not easy to reckon by what means the Fathers came,
or might come, to admit many things to be Tradition; and themselves were not
sure: therefore they made rules of their conjecture, presumptions, and
sometimes weak arguings. It will be much more hard for us to tell which are
right and which are wrong; who have nothing but their rules, which were then
but conjectural, and are since proved in many instances to be improbable.

1. Such is that rule of S. Austin, Lib. 4. de baptis. contr. Donat. c. 24.
etc. 6.
Whatsoever was anciently received, and not instituted (so far as men looking
back may observe) by posterity, that is, not decreed by Councils, may most
rightly be believed to descend from Apostolical Tradition: That is, if we do
not know the beginning of an universal custom, we may safely conclude it to be
Primitive, and Apostolic. Which kind of rule is something like what a witty
Gentleman said of an old man and an old woman in Ireland; that if they should
agree to say that they were Adam and Eve, no man living could disprove them.
But though these persons are so old that no man remembers their beginning, and
though a custom be immemorial, and has prevailed far and long; yet to reduce
this to the beginning of things may be presumed by him that a mind to it, but
can never convince him that has not. And it is certain, this rule is but a
precarious pitiful Presumption, since every ancient custom that any succeeding
age has a mind to continue, may, for the credit of it, and the ignorance of
the original, like new upstart Gentlemen, be entitled to an Honorable House.
Every one believes the Commandments of his Ancestors to be Traditions
Apostolical, said S. Hierom: And that these came in by private authority, and
yet obtained a public name, we have competent warranty from Tertullian, De
Corona Milit. c. 4.
who justifies it thus far. [Do you not think it lawful for every faithful man
to appoint what ever he thinks may please God, unto discipline and salvation?
And [From whomsoever the Tradition comes, regard not the Author, but the
Authority.] And S. Irenaeus tells, Apud Eusebius. l. 5. c. 26. Gr. 24. Let.
that the variety of keeping Lent (which puts in strongly also to be an
Apostolical Tradition) began among his Ancestors [who did not accurately
observe their customs, who by a certain simplicity or private authority
appointed any thing for their posterity.] So that here it is apparent that
every private man that was of an ancient standing in the Church, might
introduce customs and usages which himself thought pious. And next, it is also
evident, that when these customs derived from their Ancestors, happened to
continue in a lasting use, their posterity was very apt to call them Traditions
Apostolical: according to Lib. de Corona Militis. Si legem nusquam reperio,
sequitur ut Traditio consuetudini morem hunc dederit, habitu um quandoque
Apostoli authoritatem ex interpretatione rationis.
Tertullian, who confessed this very thing. Thus things indifferent being
esteemed useful or pious, became customary, and then came for reverence into a
putative and usurped authority: But they who, having this warning from the very
persons whence the mistake comes, will yet swallow the hook, deserve to live
upon air and fancy, and to chew deceit.

But this Topic of pretended Tradition is the most fallible thing in the
world; for it is discovered, of some things that are called Apostolical
tradition, that they had their original of being so esteemed upon the authority
and reputation of one man. Some I say have been so discovered. Papias was the
Author of the Millenary opinion, which prevailed for about three whole ages;
and that so Universally, that Justin Martyr said it was believed by all that
were perfectly Orthodox; and yet it recurres to him only as the fountain of
the Tradition. But of this I shall say no more, because this instance has been
by others examined and cleared. The assumption of the Virgin Mary is esteemed a
Tradition Apostolical, but it can derive no higher then S. Austin, In sermon. de
Assumptione.
whose doctrine alone brought into the Church the veneration of the Assumption;
which S. Hierom yet durst not be confident of. But the Tradition of keeping
Easter the fourteen day of the Moon, derived only from S. John, Salmeron
tract. 51. in Romans 5. p. 468 in marg.
and the As^atick Bishops: but the other from S. Peter, and S. Paul prevailed,
though it had no greater authority. But the Communicating of Infants prevailed
for many ages in the West, S. Hierom. dial. adv. Lucifer.
and to this day in the East, and went for an Apostolical Tradition; but the
fortune of it is changed, and it now passes for an error: and S. Hierom said,
It was an Apostolical Tradition, that a Priest should never baptize without
Chrism; but of this we have scarce any testimony but his own.

But besides this, there was in the beginning of Christianity, some Apocryphal
books: of these, Origin gave great caution; Tract. 26. in Matthew.
and because the falsity of these, every good man could not discover, therefore
he charges them, that they should offer to prove no Opinion from any books, but
from the Canonical Scriptures, as I have already quoted him; but these were
very busy in reporting traditions. The book of Hermes seduced S. Clemens of
Alexandria into a belief, that the Apopostles preached to them that died
Infidels, and then raised them to life: and the Apocryphal books under the
title of Peter and Paul, make him believe that the Greeks were saved by their
Philosophy: and the Gospel of Nicodemus (so far as yet appears) was author of
the pretended tradition of the signing with the Sign of the Cross, at every
motion of the body; and led Tertullian, and S. Basil, and, in consequence, the
Churches of succeeding ages, into the practice of it. A little thing will draw
on a willing mind; and nothing is so credulous, as piety and timorous Religion;
and nothing was more fearful to displease God, and curious to please him than
the Primitive Christians; and every thing that would invite them to what they
thought pious was sure to prevail; and how many such pretenses might enter in
at this wide door, every man can easily observe.

Add to this, that the world is not agreed about the competency of the
testimony; or what is sufficient to prove tradition to be Apostolical. Some
require and allow only the testimony of the present Catholic Church, to prove
a Tradition: which way if it were sufficient, then it is certain, that many
things which the primitive Fathers and Churches esteemed tradition, would be
found not to be such; because (as appears in diverse instances above reckoned)
they admitted many and there could be no degrees of credibility in testimony,
but still the present were to carry it; that is, every age were to believe
themselves, and no body else. And the reason of these things is this, because
some things have in some ages been universally received, in others universally
rejected. I instance in the state of Saints departed, which once was the
opinion of some whole ages; and now we know in what ages it is esteemed an
error. 3. The Communicating Infants, before instanced Maldonat. in 6. Joh. 53.
videetiam Espencaeu^ de adorat. Eucharist. l. 2. c. 12.
Now all that while, there was no Apostolical tradition against this doctrine
and practice, or at least none known: for, if there had, these Ages would not
have admitted this doctrine: But if there were no tradition against it at that
time, there is none now. And indeed the Testimony of the present Church cannot
be useful in the Question of Tradition, if ever there was any age or number of
orthodox and learned men, that were against it: only in a negative way it can
be pretended; that is, if there was no doctrine, or practice, or report ever to
the contrary, then they that have a mind to it, may suppose, or hope, it was
Apostolical; or at least, they cannot be sure that it was not. But this way can
never be useful in the Questions of Christendom, because in them there is
Father against Son, and Son against Father; Greeks against Latin: and their
minds differ as far, as East and West; and therefore it cannot be in our late
Questions, that there was never any thing said to the contrary; but if there
was, then the testimony of the present Church is not sufficient to prove the
tradition to be Catholic and Apostolic. 4. If the testimony of the present
Church were a sure in matter of fact; and such is the Tradition: concerning
which the Question only is, Whether such a thing was actually taught by an
Apostle, and transmitted down by the hand of uninterrupted succession of Sees
and Churches. Antiquissimum quodque, verissimum. We know the fountains were
pure; and the current, by how much the nearer it is to the spring, it is the
less likely to be corrupted. And therefore it is a beginning at the wrong end,
to say, The present Church believes this, therefore so did the primitive: but
let it be showed that the primitive did believe this; for else it is Out-facing
of an Opponent; as if he ought to be aasham'd to question whether you have done
well, or no. For, if that question may be asked, it must be submitted to trial,
and it must be answered; and the holding the opinion, will not justify the
holding it; that must be done by something else: therefore the sampler and the
sampled must be compared together; and it will be an ill excuse, if a servant,
who delivers a spotted garment to his Lord, and tells him, Thus it was
delivered to me, for thus you see it is now. If he can prove it was so at
first, he may be justified, but else at no hand. And I and all the world will
be strangely to seek what the Church of Rome means, by making conformity to the
Primitive Church, a note of the true Church; if [being now as it is] be the
rule for what it ought to be: For if so, then well may we examine the primitive
Church by the present, but not the 5.
5. If the present Catholic Church were infallible, yet we were not much the
nearer, unless this Catholic Church could be consulted with, and heard to
speak; not then neither, unless we know which were indeed the Catholic Church.
There is no word in Scripture, that the testimony of the present Church, is the
infallible way of proving the unwritten word of God; and there is no tradition.
that it is so, that I ever yet heard of; and it is impossible it should be so,
because the present Church of several ages have had contrary traditions: And if
neither be, why shall we believe it? if there be, let it be showed. In the mean
time, it is something strange, that the infallibility of a Church, should be
brought to prove every particular tradition; and yet it self be one of those
particular traditions which proves it self.

But there is a better way: Vincentius Lerinensis his way, of judging a
traditional doctrine to be Apostolical and Divine, is, The consent of all
Churches, and all Ages. It is something less that S. Austin requires, Lib. 2.
de doct. Christiana. c. 8.
Ecclesiarum Catholicarum quamplurimum sequatur (authoritatem,) inter quas sane
illae sunt quae Apostolicas seeds habere, and Epistolas accipere meruerunt. He
speaks it of the particular of judging what Books are Canonical; In which, as
tradition is the way to judge, so the rule of tradition is the consent of most
of the Catholic Churches; particularly, those places where the Apostles did
sit, and to which the Apostles did write. But this fancy of S. Austin's, is to
be understood so, as not to be measured by the practice, but by the doctrine of
the Apostolical Churches. For that any, or more of these Churches did, or did
not do so, is no argument, that such a Custom came from the Apostles; or if it
did, that it did oblige succeeding ages: unless this Custom began by a
doctrine, and that the tradition came from the Apostles, with a declaration of
it is perpetual obligation. And therefore this is only of use in matters of
necessary doctrine. But because there is in this question, many differing
degrees of authority; he says that our assent is to be given accordingly. Those
which are received of all the Catholic Churches are to be preferred, before
those which are not received by all; and of these, those are to be preferred,
which have the more and the graver testimony: but if it should happen (which
yet is not) that some are witnessed by the more, and others by the graver, let
the assent be equal.] This indeed, is a good way to know nothing; for if one
Apostolical Church differ from another in a doctrinal tradition, no man can
tell whom to follow, for they are of equal authority; and nothing can be thence
proved, but that Oral tradition is an uncertain way of conveying a Doctrine.
But yet this way of S. Austin, is of great and approved use, in the knowing
what Books are Canonical; and in these things it can be had, in some more, in
some less, in all more than can be said against it: and there is nothing in
succeeding times, to give a check to our assents in their degrees, because the
longer the Succession runs, still the more the Church was established in it.
But yet concerning those Books of Scripture, of which it was long doubted in
the Church, whether they were part of the Apostolical Canon of Scripture; there
ought to be no pretense, that they were delivered for such by the Apostles, at
least not by those Churches, who doubted of them: unless they will confess,
that either their Churches were not founded by an Apostle; or that the Apostle,
who founded them, was not faithful in his Office, in transmitting all that was
necessary; or else that those Books (particularly, the Epistle to the Hebrews,
etc.) were no necessary part of the Canon of Scripture; or else, lastly, that
that Church was no faithful keeper of the Tradition which came from the
Apostle. All which things, because they will be denied by the Church of Rome
concerning themselves; the consequent will be, that Tradition is an Uncertain
thing; and, if it cannot be entire and full in assigning the Canon of
Scripture, it is hardly to be trusted for any thing else which consists of
words subject to diverse interpretations. But in other things (it may be) the
case is not so: For we find that in diverse particulars, to prove a point to be
a Tradition Apostolical, use is made of the testimony of the three first Ages.
Indeed, these are the likest to know; but yet they have told us of some things
to be Traditions, which we have no reason to believe to be such. Only thus far
they are useful; If they never reported a doctrine, it is the less likely to
descend from the Apostles; and if the order of succession be broken any where,
the succeeding ages can never be surer. If they speak against a doctrine, as
for example, against the half-Communion, we are sure, it was no Tradition
Apostolical; if they speak not at all of it, we can never prove the Tradition;
for it may have come in since that time, and yet come to be thought or called
Tradition Apostolical from other causes, of which I have given account. And
indeed there is no security sufficient, but that which can never be had; and
that is, the Universal positive testimony of all the Church of Christ; which he
that looks for in the disputed Traditions, pretended by the Church of Rome, may
look as long as the Jews do for their wrong Messiah. So much as this is, can
never be had; and less than this, will never do it. I will give one
considerable instance of this affair: The Patrons of the opinion of the
immaculate conception of the Blessed Virgin Mother, Salmeron. disp. 51. in Romans
5.
allege, that they have the consent of almost the Universal Church, and the
agreeing sentence of all Universities, especially of the chief, that is, of
Paris; where no man is admitted to be Master in Theology, unless he binds
himself by oath to maintain that doctrine. They allege, that since this
question began to be disputed, almost all the Masters in Theology, all the
Preachers of the Word of God, all Kings and Princes, republiques and peoples,
all Popes and Pastors, and Religions (except a part of one) consent in this
doctrine. They say, that of those Authors which are by the other side pretended
against it, some are falsely cited, others are wrested and brought in against
their wills; some are scarce worth the remembering, and are of an obsolete and
worn-out authority.] Now if these men say true, then they prove a tradition, or
else nothing will prove it but a consent absolutely Universal, which is not to
be had. For, on the other side, They that speak against the immaculate
Conception of the Blessed Virgin, particularly Cardinal Cajetan, bring (as he
says) the irrefragable testimony of fifteen Fathers against it: others bring no
less then two hundred; and Bandellus brings in almost three hundred:] and that
will go a great way to prove a Tradition. But that this also is not sufficient,
see what the other side say to this. They say [that Scotus, and Holcot, and
Vbertinusde Casalis, and the old Definition of the University of Paris, and S.
Ambrose, and S. Augustine are brought in falsely or violently; and if they were
not, yet they say it is an illiteral disputation, and not far from Sophistry,
to proceed in this way of arguing: For it happens sometimes that a multitude of
Opiners proceeds only from one famous Doctor; and that when the Donatists did
glory in the multitude of Authors, S. Austin answered, that it was a sign the
cause wanted truth, when it endeavored to rely alone upon the authority of
many: and that it was not fit to relate the sentiment of S. Bernard,
Bonaventure, Thomas, and other Devotes of the Blessed Virgin, as if they were
most likely to know her privileges, and therefore would not have denied this
of Immaculate Conception, if it had been her due. For she has many devout
servants the world knows not of: and Elisha, though he had the spirit of Elias
doubled upon him, yet said, Dominus celavit a me, and non indicavit mihi; and
when Elias complained he was left alone, God said he had 7000 more. And the
Apostles did not know all things; and S. Peter walked not according to the
truth of the Gospel; and S. Cyprian erred in the point of rebaptizing
heretics. For God has not given all things unto all persons, that every age
may have proper truths of its own, which the former age knew not.] Thus
Salmeron discourses, and this is the way of many others, more eminent; who make
use of authority and antiquity when it serves their turn; and when it does not,
it is of no use, and of no value.

But if these things be thus, then how shall Tradition be proved? if the little
remnant of the Dominican party, which are against the Immaculate Conception,
should chance to be brought off from their opinion (as, if all the rest of the
other Orders, and many of this be already, it is no hard thing to conjecture,
that the rest may) and that the whole Church (as they will then call it) be of
one mind, shall it then be reasonable to conclude, that then this doctrine was
and is an Apostolical Tradition; when as yet we know and dare say, it is not?
That Is the case, and that is the new doctrine: but how impossible it is to be
true, and how little reason there is in it, is now too apparent. I see that
Vowing to Saints is now at Rome accounted an Apostolical doctrine: but with
what confidence can any Jesuit tell me that it is so, when by the Confession
of their chief parties it came in later than the fountains of Apostolical
Doctrines. De cultu S S. lib. 3. c. 9. Sect. Praeterea.
When the Scriptures were written, the use of vowing to Saints was not begun,
says Bellarmine; and Cardinal Contre le Roy Jaques.
Perron confesses that in the Authors more near to the Apostolical age, no
footsteps of this custom can be found. Where then is the Tradition Apostolical?
or can the affirmation of the present Church make it so? To make a new thing,
is easy; but no man can make an old thing.

The consequence of these things is this: All the doctrines of faith and good
life are contained and expressed in the plain places of Scripture; and besides
it, there are and there can be no Articles of faith: and therefore they who
introduce other articles, and upon other principles, introduce a faith unknown
to the Apostles and the Fathers of the Primitive Church. And that the Church of
Rome does this, I shall manifest in the following discourses.

SECTION IV.
There is nothing of necessity to be believed, which the Apostolical Churches
did not believe.
IN the first Part of the Dissuasive, it was said, that the two Testaments are
the Fountains of Faith; and whatsoever (viz. as belonging to the faith) came in
after these, foris est, is to be cast out; it belongs not to Christ: and now, I
suppose, what was then said is fully verified. And the Church of Rome,
obtruding many propositions upon the belief of the Church, which are not in
Scripture, and of which they can never show any Universal or Apostolical
Tradition, urging those upon pain of Damnation, imposing an absolute necessity
of believing such points, which were either denied by the Primitive Church, or
were counted but indifferent, and matters of opinion, has disordered the
Christian Religion, and made it to day a new thing, and unlike the great and
glorious Founder of it, who is the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever.
The charge here then is double, they have made new Necessities, and they have
made new Articles.

I choose to speak first of their tyrannical Manner of imposing their Articles;
viz. every thing under pain of damnation: The other of the new Matter, is the
subject of the following Sections.

First then, I allege that the primitive Church being taught by Scripture and
the examples Apostolical, affirmed but few things to be necessary to salvation.
They believed the whole Scriptures; every thing they had learned there, they
equally believed: but because every thing was not of equal necessity to be
believed, they did not equally learn and teach all that was in Scripture. But
the Apostles (say some,) oaths say that immediately after them the Church, did
agree upon a Creed, a Symbol of Articles which were in the whole, the
foundation of Faith, the ground of the Christian hope; and that, upon which
charity, or good life, was to be built. There were in Scripture many Creeds;
the Gentiles Creed, Matthew. 16. 16.
Martha's Creed, the Eunuch's Creed, S. Peter's Creed, 1 John 4. 2. and 15.
S. Paul's Creed; To believe that God is, and that he is the rewarder of them
that seek him diligently: To believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of the living
God, Joh. 20. 31. and 11. 27.
that Jesus is come in the flesh; Hebr. 11. and 6. 69.
that he rose again from the dead; these Confessions were the occasions of
admirable effects; by the first the Gentiles come to God; by the following,
Matthew. 16. 17.
blessedness is declared, salvation is promised to him that believes, and to
him that confesses this, God will come and dwell in him, and he shall dwell in
God; and this belief is the end of writing the Gospel, as, having life through
Christ, is the end of this belief: Romans 10* 8.
and all this is more fully explicated by S. Paul's Creed; M^tth. 10. 32.
This is the word of faith which we preach, that if thou shall confess with thy
mouth the Lord Jesus, Marc. 8. 38.
and shall believe in thine heart, Luc. 9. 26. and 12. 8.
that God has raised him from the Dead, thou shall be saved. 2 Timothy 2. 12.
This is the word of faith; Apocal. 3. 5.
which if we confess with our mouths, and entertain and believe in our heart;
that is, do live according to it, we shall certainly be saved. If we
acknowledge Christ to be our Lord, that is, our Lawgiver, and our Savior, to
rescue us from our sins and their just consequents, we have all faith; and
nothing else can be the foundation, but such Articles which are the confession
of those two truths, Christ Jesus our Lord, Christ Jesus our Savior; that by
Faith we be brought unto Obedience and Love; and by this love we be brought to
Christ, and by Christ unto God; this is the whole complexion of the Christian
faith, the Economy of our salvation. There are many other doctrines of
Christianity of admirable use, and fitted to great purposes of knowledge and
Government; Romans 10. 8.
but the word of faith (as S. Paul calls it) that which the Apostles preached,
viz. to all, and as of particular remark, and universal efficacy, and absolute
sufficiency to salvation, is that which is described by himself, in those few
words now quoted. Other foundation than this, no man can lay, that is, Jesus
Christ. Every thing else is but a superstructure; and though it may, if it be
good, be of advantage; yet if it be amiss, so the foundation be kept, it will
only be matter of loss and detriment, but consistent with salvation. And
therefore S. Paul judged, that he would know nothing but Jesus Christ, and him
crucified. And this is the sum total of all; This is the Gospel: so S. Paul,
most fully; I declare unto you the Gospel which I preached unto you, which also
ye have received, and wherein ye stand, by which also ye are saved, if ye keep
in memory what I have preached unto you, unless ye have believed in vain: And
what is this Gospel, this word preached and received, that by which we stand,
and that by which we are saved? It is nothing but this, I delivered unto you
first of all that which I received, how that Christ died for our sins according
to the Scriptures, and that he was buried, and that he rose again the third
day, according to the Scriptures. This was the traditum, the depositum, this
was the Evangelium; Christ died: he died for our sins, and he rose again for
us; and this being the great Tradition, by which they tried the Spirits, yet
was it laid up in Scriptures. 1 Cor. 3. 11.
That Christ died, was according to the Scriptures; that he rose again, was
according to the Scriptures; and that S. Paul twice, 1 Cor. 15. 3. 4. 1 Cor. 2.
2.
and that so immediately, remarks this, is not without mystery; but it can
imply to us nothing but this, that our whole faith is laid up in the
Scriptures; and this faith is perfected, as to the essentiality of it, in the
Death and Resurrection of Christ; as being the whole Economy of our pardon,
and Justification. And it is yet further remarkable, that when S. Paul (as he
often does) renews and repeats this Christian Creed; 1 Cor. 4. 6.
he calls upon us, Romans 12. 3.
not to be wise above what is written; and to be wise unto sobriety. Which he
afterward expounding, says; verse. 5.
He that prophesies, let him do it according to the proportion of Faith; that
is, if he will enlarge himself he may, and prophecy greatly; but still to keep
himself to the analogy of Faith; not to go beyond that, not to be wiser than
that measure of sobriety. And if we observe the three Sermons of S. Peter, the
Sermon of S. Philip, and S. Silas, Acts 2. 24. and 3. 12.
the Sermons of S. Paul often preached in the Synagogues; they were all but
this: that Jesus Christ is the Son of God; that he is the Lord of all; Acts 8.
12. 37, 38.
that he is the Christ of God, that God anointed him, Acts 9. 20. and 17. 2.
and 16. 31. and 1^. 2. 18. 2. 31.
that he was crucified and raised again from the dead; and that repentance, and
remission of sins, was to be preached in his name.

But as the Spirit of God did purpose for ever with strictness to retain the
simplicity of Faith, so also he was pleased so far to descant upon the plain
ground, as to make the mystery of godliness to be clearly understood by all
men. And therefore that we might see it necessary to believe in Jesus, it was
necessary we should understand he was a person to be relied upon, that he was
infinitely credible, powerful, and wise, just and holy; and that we might
perceive it necessary and profitable to obey him, it was fit we understood Why;
that is, What good would follow him that is obedient, and what evil to the
refractory. This was all; and this indeed was the necessary appendage of the
simple and pure word of Faith; and this the Apostles drew into a Symbol, and
particular minute of Articles. Now although the first was sufficient; yet they
knowing it was fit we should understand this simplicity, with the investiture
of some circumstances; and yet knowing, that it was not fit, the simplicity of
Faith, should be troubled with new matter, were pleased to draw the whole into
a Scheme, sufficient and intelligible, but nothing perplexed, nothing
impertinent: and this the Church has called the Apostles Creed; which contains
all that which is necessary to be inquired after, and believed by an Universal
and prime necessity.

True it is, other things may become necessary, by accident, and collateral
obligations; and if we come to know what God in the abundance of his wisdom and
goodness, has spoken to mankind, we are bound to believe it: but the case is
different. Many things may be necessary to be believed, that we may acknowledge
God's veracity: and so also many things are necessary to be done, in obedience
to the empire and dictates of the conscience; which oftentimes has authority,
when she has no reason; and is a peremptory Judge, when she is no wise
Counselor. But though these things are true; yet nothing is a necessary
Article of Faith, but that which ministers necessarily to the great designs of
the Gospel, that is, a life conformable to God, a God-like life, and an
imitation of of the Holy Jesus. To believe, and to have faith in the
Evangelical sense, are things very different. Every man is bound to have Faith
in all the proper objects of it. But only some men are bound to believe truths,
which are not matters of Faith. This obliges upon supposition of a manifest
discovery, which may, or may not happen; but in the other case, we are bound to
inquire; and all of us must be instructed, and evere man must assent: and
without this, we cannot be Christ's Disciples; we are rebels, if we oppose the
other, and no good man can or does.

For if he be satisfied, that it is the word and mind of God, he must and will
believe it, he cannot choose; and if he will not confess it, when he thinks God
bids him, or if he opposes it when he thinks God speaks it, he is malicious and
a villain; but if he does not believe God said it, then he must answer for more
than he knows, or than he ought to believe, that is, the Articles of Faith: but
we are not Subjects or Children, unless we consent to these. The other cannot
come into the common accounts of mankind, but as a man may become a law unto
himself, by a confident, an unnecessary, and even a false persuasion (because,
even an erring conscience, can bind) so much more can God become a law unto us,
when we by any accident, come into the knowledge of any Revelation from God:
but these are not the Christian Faith (in the strict and proper sense;) that
is, these are not the foundation of our Religion: many a man is a good
Christian without them; and goes to Heaven, though he know nothing of them; but
without these, no Christian can be saved.

Now then, the Apostles, the founders of Christianity, knowing the nature,
design, efficacy and purpose of the Articles of Faith, selected such
propositions, which in conjunction did integrate our Faith, and were therefore
necessary to be believed unto salvation; not because these Articles were for
themselves commanded to be believed; but because, without the belief of them,
we could not obtain the purposes and designs of faith; that is, we could not be
enabled to serve God, to destroy the whole body of sin, to be partakers of the
Divine Nature. This Collect or Symbol of propositions is that which we call the
Apostles Creed, which I shall endeavor to prove to have been always in the
Primitive Church esteemed a full and perfect Digest of all the necessary and
fundamental Articles of Christian Religion: and that beyond this, the Christian
faith or the foundation was not to be extended; but this, as it was in the
whole Complexion necessary, so it was sufficient for all men unto Salvation.

S. Paul gave us the first formal intimation of this measure, 2 Timothy 1. 13.
in his advises to S. Timothy: Hold fast the form of sound words which thou
have heard of me in faith and love, which is in Christ Jesus. That good thing
which was committed unto thee keep by the Holy Ghost, which dwells in us.]
This was the depositum that S. Paul left with Timothy; the hypotyposis or
summary of Christian Belief, the Christian Creed; which S. Paul opposes to the
profane new talkings, 1 Timothy 6. 20.
and the disputations of pretended learning: meaning, that this Symbol of faith
is the thing on which all Christians are to rely; and this is the measure of
their faith; other things, it is ods, but they are bablings, and profane
quarrelling, and unedifying argumentations. S. Ignatius recites the substance
of this Creed in four of the Epistles usually attributed to him; Epist 3. ad
Magnes. and 5. ad Philipp. and 7. ad Smyrnens. and 11. ad Eph^sio.
some of which are witnessed by Eusebius and S. Hierom; and adds at the end of
it this Epiphonema; Haee qui plane cognorit and crediderit, beatus est. And S.
Irenaeus reciting the same Creed, or form of words, differing only in order of
placing them, S. Irenaeus, lib. 1. ca ^*2.
but justly the same Articles and Foundation of faith, affirms that this is the
faith which the Catholic Church to the very ends of the Earth has received
from the Apostles and their disciples. And this is that Tradition Apostolical
of which the Churches of old did so much glory, and to which with so much
confidence they appealed, and by which they provoked the heretics to trial.
Et. cap. 3.
[This Preaching and this Faith when the Church scattered over the face of the
world had received, she keeps diligently as dwelling in one house; and
believes, as having one soul and one heart; and preaches and teaches, and
delivers these things, as possessing one mouth. For although there are diverse
speeches in the world, yet the force of the Tradition is one and the same.
Neither do the Churches founded in Germany believe otherwise, aut aliter
tradunt, or have any other tradition; nor the Iberian Churches, or those among
the Celtae, nor the Churches in the East, in Egypt, or in Lybia, nor those
which are in the midst of the world.] But he adds, that this is not only for
the ignorant, the idiots or Catechumeni; but [neither he who is most eloquent
among the Bishops can say any other things than these: for no man is above his
Master: neither has he that is the lowest in speaking lessened the tradition.
For the faith is one and the same; he that can speak much, can speak no more;
and he that speaks little, says no less.] This Creed also he recites again,
affirming that even those Nations, who had not yet received the books of the
Apostles and Evangelists, yet by this Confession and this Creed, Lib 3 cap. 4.
Propter fidem per quam sapientissimi sunt.
did please God, and were most wise through faith: for this is that which he
calls, the tradition of the truth; that is, of that truth which the Apostles
taught the Church; and by the actual retention of which truth, it is, that the
Church is rightly called, the pillar and ground of truth, by S. Paul; Lib. 4.
cap. 62.
and in relation to this, S. Irenaeus reckoned it to be all one; extra
veritatem, id est, extra Ecclesiam. Upon this Collect of truths the Church was
founded, and upon this it was built up; and in this, all the Apostolical
Churches did hope for life eternal; and by this they opposed all schisms and
heresies; as knowing what their and our great Master himself said in his last
Sermon, John 17. 3.
This is life eternal to know thee the only true God, and whom thou have sent
Jesus Christ.

This also is most largely taught by Tertullian, Tertul de praescript. adv.
haer^t. c. 13. and 14.
who when he had recited the Apostolical Creed, in the words and form the
Church then used it, calls it the Rule of faith; he affirms this Rule to have
been instituted by Christ; he affirms that it admits of no questions; and has
none but those which the heresies brought in, and which indeed makes heretics.
But this form remaining in its order, you may seek and handle, and pour out all
the desires of Curiosity, if any thing seems ambiguous or obscure; in case any
Brother be a Doctor endued with the grace of knowledge; but be curious with
your self, and seek with your self: but at length, it is better for you to be
ignorant, lest you come to know what ye ought not, for you already know what
you ought. Faith consists in the rule. Lib. de veland.
To know nothing beyond this, is to know all things. Virg. c. 1. Regula quidem
fidei una ^mnino est, sola immobilis and irreformabilis.
] To the same purpose he affirms, that this Rule is unalterable, is immovable,
and irreformable; it is the Rule of faith, and it is one; unchangeably the
same: which when he had said, he again recites the Apostles Creed; Lib. de
veland. Virg. c. ^.
he calls it legem fidei; this law of faith remaining; in other things of
discipline and conversation, the grace of God may thrust us forward, and they
may be corrected and renewed:] But the faith cannot be altered, there is
neither more nor less in that. And it is of great remark what account
Tertullian gives of the state of all the Catholic Churches, and particularly
of the Church of Rome in his time. [That Church is in a happy state into which
the Apostles with their blood poured forth all their doctrine: De praescript.
c. 36.
let us see what she said, what she taught, what she published in conjunction
with the African Churches: she knows one God, the creator of the World; and
Jesus Christ of the Virgin Mary, the Son of God the Creator; and the
resurrection of the flesh: she mingles the Law and the Prophets, with the
Evangelical, and Apostolical writings, and from thence she drinks that faith:
she sings with Water, she clothes with the holy Spirit, she feeds with the
Eucharist, she exhorts to Martyrdom, and against this Institution receives
none.] This indeed was a happy state; and if in this she would abide, her
happiness had been as unalterable, as her faith. But from this, how much she
has degenerated, will too much appear, in the order of this discourse.

In the confession of this Creed, the Church of God baptized all her
Catechumens; to whom in the profession of that faith, they consigned all the
promises of the Gospel. S. Hilar. l. 10. de Trinit. verse. finem.
For the truth of God, the faith of Jesus Christ, the belief of a Christian is
the purest, simplest thing in the world. In simplicitate fides est, in fide
justitia est, in confessione pietas est: Nec Deus nos ad beatam vitam per
difficiles quaestiones vocat, nec multiplici eloquentis facundiae genere
sollicitat; in absoluto nobis ac facili est aeternitas. Jesum Christum credimus
suscitatum a mortuis per Deum, and ipsum esse Dominum confitemur. This is the
Breviary of the Christian Creed: and this is the way of salvation, lib. de
Synodis.
says S. Hilary. But speaking more explicitly to the Churches of France and
Germany; he calls them happy and glorious, qui perfectam atque Apostolicam
fidem conscientia and professione Dei retinentes, conscriptas fides huc usque
nescitis; because they kept the Apostolical Belief: for, that is perfect.

Thus the Church remaining in the purity, and innocent simplicity of the Faith;
there was no way of confuting Heretics, but by the words of Scripture, or by
appealing to the tradition of this Faith, in the Apostolical form: and there
was no change made till the time of the Nicene Council; but then, it is said,
that the first simplicity began to fall away, and some new thing to be
introduced into the Christian Creed. True it is, that then Christianity was in
one complexion with the Empire; and the division of Hearts, by a different
Opinion, was likely to have influence upon the public peace, if it were not
composed by peaceable consent, or prevailing authority; and therefore the
Fathers there assembled, together with the Emperor's power, did give such a
period to their Question as they could; but as yet it is not certain, that they
at their meeting recited any other Creed than the Apostolical; for that they
did not, In Antidoto ad Nicolaum 5. Papam.
Laurentius Valla, a Canon in the Lateran Church, affirms, that himself has
read in the ancient Books of Isidore, who collected the Canons of the ancient
Councils. Certain it is, the Fathers believed it to be no other than the
Apostolical faith; and the few words they added to the old form, was nothing
new, but a few more explicate words, of the same sense intended by the
Apostles, and their Successors; as at that time the Church did remember by the
successive preachings, and written Records which they had, and we have not; but
especially by Scripture. But the change was so little, or indeed so none as to
the matter, that they affirmed of it; Epiphan. in. (...).
This was the Creed delivered by the Holy Apostles; and in the old Latin
Missal, published at Strasburgh, An. Dom. 1557. after the recitation of the
Nicene Creed (as we usually call it) it is added in the Rubric; Finito Symbolo
Apostolorum dicat Sacerdos, Dominus vobiscum. So that it should seem, the
Nicene Fathers used no other Creed, than what themselves thought to be the
Apostolical. And this is the more credible, because we find that some other
Copies of the Apostles Creed; particularly, that which was used in the Church
of Aquileia, has diverse words and amplifications of some one Article; as, to
the Article of, God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth, is added
invisible and impassible: which, though the words were set down there, because
of the Sabellian Heresy; yet they said nothing new, but what to every man of
reason was included in the very nature of God; and so was the addition of Nice,
concerning the Divinity of the Son of God, included in the very natural
Filiation expressed in the Apostles Creed: and therefore this Nicene Creed, was
no more a new Creed, than was that of Aquileia; which although it was not in
every word, like the Roman Symbol, yet it was no other, than the Apostolical.
And the same is the case even of those Symbols, where something was omitted,
that was sufficiently in the bowels of the other Articles; Thus in some Creeds,
Christ's Death is omitted; but his Crucifixion and Burial are set down. The
same variety also is observable in the Article of Christ's descent into Hell;
which as it is omitted in that form of the Apostolical Creed, which I am now
saying was used by the Nicene Fathers; so was it omitted in the six several
Recitations and Expositions of it, made by Chrysologus, and in the five
Expositions made of it by S. Austin, in his Book de Fide and Symbolo, and in
his four Books, de Symbolo ad Catechumenos, and diverse others. So the Article
of the Communion of Saints, which is neither in the Nicene, nor
Constantinopolitan Creed, nor in the ancient Apostolical Creeds, expounded by
Marcellus, Ruffinus, Chrysologus, Maximus Taurinensis, Venantius Fortunatus,
Etherius and Beatus: Lib. 1. contra. Elipand. Tolet.
yet because it is so plain in the Article of the Church; as, the omission is
no prejudice to the integrity of the Christian Faith, so the inserting it is no
addition of an Article, or Innovation. So these Copies now reckoned, omit in
the beginning of the Creed, Maker of Heaven and Earth; but out of the
Constantinopolitan Creed, it is now inserted into all the Copies of the
Apostolical Symbol. Now, as these omissions, or additions respectively, that
is, this variety is no prejudice to these being the Apostles Creed; So neither
is the addition made at Nice, any other, but a setting down what was plainly
included in the Filiation of the Son of God; and therefore was no addition of
an Article, nor properly an explication, but a saying in more words what the
Apostles, and the Apostolical Churches did mean in all the Copies, and what was
delivered before that Convention at Nice. But there was ill use made of it; and
wise men, if they had pleased, might easily have foreseen it. But whether it
was so, or no (for I can no otherwise affirm it, than as I have said) yet to
add any new thing to the Creed, or to appoint a new Creed, was at that time so
strange a thing, so unknown to the Church, that though what they did, was done
with pious intention, and great advantage in the Article it self; yet it did
not produce that effect, which from such a concurrence of sentiments, might
have been expected. For first, even some of the Fathers then present, refused
to subscribe the Additions, some did it (as they said) against their will, some
were afraid to use the word (...), or Consubstantial: and most men were still
so unsatisfied, that presently after, Council upon Council, was again called,
at Sirmium, Ariminum, Seleucia, Sardis, to appease the new stirrs, rising upon
the old account; and instead of making things quiet, they quenched the fire
with oil: and the Principal persons in the Nicene Council, Casu Hosii, plane
miserab^li, Cathulicus Orbis contrem^it, concussaeque sunt solidissimae petrae.
Baron. A. C. 347. 17. 18.
changed their minds, and gave themselves over to the contrary temptation. Even
Hosius himself, who presided at Nice, and confirmed the former Decrees at
Sardis; yet he left that Faith, and by that desertion affrighted, and shook the
fabric of the Christian Church, in the Article added or explained at Nice. In
the same sad condition was Marcellus of Ancyra, Vide Epist. Marcellinorum ad
Episcipos in Dio-Caesarea exulantes.
a great friend of S. Athanasius, and an earnest opposer of Arius; so were the
two Photinus's, Eustathius, Elpidius, Heracides, Hygin, Sigerius, the President
Cyriacus, and the Emperor Constantine himself; who by banishing Athanasius
into France, by becoming Arian, and being baptized by an Arian Bishop, secured
the Empire to his sons; as themselves did say, as it is reported by Lucifer
Calaritanus Pro S. Athanas. l. 1. apud Baron. A.^. 336. 13.
and that he was vehemently suspected by the Catholics, is affirmed by
Eusebius, Hierom, Ambrose, Theodoret, Sozomen, and Socrates. But Liberius
Bishop of Rome was more than suspected to have become an Arian, Idem aiunt
Martinus Pol^nus, Alphonsus de Castro, and Volaterranus.
as Athanasius himself, S. Hierom, Damasus, and S. Hilary report. So did Pope
Felix the second, and Leo his successor. It should seem by all this, that the
definitions of General Councils were not accounted the last determination of
truths, or rather that what propositions General Councils say are true, are not
therefore part of the body of faith, though they be true; or else that all
these persons did go against an established rule of faith and conscience; which
if they had done they might easily have been oppressed by their adversaries
urging the plain authority of the Council against them. But, Neither am I to
urge against thee the Nicene Council, nor thou the Council of Ariminum against
me, was the saying of S. Austin; even long after the Council of Nice had by
Concession obtained more authority than it had at first. Now the reason of
these things can be no other than this; not that the Nicene Council was not the
best that ever was since the day that a Council was held at Jerusalem by all
the Apostles; but that the Council's adding something to the Creed of the
Church, which had been the (...) of the Christian faith for 300 years together,
was so strange a thing, that they would not easily bear that yoke. And that
this was the matter, appears by what the Fathers of the Church after the
Council did complain. Dum in verbis pugna est, dum de novitatibus quaestio est,
dum de ambiguis, dum de Authoribus querelae est; dum de studiis certamen est,
dum in consensu difficultas est, dumque alter alteri anathema esse coepit,
prope jam nemo est Christi. S. Hilar.
[After the Nicene Synod we write nothing but Faiths, viz. (new Creeds:) while
there is contention about Words, while there is question about Novelties, while
there is complaint of ambiguities, and of Authors, while there is contention of
parties, and difficulty in consenting, and while one is become an Anathema to
another, scarce any man now is of Christ.] And again, [We decree yearly and
monthly faiths of God; we repent when we have decreed them; we defend them
that repent, we anathematize them that are defended; we either condemn foreign
things in our own, or condemn our own in foreign things; and biting one another
we are devoured of one another.] This was the product of leaving the simplicity
and perfection of the first rule; by which the Church for so many ages of
Martyrdom was preserved and defended, and consummated their religious lives,
and their holy baptism of blood, and which they opposed as a sufficient shield
against all heresies arising in the Church.

And yet the Nicene Fathers did add no new Article, Quid unquam aliud Ecclesia
Conciliorum decretis enisa est, nisi ut, quod antea simpliciter credebatur, h^c
idem postea diligentius crederetur. Vincent. Lirin. contr. haeres. cap. 32.
of new matter; but explicated the Filiation of Jesus Christ, saying in what
sense he was the Son of God; which was in proper speaking an interpretation of
a word in the Apostles Creed: and yet this occasioned such stirs, and gave so
little satisfaction at first, and so great disturbances afterward; that S.
Hilary Lib. de Synodis.
called them happy, who neither made, nor knew, nor received any other Symbol
besides that most simple Creed used in all Churches ever since the Apostles
days.

However, it pleased the Divine Providence so to conduct the spirits of the
Catholic Prelates, that by their wise and holy adhering to the Creed as
explicated at Nice, they procured great authority to the Nicene faith, which
was not only the truth, but a truth delivered and confirmed by the most famous
and excellent Prelates that ever the Christian Church could glory in, since the
death of the Apostles. But yet that the inconvenience might be cut off which
came in upon the occasion of the Nicene addition; (for it produced thirty
explicative Creeds more in a short time, as Marcus Ephesius openly affirmed in
the Council of Florence;) in the Council of Ephesus, which was the third
general, it was forbidden that ever there should be any addition to the Nicene
faith; Council. Ephesians. Can. 7.
[That it should not be lawful from thence forward, for any one to produce, to
write, or to compose any other faith [or Creed] besides that which was defined
by the Holy Fathers meeting at Nice in the Holy Spirit.] Here the supreme power
of the Church, a General Council, has declared that it never should be lawful
to add any thing to the former confession of faith explicated at Nice; and
this Canon was renewed in the next General Council, that of Chalcedon; [That
the faith formerly determined should at no hand, in no manner be shaken or
moved any more:] The Author of the Letter] p. 7.
meaning, by addition or diminution. There are some so impertinently weak as to
expound these Canons to mean only the adding any thing contrary to the Nicene
faith; which is an answer against reason and experience; for it is not
imaginable that any man, admitting the Nicene Creed, can by an addition intend
expressly to contradict it; and if he does not admit and believe it, he would
lay that Confession aside, and not meddle with it: but if he should design the
inserting of a clause that should secretly undermine it; he must suppose all
men that see it to be very fools, not to understand it, or infinitely careless
of what they believe and profess: but if it should happen so; then this were a
very good reason of the prohibition of any thing whatsoever to be added, lest
secretly and undiscernably the first truth be confuted by the new article: And
therefore it was a wise caution to forbid all addition, lest some may prove to
be contrary. And then secondly, it is against the experience of things; for
first the Canon was made upon the occasion of a Creed brought into the Council
by Charisius; but all Creeds thereupon were rejected, and the Nicene adhered
to, and commanded to be so for ever. In Can. 7. vide Balsam. in ^un^.
For as Balsamon observes, there were three things done in this Canon; 1. There
was an Edict made in behalf of the things decreed at Ephesus. 2. In like manner
the holy Creed being made in the first Synod, this Creed was read aloud, and
caution was given that no man should make any other Creed upon pain of
deposition, if he were an Ecclesiastic; of excommunication, if he were a
Laick. 3. The third thing he also thus expresses [The same thing also is to be
done to them who receive and teach the decrees of Nestorius.] So that the Creed
that Charisius brought in was rejected, because it was contrary to the Nicene
faith; but all Symbols were for ever after forbidden to be made, not only lest
any thing contrary be admitted, but because they would admit of no other; and
this very reason S. Athanasius assigned why the Fathers of the Council of
Sardis denied the importunity of some, Epist ad Epict.
who would have something added to the Nicene confession; they would not do it,
lest the other should seem defective. And next to this, it was carefully
observed by the following Councils, 4. 5. 6. and 7. and by it self in a great
Affair: for 1. though this Council determined the Blessed Virgin Mary to be
(...) the Mother of God, against Nestorius; yet, 2. the Fathers would not put
the Article into the Creed of the Church; but esteemed it sufficient to
determine the point and condemn Nestorius: And 3. the Greek Church has ever
since most religiously observed this Ephesine Canon: And, 4. upon this account
have vehemently spoken against the Latins, for adding a clause at Gentilly in
France. Epist* ad Epict.
5. S. Athanasius speaking of the Nicene Faith or Creed, says, It is sufficient
for the destruction of all impiety, and for the confirmation of all the Holy
Faith in Christ: and therefore, there could be no necessity of adding any thing
to so full, so perfect an Instrument; and consequently, no reasonable cause
pretended, why it should be attempted: especially since there had been so many,
so intolerable inconveniences already introduced by adding to the Symbols
their unnecessary Expositions. 6. The purpose of the Fathers is fully declared
by the Epistle of S. Cyril, Cyril. Alex. ad Johan. Antioch. Sess. 5.
in which he recites the Decree of the Council, and adds, as a full explication
of the Council's meaning, We permit neither our selves nor others, to change
one word or syllable of what is there. The case is here, as it was in
Scripture, to which no addition is to be made; nothing to be diminished from
it. But yet every Doctor is permitted to expound, to enlarge the expressions,
to deliver the sense, and to declare (as well as they can) the meaning of it.
And much more might the Doctors of the Church do to the Creed: To which,
although something was added at Nice, and Constantinople; yet from thence
forward they might in private, or in public, declare what they thought was the
meaning, and what were the consequents, and what was virtually contained in the
Articles; but nothing of this by any authority whatsoever, was to be put into
the Creed. For in Articles of Belief, simplicity is part of it is excellency and
sacredness; and those mysteriousnesses, and life-giving Articles which are fit
to be put into Creeds, are, as Philistion said of Hellebore, medicinal when it
in great pieces, but dangerous, or deadly, when it is in powder. And I remember
what a Heathen aid of the Emperor Constantius, who troubled himself too much
in curiosities, and nice arguings about things Unintelligible, and Unnecessary:
Christianam religionem absolutam and simplicem anili superstitione confudit. In
qua scrutanda perplexius quam in componenda gravius excitavit dissidia, quae
progressa fusius aluit concertatione verborum, dum ritum omnem ad suum trahere
conatur arbitrium. Christian Religion is absolute, and simple; and they that
conduct it, should compose all the parts of it with gravity, not perplex it
with curious scrutinies; not draw away any word or Article, to the sense of his
own interest. For if it once pass the bounds set by the first Masters of the
Assemblies, and lose that simplicity, with which it was invested; there is no
term or limit, which can be any more set down. Exempla non consistunt, sed,
quamvis in tenuem recepta tramitem, latissime evagandi sibi faciunt potestatem.
The devesting the Church from the simplicity of her Faith; is like removing the
ancient Landmark: you cannot tell by the mark, in what Country you are in,
whether in your own, or in the Enemies. And in the world nothing is more
unnecessary. For if that faith be sufficient; if in that faith the Church went
to Heaven, if in that she preserved unity, and begat Children to Christ, and
nursed them up to be perfect men in Christ, and kept her self pure from
Heresy, and unbroken by Schism; whatsoever is added to it, is either contained
in the Article virtually, or it is not. If not, then it is no part of the
Faith, and, by the laws of Faith, there is no obligation passed upon any man to
believe it. But if it be, then he that believes the Article, does virtually
believe all that is virtually contained in it: but no man is to be pressed with
the consequents drawn from thence; unless the Transcript be drawn by the same
hand, that wrote the Original; for we are sure it came in the simplicity of it,
from an infallible Spirit; but he that bids me believe his Deductions under
pain of damnation, bids me under pain of damnation, believe that he is an
Unerring Logician: for which, because God has given me no command; and himself
can give me no security; if I can defend my self from that man's pride, God
will defend me from Damnation.

But let us see a little further, with what constancy, That, and The following
Ages of the Church, did adhere to the Apostles, Creed, as the sufficient, and
perfect Rule of Faith. There was an Imperial Edict of Gratian, Valentinian, and
Theodosius; Cunctos populos quos clementiae nostrae regit imperium, in ea
volumus religione versari, quam Divinum Petrum Apostolum tradidisse Romany,
religio usque nunc ab ipso insi nuata declarat; quamque pontificem Damasum
sequi claret, and Petrum Alexandriae Episcopum, virum Apostolicae sanctitatis:
hoc est, ut, secundum Apostolicam disciplinam, Evangelicamque doctrinam,
Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus sancti Vnam Deitatem, sub pari majestate, and
sub pia Trinitate, credamus. Hanc legem sequentes Christianorum Catholicorum
nomen jubemus amplecti: reliquos vero dementes vesanosque judicantes, Haeretici
dogmatis infamiam sustinere, divina primum vindicta, post etiam motu animi
nostri, quem ex coelesti arbitrio sumpserimus, ultione plectendos. Part of this
being cited in the Dissuasive; to prove that in the early Ages of the Church,
the Christian Faith was much more simple than it is now in the Roman Church;
The Letter to a friend. p. 4.
and that upon easier terms, men might then be Catholic: It was replied by
some one of the Opponents, That by this law was not meant, that all who
believed the Trinity, were Catholics absolutely, but only as to those points:
and the Reason given, is this, Because after this law, the Novatians,
Donatists, Nestorians, Eutychians, etc. were proceeded against as Heretics and
Schismatics, notwithstanding their belief of the Trinity and Unity of the
Godhead:] But this thing was spoken, without all care whether it were to the
purpose or no. For when this law was made, that was the Rule of Catholicism (as
appears by the words of the law:) and if afterward, it became altered, and the
Bishops became too opinionative, or thought themselves forced into further
declarations; must therefore the precedent law be judged ex post facto by what
they did afterward? It might as well have been said; the Church was never
content with the Apostles Creed, because afterward the Lutherans and
Calvinists, and Zuinglians, etc. were proceeded against as Heretics and
Schismatics, notwithstanding their belief of all that is in the Apostles
Creed. Ex post facto nunquam crescit praeteriti aestimatio, says the law. But
for the true understanding of this Imperial law, we must know that the
confession of the Holy Trinity and Unity, was not set down there, as a single
Article, but as a Summary of the Apostles Creed; the three parts of which, have
for their heads, The three Persons of the holy and undivided Trinity. And this
appears by the relation, the law makes to the faith Saint Peter taught the
Church of Rome; and to the Creed of Damasus, which may be seen in Saint Hierom,
who rejects the Creed of that worthy Prelate, in the second Tome of his Works;
in which the Apostolical Creed is explicated, that what relates to the Trinity
and Unity, spoken of in the Imperial Law, or Rule of Catholics and Christians,
is set down in it is full purpose and design: And this thing may better be
understood by an instance in the Catechism of the Church of England; for when
the Catechumen has at large recited the Apostles Creed; he is taught to sum
it up in this manner: First, I learn to believe in God the Father, who has
made me, and all the world: Secondly, In God the Son, who has redeemed me, and
all mankind: Thirdly, In God the Holy Ghost, who sanctifies me, and all the
elect people of God. This is the Summary of the Creed; and these things are not
to be considered as Articles distinct and complete, and integrating the
Christian Faith, but as a breviary of that Faith, to which in the same place it
is made to relate; just as the Imperial Law does relate to the Faith of S.
Peter, and the Creed of Damasus, and Peter of Alexandria: Concerning which, he
that says much, says no more; and he that says little, says no less; for the
Faith is the same, as I have already cited the words of S. Irenaeus. Since then
the Emperors made the summary of the Apostles Creed, to be the rule of
discerning Catholics from Heretics; it follows, that the Roman Church,
Catholic, signifies something else than it did in the primitive Church. S.
Ambrose says, Faith is conceived by the Apostles Creed; all Faith lies in that,
as the Child in the Mother's Womb; and he compares it to a Key, because by it
the darknesses of the Devil are unlocked, that the light of Christ might come
upon us; and the hidden sins of conscience are opened, that the manifest works
of righteousness may shine. This Key is to be shown to our Brethren, that by
this, as Scholars of S. Peter, they may shut the gates of Hell, and open the
doors of Heaven. He also calls it, The Seal of our Heart, and the Sacrament of
our Warfare. S. Hierom speaking of it, Epist. ad Pammach. contra ^rro es Johan.
Hierosolymit. Exp si^. Symbol. c. 2, 3. l. 6. Orig. c. 9.
says, The Symbol of our Faith and Hope, which was delivered by the Apostles,
is not written in Paper and Ink, but in the fleshy tables of our hearts. After
the confession of the Trinity, and Unity of the Church, the whole, or every
Sacrament of the Christian Religion, is concluded with the resurrection of the
flesh. Which words are intimated, and in part transcribed by Isidore of Sevil.
Ruffinus says, The Apostles being to separate, and go to their several charges,
appointed, Normam futurae praedicationis, regulam dandam credentibus,
unanimitatis and fidei suae indicium; the Rule of what they were to preach to
all the world, the measure for believers, the Index of Faith and Unity; Not any
speech, not so much as one, even of them that went before them in the faith,
was admitted or heard by the Church. By this Creed the foldings of infidelity
are loosed; by this, the gate of life is set open; by this, the glory of
Confession is shown. It is short in words, but great in Sacraments. It confirms
all men with the perfection of believing, with the desire of confessing, with
the confidence of the Resurrection. Whatsoever was prefigured in the
Patriarchs, whatsoever is declared in the Scriptures, whatsoever was foretold
in the Prophets, of God who was not begotten, Sermon. 131. de tempore, sive Sermon.
2. de exposit Symboli ad Competente^.
of the Son of God who is the only begotten of God, or the Holy Spirit, etc.
Totum hoc breviter juxta oraculum propheticum Symbolum in se continet
confitendo.] So S. Austin, who also calls it, [The fullness of them that believe.
It is the rule of faith, the short, the certain rule, which the Apostles
comprehended in twelve Sentences, that the believers might hold the Catholic
Unity, and convince the heretical pravity. The comprehension and perfection of
our faith.] Sermon. 181. de tempore. Hom. 115.
The short and perfect Confession of the Catholic Symbol is consigned with so
many Sentences of the twelve Apostles, Epist. 13. ad Pulcher. Augustum.
is so furnished with celestial ammunition; that all the opinions of Heretics
may be cut off with that sword alone, said Pope Leo.] I could add many more
testimonies declaring the simplicity of the Christian faith, and the fullness
and sufficiency of the Apostolical Creed. But I sum them up in the words of
Rabanus Maurus, [In the Apostles Creed there are but few words, Lib. 2. de
institut. Clericorum, cap. 56.
but it contains all Religion, (Omnia in eo continentur Sacramenta:) for they
were summarily gathered together from the whole Scriptures by the Apostles;
that because many Believers cannot read, or if they can, yet by their secular
affairs are hindered that they do not read the Scriptures, retaining these in
their hearts they may have enough of saving knowledge.]

Now then since the whole Catholic Church of God in the primitive ages, having
not only declared that all things necessary to salvation are sufficiently
contained in the plain places of Scripture; but that all, which the Apostles
knew necessary, they gathered together in a Symbol or form of Confession, and
esteemed the belief of this sufficient unto salvation; and that they required
no more in credendis, as of necessity to Eternal life, but the simple belief of
these articles: these things ought to remain in their own form and order. For,
what is and what is not necessary, is either such by the Nature of the Articles
themselves, or by the Economy of Gods Commandment: and what God did command,
and what necessary effect every Article had, the Apostles only could tell, and
others from them. They that pretend to a power of doing so as the Apostles did,
have shown their want of skill; and by that, confess their want of power of
doing that which to do is beyond their skill. For, which sins are venial and
which are mortal, all the Doctors of the Church of Rome cannot tell; and how
then can they tell this of Errors, when they cannot tell it of Actions? But if
any man will search into the harder things, or any more secret Sacrament of
Religion, by that means to raise up his mind to the contemplation of heavenly
things, and to a contempt of things below, he may do it if he please, so that
he do not impose the belief of his own speculations upon others, or compel them
to confess what they know not, and what they cannot find in Scriptures, or did
not receive from the Apostles. We find by experience, that a long act of
Parliament, or an Indenture and Covenant that is of great length, ends none,
but causes many contentions; and when many things are defined, and definitions
spun out into declarations, men believe less, and know nothing more. And what
is Man, that he who knows so little of his own body, of the things done
privately in his own house, of the nature of the meat he eats; nay, that knows
so little of his own Heart, and is so great a stranger to the secret courses of
Nature? I say, what is man, that in the things of God he should be ashamed to
say, This is a secret; This God only knows; S. Athanas. ep. ad Serapion.
This he has not revealed; This I admire, but I understand not; I believe, but
I understand it to be a mystery? And cannot a man enjoy the gift which God
gives, and do what he commands, but he must dispute the Philosophy of the gift,
or the Metaphysics of a Command? Cannot a man eat Oysters, unless he wrangle
about the number of the senses which that poor animal has? and will not
condited Mushromes be swallowed down, unless you first tell whether they differ
specifically from a sponge? S. Basil. de Spir. S. c. 13.
Is it not enough for me to believe the words of Christ, saying, This is my
body? and cannot I take it thankfully, and believe it heartily, and confess it
joyfully; but I must pry into the secret, and examine it by the rules of
Aristotle and Porphyry, and find out the nature and the undiscernable
philosophy of the manner of its change, and torment my own brains, and distract
my heart, and torment my Brethren, and lose my charity, and hazard the loss of
all the benefits intended to me, by the Holy Body; because I break those few
words into more questions, than the holy bread is into particles to be eaten?
Is it not enough, that I believe, that, whether we live or die, we are the
Lord's, in case we serve him faithfully? but we must descend into hell, and
inquire after the secrets of the dead, and dream of the circumstances of the
state of separation, and damn our Brethren if they will not allow us and
themselves to be half damned in Purgatory? Is it not enough that we are
Christians? that is, that we put all our hope in God, who freely gives us all
things by his Son Jesus Christ; that we are redeemed by his death, that he rose
again for our justification; that we are made members of his body in Baptism,
that he gives us of his Spirit, that being dead to the lusts of this world we
should live according to his doctrine and example; that is, that we do no evil,
that we do what good we can; that we love God, and love our Brother; that we
suffer patiently, and do good things in expectation of better, even of a happy
Resurrection to eternal life, which he has promised to us by his Son, and
which we shall receive, if we walk in the Spirit, and live in the Spirit? What
is wanting to him that does all this? but that he do so still? Is not this
faith unto righteousness, and the confession of this-faith, unto salvation? We
all believe we shall arise from our graves at the last day; one sort of
Christians thinks with one sort of body, and another thinks with another; but
these conjectures ought not to be accounted necessary; and we are not concerned
to dispute which it is; for we shall never know by all our disputing; but we
may lose the good of it, if we make it an argument of Uncharitableness. But
besides this,

Did not the Apostles desire to know nothing but Christ Jesus, and him
crucified, and risen again? and did not they preach this faith to all the
world, and did they preach any other; but severely reprove all curious and
subtle questions, and all pretenses of science, or knowledge falsely so called,
when men languished about Questions and strife of words? Are we not taught by
the Apostles, that we ought not to receive our weak Brother unto doubtful
disputations; and that the servant of God ought not to strive? Did not they
say, that all that keep the foundation shall be saved; some with, and some
without loss? and that erring brethren are to be tolerated; and that if they be
servants of God, and yet, in a matter of doctrine or opinion, otherwise minded,
God shall reveal even this also unto them? And if these things be thus, Why
shall one Christian Church condemn another, which is built upon the same
foundation with her self? And how can it be imagined, that the servants of God
cannot be saved now as in the days of the Apostles? Are we wiser than they, are
our Doctors more learned, or more faithful? Is there another Covenant made with
the Church since their days? or is God less merciful to us, than he was to
them? Or has he made the way to heaven narrower in the end of the world, than
at the beginning of the Christian Church? Do men live better lives now, than at
the first; so that a holy life is so enlarged, that the foundation of faith
laid at first is not broad enough to support the new buildings? We find it much
otherwise. And men need not enlarge the Articles and Conditions of Faith in
these degenerate ages, wherein when Christ comes he shall hardly upon earth
find any faith at all: and, if there were need, yet no man is able to do it,
because Christ only is our Lord and Master, and no man is Master of our faith.

But to come closer to the thing. It is certain, There is nothing simply
necessary to salvation now, that was not so always: and this must be confessed
by all that admit of the so much commended rule of Vincentius Lirinensis; That
which was always, and every where believed by all; that is the rule of faith:
and therefore, there can be no new measure, no new Article, no new
determination, no declaration obliging us to believe any proposition that was
not always believed. And therefore as, that which was first is true, that which
was at first, and nothing else, is necessary. Nay, suppose many truths to be
found out by industry, and by Divine Assistances, yet no more can be necessary;
because nothing of this could ever be wanting to the Church. Therefore the new
discovered truth cannot of it self be necessary. Neither can the discovery make
it necessary to be believed, unless I find it to be discovered and revealed by
him, whose very discovery, though accidental, yet can make it necessary; that
is, unless I be convinced that God has spoken it: Indeed, if that happen,
there is no further inquiry. But, because there are no new revelations since
the Apostles died, whatever comes in after them is only by man's ratiocination:
and therefore can never go beyond a probability in it self, and never ought to
pretend higher, lest God's incommunicable right be invaded, which is to be the
Lord of humane Understandings. The consequent of all this is, There can be
nothing of necessity to be believed, which the Church of God, taught by the
Apostles, did not believe necessary.

SECTION V.
That the Church of Rome pretends to a power of introducing into the
Confessions of the Church, new Articles of faith; and endeavors to alter and
suppress the old Catholic Doctrine.
NOw then having established the Christian Rule and Measure, I shall in the
next place show how the Church of Rome has usurped an Empire over Consciences,
offering to enlarge the Faith, to add new propositions to the Belief of
Christians; and imposes them under pain of damnation. And this I prove, 1.
Because they pretend to a power to do it. 2. They have reason and necessity to
do so in respect of their interest, and they actually do so both in faith and
manners. 3. They use indirect and unworthy arts that they may do it without
reproach and discovery. 4. Having done this, they, by enlarging Faith, destroy
Charity.

1. They pretend to a power to do it. The Authorities which were brought in the
first part of the Dissuasive, Chapt. 1. Sect. page 10. edit. Dublin 1664.
did sufficiently prove this; but because they were snarl'd at, I shall
justify, and enlarge them, and confirm their sense by others. First, the Pope
has authority (as his Doctors teach the world) to declare an Article of Faith,
and this is as much as the Apostles themselves could do; that is, As the
Apostles, by gathering the necessary Articles of Faith, made up a Symbol of
what things are necessary, and by their imposing this Collection on all
Churches, their baptizing into that Faith, their making it a Rule of Faith to
all Christians, did declare, not only the truth, but the necessity of those
Articles to be learned, and to be believed; So the Pope also pretends he can
declare. For declaring a thing to be true, and declaring it to be an Article of
Faith, are things of vast difference. He that declares it only to be true,
imposes no necessity of believing it; but if he can make it appear to be true,
he, to whom it so appears, cannot but believe it. But if he declares it to be
an Article of Faith, he says, that God has made it necessary to be known, and
to be believed; and if any has power to declare this, to declare I say, not as
a Doctor, but as an Apostle, as Jesus Christ himself, he is Master and Lord of
the Conscience. Now that the Pope pretends to this, we are fiercely taught by
his Doctors, and by his Laws. Thus the Gloss upon the Extravagant de verborum
significatione, Gloss ibid.
Cap. Cum inter. verb. Declaramus, says, He being Prince of the Church, and
Christ's Vicar, can in that capacity make a declaration upon an Article of the
Catholic Faith. He can declare it authoritative, not only as a Doctor, but as
a Prince; by Empire and Command, as Princeps Ecclesiae. The Sorbon can Declare
as well as he upon the Catholic Faith, if it be only matter of skill and
learning; but to declare so, as to bind every man to believe it; to declare so,
as the Article shall be a point of Faith, when before this Declaration, it was
not so quoad nos; this is that, which is pretended be declaring: And so this
very Gloss expounds it; adding to the former words [The Pope can make an
Article of Faith, if an Article of Faith be taken not properly, but largely,
that is, for a Doctrine which now we must believe, whereas, before such
declaration, we are not tied to it. These are the words of the Gloss. The sense
of which is this; There are some Articles of Faith, which are such before the
declaration of the Church, and some which are by the Churches declaration made
so: some were declared by the Scriptures, or by the Apostles; and some by the
Councils, or Popes of Rome: after which declaration, they are both alike,
equally necessary to be believed; and this is that which we charge upon them,
as a dangerous and intolerable point. For it says plainly, that whereas Christ
made some Articles of Faith, the Pope can make others; for if they were not
Articles of Faith, before the declaration of the Pope, then he makes them to be
such; and that is truly (according to their own words) facere Articulum fidei:
this is making an Article of Faith. Neither will it suffice to say; that this
Proposition, so declared, was, before such a declaration, really and indeed, an
Article of Faith in it self; but not in respect of us. For this is all one in
several words. For an Article of Faith is a relative term; it is a Proposition
which we are commanded to believe, and to confess: and to say, This is an
Article of Faith, and yet that no man is bound to believe it, is a
contradiction. Now then, let it be considered: No man is bound to believe any
Article till it be declared; as no man is bound to obey a Law, till it be
promulgated; Faith comes by hearing; till there be hearing, there can be no
Faith; and therefore no Article of Faith. The truth is Eternal; but Faith is
but temporary, and depends upon the declaration. Now then, suppose any Article:
I demand, did Christ and his Apostles declare it to the Church? If not, how
does the Pope know it, who pretends to no new Revelations? If the Apostles did
not declare it, how were they faithful in the house of God? Acts 20. 27.
and how did S. Paul say truly, I have not failed or ceased, (...) to declare,
to annunciate to you all the whole Counsel of God. But if they did say true,
and were faithful, and did declare it all; then was it an Article of Faith,
before the Pope's Declaration; and then it was a sin of ignorance not to
believe it, and of malice, or pusillanimity not to confess it, and a worse sin
to have contradicted it. And who can suppose that the Apostolical Churches and
their descendants should be ignorant in any thing that was then a matter of
Faith? If it was not then, it cannot now be declared that it was so then; for
to declare a thing properly, is to publish what it was before; if it was then,
there needs no declaration of it now, unless by declaring, we mean preaching
it, and then every Parish Priest is bound to do it, and can do it as well as
the Pope. If therefore they mean more, as it is certain they do, then,
Declaring an Article of Faith is but the civiller word for Making it. Christ's
preaching, and the Apostles imposing it, made it an Article of Faith, in it
self and to us; other declaration excepting only teaching, preaching,
expounding and exhorting we know none, and we need none; for they only could do
it, and, it is certain, they did it fully.

But I need not argue, and take pains to prove that by Declaring, they mean
more than mere Preaching; Themselves own the utmost intention of the Charge.
The Pope can statuere Articulos fidei; that is more than declare merely; it must
be to appoint, to decree, to determine that such a thing is of necessity to be
believed unto salvation; Art. 27. Certum est in man^ Ecclesiae aut Papae
prorsus non esse, statuere articulos fide, etc.
and because Luther said, the Pope could not do this, he was condemned by a
Bull of Pope Leo. But we may yet further know the meaning of this; For their
Doctors are plain in affirming, that the Pope is the Foundation, Turrecrem. l.
2. cap. 107.
rule, and principle of faith. So Turrecremata: For to him it belongs to be the
measure and rule, and science of things that are to be believed, and of all
things which are necessary to the direction of the faithful unto life Eternal.
And again, It is easy to understand that it belongs to the Authority of the
Pope of Rome, Idem ibid.
as to the general and principal Master and Doctor of the whole World, to
determine those things which are of faith; and by consequence to publish a
Symbol of Faith: to interpret the senses of Holy Scriptures: to approve and
reprove the sayings of every Doctor belonging to Faith. Hence comes it to pass,
that the Doctors say, that the Apostolical See, is called the Mistress, and
Mother of Faith.] And what can this mean; but to do that, which the Apostles
could not do; that is, Extravag. de v^rb. signifi. cap quia Quorundum gloss.
to be Lords over the Faith of Christendom. For to declare only an Article of
Faith, is not all they challenge; they can do more: As he is Pope, he can, not
only declare an Article of Faith, but introduce a new one. And this is that,
which I suppose Augustinus Triumphus to mean, Qu. 59 art. 1.
when he says; Symbolum novum condere ad Papam solum spectat: and, if that be
not plain enough, he adds. Art. 2.
As he can make a new Creed, or Symbol of Faith; so he can multiply new
Articles, one upon another. Vide Salmeron. orolog. in comment. in Epist. ad
Roman. part. 3 p. 176. Sect. Tertio dicitur.
For the conclusion of this particular, I shall give a very considerable
Instance, which relies not upon the Credit and testimony of their Doctors, but
is matter of fact, and notorious to all the World. For it will be to no purpose
for them to deny it, and say, that the Pope can only declare an Article, but
not make a new one. For it is plain, that they so declare an old one, that they
bring a new one in; they pretend the old Creed to be with Child of a Cushion,
and they introduce a suppositious Child of their own. The Instance I mean, is,
that Article of the Apostles Creed, I believe the holy Catholic Church: The
Question is made, What is meant by it? They that have a mind to it, understand
it easily enough; it was a declaration of the coming of the Messiah into the
world; the great proof that Jesus of Nazareth was the Shiloh, or he that was to
come. For whereas the Jews were the Enclosure, and peculiar people of God; at
the coming of the Messiah it should be so no more; but the Gentiles being
called, and the sound of the Gospel going into all the world, it was no more
the Church of the Jews, but Ecclesia totius mundi, the Church of the Universe,
the Universal, or Catholic Church; of Jews and Gentiles, of all people, and
all Languages. Now this great and glorious mystery, we confess in this Article;
that is, we confess, that God has given to his Son, the Heathen for an
Inheritance, and the utmost parts of the world for a possession; that God is no
respecter of persons, Acts 10. 35.
but in every Nation, he that fears him, and works righteousness, is
accepted with him. This is the plain sense of the Article, and renders the
Article also highly considerable, and represents it as Fundamental; and it is
agreeable with the very Economy of the Gospel; and determines one of the
greatest questions that ever were in the world, the dispute between the Jews
and Gentiles; and is not only easy, and intelligible, but greatly for
Edification.

Now then, let us see how the Church of Rome, by her Head and Members, expound,
or declare this Article, I believe the Holy Catholic Church; so it is in the
Apostles Creed. I believe one Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church; so the
Nicene Creed. Here is no difference, and no Commentary; but the same thing with
the addition of one word to the same sense; only it includes also the first
Founders of this Catholic Church; as if it had been said, I believe that the
Church of Christ is disseminated over the world, and not limited to the Jewish
pale; and that this Church was founded by the Apostles upon the rock Christ
Jesus. But the Church of Rome has handled this Article after another manner;
she has explained it so clearly, that no wise man can believe it; she has
declared the Article so as to make it a new one, and made an addition to it
that destroys the principal: Sanctam Catholicam and Apostolicam Romanam
Ecclesiam, omnium Ecclesiarum Matrem and Magistram agnosco, I acknowledge the
holy Catholic and Apostolic Roman Church, the Mother and Mistress of all
Churches. And at the end of this declaration of the Creed, it is added as at
the end of the Athanasian; This is the true Catholic faith, without which no
man can be saved. And this is the Creed of Pope Pius the fourth, enjoined to be
sworn by all Ecclesiastics, secular or Religious. Now let it be considered,
Whether this Declaration be not a new Article, and not only so, but a
destruction to the old. 1. The Apostolical Creed professes to believe all he
means some, and the Universal means but particular. But besides this, 2. It is
certain, this must be a piece of a new Roman Church should be comprehended
under the Catholic Church, than as every other Church which was then, or
should be after. And why Roman should be put in, and not the Ephesine, the
Caesarean, or the Hierosolymitan, it is not to be imagined. 3. This Roman
Church was in being. I believe the holy Catholic Church, was an Article of
faith before Roman Church at all. 4. The interposing the Roman into the Creed,
as equal, and of the extent with the Catholic, is not only a false, but a
malicious addition. For they having perpetually in their mouths, That out of
the Catholic Church there is no Salvation; and now against the truth,
simplicity, interest and design of the Apostolical Creed, having made the Roman
and Catholic to be all one: they have also established this doctrine as
virtual part of the Creed, that out of the Communion of the Church of Rome
there is no Salvation to be hoped for; and so by this means damn all the
Christians of the world who are not of their Communion; and that is the far
biggest Roman to expound Catholic in the Creed; when it is confessed among
Driedo de dogmat. Eccl. lib. 4. c. 3. p. 3.
themselves that it is not of faith, that the Apostolic Church cannot be
separated from the Roman; and Lib. 4. de Pontif. Romans c. 4. Sect. At secundum.
Bellarmine proves this; because there is neither Scripture nor Tradition that
affirms it: and then if ever they be separated, and the Apostolic be removed
to Constantinople, then the Creed must be changed again, and it must run thus,
I believe the holy Catholic, and Apostolic Constantinopolitan the Roman
Church is the Mother of all Churches: when it is confessed that S. Peter sat
Bishop at Antioch seven years before his pretended coming to Rome: and that
Jerusalem is the Mother of all Churches. For the Law went forth out of Sion,
and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem: Apud Baron. AD. 382. n 15.
and therefore the Ecumenical Council of Constantinople in the Consecration of
S. Cyril, said, Vide etiam S. Basil, tom. 2. ep. 30. and Greg. Theol.
We show unto you Cyril the Bishop of Jerusalem, which is the Mother of all
other Churches. The like is said of the Church of Cesarea, (with an exception
only of Jerusalem,) quae prope matter omnium Ecclesiarum, and fuit ab initio,
and nune quoque est, and nominatur: quam Christiana respublica, velut centrum
suum circulus, undique observat. How this saying of S. Gregory the Divine can
consist with the new Roman Creed, I leave it to the Roman Doctors to consider.
In the mean time, it is impossible that it should be true, that the Roman
Church is the Mother of all Churches, not only because it is not imaginable
she could beget her own Grandmother; but for another pretty reason, which
Bellarmine has invented; [Though the Ancients every where call the Roman
Church the Mother of all Churches, Lib. 1. de Romans
and that all Bishops had their Consecration and Dignity from her; Pontif. c.
23. Sect. Secunda ratio.
yet this seems not to be true, but in that sense, because Peter was Bishop of
Rome: he ordained all the Apostles and all other Bishops, by himself, or by
others. Otherwise since all the Apostles constituted very many Bishops in
diverse places, if the Apostles were not made Bishops by Peter, certainly the
greatest part of Bishops will not deduce their original from Peter.] This is
Bellarmine's argument, by which he has perfectly overthrown that clause of
Pius quartus his Creed; that the Roman Church is the Mother of all Churches. He
confesses she is not, unless S. Peter did consecrate all the Apostles; he might
have added, No, nor then neither, unless Peter had made the Apostles to be
Bishops, after himself was Bishop of Rome; for what is that to the Roman
Church, if he did this before he was the Roman Bishop? But then that Peter made
all the Apostles Bishops is so ridiculous a dream, that in the world nothing is
more unwarrantable. For, besides that S. Paul was consecrated by none but
Christ himself, it is certain that he ordained Timothy and Titus, and that the
succession in those Churches ran from the same Original in the same Line; and
there is no Record in Scripture that ever S. Peter ordained any; not any one of
the Apostles who received their authority from Christ and the Holy Spirit, in
the same times altogether: which thing is also affirmed by Institut. moral.
part. 2 l. 4. c. 11. Sect. Altera opinio.
Azorius, and De tripl. virt. Theolog. disp. 10. Sect. 1. n. 5. and 7.
Suarez, who also quotes for it the Authority of S. Quaest. Vet. and N. Test.
q. 97.
Austin, and the Gloss. So that from first to last, it appears that the Roman
Church is not the Mother Church, and yet every Priest is sworn to live and die
in the belief of it, that she is. However, it is plain, that this assumentum
and shred of the Roman Creed, is such a declaration of the old Article of
believing the Catholic Church, that it is not only a direct new Article of
faith but destroys the old.

By thus handling the Creed of the Catholic Church we shall best understand
what they mean, when they affirm that the Pope can interpret Scripture
authoritative, and he can make Scripture. Ad quem pertinet sacram Scripturam
authoritative interpretari: Ejus enim est interpretari, cujus est condere. He
that can make Scripture can make new Articles of faith surely. Much to the same
Purpose are the words of Pope Innocent the fourth, Innocent. 4. in cap. super
eo. de Bigamis.
He cannot only interpret the Gospel, but add to it. Indeed if he have power
to expound it authoritative, that is as good as making it; for by that means he
can add to it, or take from the sense of it. But that the Pope can do this,
that is, can interpret the Scriptures authoritative, sententialiter,
obligatorie, so as it is not lawful to hold the contrary, is affirmed by
Augustinus Triumphus Qu. 67. a. 2.
, Turrecremata Lib. 2. c. 107.
, and Hervey De potestate Papae.
. And Cardinal Hosius De expresso Dei verbo and in Epilogo.
goes beyond this, saying, That although the words of the Scripture be not
open, yet being uttered in the sense of the Church, they are the express words
of God; but uttered in any other sense, are not the express word of God, but
rather of the Devil.] To these I only add what we are taught by another
Cardinal; who persuading the Bohemians to accept the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper in one kind, tells them; and it is that I said before; If the Church,
Card. Cusan. Ep^st. 2. ad B^h^m^s, de usu Communionis, p. 833.
viz. of Rome (for that is with them the Catholic Church) or if the Pope, that
is, the Virtual Church, do expound any Evangelical sense contrary to what the
current sense and practice of the Catholic Primitive Church did; not that, but
this present interpretation must be taken for the way of Salvation. For God
changes his judgment as the Church does. Epist. 3. p. 838.
So that it is no wonder, that the Pope can make new Articles, or new
Scriptures, or new Gospel; it seems the Church of Rome can make contrary
Gospel: that if in the primitive Church to receive in both kinds was via
salutis, because it was understood then to be a precept Evangelical; afterward
the way of Salvation shall be changed, and the precept Evangelical must be
understood, To take it in one kind. But this is denied by Balduinus, In 1.
Decret. de summa Trinitate and fide Cathol. n. 44. 15. did. Canones.
who, to the Question Whether can the Pope find out new Articles of Faith?
says, I answer, Yes: But not contrary. It seems the Doctors differ upon that
point: but that which the Cardinal of Cusa, the Legate of P. Nicolas the fifth,
taught the Bohemians, was, how they should answer their objection: for (they
said) if Christ commanded one thing, and the Council, or the Pope, or the
Prelates commanded contrary, they would not obey the Church but Christ. But how
greatly they were mistaken, the Cardinal Legate told them, Epist 2. ad Bohemos,
p. 834. edit. Basil. A. D. 1565.
Possible non est, Scripturam quamcunque, sive ipsa praeceptum sive consilium
contineat, in eos qui apud Ecclesiam existunt, plus auctoritatis ligandi
haebere aut solvendi fideles, quam ipsa Ecclesia voluerit, aut verbo aut opere
expresserit: and in the third Epistle he tells them, The authority of the
Church is to be preferred before the Scriptures. In piorum Clypeo. qu 29.
artit. 5.
The same also is taught by Elysius Nepolitanus.

It matters not what the primitive Church did; no, nor much what the
Apostolical did: Pighius Hierarch. l. 1. c. 2.
For the Apostles indeed, wrote some certain things, not that they should rule
our Faith, and our Religion, but that they should be under it; that is, they
submit the Scriptures to the Faith, nay, even to the Practice of the Church.
For the Pope can change the Gospel, said Henry, the Master of the Roman Palace,
Ad legatos ^ohemicos sub Felice Papa. A. D. 1447. vide Polan. in Dan. 11. 371.
and, according to place and time, give it another sense: insomuch, that if any
man should not believe Christ to be the true God and man, if the Pope thought
so too, he should not be damned, said the Cardinal of S. Angelo; And Silvester
Prierias Sylvest. Prierias cont. Lutherum, Conclu. 56.
expressly affirmed, that the authority of the Church of Rome, and the Pope's,
is greater than the authority of the Scriptures. These things being so
notorious, I wonder with what confidence Bellarmine can say, That the
Catholics, meaning his own parties, do not subject the Scripture, but prefer
it before Councils; and that there is no controversy in this; when the
contrary is so plain in the pre-alledged testimonies: but because his
conscience checked him in the particular, he thinks to escape with a
distinction: If the Catholics sometimes say, That the Scriptures depend upon
the Church, or a Council, they do not understand it, in respect of authority,
or in themselves; but by explication, and in relation to us Bellarm. de Council.
author. lib. 2. cap. 12. Sect. Diximus.
. Which is too crude an affirmative to be believed: for, besides that Pighius
in his Epistle to Paul III. before his Books of Ecclesiastical Hierarchy
affirms, that the whole authority of the Scripture, depends upon the Church;
and the Testimonies, above cited, do in terms confute this saying of his; the
distinction it self, helps not all: for if the Scriptures have quoad nos, no
authority, but what the Pope, or the Church is pleased to give them; then they
have in themselves none at all. For the Scriptures were written for our
learning; not to instruct the Angels, but to conserve the truths of God for the
use of the Church; and they have no other use or design; And if a man shall say
the Scriptures have in themselves great authority; he must mean that in
themselves they are highly credible quoad nos, that is, that we are bound to
believe them for their own truth and excellency. And if a man shall say, They
have no authority quoad nos, but what the Church gives them; he says, They are
not credible in themselves, and, in se, have no authority; so that this
distinction is a Metaphysical Nothing, and is brought only to amuse men that
have not leisure to consider. And he that says one, says the other; or as bad,
under a thin and transparent cover. The Church gives testimony external, to the
Scripture; but the internal authority is inherent and derives only from God.
But let the witness of the Church be of as perfect force, as can be desired, I
meddle not with it here; but that which I charge on the Roman Doctors, is, that
they give to their Church a power of introducing, and imposing new Articles of
Belief; and pretending that they have power so to do; and their definitions are
of authority equal (if not superior) to the Scriptures. And this I have now
proved by many testimonies: to all which I add that of the Canon Law it self.
Did. 19. Can. in Canonicis.
In which Gratian most falsely alleges pretended words of Saint Austin (which
Bellarmine De Council. authorit. lib. 2. cap. 12. Sect. Respond^o ad Gra^ianum.
calls a being deceived by a false Copy) and among the Canonical Scriptures,
reckons the decretal Epistles of the Popes; inter quas sane illae sunt, quas
Apostolica Seeds habere, and ab ea alii meruerunt accipere Epistolas: Now who
can tell of any Copy of S. Austin, or heard of any, in which these words were
seen? Certainly, no man alive; but if Gratian was deceived, the deceivers were
among themselves; and yet they loved the deception, or else they might have
expunged those words, when Gregory the 13th. appointed a Committee of learned
men to purge that (...). But it yet remains; and if they do not pass for Saint
Austin's words, yet they are good Law at Rome. 10^. Com. tit. 1. de Ecclesia
and ejus authorit.
And Heretics indeed talk otherwise, said Eckius. Objiciunt Haeretioi, Major
est authoritas Scripturae quam Ecclesiae; but he has confuted them with an
excellent Argument. The Church using blood and strangled, has by authority
changed a thing, defined by the Scripture. Behold (says he) the power of the
Church over Scripture! I love not to take in such polluted channels; he that is
pleased with it, may find enough to entertain his wonder, and his indignation,
if he please to read fol. 126. 1. b. and 104. b. and 133. b.
Capistrano, page 42. n. 15. and p. 11. n. 18. and 124. n. 9.
Cupers, defens. Trid. l. 1. and l. 2. and explic. orthod. l. 2.
Andradius, page 3. l. 22. cap. 3. Sect. 3.
Antonius, de fide and justif. 74. 6. and hierarch. Eccl. l. 1. c. 2. 3. 4. and
in praefatione ad Paulum ter^ium.
Pighius, Contr. Luth^. Concl. 56.
Sylvester Prierias, dis. contr. Luther. 8. de Eccl. Concl. 1. l. edit. 1554.
Johannes Maria Verratus, Encherid. cap. 1.
Coster, in 3. l. dec^etal. de convers. conjug. c. ex publico. n. 16.
Zabarel, and de verb. Dei l. 3. c. 10. Sect. Ad decimum quintum.
Bellarmine himself, who yet, with some more modesty of expression, affirms the
same thing in substance, which according as it has been, is, and is still
likely to be made use of, is enough to undo the Church; The word of the Pope,
teaching out of his Chair, is non omnino, not (altogether, or not at all) the
word of man, that is a word liable to error, but in some sort the word of God,
etc. Agreeable to which is that which the Lawyers say, that the Canon Law is
the Divine Law; so said Super. 2. decret. de jurejur. c. Nimis. n. 1.
Hostiensis. I hope, I shall not be esteemed to slander her, when these writers
think they so much honor the Church of Rome in these sayings. In pursuance of
this power and authority, Pope Pius the 4th. made a new Creed; and putting his
power into act, did multiply new Articles, one upon another. And in the Council
of Trent, amongst many other new, and fine Doctrines, this was one, That it is
Heresy to say, That Matrimonial Causes do not pertain to Ecclesiastical
Judges: and yet we in England owe this privilege to the favor and bounty of
the King, and so did the Ancient Churches to the kindness and Religion of the
Emperor; and, if it were so, or not so, it is but matter of Discipline, and
cannot by a simple denial of it, become an Heresy. So that what I have
alleged, is not the opinion of some private Doctors, but the public practice
of the Roman Church. Lib. Benedicti de Benedict. Bon niae excusus. A. D. 1600.
Commissum ei (Papae) munus non modo articulos indeterminatos determinandi, sed
etiam fidei Symbolum condendi: atque hoc ipsum Orthodoxos omnes omnium
saeculorum agnovisse, and palam confessos esse; it was said to Paulus Quintus,
in an address to him. And how good a Catholic Baronius was in this particular,
An. Dom. 373. n. 22.
we may guess by what himself says concerning the business of the
Apollinarists, in which the Pope did, and undid; Vt plane appareat, says
Baronius, ex arbitrio pependisse Romani Pontificis, Decreta sancire, and
sancita mutare.

2. That which I am next to represent, is, that the Church of Rome has reason
and necessity to pretend to this power of making new Articles; for they having
in the body of their Articles, and in the public Doctrines allowed by them,
and in the profession and practices of their Church, so many new things, which
at least seem contrary to Scripture, or are not at all in Scripture; and such
for which it is impossible to show any Apostolical, or Primitive tradition, do
easily and openly betray their own weakness and necessity in this affair. My
first Instance is of their known Arts of abusing the people, by pretended
Apparitions, and false Miracles, for the establishing of strange Opinions. Non
obscurum est quot opiniones invectae sunt in orbem per homines, ad suum
quaestum callidos, confictorum miraculorum praesidio, said Erasmus. These
Doctrines must needs be things that come over the Walls, and in at the Windows;
they come not the right way. For besides that, In 1 Cor. 2.
as S. Chrysostom says, It was at first profitable, Tom. 6. (...).
that miracles should be done; and now it is profitable, that they be not done:
for then our Faith was finished by Miracles, but now by the Divine Scriptures:]
Miracles are like watering of plants, to be done when they are newly set, and
before they have taken root. Hence the Apostle says, Tongues are for a sign to
them that believe not, and not for them that believe.] So S. Gregory, Homil.
29. in Evangel.
Our Ancestors followed after signs; by which it came to pass, that they should
not be necessary to their posterity; And S. Aug. de vera relig. c. 25.
he that yet looks for Miracles that he may believe, is himself a Miracle. Nay,
to pretend Miracles now adays, is the worst sign in the world. And here S.
Austin in great zeal, gives warning of such things as these. [ Id de civit. Dei
l. 22. c. 8.
Let not a man say, This is true, because Donatus, Pontius, or another, has
done wonderful things; or because men praying at the memories of Martyrs are
heard; or because such, or such things there happen, or because that Brother of
ours, or that Sister of ours waking saw such a Vision, or sleeping dreamt such
a Dream: let those fictions of lying men, or wonders of deceitful spirits, be
removed. For either those things which are spoken, are not true, or if any
miracles of Heretics be done, we ought to take heed the more. Because when our
Lord said, Some deceivers should arise, which should do signs, and deceive, if
it were possible, the very Elect; he, August. tract. 13. in Evang*
commending this saying, vehemently added, Behold, I have told you of it
before.]; This same is also taught by the Author of the imperfect work on S.
Matthew, Johan. Homil. 49.
imputed to Saint Chrysostom, who calls the power of working Miracles (after
the first vocation of the Gospel) seductionis adjutoria, the helps of
seduction; as at first they were used by Christ, and Christ's servants, as
instruments of vocation; and affirms, These helps of deceit were to be
delivered to the Devil.] It was the same in the Gospel, as it was in the Law of
Moses; after God had by signs and wonders in the hand of Moses, fixed and
established his Law, which only was to be their Rule; and Caution was given,
Deuter. 1. 13. that against that Rule, no man should be believed, though he
wrought miracles. Quest. in Deuter.
Upon which words Theodoret says, [We are instructed, that we must not mind
signs, when he that works them, teaches any thing contrary to piety.] And
therefore these things can be to no purpose, unless it be to deceive; except
this only, that where miracles are pretended, there is a warning also given,
that there is danger of deception, and there is the Seat of Antichrist, who is
foretold should come in all signs, and lying wonders. Hic. 11. 1^. vide
Stellam; ibid.
Generatio nequam signum quaerit, said Christ. But it is remarkable by the
Doctrines, for which in the Church of Rome, Miracles are pretended, that they
are a Cover fitted for their Dish; new miracles to destroy the old truths, and
to introduce new opinions. For to prove any Article of our Creed, or the
necessity of a Divine Commandment, or the Divinity of the Eternal Son of God,
there is now no need of miracles, and for this way of proving these, and such
Articles as these, they trouble not themselves; but for Transubstantiation,
Adoration of the consecrated Bread and Wine, for Purgatory, Invocation, and
worship of Saints, of their Relics, of the Cross, Monastical Vows,
Fraternities of Friars and Monks, the Pope's Supremacy, and double Monarchy in
the Church of Rome, they never give over to make, and boast Prodigious
Miracles. But with what success, we may learn from some of the more sober and
wise amongst them. In Sacramento apparet Caro, In quartam sent. qu. 53.
interdum humana procuratione, interdum operatione diabolica, said Alexander of
Ales: this indeed was an old trick, and S. Irenaeus reports, Iren l. 1. c. 9.
that it was done by Marcus, that great Haersiarch, that by this prayer he
caused the Eucharistical Wine to appear as if it were turned into Blood; In
Canon Missae. lect. 49.
and Biel affirms, that Miracles are done to men who run to Images, sometimes
by operation of Devils, to deceive those inordinate worshippers; God permitting
it, and their infidelity exacting it. And when, in the Question of the
immaculate Conception, there are miracles produced on both sides (as the
learned Bishop of the Canaries tells us) it must needs be, Melchior. can^s lo^.
Com. mun. l. 11. c. 6.
that on one side the Devil was the Architect, if not on both. And such stories
are so frequently related by the Romish Legends, by S. Gregory Bishop of Rome,
by Beda, by Vincentius Belvacensis Antoninus, by the Speculum Exemplorum, and
are accounted Religious stories, and are so publicly preached and told by the
Friars in their Sermons, and so believed by the people, and the Common sort of
Roman Catholics, and indifferently amongst many of the better sort, that their
minds are greatly possessed with such a superstitious credulity, and are fed
with such hypochondriacal, and fond opinions, that it is observable, how they,
by those usages, are become fond News-mongers, and reporters of every
ridiculous story. Hi pie nonnihil admentientes, supponunt reliquias, fabricant
miracula, confinguntque (quae Exempla vocant) vel plausibiles; vel terribiles
fabulas: De vanit. Scier. cap. 97.
So Cornelius Agrippa complains of the Writers of such ridiculous stories in
that Church; that, as one of their own Writers said, they equal, if not exceed,
Amadis and Clarianus. Who please to see more of this, may be satisfied with
reading Canus, in the Chapter above quoted: or, if he please, he may observe it
in Bellarmine himself; who out of those very legends and stories, which are
disallowed by Canus, and out of diverse others, as Garetius, Tilmanus;
Bredenbachius, Thomas of Walden, and I know not who besides, recount seven
miracles, to prove the proper natural presence of Christ's Body in the
Sacrament; amongst which, it is not the least which he tells; of the fellow's
beast, Bellar. lib. 3. de Euchar. c. 8.
who left his barley at the Command of S. Anthony of Padua, and went to worship
the Sacrament. Such things as these it is no wonder that they are either acted
or believed in the Church of Rome, since so many Popes and Priests are
Magicians; and since that villain of a man, Pope Hildebrand (as Cardinal Beno
relates in his life) could by shaking of his Sleeve make sparks of fire fly
from it. I end this, and make no other use of it then what is made by
Aventinus, Lib. 5. and l. 7.
saying, That this Pope under show of Religion is said to have laid the
foundation of the Empire of Antichrist. Multi falsi prophetae nebulas
offundunt; fabulis, miraculis (Exempla vocant) a veritate Christi plebem
avertunt. Falsi tum prophetae, falsi Apostoli, falsi sacerdotes emersere, qui
simulata religione populum deceperunt, magna signa atque prodigia ediderunt,
and in templo Dei sedere atque extolli super id quod colitur, coeperunt. Dumque
suam potentiam, dominationemque stabilire conantur, charitatem, and
simplicitatem Christianam extinxerunt.] And they continue to do so to this day,
where they have any hopes to prevail without discovery. Secondly, themselves
acknowledge, That there are many things of which was no inquiry in the
Primitive Church* which yet upon doubts arising are now become perspicuous by
the diligence of aftertimes; it is the acknowledgement of the Cardinal of
Rochester. Lib. 3. De cultu sanctorum, c. 9.
And Bellarmine helps to make this good with a considerable instance, Sect.
Praetered.
Cum scriberentur Scripturae nondum coeperat usus vovendi sanctis; Contre le
Roy de la Grand Bretaigne.
and Cardinal Perron adds, Et quant aux autheurs plus proche du siccle
Apostolic, encore qu'il ne se trouve pas de vestiges de ceste coustume, etc.
Neither in the age of the Apostles, that is, when the Scriptures were written,
nor in the age next to it, are there any footsteps of Vowing to Saints; for
then the custom was not begun. The Pope's infallibility goes amongst very many
for a Catholic doctrine; In Spain and Italy, in Austria and Poland it is so,
Lib. 4. De Pont^fi^^ (...), cap. 2. Sect. Secunda (...). and Sect. Ex (...).
and every where else where the Jesuits prevail: but when Bellarmine had
affirmed that Nilus, Gerson, Almain, Alphonsus a Castro, and Pope Adrian the
VI. had taught that the Pope might be a heretic, if he defines without a
General Council; and in his censure of them, affirmed that this opinion is not
proprie haeretica, he plainly, by certain and immediate consequence, confesses
that for 1400 or 1500 years the Judgment of the Pope was not esteemed
infallible. Now if this be true, it is impossible that it can ever be
determined as a Catholic truth; for there is no Catholic Tradition for it.
There was not for many ages; and therefore, either there is no Tradition in the
present Church for it, or if there be, it is contrary to the old Tradition: and
therefore, either the Tradition of the present Church is no rule, or, if it be,
it is a very new one; and several ages are bound to believe contradictory
propositions. That the Pope is above a Council is held by some Roman
Catholics, and it is held so by all the Popes, and has without scruple been
determined in the chair, and contended for earnestly, for about two hundred
years past; and yet all the world knows, it was not so of old. Lib. 2. de
Council. author. c. 14.
For we know when the Question began, Sect. Vltima sententia, and ca. 17. Sect.
Tertia propositi^.
even in the time of the first Council of Pisa, a little before the Council of
Constance; and now, that the Pope is above the Council, is sententia fere
communis; nay, it is fere de fide, says Bellarmine. Which expression of his
shows plainly, that Articles of faith grow in the womb of the Roman Church, as
an Embryo, to be perfected when the Pope shall see his time. Nay, if the Pope's
definition in Cathedra be infallible, or if it can be known where the Popes
does define in Cathedra this proposition that the Pope is above a Council is
more than fere de Fide: for, that the Council is superior, is an heretical
opinion, and the favorers of it Heretics, Pius quartus affirmed in his
Complaint against Lansack the French Ambassador in the Council of Trent, A D.
1562.
and he threatened to persecute and chastise them. And the like is to be said
concerning that fine new Article of faith made by Pope Paul the fourth (of
which I have spoken in the first Section) that a Pope cannot be bound, much
less can be bind himself, viz. by any Oath; for that was the Subject matter of
the discourse. The number of the seven Sacraments is now an Article of the
Roman faith, taught in their Catechisms, determined in their Councils, preached
in their Pulpits, disputed for against their adversaries; and yet the Council
of Florence was the first Council, and Peter Lombard was the first man we find
ever to have precisely fixed upon that number, as Bellarmine Lib. 2. De effect.
Sacr. c. 25. Sect. Secunda probatio.
, and Valentia In Thom. tom. 4. disp. 3. q. 6. punct. 2. Sect. Tertio
objiciunt, etc.
sufficiently acknowledge, even when they would fain deny it. Here I might
instance in the Seal of Confession, which as they have at Rome passed it under
a Sacramental lock and key, and founded upon a Divine law (for so they
pretend,) is one of the new Articles of Faith, which wholly depends upon the
authority of the Church of Rome; who for the sake of this, and many other
Articles, is compelled to challenge a strange power even of making and imposing
new Creeds, or of quitting her new Articles. But the whole order of Sections in
this Chapter will be one continued argument of this particular.

SECTION VI.
Of the Expurgatory Indices in the Roman Church.
THey use indirect and unworthy arts, that they may do it without reproach and
discovery: and for this I instance in the whole affair and annexes of their
Expurgatory Indices. Concerning which, three things are said in the first part
of this Dissuasive. 1. That the King of Spain gave a Commission to the
Inquisitors to purge all Catholic Authors, but with a clause of secrecy. 2.
That they purged the Indices of the Fathers works. 3. That they did also purge
the works of the Fathers themselves. The first and the last are denied by them
that wrote against the Dissuasive: The second they confess, and endeavor to
justify. But how well, will appear when I have first made good the first and
the last.

1. That the King of Spain gave a clancular Commission to the Inquisitors, can
be denied by no man but by him that has ignorance for his excuse; and then
also the ignorance ought rather to be modestly confessed, E. W. page. 17. He is
false and faulty through this whole Section; faulty in telling us of a
clancular Commission given by the King of Spain to the Inquisitors, etc.
without directing us to either Book or Index where to find it.] This Commission
is in Junius his Edition of the Indices Expurgatorii; and of this Book the
author of a Letter to a friend did make use, as appears in his 6. page under n.
16.
than a fault charged upon him, who knowing it, did affirm it. But the
Commission is printed both in Dutch and Latin, together with the Expurgatory
Indices of Belgium and Madrid, at Henovia or Henault by Guilielmus Antonius,
1611. in which the King affirms that he caused the Belgic Index to be printed
by his own chief Printer, at his own charge, Non quidem evulgandum,
distrahendumque; sed distribuendum solis Cognitoribus, etc. And a little after,
giving faculty to the Prelates to choose one or more Assistants, he adds,
Itque ipsi privatim nullisque consciis apud se Indicem Expurgatorium habebunt,
quem eundem neque aliis communicabunt, neque ejus exemplum ulli dabunt, etc.
This then is soon at an end.

2. But Junius that published the Indices seems to say that they did not purge
the works of the Fathers. To this the Answer that Junius himself makes is
sufficient; for he instances in their purgation of Bertram, who yet was elder
than Haymo, Theophylact, Oecumenius, and almost two hundred years before S.
Bernard; and yet they openly professed to use him as they please: and when
Bertram had said visibiliter, they commanded he should be read invisibiliter:
which is a pretty little change, and very meet to Bertram's sense surely. But
Bellarmine is also in this particular a witness beyond exception; lib. 4. De
verb^ Dei, cap. 11.
for when he had recited an objection out of S. Chrysostom, Sect. Sext^ profert.
proving that in the times of heresy there is no way of finding truth but by
the Scripture; having nothing else to answer, he says, The book was either
written or interpolated by an Arian; Et propterea totus hic locus, tanquam ab
Arianis insertus, e quibusdam codicibus nuper emendatis sublatus est. But the
thing is plain also in the Indices themselves; for in the Spanish Index by the
Command of Gaspar Quiroga Archbishop of Toledo, and in that also of Sandoval,
the purge has passed upon the Bibliotheca sanctorum Patrum collected by
Binius; where not only the Gloss upon S. Gregory of Neocaesarea, but the works
of S. Anthony the Abbot, Page 282. Edit.
S. Melito, Mark the Hermit, Dorotheus, and diverse others, Hanov. 1611.
are purged; and that the Reader may be satisfied in the manner and design of
the proceeding, the doctrines or saying to be blotted out are these: [We have
learned to worship and venerate that nature only that is Uncreated: dele
[solummodo] said the good Fathers of the purges: Prudence, and Life, and Piety,
make the Priest. A wicked mind cannot be justified. He that keeps not the
Commandments, does not believe rightly. Only the Holy Trinity is properly
incorporeal. A spiritual prayer helps not an unclean mind. These are all
doctrines very dangerous and heretical, and therefore though the Fathers teach
them, yet deleantur; let them pass through the fire, and leave their dross
behind them. But I desire the Reader to observe that when in the Sandoval
Edition of the Index, and order was taken for the purging the Bibliotheca
Patrum in the Edition of it at Colein, the Sandoval Canon was not observed; and
the reason given for it, was this, Lest the heretics may have occasion given
them to insult; which they could not do, unless they had taken their
adversaries in their tampering. But they are gone yet one step further in this
particular: for in the latter Editions of the Bibliotheca, Edit. Paris. 1610.
they do not add the title of Sanctorum to them; but Patrum only, and
Ecclesiasticorum Scriptorum; according to the order of the Sandoval Expurgatory
Index, printed at Madrid, 1612. and of the Quirogian Index, printed there 1583.
So that, as they are forced secretly to imply that they are not so right for
their Catholic cause, as they would have them: so they are resolved,
whatsoever is not so, shall not pass with them for Holy. And in this diminution
and dishonor of the memory of these Ancient Fathers, S. Clement of Alexandria
his good name has suffered shipwreck; for in Index Expurg. Saniov. p. 83.
Clemente Alexandrino, in duplici titulo operis, dele titulum Divi; for now it
happens in some measure to them that have in honor the memory of such men that
seemed to speak any thing against the errors of the Roman Church, as it did to
Arulenus Ruslicus praising of Paetus Thrasea, and to Herennius Senecio
commending Helvidius Priscus, Capitale fuit, said Tacitus; and this is
notorious in their Tables, their new-fashion'd diptychs; where men of
honorable name and great worth are called damnati Authors, and their very
name commanded to be put out, and some Periphrasis set down for them. 2. But
that I may give one pregnant instance of their purging the Fathers; I desire
him that is curious and would be satisfied in this thing, to see the Edition of
S. Austin, at Venice; and in the inscription of his Works he shall find this
Confession, [In quo, praeter locorum multorum restitutionem secundum
collationem veterum Exemplarium, curavimus removeri illa omnia quae fidelium
mentes haeretica pravitate possent inficere, aut a Catholica Orthodoxa fide
deviare.] And in the Quirogian Index, which has these words, Sunt autem fere
omnia quae offendunt in Prologis and Marginalibus Annotationibus, we may easily
see, that not the Prologues and Annotations alone are guilty, but even S.
Austin's text. But beyond conjecture, the thing is in it self evident. But the
Fathers words are expunged in one place, and consequently condemned in every
place; which is that I intended in the citation of those words by Junius, and
which were also set down in the first part of this Dissuasive. But both in the
text and Index of S. Cyril of Alexandria, In Esai. lib. 1. c. 51. in fin.
these words are, and yet commanded to be blotted, Habitat Jesus per fidem in
cordibus nostris. Ephesians. 3. 17.
Which very words are not in S. Cyril only, but in S. Paul too; and by S. Cyril
quoted with a sicut scriptum est.

And again, Index Quirog. p. 74.
Deleantur ex textu illa verba, Fidei autem gratiam cum his qui valde inquinati
sunt, tum etiam paulum morbo affectis, satis ad emendationem valituram esse
fidem, dicens] Fides sola justificat, are commanded to be blotted, and yet they
are both in the Index and the text of S. Hierom. In Epist. ad Romans c. 10.
haeres. 69.
So the Gloss of Epiphanius of Creaturam non adorare is commanded to be blotted
out; when the words of Epiphanius Text are, Sancta Dei Ecclesia creaturam non,
adorat, and it is so in other places; of which the Indices themselves are the
best testimony. And that no man may question whether they purged the Fathers,
yea or no, Sixtus Senensis said it to Pius Quintus, Deinde expurgari and
emaculari curasti omnia Catholicorum Scriptorum, ac praecipue veterum Patrum
Scripta: especially the Writings of the ancient Fathers were purged.

Now true it is, that in the following words, he pretends a reason why he did
so, and tells what things were purged; even those things which were infected,
and poisoned by the Heretics of our age. These last words, and this reason,
was not cited in the first part, when the former words were made use of; and
therefore an outcry was raised by them that wrote against it, F. W. p. 12. and
the Author of a Let. page 7.
as if they had been concealed by fraudulent design. To which I answer, that I
was not willing to interrupt the order of my discourse, with quoting words
which are neither true, nor pertinent. For they have in them no truth, and no
good meaning. They are protestatio contra factum; as being set there to
persuade the world, that none of the Fathers, or modern Catholics were purged,
unless the Lutherans had corrupted them; when all the world knows, they have
purged the Writings of the Catholics old and new, Fathers and Moderns, which
themselves had printed, and formerly allowed; but now being wiser, and finding
them to give too much evidence against them, they have altered them. I could
instance in many; but I shall not need, since enough may be seen in Doctor
James his Table of Books, which were first set forth and approved, and
afterward censured by themselves. I shall trouble my Reader but with one
instance. That one is, the work of Ferus upon S. John's first Epistle, which
was printed at Antwerp 1556. with the privilege given by King Philip, to
Martinus Nutius, with this Elogy. Nam suae Majestati patuit librum esse omnino
utilem, and nihil continere quod pias aures merito offendere possit. The same
Book was printed at Paris, 1555. by de Marnet, and 1556. by Audoen Petit, or
Parvus; at Lions, 1559. by Jacobus de Mellis; and the same year at Lovain, by
Servatius Sessenus, and at Mentz, where he was Preacher, by Francis Behem; and
after all this, it was printed at Paris, 1563. by Gabriel Buon, and at Antwerp,
1565. by the heirs of Nutius. Now all these Editions were made by the Papists,
and allowed of; and no Protestant, no Heretic of that age (that I may use the
words of Senensis) had corrupted them; neither is it pretended that they did:
and yet this Book was purged at Rome, 1577. and altered, added, and detracted
in 194. places: of the nature and consequence of which alterations, I give this
one Instance: In the second Chapter, where Ferus, in the old Edition of Mentz,
Lovain, Antwerp, etc. had these words, Scriptura Sacra data est nobis ceu certa
quaedam regula Christianae doctrinae; But in the Roman Edition, 1577. the words
are changed thus; Sacra Scriptura and Traditio nobis data sunt ceu certa
quaedam regula Christiadae doctrinae. By which Instance it plainly appears,
that the Inquisitors General, and the Pope, purge others than what the
Heretics have corrupted, and that these words of Sixtus Senensis, are but a
false cover to a foul dish, when they could no longer hide it. Nay, even the
Rules given by the Pope himself, Clement the VIII th. give order for
prohibiting the Books of the Catholics, Reg. 6.
before they be purged. Si nonnulla contineant quae sine delectu ab omnibus
legi non expedit: and in the Preface to the Sandoval Index, it is said; Obiter
autem in quorundam orthodoxorum libris nonnulli lapsus aut quaedam obscurius
dicta deprehensa, quibus expurgatio, explicatio, aut cautio prudenter adhibita,
ne minus cautos lectores contingat impingere. Which is a plain indication, that
the Church of Rome proceeds in her purging of Books upon other accounts than
removing the corruptions lately introduced by the Lutherans or Calvinists. And
all this, and much more being evident and notorious, there was reason then to
think, as I do still, that those words were of no use to be added, unless to
give occasion of impertinent wrangling, but that there could be no other design
in it, is manifest by what I have now said. 3. But the expurgatory Indices had
the less need to do much of this, since their work was done to their hands. For
the Fathers works had passed though fire Ordeal, By the Author of the Letter
and E. W.
many times before. I instanced in the Edition of S. Ambrose, by Ludovicus
Saurius, wherein many lines were cancellated, and the Edition spoiled; and this
was done by the authority of two Franciscans; Junius in Praefat. ad. Ind.
Expurg. Belgic.
qui pro authoritate has omnes paginas dispunxerunt ut vides, and illas
substitui in locum priorum curaverunt, praeter omnem librorum nostrorum fidem,
said Saurius. Against this, it is said, that it is a slander, because the Index
Expurgatorius, was not appointed till the end of the Council of Trent, which
was An. Dom. 1563. and therefore could not put a force upon Saurius, who
corrected this Book, and assisted at the Edition of it, 1559. To which I
answer; that it was not said, that the Index Expurgatorius, put a force upon
Saurius; but only a force was put upon him: and, that it was so by two
Franciscans, Jnnius, who tells the story, does affirm. 2. For ought appears to
the contrary, nay, most probable it was so, that this force was put upon him by
the authority of the Expurgatorius Index; for though the Council of Trent
appointed one a little before it is ending, which was in 1563; yet there was an
Index made before that, by P. Paul the 4th. who died four years before the end
of the Council; and this he made by the Council of all the Inquisitors, Council.
Trident. in prima Sessione sub Pio Quarto.
and of many famous men, who sent him advice from all parts, and he made a most
complete Catalogue, to which nothing can be added, except some Book come forth
within two years, said Friar Augustine Selvago, Archbishop of Genua. So that
here was authority enough, and there wanted no zeal, and here is matter of fact
complained of, by the parties suffering. 4. It would indeed have been matter of
great scandal and reproach, to have openly handled all the Fathers
indifferently, as they used the Moderns; and though (as I have proved) this did
not wholly restrain them, yet it abated much of their willingness; but there
was less need of it, because they had very well purged them before; by
cancellating the lines, by parting the pages, by corrupting their Writings, by
putting Glosses in the Margent, and afterward putting these Glosses into the
Text. Quod lector ineptiens annotarat in margin sui codicis, Scribae
retulerunt in contextum; said Erasmus in his Preface to the Works of S. Austin,
to the Archbishop of Toledo; and the same also is observed by the
Paris-overseers of the press, in their Preface to their Edition of S. Austin's
Works at Paris 1571. by Martin and Nivellius. And this thing was notorious in a
considerable instance, in S. Cyprian, Vide Pamelii annot. in librum.
de Vnitate Ecclesiae; where after the words of Christ spoken to S. Peter, and
recorded by S. Matthew; there had been a marginal note, Hic Petro primatus
datur; which words they have brought into the Roman, and Antwerp Editions; but
they have both left out Hic, and the Roman, instead of it, has put Et. And
whereas in the old Editions of Cyprian, even the Roman it self, these words
were, He who withstandeth, and resists the Church, does he trust himself to
be in the Church? some body has made bold to put the words thus, in the Text
of the Edition of Antwerp; He who forsakes Peter's Chair, on which the Church
is founded, does he trust himself to be in the Church? But in how many places
that excellent Book of S. Cyprian's is interlined, and spoiled by the new
Correctors, is evident to him that shall compare the Roman Edition with the
elder Copies, and them with the later Edition of Antwerp; and Pamelius himself,
concerning some words, says, ibid.
Atque adeo non sumus veriti in textum inserere. I could bring in many
considerable instances, though it be more than probable, that of forty
falsities in the abusing the Father's Writings by Roman hands, there was not
perhaps above one or two discoveries; yet this, and many other concurrences
might make it less needful to pass their Sponges upon the Fathers. But when the
whole charge of printing of Books at Rome, lies on the Apostolical See, as
Epist. l. 9. ad Jacobum Gorseium.
Manutius tells us; it is likely enough, that all shall be taken care of, so as
shall serve their purposes. And so the Printer tells us, viz. In Praef. ad
Pium, Quartm in librum Cardinalis Poli de C^ncilio.
That such care was taken to have them so corrected, that there should be no
spot which might infect the minds of the simple, with the show or likeness of
false doctrine. And now by this, we may very well perceive, how the force was
put upon Saurius, in the purging S. Ambrose, even by the Inquisitors; and that
by the authority and care of the Pope: and therefore though the Works of most
of the greater Fathers were not put into the Expurgatory Indices, yet they were
otherwise purged, that is, most shamefully corrupted, torn and maimed, and the
lesser Fathers passed under the file in the Expurgatory Indices themselves.

3. But then, The Author of a Letter to a friend, page 7. E. W. p. 20.
that they purged the Indices of the Fathers Works, is so notorious, that it is
confessed, and endeavored to be justified. But when we come to consider, that
many times the very words of the Fathers which are put into the Index, are
commanded to be expunged, it at once shows, that fain they would, and yet durst
not expunge the words out of the Books, since they would be discovered by their
adversaries, and they would suffer reproach without doing any good to
themselves. Now whereas it is said, [that therefore the words of the Fathers
are blotted out of the Indices, E. W. p. 1^.
because they are set down without antecedents, and consequents; and prepare
the Reader to an ill sense:] this might be possible, but we see it otherwise in
the Instances themselves, which oftentimes are so plain, that no context, no
circumstances, can alter the proposition: which is most of all notorious in the
deleatur's of the Indices of the Bible set forth by Robert Stephen. Credens
Christo non morietur in aeternum, this is to be blotted out; Joh. 11. 26.
and yet Christ himself said it, Every one that lives, and believes in me shall
never die. Justus coram. Deo nemo, is to be blotted out of Robert Stephen's
Index; Psalm. 142. v. 1. alias 143.
and yet David prayed, Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord; for in
thy sight shall no man living be justified. Now what antecedent, or what
context, or what circumstances can alter the sense of these places; which being
the same in the Text and the Index, shows the good will of the Inquisitors; and
that like King Edward the 6th. his Tutor, they corrected the Prince upon his
Page's back; and they have given sufficient warning of the danger of those
words wherever they find them in the Fathers, since they have so openly rebuked
them in the Indices. And therefore I made no distinction of places; but
reckoned those words censured in the Expurgatory Tables as the Fathers words
censured or expunged; and in this I followed the style of their own Books, for
in the Belgic Index, the style is thus; In Hieronymi Operibus expungenda, page
70. Edit. 1611.
quae sequuntur, and yet they are the Scholia, Indices, and sense of the
Fathers set down, and printed in the same volume altogether; and, having the
same fate, and all upon the same account, I had reason to charge it as I did.

And how far the evil of this did proceed, may easily be conjectured by what
was done by the Inquisition in the year 1559. in which there was a Catalogue of
62 Printers; and all the books which any of them printed, of what author, or
what language soever, prohibited; and all books which were printed by Printers,
that had printed any books of Heretics: insomuch that not only books of a
hundred, two hundred, three hundred years ago, and approbation, were
prohibited, but there scarce remained a book to be read.

But by this means they impose upon men's faith and consciences; suffering them
to allow of nothing in any man, no not in the Fathers, but what themselves mark
out for them; not measuring their own doctrines by the Ancients, but reckoning
their sayings to be, or not to be Catholic, according as they agree to their
present opinions: which is infinitely against the candor, ingenuity, and
confidence of truth, which needs none of these arts. And besides all this, how
shall it be possible to find out tradition by succession, when they so
interrupt and break the intermedial lines? And this is beyond all the foregoing
instances very remarkable in their purging of Histories. In Munsters
Cosmography, there was a long Story of Ludovicus the Emperor of the house of
Bavaria, that made very much against the Sea of Rome. It is commanded to be
left out; and in illius loco inseratur, si placet, sequens historia: Index.
Beig. p. 161. Impres. A. D. 1611. Hanoviae.
and then there is made a formal story not consonant to the mind of the
Historian. And the same Lewis of Bavaria published a smart answer to the Bull
of P. John. 22. an information of the nullity of the Popes proceedings against
him: Cantellarius Bavariae egregie vindicavit principis sui memoriam a
Bz^vianis impostu. is.
but the records and monuments of these things they tear out by their
Expurgatory Tables; lest we of latter ages should understand how the Popes of
Rome invaded the rights of Princes, and by new doctrines and occasions changed
the face, the body, the innocence and the soul of Christian Religion. The whole
Apology of the Emperor Henry the fourth, and the Epistles of Prince Frederick
the second, they pull out of the fifth Tome of the Writers of the Germane
affairs, In vita Julii Agric.
Neque in ipsos modo Authors, sed in libros quoque eorum saevitum (that I may
use the words of Tacitus complaining), delegato Triumviris Ministerio ut
Monumenta clarissimorum ingeniorum in comitio ac foro urerentur: scilicet illo
igne vocem populi Romans and libertatem Senatus, and conscientiam generis humani,
aboleri arbitrabantur, expulsis insuper sapientiae professoribus, atque omni
bona art in exilium acta, ne quid usquam honestum occurreret. For thus they
not only destroy the liberty of the Church, and the names of the honorable,
and the Sentences of the wise; but even hope to prevail upon the consciences of
all mankind, and the History of the World, that nothing may be remembered by
which themselves may be reproved. But this is not agreeable to the simplicity
and ingenuity of the Christian Religion. Non tali auxilio, nec defensoribus
istis
Christus eget.


But what Arnobius said to the heathen, Lib. 3. adv. gentes.
in their violent and crafty arts to suppress of growth of Christianity, may be
a good admonition to these Artists of the Inquisition, Intercipere scripta, and
publicatam velle submergere lectionem, non est Deum defendere, sed veritatis
testificationem timere.

One thing more I am to add here, that they are so infinitely insecure in
their errors, and so unsatisfied with the learning of the world, and they find
it so impossible to resist the frequent and public testimonies of truth; or
indeed rather they so grow in error, and so often change their propositions;
that they neither agree at one time, nor does one time agree with another, in
their Purgations; that a Saint to day may be a common person to morrow; and
that which is an allowed doctrine now, next year may be heretical, or
temerarious, or dangerous. The Speculum Oculare of Johannes Capnio was approved
by Pope Leo the tenth. It was afterward rejected by Pope Paul the fourth; and
him the Council of Trent following, and rejecting the sentence of Pope Leo, did
also condemn it; and the Inquisitors, to whom the making of the Index was
committed by Paul the fourth, caused it to be burnt: but afterward the Censors
of Doway permit the book, and so it is good again. What uncertainty can be
greater to consciences than what the ignorance or faction of these men cause?
Here is Pope against Pope, a Council against the Pope; and the Monks
Inquisitors of Doway against both Pope and Council; and what can be the end of
these things? When the Quirogian Index came forth, a man would think, there had
been an end of so much as was there purged: and certain it is, they were
cautious enough, and they purged all they thought deserved it: Vide
Praefaticnem ad Lectorem in Ind. Sandov.
but yet when they of Salamanca published the Bible of Robert Stephens, and
strictly had observed the Rules of Cardinal Quirago, Ita ut in contextu pauca,
in Annotationibus plurima omiserint; yet other Inquisitors, being wiser by a
new light, did so blot and raze, and scratch out many things more, that the
Bible, which was a very fair one in A. D. 1584. came forth exceedingly defaced
and spoiled in the year 1586.

I need not observe, That in all the Expurgatory Indices you shall not find
Gasper Schioppius, or the Jesuits censured; nor Baronius, although he declared
the Kingdom of Sicily to belong to the Pope, and not to the King of Spain; but
if any thing escape which lessens the Popes Omnipotence, (it is their own word)
then it is sure to fall under the Sponges and the Rasor: so that this mystery
of iniquity is too evident to be covered by the most plausible pretenses of any
interested advocate. But if this be the way, to stop all mouths, but those that
speak the same thing, it is no wonder if they boast of unity: they might very
well do so; but that the providence of God, which overrules all events, has by
his Almighty power divided them, in despite of all their cunning arts to seem
to be sons of one mother: only it will be now a much more hard province, to
tell when their errors first began, since they have taken order to cut out the
tongues of them that tell us. And this they have done to their own Canon Law it
self, and to the old Glosses, in which there were remaining some footsteps of
the Ancient and Apostolical Doctrine; upon which the craft of the enemy of
Mankind, Imprimebantur etiam Hanoviae, procurantibus Junio and Papp^. 1611.
and the arts of interested persons had not quite prevailed: as is largely to
be seen in the very Censures themselves upon the Glosses, published by the
Command of Pope Pius quintus 1580.

SECTION VII.
The Incharitableness of the Church of Rome in her judging of others.
4. THe next thing I charge upon them, is, That having done these things to
propagate their new doctrines, and to suppress those which are more Ancient and
Catholic; they are so implacably angry at all that dissent from them, that
they not only kill them (where they have power;) but damn them all, as far as
their Sentence can prevail. If you be a Roman Catholic, let your life be what
it will; their Sacrament of Penance is (...), it takes away all their sins in a
quarter of an hour: but if you differ from them, even in the least point they
have declared, you are not to be endured in this world, nor in the world to
come. Indeed this is one of the inseparable Characters of an Heretic; he sets
his whole Communion and all his charity upon his article; For to be zealous in
the Schism, that is the Characteristick of a good man, that is his note of
Christianity: In all the rest he excuses you or tolerates you, provided you be
a true believer; then you are one of the faithful, a good man and a precious,
you are of the Congregation of the Saints, and one of the godly. All
Solifidians do thus; and all that do thus are Solifidians, the Church of Rome
her self not excepted; for though in words she proclaims the possibility of
keeping all the Commandments; yet she dispenses easier with him that breaks
them all, than with him that speaks one word against any of her articles,
though but the least; even the eating of fish, and forbidding flesh in Lent. So
that it is faith they regard more than charity, a right belief more than a holy
life; and for, this you shall be with them upon terms easy enough, provided
you go not a hairs breadth from any thing of her belief. For if you do, they
have provided for you two deaths and two fires, both inevitable and one
Eternal. And this certainly is one of the greatest evils, of which the Church
of Rome is guilty: For this in it self is the greatest and unworthiest
Uncharitableness. But the procedure is of great use to their ends. For the
greatest part of Christians are those that cannot consider things leisurely and
wisely, searching their bottoms, and discovering the causes, or foreseeing
events, which are to come after; but are carried away by fear and hope, by
affection and prepossession: and therefore the Roman Doctors are careful to
govern them as they will be governed; If you dispute, you gain, it may be, one,
and lose five; but if ye threaten them with damnation, you keep them in
fetters; for they that are in fear of death, Heb. 2. 15.
are all their life time in bondage (says the Apostle:) and there is in the
world nothing so potent as fear of the two deaths, which are the two arms and
grapples of iron by which the Church of Rome takes and keeps her timorous, or
conscientious, Proselytes. The easy Protestant calls upon you from Scripture,
to do your duty, to build a holy life upon a holy Faith, the Faith of the
Apostles, and first Disciples of our Lord; he tells you, if you err; and
teaches you the truth; and if ye will obey, it is well; if not, he tells you of
your sin, and that all sin deserves the wrath of God; but judges no man's
person, much less any states of men. He knows that God's Judgments are
righteous and true; but he knows also, that his Mercy absolves many persons,
who, in his just Judgment were condemned: and if he had a warrant from God to
say, that he should destroy all the Papists, as Jonas had, concerning the
Ninevites; yet he remembers that every Repentance, if it be sincere, will do
more, and prevail greater, and last longer, than God's anger will. Besides
these things, there is a strange spring, and secret principle in every man's
Understanding, that it is oftentimes turned about by such impulses, of which no
man can give an account. But we all remember a most wonderful Instance of it,
in the Disputation between the two Reynolds's, John and William; the former of
which being a Papist, and the later a Protestant, met, and disputed, with a
purpose to confute, and to convert each other; and so they did: for those
Arguments which were used, prevailed fully against their adversary, and yet did
not prevail with themselves. The Papist turned Protestant, and the Protestant
became a Papist, and so remained to their dying day. Bella, inter geminos,
plusquam civilia, fratres
Traxerat ambiguus Religionis apex.
Ille reformatae fidei pro partibus instat:
Iste reformandam denegat esse fidem.
Propositis causae rationibus; alter utrinque
Concurrere pares, and cecidere pares.
Quod fuit in votis, fratrem capit alter uterque:
Quod fuit in fatis, perdit uterque fidem.
Captivi gemini sine captivante fuerunt,
Et victor victi transfuga castra petit.
Quod genus hoc pugnae est, ubi victus gaudet uterque;
Et tamen al^eruter^se su^erasse dolet?

Of which some ingenious person gave a most handsome account, in an excellent
Epigram, which for the verification of the story, I have set down in the
Margent. But further yet, he considers the natural and regular infirmities of
mankind; and God considers them much more; he knows that in man there is
nothing admirable but his ignorance, and weakness; his prejudice, and the
infallible certainty of being deceived in many things: he sees, that wicked men
oftentimes know much more than many very good men; and that the Understanding
is not of it self considerable in morality, and effects nothing in rewards and
punishments: It is the will only that rules man, and can obey God. He sees and
deplores it, that many men study hard, and understand little; that they dispute
earnestly, and understand not one another at all; that affections creep so
certainly, and mingle with their arguing, that the argument is lost, and
nothing remains but the conflict of two adversaries affections; that a man is
so willing, so easy, so ready to believe what makes for his Opinion, so hard
to understand an argument against himself, that it is plain, it is the
principle within, not the argument without, that determines him: He observes
also that all the world (a few individuals excepted) are unalterably determined
to the Religion of their Country, of their family, of their society; that there
is never any considerable change made, but what is made by War and Empire, by
Fear and Hope: He remembers that it is a rare thing, to see Jesuit of the
Dominican Opinion; or a Dominican (until of late) of the Jesuit; but every
order gives Laws to the Understanding of their Novices, and they never change:
He considers there is such ambiguity in words, by which all Lawgivers express
their meaning; that there is such abstruseness in mysteries of Religion, that
some things are so much too high for us, that we cannot understand them
rightly; and yet they are so sacred, and concerning, that men will think they
are bound to look into them, as far as they can; that it is no wonder if they
quickly go too far, where no Understanding, if it were fitted for it, could go
far enough: but in these things it will be hard not to be deceived; since our
words cannot rightly express those things; that there is such variety of humane
Understandings, that men's Faces differ not so much as their Souls; and that if
there were not so much difficulty in things, yet they could not but be
variously apprehended by several men; and then considering that in twenty
Opinions, it may be not one of them is true; nay, whereas Varro reckoned, that
among the old Philosophers, there were 800 Opinions concerning the summum
bonum, and yet not one of them hit the right: They see also that in all
Religions, in all Societies, in all Families, and in all things, opinions
differ; and since Opinions are too often begot by passion, by passions and
violences they are kept; and every man is too apt to overvalue his own
Opinion; and out of a desire that every man should conform his judgment to his
that teaches, men are apt to be earnest in their persuasion, and over-act the
proposition; and from being true, as he supposes, he will think it profitable;
and if you warm him either with confidence, or opposition, he quickly tells
you, It is necessary; and as he loves those that think as he does, so he is
ready to hate them that do not; and then secretly from wishing evil to him, he
is apt to believe evil will come to him; and that it is just it should: and by
this time, the Opinion is troublesome, and puts other men upon their guard
against it; and then while passion reigns, and reason is modest and patient,
and talks not loud like a storm, Victory is more regarded than Truth, and men
call God into the party, and his judgments are used for arguments, and the
threatenings of the Scripture are snatched up in haste, and men throw arrows,
firebrarnds, and death, and by this time all the world is in an uproar. All
this, and a thousand things more, the English Protestants considering, deny not
their Communion to any Christian who desires it, and believes the Apostles
Creed, and is of the Religion of the four first General Councils; they hope
well of all that live well; they receive into their bosom, all true believers
of what Church soever; and for them that err, they instruct them, and then
leave them to their liberty, to stand or fall before their own Master.

It was a famous saying of Stephen, the Great King of Poland; that God had
reserved to himself three things. 1. To make something out of nothing. 2. To
know future things, and all that shall be hereafter. 3. To have the rule over
Consciences. It is this last, we say, the Church of Rome does arrogate and
invade.

1. By imposing Articles, as necessary to salvation, which God never made so.
Where has God said; That it is necessary to salvation, that every humane
Creature should be subject to the Roman Bishop? Extrav. de Majorit. and
obedien. Dicimus, definimus, pronunciamus absolute necessarium ad salutem omni
humanae Creaturae subesse Romano Pontifici.
But the Church of Rome says it; and by that, at one blow, cuts off from
Heaven, all the other Churches of the world, Greek, Armenian, Ethiopian,
Russian, Protestants: which is an Act so contrary to charity, to the hope and
piety of Christians, so dishonorable to the Kingdom of Christ, so disparaging
to the justice, to the wisdom and the goodness of God, as any thing which can
be said. Where has it been said, That it shall be a part of Christian Faith,
To believe, that though the Fathers of the Church did Communicate Infants, yet
they did it without any opinion of necesty? And yet the Church of Rome has
determined it, in one of her General Councils, Sess. 1. cap. 4
as a thing, Sine Controversia Credendum, to be believed without doubt, or
dispute: It was indeed the first time that this was made a part of the
Christian Religion; but then let all wise men take heed how they ask the Church
of Rome; Where was this part of her Religion before the Council of Trent? for
that is a secret: and, that this is a part of their Religion, I suppose will not
be denied, when a General Council has determined it to be a truth without
controversy, and to be held accordingly. Where has God said, that those
Churches that differ from the Roman Church in some propositions cannot confer
true Orders, nor appoint Ministers of the Gospel of Christ? and yet, Super
totam materiam, the Church of Rome is so implacably angry, and imperious with
the Churches of the Protestants, that, if any English Priest turn to them, they
re-ordain him; which yet themselves call sacrilegious, in case his former
Ordination was valid; as it is impossible to prove it was not, there being
neither in Scripture, nor Catholic tradition any Laws, Order, or Rule,
touching our case in this particular. Where has God said, that Penance is a
Sacrament, or that without confession to a Priest, no man can be saved? If
Christ did not institute it, how can it be necessary? and if he did institute
it, yet the Church of Rome ought not to say, it is therefore necessary; for
with them an Institution is not a Command, though Christ be the Institutor; and
if Institution be equal to a Commandment, how then comes the Sacrament not to
be administered in both kinds; when it is confessed, that in both kinds it was
instituted?

2. The Church of Rome does so multiply Articles, that few of the Laity know
the half of them, and yet imposes them all under the same necessity; and if in
any one of them, a man make a doubt he has lost all Faith, and had as good be
an Infidel; for the Church's Authority being the formal object of Faith, that
is the only reason why any Article is to be believed; the reason is the same in
all things else: and therefore you may no more deny any thing she says, than
all she says; and an Infidel is as sure of Heaven, as any Christian is that
calls in question any of the innumerable propositions, which with her are
esteemed de fide. Now if it be considered, that some of the Roman doctrines are
a state of temptation to all the reason of mankind, as the doctrine of
Transubstantiation; that some are at least of a supicious improbity, as worship
of Images, and of the consecrated Elements, and many others; some are of a nice
and curious nature, as the doctrine of Merit, of Condignity and Congruity; some
are perfectly of humane inventions, without ground of Scripture, or Tradition,
as the forms of Ordination, Absolution, etc. When men see, that some things
can never be believed heartily, and many not understood fully, and more not
remembered, or considered perfectly, and yet all imposed upon the same
necessity; and as good believe nothing, as not every thing; this way is apt to
make men despise all Religion, or despair of their own Salvation. The Church of
Rome has a remedy for this; and by a distinction undertakes to save you
harmless: you are not tied to believe all with an explicit Faith; it suffices
that your Faith be implicit, or involved in the Faith of the Church; that is,
if you believe that she says true in all things, you need inquire no further:
So that by this means, the authority of their Church is made authentic, for
that is the first and last of the design; and you are taught to be saved by the
Faith of others; and a Faith is preached, that you have no need ever to look
after it; a Faith, of which you know nothing; but it matters not, as long as
others do: but then it is also a Faith, which can never be the foundation of a
good life; for upon ignorance, nothing that is good, can be built; no not so
much as a blind obedience; for even blindly to obey, is built upon something,
that you are bidden explicitly to believe; viz. the infallibility, or the
authority of the Church: but upon an implicit Faith, you can no more establish
a building, than you can number that which is not. Besides this, an implicit
Faith in the Articles of the Church of Rome, is not sense; it is not Faith at
all, that is not explicit; Faith comes by hearing, and not by not hearing: and
the people of the Roman Church believe one proposition explicitly, that is,
that their Church cannot err; and then indeed, they are ready to believe any
thing they tell them; but as yet they believe nothing but the infallibility of
their Guides: and to call that Faith, which is but a readiness, or disposition
to have it, is like filling a man's belly with the meat he shall eat to morrow
night; an act of Understanding antedated. But when it is considered in it is own
intrinsic nature and meaning; it effects this proposition, that these things
are indeed no objects of that Faith, by which we are to be saved (for it is
strange, that men having the use of reason, should hope to be saved by the
merit of a Faith that believes nothing, that knows nothing, that understands
nothing) but that our Faith is completed in the essential notices of the
Evangelical Covenant, in the propositions which every Christian man and woman
is bound to know; and that the other propositions are but arts of Empire, and
devices of Government; or the Scholastic confidence of Opinions; something to
amuse consciences, and such by which the mystic persons may become more
knowing and revered than their poor Parishioners.

3. The Church of Rome determines trifles and inconsiderable propositions, and
adopts them into the family of faith; Of this nature are many things which the
Popes determine in their chairs, and send them into the world as oracles. What
a dangerous thing would it be esteemed to any Roman Catholic, if he should
dare to question, Whether the Consecration of the Bread and Wine be to be done
by the prayer of the Priest, or by the mystic words of Hoc est corpus meum,
said ove the Elements? For, that by the force of those words, said with right
intention, the bread is transsubstantiated, Lib. 1. de Sacr. Euchar. cap. 12.
Sect. Est igitur.
and made the body of Christ, Ecclesia Catholica magno consensu docet, said
Bellarmine; so it is also in the Council of Florence, in the Instruction of the
Armenians; Lib. 1. Sent. did. 8.
so it is taught in the Catechism of the Council of Trent; so it is agreed by
the Master of the Sentences and his Scholars; by Gratian, and the Lawyers; and
so it is determined in the law it self, Cap. Cum Martha extr. de celebratione
Missarum. And yet this is no certain thing; and not so agreeable to the
spirituality of the Gospel, to suppose such a change made by the saying so many
words. And therefore although the Church does well in using all the words of
Institution at the Consecration; for so they are carefully recited in the
Liturgies of S. James, S. Clement, S. Basil, S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, the
Anaphora of the Syrians, Inter Evangelistas quae omittuntur ab uno supplentur
ab alio. Innocentius de offic.
in the Universal Canon of the Ethiopians, only they do not do this so
carefully in the Roman Missal, but leave out words very considerable, words
which S. Luke, and S. Paul recite; viz. which is broken for you; Missae l. 3.
c. 17.
or which is given for you: and to the words of Consecration of the Chalice,
they add words which Christ did not speak in the Institution and Benediction;
yet besides this generally the Greek Fathers, and diverse of the Latin, do
expressly teach, that the Consecration of the elements is made by the prayers
of the Church, recited by the Bishop or Priest: For the Scripture tells us,
that Christ took the bread, he blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to them,
saying, Take, eat. It is to be supposed that Christ consecrated it before he
gave it to them; and yet if he did, all the Consecration was effected by his
Benediction of it: And if (as the Romanists contend) Christ gave the Sacrament
of the Eucharist to the two Disciples at Emmaus, it is certain there is no
record of any other Consecration, but by Christ's blessing or praying over the
elements. It is indeed possible that something more might be done than was set
down, but nothing less; and therefore this Consecration was not done without
the Benediction; and therefore Hoc est corpus meum alone cannot do it; at least
there is no warrant for it in Christ's Example. And when S. Peter in his
Ministry did found and establish Churches, Orationum ordinem quibus oblata Deo
sacrificia consecrantur a S. Petro primo fuisse institutum, said Isidore,
Remigius, Hugo de S. Victore, and Alphonsus a Castro; S. Peter first instituted
the order of Prayers by which the sacrifices offered to God were consecrated:
and in the Liturgy of S. James, after the words of Institution are recited over
the Elements, there is a Prayer of Consecration, O Lord, make this Bread to be
the body of thy Christ, etc. Which words although Bellarmine troubles himself
to answer, as Cardinal Bessarion did before him; yet we shall find his answers
to no purpose; expounding the prayer to be only a Confirmation, or an Amen to
what was done before; for if that Consecration was made before that Prayer, how
comes S. James to call it Bread after Consecration? And as weak are his other
answers, saying, The Prayer means that God would make it so to us, not in it
self: which although S. James has nothing to warrant that Exposition; yet it
is true upon another account, that is, because the Bread becomes Christ's body
only to us, to them who communicate worthily; but never to the wicked, and it
is not Christ's body but in the using it, and that worthily too. And therefore
his third Answer (which he uses first) is certainly the best; and that is the
answer which Bessarion makes, That, for ought they know, the order of the words
is changed; and that the Prayer should be set before, not after the words of
Consecration. Against which, although it is sufficient to oppose, that, for
ought they or we know, the order is not changed; for to this day, and always
(so far as any record remains) the Greeks kept the same order of the words; and
the Greek Fathers had their sentiment and doctrine agreeable to it. And as in
S. James his Liturgy, so in the Missal said to be of S. Clement, the same order
is observed; and after the words of the Institution or Declaration, God is
invocated to send his Holy Spirit to make the oblation to become the body and
blood of Christ. And in pursuance of this Justin Martyr calls it, Apol. 2. lib.
8. cont. Celsum.
(...), and Origin, (...); Ad quorum preces Christi corpus sanguisque
conficitur, Lib. 3. de Trinit. c. 4.
said S. Hierom; and S. Austin calls the Sacrament, Prece mystica consecratum.
Vide Divine instit. of the Office Ministeri^l, ^ect 7. Of the Real and Spi^.
presence, Sect. 4.
But of this thing I have given an account in other places: The use I make of
it now, is this; that the Church of Rome is not only forward to decree things
uncertain, or to take them for granted, which they can never prove; but when
she is by chance or interest, or mistake fallen upon a proposition, she will not
endure any one to oppose it; and indeed, if she did suffer a change in this
particular, not only a great part of their Thomistical Theology would be found
out to be sandy and inconsistent; but the whole doctrine of Transubstantiation
would have no foundation. True it is, this is a new doctrine in the Church of
Rome; for Amularius affirms that the Apostles did consecrate only by
Benediction; and Pope Innocent the third, and Pope Innocent the fourth, taught
that Christ did not consecrate by the words of Hoc est corpus meum: so that the
doctrine is new; and yet I make no question, he that shall now say so, shall
not be accounted a Catholic.

But the instances are many of this nature, not necessary to be enumerated,
because they are notorious; and when the Quaestiones disputatae, as S. Thomas
Aquinas calls a Volume of his Disputation, are (at least many of them) past
into Catholic propositions, and become the general doctrine of their Church;
they do not so much insist upon the nature of the propositions, as the securing
of that authority by which they are taught. If any man dissent in the doctrine
of Purgatory, or Concomitancy, and the half Communion, then presently Hannibal
ad portas; they first kill him, and then damn him (as far as they can.) But in
the great questions of Predetermination, in which man's duty, and the force of
laws, and the powers of choice, and the attributes of God are deeply concerned,
they differ infinitely, and yet they endure the difference, and keep the
Communion. But if the heats and interests that are amongst them had happened to
be employed in this Instance; they would have made a dissent in these questions
as damnable as any other. But the events of salvation and damnation (blessed be
God) do not depend upon the votes and sentences of men, but upon the price
which God sets upon the propositions; and it would be considered, that there
are some propositions in which men are confident and err securely, which yet
have greater influence upon the honor of God, or his dishonor, or upon good
or bad life respectively, than many others, in which the (...) make more noise,
and have less consideration. For these things they teach not, as the scribes,
but as having authority; not as Doctors but as Lawgivers; which because Christ
only is, the Apostles by the assistance of an infallible spirit did publish
his Sanctions; but gave no laws of faith, but declared what Christ had made so;
and S. Paul was careful to leave a note of difference, with a. hoc dico ego,
non Dominus: it follows that the Church of Rome does dominari fidei and
conscientiis, make her self mistress of faith and consciences: which being the
prerogative of God, it is part of his glory that he will not impart unto
another. But this evil has proceeded unto extremity, and armies have been
raised to prove their propositions; and vast numbers of innocent persons have
been put to the sword, and burnt in the fire, and exposed to horrible torments,
for denying any of their articles; and their Saints have been their Ensign
bearers, particularly S. Dominick; and an office of torment and Inquisition is
erected in their most zealous Countries. Nempe hoc est esse Christianum, this
is the Roman manner of being Christian: And whom they can, and whom they cannot
kill they excommunicate, and curse, and say, they are damned. This is so
contrary to the communion of Saints, and so expressly against the rule of the
Apostle commanding us to receive them that are weak in faith, but not to
receive them unto doubtful disputations; and so ruinous to the grace of
charity, which hopes and speaks the best, and not absolutely the worst thing in
the world; and so directly opposed to Christ's precept, which commands* us, not
to judge, that we be not judged; and is an enemy to public peace, which is
easily broken with them whom they think to be damned wretches; and is so
forgetful of humane infirmity; and but little considers, that in so innumerable
a company of old and new propositions, it is great odds but themselves are or
may be deceived; and lastly, it is so much against the very law of nature,
which ever permits the Understanding free, though neither tongue nor hand; and
leaves all that to the Divine Judgment, which ought neither to be invaded nor
antedated; that this evil doctrine and practice is not more easily reproved
than it is pernicious and intolerable, and of all things in the world the most
unlike the spirit of a Christian. I know that against this they have no answer
to oppose, but to recriminate; and say that we in the Church of England do so;
and hang their priests, and punish by fines and imprisonment their lay
Proselytes. To which the answer need not be long, or to trouble the order of
the discourse. For 1. we put none of their Laity to death for their opinion;
which shows that it is not the Religion is persecuted, but some other evil
appendix. 2. We do not put any of their Priests to death who is not a native of
the Kingdoms; but those subjects who pass over hence, and receive orders
abroad, and return with evil errands. 3. Neither were these so treated, until
by the Pope our Princes were excommunicated, and the Subjects absolved from
their duty to them, and encouraged to take up arms against them; and that the
English Priests returned with traitorous desings, and that many conspiracies
were discovered. 4. And lastly, when much of the evil and just causes of fear
did cease, the severity of procedure is taken off, and they have more liberty
than hitherto they have deserved. Now if any of these things can be said by the
Church of Rome in her defense, I am content she shall enjoy the benefit of her
justification. For her rage extends to all, Laity as well as Clergy; foreign
Clergy as well as Domestic, their own people and strangers, the open
dissentients and the secretly suspected; those that are delated and those whom
they can inquire of; and own that, which we disavow; and which if we did do, we
should be reproved by our own sentences and public profession to the contrary.

But now after all this, if it shall appear that the danger is on the part of
the Roman Church, and safety on our side, and yet that we in our censure of
their doctrines are not so fierce, and in our fears of their final condition
not so decretory and rash; then this doctrine of theirs against us, is both the
more uncharitable, and the more unreasonable.

1. That the Church of Rome is infinitely confident they are in the right I
easily believe, because they say they are; and they have causes but too many to
create, or to occasion that confidence in them: for they never will consider
concerning any of their Articles; their unlearned men not at all, their learned
men only to confirm their own, and to confute their adversaries, whose
arguments though never so convincing, they are bound to look upon as
temptations, and to use them accordingly; which thing (in case they can be in
an error) may prove so like the sin against the Holy Ghost, as Milk is to Milk;
if at least all conviction of error; and demonstrations of truth, be the effect
and grace of the Spirit of God: which ought very warily to be considered.

But this confidence is no argument of truth: for they telling their people,
that they are bound to believe all that they teach with an assent, not equal to
their proof of it, but much greater, even the greatest that can be; they tie
them to believe it without reason, or proof: for to believe more strongly than
the argument inferrs, is to believe something without the argument; or at least
to have some portions of Faith, which relies upon no argument; which if it be
not effected by a supreme, and more infallible principle, can never be
reasonable: but this they supply with telling them, that they cannot err; and
this very proposition it self, needing another supply (for why shall they
believe this, more than any thing else, with an assent greater than can be
effected by their argument?) they supply this also, with affrighting Homilies
and noises of damnation. So that it is no wonder, that the Roman people are so
confident; since it is not upon the strength of their argument, or cause (for
they are taught to be confident beyond that) but it is upon the strength of
passion, credulity, interest and fear, education, and pretended authority: all
which, As, we hope God will consider in passing his unerring sentence upon the
poor misled people of the Roman Communion; So, we also, considering their
infirmity and our own, dare not enter into the secret of God's judgment
concerning all, or any of their persons; but pray for them, and offer to
instruct them; we reprove their false doctrines, and use means to recall them
from darkness, into some more light than there they see; but we pass no
further; and we hope that this charity and modesty will not, (we are sure it
ought not) be turned to our reproach, for this is the (...), that toleration of
our erring Brethren, Romans 2. 4.
and long sufferance, which we have learned from God, and it ought to procure
Repentance in them; and yet if it does not, we do but our duty, always
remembering the words of the Great Apostle which he spoke to the Church of Rome,
Thou art inexcusable, v. 1.
O man, whosoever thou art, that judge another; for in what thou judge
another, thou condemnest thy self; and we fear, and every man is bound to do so
too, lest the same measure of judgment we make to the errors of our Brother, be
heap*d up against our own, in case we fall into any. And the Church of Rome
should do well to consider this; for she is not the less likely to err, but
much more for thinking she cannot err; her very thinking and saying this
thing, being her most Capital error, as I shall afterward endeavor to make
apparent. I remember that Paganinus Gaudentius, a Roman Gentleman, tells that
Theodore Beza, being old, and coming into the Camp of Henry the 4th. of France,
was asked by some Whether he were sure that he followed the true Religion. He
modestly answered, That he did daily pray to God, to direct him with his holy
Spirit, and to give him a light from Heaven to guide him. Upon which answer,
because they expounded it to be in Beza, uncertainty, and irresolution, he says
that may who heard him, took that hint, and became Roman Catholics. It is
strange it should be so, that one man's modesty should make another man bold;
and that the looking upon a sound eye, should make another sore. But so it is;
that in the Church of Rome, very ill use is made of our charity and modesty.
However, I shall give a true account of the whole affair as it stands, and then
leave it to be considered.

SECTION VIII.
The Insecurity of the Roman Religion.
1. AS to the security which is pretended in the Church of Rome; it is,
confidence rather than safety, as I have already said; but if we look upon the
propositions themselves, we find that there is more danger in them than we wish
there were. I have already in the preface to the First Part instanced in some
particulars, in which the Church of Rome has suffered infirmity, and fallen
into error; and the errors are such, which the Fathers of the Church (for we
meddle not with any such judgment) call damnable. As for example; to add any
thing to Scriptures, or to introduce into the Faith, any thing that is not
written; or to call any thing Divine, that is not in the authority of the Holy
Scriptures; which Tertullian says, whosoever does may fear the woe pronounced
in Scripture against adders and detracters; and S. Basil says, is a manifest
note of infidelity, and a most certain sign of pride; and others add, it is an
evil heart of immodesty, and most vehemently forbidden by the Apostles. Against
the testimonies then brought, some little cavils were made, and many evil words
of railing published, which I have not only washed off in the second Section of
this Second part, but have, to my thinking, clearly proved them guilty of doing
ill in this question, and receding from the rule of the primitive Church; and
have added many other testimonies concerning the main Inquiry, to which the
weak answers offered can no way be applied, and to which the more learned
answers of Bellarmine and Perron, are found insufficient; as it there is made
to appear. So that I know nothing remains to them to be considered, but Whether
or no, the primitive, and holy Fathers, were too zealous in condemning this
doctrine and practice of the Roman Church too severely? We are sure the thing
which the Fathers so condemn, is done without warrant, and contrary to all
authentic precedents of the purest and holiest Ages of the Church, and greatly
derogatory to the dignity and fullness of Scripture; and infinitely dangerous to
the Church for the intromitting the doctrines of men into the Canon of Faith,
and a great diminution to the reputation of that providence, by which it is
certain, the Church was to be secured in the Records of Salvation; which could
not be done by any thing so well, as by writing what was to be kept inviolate;
especially in the propositions of Faith, relying oftentimes upon a word, and a
phrase, and a manner of expression; which in the infinite variety of reporters,
might too easily suffer change. Thus far we can safely argue concerning the
error of the Church of Rome; and to this not we, but the Fathers, add a severe
Censure. And when some of these censures were set down by way of caution and
warning, not of judgment and final sentence; it seems a wonder to me how these
Gentlemen of the Roman Communion, Letter, and Truth will out, etc.
that wrote against the Book, should recite all these terrible sayings out of
the Fathers against their superaddition of Articles to the Faith contained in
Scriptures, and be so little concerned as to read them with a purpose only to
find fault with the quotations, and never be smitten with a terror of the
judgment which the Fathers pronounce against them that do so. Just as if a man
being ready to perish in a storm, should look up and down the ship to see if
the little paintings were exact; or as if a man in a terrible clap of thunder
should consider whether he ever heard so unmusical a sound, and never regard
his own danger. 2. The same is the case in their (...), worshipping of
consecrated Bread: in which, if they be not deceived; all the reason, and all
the senses of all the men in the world are deceived; and if they be deceived,
then it is certain, they give Divine worship to what they naturally eat and
drink; and how great a provocation of God that is, they cannot but know by the
whole analogy of the Old and New Testament, and even by natural reason it self,
and all the dictates of Religion which God has written in our hearts. On the
other side, if we consider that if the Divine worship they intend to Christ
were passed immediately to him sitting in Heaven, and not through that blessed
thing upon the Altar, but directly and primarily to him whose passion there is
represented, and the benefits of whose death are there offered and exhibited;
there could be no diminution of any right due to Christ. Nay to them who
consider, that in the first institution and tradition of it to the Apostles,
Christ's body was still whole and unkroken, and separate from the Bread, and
could not then be transubstantiate and pass from it self into what it was not
before, and yet remain still it self what it was before; and that neither
Christ did command the Apostles to worship, neither did they worship any thing
but God the Father, at that time; it must needs seem to be a prodigious venture
of their souls, to change that action, into a needless, and ungrounded
superstition: especially since after Christ's ascension, his body is not only
in Heaven, which must contain it until his coming to judgment; but is so
changed, so immaterial, or spiritual, that it is not capable of being broken by
hands or teeth. In not adoring that which we see to be Bread, we can be as safe
as the Apostles were, who, (that we find) did not worship it; but in giving
Divine honors to it, we can be no more safe (in case their proposition be
amiss) than he that worships the Sun, because he verily believes he is the God
of Heaven. A good meaning in this case will not justify his action; not only
because he has enough to instruct him better, and to bring him to better
understanding, but especially because he may mean as well, if he worships
Christ in Heaven, Ad sua templa oculis, animo ad sua numina spectans; yea, and
better, when he does actually worship Christ at that time, directing the
worship to him in Heaven, and would terminate his worship on the Host, if he
were sure it were Christ, or were commanded so to do. Add to this, that to
worship Christ is an affirmative praecept, and, so it be done in wisdom and
holiness, and love, in all just ways of address to him, in praying to him,
reciting his prayers, giving him thanks, trusting in him, hoping in him, and
loving him with the best love of obedience: not to bow the knee, hic and nunc
when we fear to displease him by so doing, cannot be a sin, because for that
hic and nunc there is no commandment at all. And after all; if we will suppose
that the doctrine of Transubstantiation were true; yet because the Priest that
consecrates may indeed secretly have received invalid Orders, or have evil
Intention, or there may be some undiscernable nullity in the whole Economy and
ministration; so that no man of the Roman Communion can say, that by Divine
faith he believes that this Host is at this time transubstantiated; but only
has conjectures and ordinary suppositions, that it is so, and that he does not
certainly know the contrary. He that certainly gives Divine Honor to that
which is not certain to be the Body of Christ, runs into a danger too great, to
promise to himself he shall be safe. Some there are who go further yet, and
consider that the Church of Rome say only, that the bread is changed into the
body of Christ, but not into his soul; for then the same bread would be at the
same time both material and immaterial; and that if it were, that to give
honors absolutely Divine to the humanity of Christ, abstracted from
consideration of his Divinity, into which certainly the bread is not
transubstantiated, is too near the doctrine of the Socinians, who suppose the
humanity to be absolutely Deified; and Divine Honors to be due to Christ as a
man whom God has exalted above every name. But if they say, that they worship
the body in concretion with the Divinity; it is certain that may be done at all
times by looking up to heaven in all our religious addresses. And therefore
that is the safe way, and that is the way of the Church of England. The other
way, viz. of the Church of Rome, at the best is full of dangers, and qui amat
periculum peribit in illo, was the wise man's caution.

Rome in worshipping Angels; which as it is no where commanded in the New
Testament, so it is expressly forbidden by an Angel himself twice, Revel. 22.
to S. John, adding an unalterable reason; for I am thy fellow servants, worship
God; or as some Ancient Copies read it, worship Jesus: meaning that, although
in the Old Testament the Patriarchs and Prophets did bow before the Angels that
appeared to them as God's Ambassadors, and in the Person of God; and to which
they were greatly inclined, because their law was given by Angels: yet when God
had exalted the Son of Man to be the Lord of Men and Angels, we are all
fellow servants; and they are not to receive religious worship as before, nor
we to pay it them. And by this we understand the reproof which S. Paul makes of
the Gnostics, Col. 2.
of whose practice he forewarns the Christians that they suffer not themselves
to be deceived by the worshipping of Angels. Now by these authorities it is
plain, that it can at least be no duty to worship Angels; and therefore they
that do it not, cannot be blamed: but if these words mean here, as they do in
all other places, there is at least great danger to do it.

4 And of the like danger is Invocation of Saints; Paul used as an argument
against worship of Angels, and that is, intruding into those things we
understand not; for it pretends to know their present state, which is hid from
our eyes; and it proceeds upon the very reason upon which the Gnostics and the
Valentinians went; that is, that it is fit to have mediators between God and
us: that we may present our prayers to them, and they to God. To which add,
that the Church of Rome presenting Candles and other Donaries to the Virgin
Mary as to the Queen of Heaven, do that which the Collyridians did; the gift is
only differing, as Candle and Cake, Gold and Garments, this vow or that vow.
All which being put together makes a dangerous Liturgy; not like to the Worship
and Devotion used in the Primitive Church, but so like to what is forbidden in
Scripture, that it is much the worse. The advantage got by these things cannot
countervail the evil of the suspicion; and the wit of them that do so, cannot
by a secure answer escape the force of a prohibition; and therefore it were
infinitely more safe to let it alone; and to invocate and adore him only who is
(...), the Father of the Aeones, the Father of Men and Angels, and God, through
Jesus Christ; and that answers all objections.

Roman side, are little enough, and much too little to prove, that it is lawful
to make and worship them: and the distinctions and elusions, the tricks and
artifices are so many, that it is a great piece of impertinent learning to
remember them, and no small trouble to understand them; and they that most need
the distinctions (that is, the common people) cannot use them; and at the best,
it is very hard to think it lawful, but very easy to understand that it is
forbidden; and most easy to be assured it is very innocent to let it alone.
Where an image is, there is no religion, said Lactantius; and we ought rather
to die than to pollute our faith with such impieties, said Origin. Now let us
suppose that these fathers speak against the heathen superstition of
worshipping the images of their gods; Against these quotations used in the
Preface of the first Part, the Author of the Letter to a friend, page 3. And
the Author of Truth will out, page 6. object that these Fathers speak against
the worshipping of the images of heathen gods, not of the use of images amongst
Christians: which cavil the Reader may see largely refuted in the Sect. Of
Images.
certainly, if it was a fault in them, it is worse in Christians, who have
received so many Commands to the contrary, and who are tied to worship the
Father in spirit and in truth, and were never permitted to worship him by an
image. And true it is, that images are more fit for false gods, than for the
true God, the Father of Spirits; the superstition of images is more
proportioned to the Idolatry of false gods, than to true religion and the
worship of him whom eye has not seen, and cannot see, nor heart can
comprehend. And it is a vain Elusion to say, that these Fathers did not
severely censure the use of images among Christians; for all that time among
the Christians there was no use of images at all in religion; and for the very
reasons by which they condemned the heathen superstition of image worship, for
the same reasons they would never endure it at all amongst Christians. But then
if this be so highly criminal (as these Ancient Fathers say) I desire it may be
considered, for what pretended reasons the Church of Rome should not only
permit, but allow, and decree, and urge the use of images in their religious
adorations? If it be only for instruction of the Laity, that might be better
supplied by Catechisings, and frequent Homilies; and if instruction be
intended, then the single Statues are less useful; but Histories and
Hieroglyphics are to be painted upon Tables; and in them I suppose there would
be less temptation of doing abomination. But when the images simple or mixed are
painted or carved, the people must be told what their meaning is; and then they
will not need such books, who may with less danger learn their lesson by heart:
and besides this, they are told strange stories of the Saints whose images they
see, and of the images themselves that represent the Saints; and then it may be
these Laymens books may teach them things that they must unlearn again. But
yet if they be useful for instruction, what benefit is done to our spirits by
giving them adoration? That God will accept it as an honor done to himself, he
has no where told us; and he seems often to have told us the contrary; and if
it be possible by man's wit to acquit this practice from being (what the
prophets so highly reprove) spiritual whoredom, in giving Gods due to an image;
yet it can never be proved to be a part of that worshipping of God in spirit
and in truth which he requires. And though it would never have been believed in
Origen's, Tertullian's, or Lactantius's days, that ever there would arise a
sort of Christians that should contend earnestly for the worshipping images, or
that ever the heathen way of worship, viz. of what they called God, by an
image, should become a great part of Christianity, or that a Council of Bishops
should decree the worship of images, as an article of faith; or that they
should think men should be damned for denying worship to images; yet after all
this, when it is considered that the worshipping of images by Christians is so
great a scandal to the Indians, that they think themselves justified in their
religion by this; and so great a scandal to Jews and Turks, that they hate
Christianity it self for that very reason; it is a strange pertinacy in the
Church of Rome to retain this practice for so little pretensions of good, and
with so evident a mischief: To which, if this be added, that many of the ruder
people do downright worship the image without a distinction, or scruple, or
difference; and that for ought we know, many souls perish by such practices,
which might be secured by the taking away the images and forbidding the
superstition: I for my part cannot imagine how the Guides of souls can answer
it to God, or satisfy their consciences in their so vilely and cheaply
regarding Souls, and permitting them to live in danger, and die in sin, for no
spiritual good which can accrue to the Church, which can countervail the
danger, much less the loss of one Soul. However, it will be very hard from any
principle of Christian Religion, to prove it is a damnable sin, not to worship
Images; but every man that can read, has very much to say, that to worship
them, is a provocation of God to anger, and to jealousy.

6. Thus also it must needs be confessed, that it is Bellarmine's foolish
reason of the Wine sticking to lay men's Beards, is as ridiculous, as the
doctrine it self is unreasonable; and if they would shave Laymens Beards, as
they do the Clergy, it would be less inconvenience than what they now feel; and
if there be no help for it, they had better lose their Beards, than lose their
share of the Blood of Christ. And what need is there to dispute such uncertain
and unreasonable propositions, as that Christ's Blood is with the Body, by way
of Concomitancy, as if the Sacrament were not of Christ's Body broken, and the
Blood poured out; and as if, in case it be so, Christ did not know, or not
consider it, but, for all that, instituted the Supper in both kinds. And what
more is gotten by the Host alone, than by that and the Chalice too? And what
can be answered to the pious desires of so many Nations, to have the Chalice
restored; when they ask for nothing but their part of the Legacy which Christ
left them in his Testament? And the Church of Rome, which takes upon her to be
sole Executrix, or at least, Overseer of it, tells them, that the Legacy will
do them no good; and keeps it from them, by telling them, It is not necessary,
nay, it is worse than so; for when in the time of the Council of Trent,
instance was made, that leave might be given to such as desire it; the Oracle
was uttered by the Cardinal of Alexandria, Council. Trident. lib. 5. A. D. 1561.
Sub Pio Qua^^^.
but was given after the old manner, so that no man was the better. For no man
was capable of receiving the favor but he that professed he did not believe it
necessary; and then there could be no great reason to desire it: He that
thought he needed it, could not receive it; and he that found no want of it, in
all reason would not be importunate for it, and then he should be sure not to
have it: So that, in effect, there were two sorts of persons denied it; Those
that required it, and those that did not require it. And to what Christian
grace to refer the wisdom and piety of this answer, I cannot yet learn.
Neither can I yet imagine why the Cardinal S. Angelo should call Giving the Cup
to the Laity, Ibid.
a giving them a Cup of deadly poison; since certain it is, that the Blood of
Christ is a savor of life, and not of death; and, as the French Ambassador
replied, The Apostles who did give it, were not impoysoners; and the many ages
of the primitive Church did receive it with very great emolument and spiritual
comfort. To this I know it will be said by some, who cannot much defend their
Church in the thing it self, That it is no great matter; and if all things else
were accorded, this might be dispensed withal; and the Pope could give leave
to the respective Churches, to have according as it might be expedient, and fit
for edification. But this will not serve the turn: For first the thing it self,
is no small matter, but of greatest concernment. It is the Sacramental Blood of
Christ. The Holy Bread cannot be the Sacrament of the Blood; and if Christ did
not esteem it as necessary, to leave a Sacrament of his Blood, as of his Body,
he would not have done it; and if he did think it as necessary, certainly it
was so. But 2. Suppose the matter be small; why then shall a Schism be made by
him that would be thought the Great Father of Christians? and all Christendom
almost displeased and offended, rather than he will comply with their desires
of having nothing but what Christ left them? If the thing be but little, why do
they take a course to make it (as they suppose) damnation to desire it? And if
it be said, Because it is Heresy, to think the Church has erred all this
while in denying it; to this, the answer will be easy, that themselves who did
deny it, have given the occasion, and not they who do desire it; neither have
all the Christian Churches denied it; for I think none but the Roman Church
does; and if the Roman Church by granting it now to her own Children, will be
supposed to have erred in denying it; to continue this denial, will not cure
that inconvenience: for that which at first was but an Error, will now become
Heresy, if they be pertinacious in the refusal. But if it were not for
political, and humane considerations, and secular interests, there will be
little question, but that it will be safer, and more agreeable to Christ's
institution, and the Apostolical doctrine, and the primitive practice, to grant
it lovingly, than to detain it sacrilegiously: For at least, the detention will
look like Sacrilege; and the granting it, cannot but be a Fatherly, and pious
ministration: especially since when it is granted, all parties are pleased, and
no man's authority real, or pretended, is questioned. But whatever become of
this consideration which is nothing but a charitable desire, and way of peace
with our adversaries, and a desire to win them by our not intermedling with
their unalterable, and pertinacious interest; yet as to the thing it self, it
is certain, that to communicate in both kinds, is justifiable by the
institution of Christ, and the perpetual practice of the Church for many ages;
which thing certainly is, or ought to be, the greatest Rule for the Churches
imitation. And if the Church of Rome had this advantage against us in any
Article, as I hope there would not be found so much pertinacy amongst us, as to
resist the power of such an argument; so it is certain there would not be
amongst them so much modesty as to abstain from the most absolute triumph, and
the fiercest declamations: In the mean time, our safety in this Article also is
visible and notorious. Against the saying of Saint Ambrose, which in the
Preface to the first part I brought to reprove this practice; those who thought
themselves obliged to object, will find the quotation justified in the Section
of the Half-Communion; to which I refer the Reader.

of such is not the Kingdom of Heaven? The Church of England enjoins the
Parents to bring them; and her Priests to baptize them, and punishes the
neglect where it is criminal, and yet teaches no such fierce and uncharitable
proposition, which can serve no end, but what may with less damage and
affrightment, be very well secured; and to distrust God's goodness to the poor
Infants, whose fault it could not be, that they were not baptized; and to
amerce their no-fault with so great a fine, even the loss of all the good which
they could receive from him that created them, and loves them, is such a
playing with Heads, and a regardless treatment of Souls, that for charity sake,
and common humanity, we dare not mingle in their Counsels. But if we err, it
is on the safer side; it is on the one side of mercy and charity. These seven
particulars are not trifling considerations; but as they have great influence
into the event of Souls, so they are great parts of the Roman Religion, as they
have pleased to order Religion at this day. I might instance in many more, if I
thought it necessary, or did not fear they would think me inquisitive for
objections: therefore I shall add no more; only I profess my self to wonder at
the obstinacy of the Roman Prelates, that will not consent, that the Liturgy of
their Church should be understood by the people. They have some pretense of
politic reason, why they forbid the translation of the Scriptures; though all
wise men know they have other reasons, than what they pretend, yet this also
would be considered; that if the people did read the Scriptures, and would use
that liberty well, they might receive infinite benefit by them; and that if
they did abuse that liberty, it were the Peoples fault, and not the Rulers; but
that they are forbidden, that is the Rulers fault, and not the Peoples: But for
prohibiting the understanding of their public, and sometimes of many of their
private devotions, there can be no plausible pretense, no excuse of policy, no
end of piety; and if the Church of England be not in this also, of the surer
side, then we know nothing, but all the reason of all mankind is fallen asleep.

Well, however these things have at least, very much probability in them; yet
for professing these things according to the Scriptures, and Catholic
tradition, and right Reason (as will be further demonstrated in the following
paragraphs) they call us Heretics, and sentence us with damnation; Suarezius
and Bellarmine confess, that to believe Transubstantiation, is not absolutely
necessary to salvation.
with damnation, I say; for not worshipping of Images; for not calling the
Sacramental Bread, our God and Savior; for not teaching for doctrines, the
Commandments of men; for not equalling the sayings of men, to the sayings of
God; for not worshipping Angels, for not putting trust in Saints, and speaking
to dead persons, who are not present; and for offering to desire to receive the
Communion, as Christ gave it to his Disciples, and they to all to whom they
preached. If these be causes of damnation; what shall become of them that do
worship Images; and that do take away half of the Sacrament from the people, to
whom Christ left it? and keep knowledge from them, and will not suffer the most
of them to pray with the Understanding; and worship Angels, and make dead men
their Guardians, and erect Altars, and make Vows, and give consumptive
Offerings to Saints, real, or imaginary? Now truly, we know not what shall
become of them; but we pray for them as men not without hope: only as long as
we can, we repeat the words of our Blessed Savior, He that breaks one of the
least Commandments, Matthew. 5. 19.
and teaches men so, shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven.

SECTION IX.
That the Church of Rome does teach for Doctrines, the Commandments of Men.
THe former Charge has occasioned this, which is but an instance of their
adding to the Christian Faith new Articles upon their own authority. And here,
first, I shall represent what is intended in the reproof which our Blessed
Savior made of the Pharisees; saying, They taught for doctrines, the
Commandments of men. And 2. I shall prove that the Church of Rome is guilty of
it, and the Church of England is not.

1. The words of our Blessed Savior are to be understood (...), or
Conjunctively; that is, In vain do ye worship me, Matthew. 15. 9.
teaching doctrines, and Commandments of men; that is, things which men only
have delivered; and if these once be esteemed to be a worshipping of God, it is
(...), a vain worship. Now this expressed it self in two degrees; The first was
in over-valuing humane ordinances; that is, equalling them to Divine
Commandments; exacting them by the same measures, by which they require
obedience to God's laws, and this with a pretended zeal for God's honor and
service. Thus the Pharisees were noted and reproved by our Blessed Savior.

1. The things of decency, or indifferent practices, void Gods Commandment by
turning Religion into superstition.

Quicquid sapientes vetant palam fieri, id etiam in penetralibus vetitum est,
said Rabbi Bachai. But this is the Prerogative of Divine Laws which oblige as
much in private as in public; because God equally sees in the Closet and in
the Temple: Men cannot do this, and therefore cannot make Laws to bind, where
they can have no cognizance and no concern.

Si dixerint scribae dextram esse sinistram, and sinistram esse dextram, audi
eos, said the forenamed Rabbi.

2. The second degree in which this expressed it self among the Pharisees, was,
that they did not only equal, but preferred the Commandments of men before the
Commands of God. Plus est in verbis scribarum quam in verbis legis In ^itulis
Thalmudicis Baba Metzias B. recho^h, etc.
; and of this the instance that our Blessed Savior gives is in the case of the
Corban, and not relieving their Parents. Sacrum erit quicquid paravero in
futurum ad os patris Rabbi Nissim.
, If they said it was dedicated; their Father's hungry belly might not be
relieved by it. And this our Blessed Savior calls, as being the highest degree
of this superstition, a making the Commandment of God of no effect by their
tradition; this does it directly; as the other did it by necessary and
unavoidable consequence.

Now that the Church of Rome is greatly guilty of this criminal way of teaching
and mis-leading the Consciences of her disciples, will appear in these (amongst
many other) instances.

SECTION X.
Of the Seal of Confession.
1. I First instance in their Seal of Confession; And the question is not,
Whether a Priest is to take care of his Penitent's fame, or whether he be not
in all prudent and pious ways to be careful, lest he make that Intercourse
odious: For certainly he is. But whether the Seal of Confession be so sacred
and impregnable that it is not to be opened in the imminent danger of a King,
or Kingdom; or for the doing the greatest good, or avoiding the greatest evil
in the world: that is now the question, and such a Broad Seal as this, is no
part of the Christian Religion, was never spoken of by the Prophets or
Apostles, in the Old or the New Testament, never was so much as mentioned in
the Books of the Ancient Fathers and Doctors, not so much as named in the
Ancient Councils of the Church; and was not heard of until after the time of
Pope Gregory the seventh. Now how this is determined and practiced in the
Church of Rome, we may quickly see. The first direct Rule in the Western Church
we find in this affair, Decretal. de poenitent^is and remissionibus.
is the Canon of the Lateran Council; Cap. Omnis utriusque, in which to Confess
at Easter, was made an Ecclesiastical Law; and, as an Appendix to it, this
caution, Caveatautem omnino, ne verbo aut signo aut alio quovis modo
aliquatenus prodat peccatorem: sed si prudentiore consilio indiguerit, illud
absque ulla expressione personae requirat. This Law concerning them that do
confess their secret sins to a Priest, in order to Counsel, comfort, and pardon
from God by his Ministry, is very prudent and pious; and it relates only to
the person, not to the crimes: these may upon the account of any doubt, or the
advantage of better counsel and instruction be revealed; the person upon such
accounts may not, Nisi veritas aut obedientia aliud exigat, In 3. did. 21.
as S. Bonaventure said well; Unless truth, or obedience require the contrary:
for indeed the person is not often so material as to the inquiry of future
counsel, or present judgment, as the greatness, and other circumstances of the
sin. But this was an ancient Ecclesiastical Rule, ^ib. 7. cap. 16. hist. Eccles.
as we find it related by Sozomen, Presbyterum aliquem vitae integritate quam
maxim spectabilem, secretorum eitam tenacem ac sapientem huic officio
praefecerunt, A penitentiary Priest was appointted for the Penitents, a man
that was of good life, wise, and secret. So far was well, and agreeable to
common prudence, and natural reason, and the words of Solomon; Prove. 11. 13.
Qui ambulat fraudulenter revelat arcanum, qui autem fidelis est celat amici
commissum. There is in this case, some more reason than in ordinary secrets;
but still the obligation is the same, and to be governed by prudence, and is
subject to contradiction, by greater causes. The same also, is the Law in the
Greek Church, Epist. ad Amphilochium.
mentioned by S. Basil, Our Fathers permitted not that women, that had
committed Adultery, and were penitent, should be delated in public (...). A.
D. 1603.
. This is the whole ground and foundation, on which the Seal of Confession
does, or can rely, save only that in several Churches there were several Laws
in after-ages to the same purpose, and particularly, in the 11th. Canon of the
Church of England; adding also the penalty of irregularity, to every Priest
that shall reveal any thing committed to him in private Confession, but with
this Proviso; that it be not binding, in such cases where the concealment is
made capital, by the Laws of the Kingdom: which because it is very strict, and
yet very prudent, I shall make it appear, that the Church of England walks
wisely in it, and according to the precedents of the Ancient Catholic Church,
in commanding the Seal to be broken up in some cases; and yet she has
restrained it more than formerly was observed in the Churches of God.

Burchard expres^ly affirms, Lib. 19. Decreti sui. c. 37. Council Mogua^. cap.
10. and 21.
that before the Nicene Council, the penitentiary Priest might publish what he
heard in Confessions, if it were for the good of the penitent, or, for the
greatness of the crime, it seemed fit to the Confessor.

And that he says true, we have sufficient testimony from Origin. Homil. 2. in
Psalm. 37.
Tantum modo circumspice diligentius cui debeas confiteri peccatum tuum -- Si
intellexerit and praeviderit talem esse languorem tuum qui in conventu totius
Ecclesiae exponi debeat and curari, ex quo fortassis and caeteri aedificari
poterunt, and tu ipse facile sanari, multa hoc deliberatione and satis perito
medici illius consilio procurandum est. By which words he affirms, 1. That it
was in the power of the Confessor, to command the publication of certain
crimes, 2. That though it was not lightly to be done, yet upon great reason it
might. 3. That the spiritual good of the penitent, and the edification of
others, were causes sufficient for the publication. 4. That of these; the
Confessor was judge. 5. That this was no otherwise done by the consent of the
party, but because he was bound to consent when the Confessor enjoined it: And
the matter is evident, in the case of the incestuous Corinthian; who either was
restored without private Confession; or, if he was not, S. Paul caused it to be
published in the Church, and submitted the man to the severest discipline and
yet public, that was then or since in the world. The like to this, we find in
a decretal Epistle of Pope Leo; Epist. 80. ad Epist^ Companiae.
for when some Confessors, exceeding the ancient Ecclesiastical Rule, were not
so prudent and deliberate in conducting their Penitents, as formerly they were,
but commanded that all their whole Confessions should be written down, and
publicly read; he says, Though the plentitude of Faith might be landable, that
is not afraid to blush in public, yet the Confession is sufficient, if it be
made in secret first to God, and then to the Priest: and adds, Non omnium
hujusmodi sunt peccata, ut ea quae poenitentiam poscunt, non timeant publicare;
All sins are not of that nature, that are fit to be published: and therefore
removeatur tam improbabilis consuetudo; let such a reprovable custom be taken
away.] In which words of S. Leo; we find, 1. That the Seal of Confession (as at
this day it is understood at Rome,) was no such inviolable, and religious
secret; for by a contrary custom it was too much broken. 2. That he blames not
the publication of some sins, but that they indiscriminately did publish all.
3. That the nature of some sins did not permit it: for (as he adds afterward)
men by this means were betrayed to the malice of their Enemies, who would bring
them before tribunals, in some cases. 4. That this was not spoken in case of
public Crimes, delated, and brought into public notice, but such as were
spoken in private Confession. And here I cannot but desire, there had been some
more ingenuity in Bellarmine, who relating to this Epistle of S. De poenitentia
lib. 3. cap. 14. Sect. Denique cum secreta.
Leo, affirms, that S. Leo says, It is against the Apostolical Rule, to reveal
secret sins, declared in Confession; when it is plain, that S. Leo only blames
the Custom of revealing all; saying, that all sins are not of that nature, as
to be fit to be revealed. And by these precedent authorities, we shall the
easier understand that famous fact of Nectarius, who abolished the Custom of
having sins published in the Church, and therefore took away the penitentiary
Priest, whose Office was (as I proved out of Origin, Sozomen, and Burchard) to
enjoin the publication of some sins, according to his discretion. It happened in
Constantinople, that a foul fact was committed, and it was published in the
ears of the people, and a tumult was raised about it; and the Remedy was, that
Nectarius took away the Office, and the Custom together. Consulentibus
quibusdam ut Vnicuique liberum permitteret, prout sibi ipse conscius esset and
consideret, ad mysteriorum Communionem accedere, poenitentiarium illum
presbyterum exauthoravit. Every man was thenceforth left to his liberty,
according to the dictate and confidence of his own conscience, to come to the
Communion; and this afterward passed into a Rite: for the manners of men
growing degenerate, and worse sins being now confessed than (as he supposes)
formerly they had been; the judges having been more severe, and the people more
modest, it was fit enough that this Custom, upon the occasion of such a
scandal, and so much mischief like to follow it, should be laid aside wholly;
and so it was. Here is a plain story, truly told by Sozomen, and the matter is
easy to be understood. But Bellarmine, seeing the practice, and doctrine of
the Church of Rome pinched by it, makes a distinction (derived from the present
Custom of his Church) of public Confession and private, saying, That Nectarius
took away the public, and not the private. This I shall have occasion to
discuss in the next Section. I am now only to speak concerning the Seal of
Confession; which from this authority is apparent was not such a sacred thing,
but that it was made wholly to minister to the public and private edification
of the penitent, and the whole Church.

Thus this Affair stood in the Primitive Church. In descending ages when
private Confessions grew frequent, and were converted into a Sacrament; the
Seal also was made more tenacious; and yet by the discipline of the Church,
there were diverse Cases in which the Seal might be broken up. 1. There is a
famous Gloss in Cap. Tua nos. lib. 4. Decretal. tit. 1. De Sponsalibus and
Matrimonio; where the Pope answering to a question concerning a pretended
contract of marriage, says, that the marriage is good, unless the Inquiring
Bishop of Brescia could have assured him, that the man did never consent, or
intend the marriage, Quod qualiter tibi constiterit, non videmus: The Gloss
upon these words says, Imo been potuit constare; quia vir ille hoc ei
confitebatur, The Bishop might well know it, because the man had confessed it
to him; or because he had revealed it to him in penitential confession. For
though in Judicial confession before a tribunal no man is to be believed to the
prejudice of a third person, yet in penitential Confession he is to be
believed; because it is not to be supposed that he then is unmindful of his
salvation.] Where the Gloss observing that he did or might have received it in
Confession, and yet make use of it in Consultation with his superiors, and upon
that answer was to pronounce it to be, or not to be, a marriage, and to treat
the persons accordingly; it follows that the thing it self might be revealed
for the good of the penitents soul, and this was done by the Cardinal of S.
Laurence in the case of a woman introducing a supposititious Child to the
inheritance of her husband; Lib. 5. decret. tit 38.
and this revelation of the Confession produced a decretal Epistle from the
Pope in that particular case; Cap. officii. de poenit. and remiss.
and of this the Doctors give this reason; Vide Suarez. (...) Paz. in practica*
Criminal. Eccles. cap. 10^.
because a thing so odious, and that would bring so certain ruin to souls,
might not be permitted, with so great scandal, and so great mischief. 2. And
that Confession may Durandus, Almain, Medina, and Navar; and generally by all
the ancient Scholars of S. Thomas. Now if a law be made that in certain cases,
the Confessor shall publish the Confession, then every man's consent is involved
in it, as his private right is in the public interest; of which it is a part,
and to which it is subordinate and must yield. But who pleases to see how this
affair once did stand in the Church of Rome, and more especially in the
Catholic Church, if he be not yet, may be satisfied by the proofs which
Altisiodorensis gives of the lawfulness of publishing Confessions in certain
cases. 5. Lastly, if a sinful intention of committing a grievous Part. 4. Q.
28. memb. 2. art. 2. in resp ns.
Alexander of Ales, by the Confessio ult. number. 7.
Summa Angelica, which also reckons five cases more, in which it is lawful to
reveal Confessions. The same also is taught by Cap. Omnis. de poenit. and
remis. number. 24.
Panormitan, Super 5. cap. Omnis.
Hostiensis, the In Confess. 3. number. 2.
Summa Sylvestrina, and by Pope In Cap. Omnis. verb. prodit.
Innocent himself.

But now if we consider how it is in the Church of Rome at this day, and has
been this last age for the most part; we shall find that this humane
constitution, relying upon prudent and pious considerations, is urged as a
Sacramental Obligation, and a great part of the Religion; and is not accounted
obliging only for the reasons of its first Sanction; nor as an act of
obedience to the positive law, but as a Natural, Essential, Divine and
unalterable Obligation. And from thence these doctrines are derived. 1. That
what a Priest knows in Confession, he knows it not as a man, but as God: which
proposition (as it is foolish, and too near to blasphemy, and may as well
infer, that the Priest may be then adored by the penitent with the
distinction, viz. not as man, but as God; so) is expressly confuted by the
Gloss above cited, In quartum librum sent. did. 21.
and by Scotus; but taught by the Modern Casuists, and is the ground of a
strange practice. For 2. as a consequent of the former, it is taught in the
Church of Rome by their greatest Guides, that if a Priest having heard a thing
only in Confession; Vide Richard. in l^b 4. sent. d^st. ead. art. 4. q. ^.
If being asked, and sworn, he shall say, he never heard that thing, he neither
lies nor forswears. So Emanuel Aph^r. v. Confessor. n. 23.
Sa teaches; and adds, that in the same manner the penitent may also swear,
that he said nothing, or no such thing in Confession. But how this should be
excused, or whether they think the Penitent to have spoken to none but God; I
am not yet satisfied. 3. It is not lawful to reveal any thing that is told
only in Confession, though it be to avoid the greatest evil that can happen,
so said Apolog. adv. Reg. M. Brit.
Bellarmine; to save a whole Commonwealth from damage temporal or spiritual, so
Disp 33. in 3. part. ^. Thom. Sect. 1. n. ^.
Suarez; to save the lives of all the Kings in Christendom, so Praestaret Reges
omnes pe^ire quam si vel semel Confessionis sigillum violaretur. Epist. ad
Fontonem Ducaeum. p. 140.
Binet told Isaac Causabon in the Kings Library at Paris. The same is openly
avowed by Eudaemon Johannes, Apolog. pro Garnett^. c. 13.
That there is no evil so great, for the avoiding of which it can be lawful to
reveal Confession; and that this may appear to be a Catholic doctrine, the
same Author reckons up so many Moderns teaching the same, that the very names
of the Authors and Books fills up several pages: and that it is the Catholic
doctrine, is expressly taught by the Author of the famous Apology made for the
Jesuits, after the horrid parricide of Henry the fourth of France. They add,
even beyond this, all the Curiosity of the very circumstances of silence; That
this silence does not only oblige in the case of perfect Confession, but, if
it be begun, not only in case of Confession clear and express, but if it be so
much as in relation to Confession: not only the Confessor, but the Messenger,
the Interpreter, the Counselor, he that hears it by chance, or by stealth:
and he that was told of it by him that should but did not conceal it; the Seal
is to be kept by all means, directly and indirectly, by words and signs,
judicially and extrajudicially, unless the penitent give leave: but that leave
is to be express, and is not to be asked but in the case of a compelling
necessity; neither can the Confessor impose a public penance upon him, who
has confessed privately. Which things, especially the last, are most
diametrically opposed to the doctrine and discipline of the Primitive Church,
as I have already proved; but these things are expressly taught as the doctrine
of the most famous Casuists of the Church of Rome, Moral. Theol. 1 act. 7.
Exam^n. 4. de poe^it. Sect. 6. n. 63, 64, 65, etc.
by Escobar, who comparing his Book in method to the seven Seals of the
Revelations, which the four living Creatures read; Suarez the Ox, Molina the
Man, Vasques the Eagle, and Valentia the Lion; and 24. Elders, that is, 24.
Jesuits also read these seven Seals; though when they come to be reckoned,
they prove 25. so fatal is that Antichristian number to the Church of Rome,
that it occurs in every accident: but his meaning is, that the doctrines he
teaches are the doctrines of all those 25. famous leading men; Penes quos
Imperium I^terarum and Conscientiarum. If now it be not the Catholic doctrine,
then is it heretical? and then, why is it not disowned? why are not they that
say so, censured? why is not the doctrine condemned? why is it publicly
maintained and allowed by authority? why is it pleaded in bar against execution
of justice in the case of treason; as it was by F. Garnet himself, and all his
Apologists? But if this be the Catholic doctrine, then let it be considered
how cheap are the lives of Kings in their eyes, who consult more with the
safety of a Villain, whom they dare not absolve Script. Garnetti apud Is.
Casaub ni Epist. ad Fron. Du caeum, p. 13^.
, than of a King, who is worthy ten thousands of his people; and let it be also
considered, that by using all the ways in the world to make Confession easy to
Traitors and Homicides, they make it odious to Kings and Princes, and to all
that love the safety of their Sovereigns, and of the public. We find that the
laws of God yield to charity and necessity, and Christ followed the act of
David; who, when he was hungry, eat the Shewbread, which was unlawful to be
eaten but by the Priest alone: and he that commanded us to go, and learn what
that means, I will have mercy and not sacrifice, intended not that the Seal of
Confession should upon pretense of Religion be used to the most uncharitable
ends in the world; no, though it had been made sacred by a Divine Commandment;
which it is not, but is wholly introduced by Custom and Canons Ecclesiastical:
And when we see that things dedicated to God, and made sacred by Religion, and
the laws of God confirming such Religion, can be alien'd and made common in
cases of extreme necessity, or great charity; it is a strange superstition,
that shall hold that fast with teeth and nails, and never let it go, no not to
save a soul, not to preserve the life of Kings, not to prevent the greatest
m^schief in the world; This is certainly a making the Commandments of men
greater and more sacred than the Commandments of God, and a passing them into a
doctrine, great, necessary and unalterable, as a Fundamental Article.

SECTION XI.
Of the imposing Auricular Confession upon Consciences, without authority from
God.
THat Confession to a Priest, is a Doctrine taught as necessary in the Church
of Rome, is without all question; and yet that it is but the Commandment of
men, I shall (I hope) clearly enough evince; and if I do, I suppose the Charge
laid against the Church of Rome, which is the same Christ laid against the
Pharisees, will be fully made good, as to this instance; For this is one of the
sorts of that Crime, to say, Dixit Dominus, Dominus autem non dixit; to pretend
a Rite to be of Divine institution when it is not so, but humanum inventum, a
device of man's brain. The other (which is, still supposing an institution to
be humane and positive, yet to urge it with the same severe Religion, as they
do a Divine Commandment) I shall consider in other instances. For the present,
the inquiry is concerning Auricular Confession, and it is pretended necessity.
The first Decree concerning it, was in the Lateran Council; Can. 21.
in which every person of years of discretion, is commanded to confess all his
sins to his own Priest, at least once in the year; or to another Priest, with
the leave of his own; otherwise, while he is living, he must be driven from
entrance into the Church; and, when he is dead, he must have no Christian
Burial. This is very severe; but yet here is no damnation to them that neglect
it; and the duty is not pretended to be by Divine Commandment: and therefore
lest that severity might seem too much to be laid upon humane Law, they made it
up in the new forge at Trent; and there it was decreed that, To confess all,
and every mortal sin, which after diligent inquiry we remember, and every evil
thought or desire, Sess. 14. Capp. 6. and 7.
and the circumstances that change the nature of the sin, is necessary for the
remission of sins, and of Divine institution; and he that denies this, is to be
Anathema.

Whether to confess to a Priest, be an advisable discipline, and a good
instance, instrument, and ministry of Repentance, and may serve many good ends
in the Church, and to the souls of needing persons, is is no part of the
Question. We find that in the Acts of the Apostles, diverse converted persons
came to S. Paul, either publicly, or privately, and confessed their deeds;
(...). i. e. magicas incantationes; simile illud ibidem, (...) nimirum (...).
and burnt their books of Exorcism, that is, did what became severe, and hearty
penitents, who needed Counsel and Comfort, and that their Repentance should be
conducted by wise Guides. And when S. James exhorts all Christians to confess
their sins to one another, certainly it is more agreeable to all spiritual
ends, that this be done rather to the Curates of Souls, than to the ordinary
Brethren. The Church of England is no way engaged against it, but advises it,
and practices it. The Calvinist-Churches do not practice it much, because they
know not well how to divest it from it is evil appendages which are put to it by
the customs of the world, and to which it is too much exposed by the interests,
weaknesses, and partialities of men. But they commending it, show they would
use it willingly, if they could order it unto edification. Calvin. Instit. lib.
3. cap. 4. Sect. 12. 13.
Interim quin sistant se Pastori oves, quoties sacram Coenam participare
volunt, adeo non reclamo, ut maxim velim hoc ubique observari. And for the
Lutheran Churches, that it is their practice, we may see it in 2. Part. Exam.
Council. Trid. cap. 5. de poenit.
Chemnitius, who was one of greatest fame amongst them; and he is noted to this
purpose by Lib. 3. de poenit. cap. 1. Sect. Martinus Kemnitius.
Bellarmin, only they all consent, that it is not necessary nor of Divine
institution; and being but of man's invention, it ought not to pass into a
doctrine; and, as the Apostles said in the matter of Circumcision, a burden
ought not to be put upon the necks of the Disciples: and that, in lege gratiae,
In ^. did, 17. q. 2. ex Scoto.
long difficilimum too, as Mayor observes truly, by far greater than any
burden in the Law of Grace, the time of the Gospel. Let it be commanded to all,
to whom it is needful, or profitable; but let it be free, as to the Conscience
precisely, and bound but by the cords of a man, and as other Ecclesiastical
Laws are, which are capable of exceptions, restrictions, cautions,
dispensations, rescindings, and abolitions, by the same authority, or upon
greater reasons.

The Question then is, Whether to confess all our greater sins to a Priest, all
that upon strict enquiry we can remember, be necessary to salvation? This the
Church of Rome now affirms; and this the Church of England, and all Protestant
Churches deny; and complain sadly, that the Commandments of men are changed
into the doctrines of God, by a Pharisaical empire, and superstition. Here then
we join issue.

1. And in the first place, I shall represent that the doctrine of the
necessity of Confession to a Priest is a new doctrine, even in the Church of
Rome, and was not esteemed any part of the Catholic Religion before the
Council of Trent. For first, the Gloss de poenit. did. 5. c. in poenitentia,
inquiring where, or when Oral Confession was institued, says, Some say it was
instituted in Paradise, others say it was instituted when Joshuah called upon
Achan to confess his sin: others say it was instituted in the new Testament by
S. James: It is better said, that it was instituted by a certain universal
tradition of the Church, and the tradition of the Church is obligatory as a
praecept. Therefore confession of deadly sins is necessary with us (viz.
Latins) but not with the Greeks; because no such tradition has come to them.]
This is the full state of this affair, in the age when Semeca, who was the
Glossator, lived; and it is briefly this. 1. There was no resolution, or
agreement whence it came. 2. The Glossator's opinion was, it came from the
Universal tradition of the Church. 3. It was but a kind of Universal tradition;
not absolute, clear, and certain. 4. It was only a tradition in the Latin
Church. 5. The Greeks had no such tradition. 6. The Greeks were not obliged to
it; it was not necessary to them. Concerning the Greek Church, I shall
afterward consider it in a more opportune place; here only I consider it as it
was in the Latin Church: and of this I suppose there needs no better Record
than the Canon Law it self, and the authentic Glosses upon it; which Glosses,
although they be not Law, but as far as they please, yet they are perfect
testimony as to matter of fact, and what the opinions of the Doctors were at
that time. And therefore to the former, I add this; that in cap. Convertimini,
Gratian has these words, Vnde datur intelligi, quod etiam ore tacente veniam
consequi possumus, Without confession of the mouth we may obtain pardon of our
sins; and this point he pursues in all that long Chapter; and in the chapter
Resuscitatus, out of S. Austin's doctrine; and in the Chapter Qui natus, out of
the doctrine of S. John's Epistle; the conclusion of which Chapter is, Cum ergo
ante Confessionem (ut probatum est) sumus resuscitati per gratiam, and filii
lucis facti; evidentissime apparet quod sola cordis contritione sine
Confessione oris, peccatum remittitur: and, in the Chapter Omnis qui non
diligit, he expressly concludes out of S. John's words: Non ergo in confessione
peccatum remittitur, quod jam remissum esse probatur: fit itaque confessio ad
ostensionem poenitentiae, non ad impetrationem veni^. And at the end of this
Chapter, according to his custom in such disputable things; when he says, Alii
e contrario testantur; others witness to the contrary, that without confession
Oral, and works of satisfaction, no man is cleansed from his sin; the Gloss
upon the place, says thus: Ab hoc loco usque ad Sed his authoritatibus; pro
alia part allegat, quod scil. adulto peccatum non dimittitur sine oris
Confessione, quod tamen falsum est: Only he says, that Confession does cleanse,
and Satisfaction does cleanse: so that though by contrition of the heart, the
sin is pardoned; yet these still cleanse more and more, as a man is more
innovated] or amended. But these authorities brought in, (viz. that sin is not
pardoned without confession) if they be diligently expounded, prove but
little.] But Friar Maurique, who by Pius Quintus, made and published a censure
upon the Glosses, appointed these words (quod tamen falsum est) to be left out;
but the Roman Correctors under Greg. 13th. let them alone; but put in the
Margent a mark of contradiction upon it; saying, Imo verissimum est. But that
was new doctrine, and although Semeca, the Author of the Gloss, affirmed it
expressly to be false, yet Gratian himself was more reserved; but yet not of
the new opinion, but left the matter indifferent: for after he had alleged
Scripture, and authorities of Fathers on one side, and authority of Fathers on
the other; De poe^it. ^. ^. cap. Quamvis plentitudo.
he concludes, Quibus authoritatibus vel quibuslibet rationum firmamentis
utraque sententia Satisfactionis and Confessionis innitatur, in medium breviter
exposuimus. Cui autem harum potius adhaerendum sit, lectoris judicio
reservatur. Vtraque enim fautores habet sapientes and religiosos viros. Now how
well this agrees with the determination of the Council of Trent, Lib. de 5.
decret. de poeni^. and rem. in cap. Omnis utriusque sexus.
every man, by comparing, can easily judge; only it is certain, this doctrine
cannot pretend to be derived by tradition from the Apostles. Of the same
opinion was the Abbot of Panormo; saying, That opinion (viz. of the Gloss) does
much please me: because there is no manifest authority that does intimate, that
either God or Christ instituted Confession to be made to a Priest. But it were
endless to name the Sentences of the Canonists in this question; once for all,
the testimony of Maldonat may secure us, Disp. de Sacr. tom. 2. de Confess.
Orig. c. 2.
Juris Pontificii periti, secuti suum primum interpretem, omnes dicunt
Confessionem tantum esse introductam jure Ecclesiastico. But to clear the whole
Question, I shall first prove, that the necessity of confessing our sins to a
Priest is not found in Scripture; but very much to disprove it. 2. That there
is no reason enforcing this necessity, but very much against it. 3. That there
is no Ecclesiastical Tradition of any such necessity; but apparently the
contrary: and the consequent of these things will be, that the Church of Rome
has introduced a new doctrine, false, and burdensome, dangerous and
superstitious.

1. If we consider how this Article is managed in Scripture, we shall find that
our Blessed Savior said nothing at all concerning it; the Council of Trent
indeed makes their new doctrine to rely upon the words of Christ recited by S.
John, John 20. 21.
Whose sins ^e remit they are remitted, etc. But see with what success: for,
besides that all the Canonists allow not, that Confession was instituted by
Christ; Aquinas, Scotus, Gabriel Clavasinus, the Author of the Summa Angelica,
Hugo de S. Victore, Bonaventure, Alensis, Tho. Waldensis, Ferus, Cajetan,
Erasmus, B. Rhenanus, and Jansenius, though differing much in the particulars
of this question, yet all consent that precisely from the words of Christ, no
necessity of Confession to a Priest can be concluded. 2. Amongst those of the
Roman Church who did endeavor to found the necessity of Confession upon those
words, None do agree about the way of drawing their argument; In lib. 4. sent.
did. 17.
as may be seen in Scotus, Aureolus, Johannes Mayor, Thomas de Argentina,
Richardus, Durandus, Almain, Dominicus a Soto, Alphonsus a Castro, Adrianus,
Petrus dae Aquilae, and others, before the Council of Trent. 3. Though these
men go several ways (which shows, as Scotus expresses it, hoc verbum non est
praecisum) yet they all agree well enough in this, that they are all equally
out of the story, and none of them well performs what he undertakes; It is not
mine alone, but the judgment which Qu. 90. in 3^. Thom. dub. 2.
Vasquez makes of them, who confuted many of them by arguments of his own, and
by the arguments which they use one against another, and gives this censure of
them, Inter eos qui plane fatentur ex illis verbis Joh. xxo necessitatem
Confessionis (supple, elici) vix invenias qui efficaciter deducat. And
therefore this place of S. John is but an infirm foundation to build so great a
structure on it as the whole Economy of their Sacrament of Penance, and the
necessity of Confession upon it; since so many learned and acute men,
master builders believe nothing at all of it; and others that do, agree not
well in the framing of the Structure upon it, but make a Babel of it, and at
last their attempts prove vain and useless, by the testimony of their
fellow laborers.

There are some other places of Scripture which are pretended for the necessity
of Confession, but they need no particular Scrutiny; Primum istorum esse^ magis
conveniens lenend^m, si posset evidenter haberi istud praeceptum ex Evangelio.
Nec oporiet ad hoc adducere illud Matthaei 16. Tibi dabo claves regni coelorum,
quia non est nisi promissio de datione futura. Sed si aliquid in Evangelio,
videlicet, ad hoc videtur illud Joh. xx. Accipi^e Spir. S. Quorum remiseritis,
etc.
not only because they are rejected by their own parties as insufficient; but
because all are principally devolved upon the twentieth of S. John, and the
Council of Trent it self wholly relies upon it. Dicitur quod sic, de illo verbo
Jacob. 5. Confiremini alter utrum peccata, etc. sed nec per hoc videretur mihi
quod Jacobus praeceptum hoc dedit, nec praecepum a Christo promulgavit. Scotus
in l. 4. did. 17. Sect. De Secundo.
This therefore being the foundation, if it fails them as to their pretensions,
their building must needs be ruinous. But I shall consider it a little.

When Christ said to his Apostles, Whose sins ye remit, they shall be remitted
to them; and whose sins ye retain, they shall be retained; he made (says
Bellarmine, and generally the latter School of Roman Doctors) the Apostles, and
all Priests, Judges upon earth; that, without their sentence, no man that has
sinned after Baptism, can be reconciled. But the Priests who are Judges can
give no right or unerring sentence, unless they hear all the particulars they
are to judge. Therefore by Christ's law they are tied to tell in Confession all
their particular sins to a Priest: This is the sum of all that is said in
this affair. Other light skirmishes there are, but the main battle is here.

Now all the parts of this great Argument must be considered: And 1. I deny the
argument; and supposing both the premises true, that Christ had made them
judges, and that without particular cognizance they could not give judgment
according to Christ's intention; yet it follows not, that therefore it is
necessary, that the penitent shall confess all his sins to the Priest. For, Who
shall compel the penitent to appear in judgment? Where are they obliged to
come and accuse themselves before the judges? Indeed if they were before them,
we will suppose the Priests to have power to judge them; but how can it be
hence deduced, that the penitents are bound to come to this Judicatory, and not
to stand alone to the Divine tribunal. A Physician may have power to cure
diseases, yet the Patients are not bound to come to him; neither it may be will
they, if they can be cured by other means. And if a King sends a Judge with
competent authority to judge all the Questions in a Province; he can judge them
that come, but he cannot compel them to come; and they may make an end of their
quarrels among themselves, or by arbitration of neighbors; and if they have
offended the King, they may address themselves to his clemency, and sue for
pardon. And since it is certain by their own confession, that a penitent cannot
by the force of these words of Christ be compelled to confess his venial sins,
how does it appear, that he is tied to confess his mortal sins? For if a man be
tied to repent of all his sins, then repentance may be performed without the
ministry of the Priest, or else he must repent before the Priest for all his
sins. But if he may repent of his venial sins, and yet not go to the Priest;
then to go to the Priest is not an essential part of the repentance: and if it
be thus in the case of venial sins, let them show from the words of Christ any
difference in the case between the one and the other, especially if we
consider, that though it may be convenient to go to the Priest to be taught and
guided, yet the necessity of going to him is to be absolved by his Ministry.
But that of this there was no necessity believed in the Primitive Church,
appears in this; because they did not expect pardon from the Bishop or Priest
in the greatest Crimes, but were referred wholly to God for the pardon of them:
Non sine spe tamen remissionis, quam ab eo plane sperare debebit qui ejus
largitatem solus obtinet; and tam dives misericordiae est, ut nemo desperet: So
said the Bishops of France in their Synod held about the time of Pope
Zephyrinus. To the same purpose are the words of Tertullian; Salva illa
poenitentiae specie post fidem, quae aut levioribus delictis veniam ab Episcopo
consequi poterit, aut majoribus and irremissibilibus a Deo solo. The like also
is in the 31th Epistle of S. Cyprian. Now first it is easy to observe how vast
the difference is between the old Catholic Church and the present Roman: these
say, that venial sins are not of necessity to be confessed to the Priest or
Bishop; and that without their Ministry they can be pardoned: But they of old
said, that the smaller sins were to be submitted to the Bishop's Ministry. On
the other side, the Roman Doctors say, it is absolutely necessary to bring our
mortal sins, and confess them, in order to be absolved by the Priest; but the
old Catholics said, that the greatest sins are wholly to be confessed and
submitted to God, who may pardon them if he please, and will if he be rightly
sought to; but to the Church they need not be confessed, because these were
only and immediately fit for the Divine Cognizance. What is now adays a
reserved case to the Pope, was anciently a case reserved to God; and what was
only submitted formerly to the Bishop, is now not worth much taking notice of
by any one. But now put these together. By the Roman doctrine, you are not by
the duty of repentance tied to confess your venial sins; and by the Primitive,
it is to no purpose to bring the greatest crimes to Ecclesiastical repentance;
but by their immediate address to God they had hopes of pardon: From hence it
follows, that there is no necessity of doing one or other, that is, there is no
Commandment of God for it; nor yet any necessity in the Nature of the thing
requiring it.

Venerable Bede had an opinion that those sins only which are like to leprosy
ought to be submitted to the judgment of the Church: In Lucae Evang. cap. 69.
tom. 5. Colon Agripp. 1612.
Caetera vero vitia tanquam valetudines, and quasi membrorum animae atque
sensuum per semetipsum interius in conscientia and intellectu Dominus sanat.
Lib. 5. ep. 16.
And Goffridus Vindocinensis tells of one William a learned man, whose doctrine
it was, That there were but four sorts of sins, which needed Confession, the
Error of Gentilism, Schism, Heretical pravity, and Judaical perfidiousness:
Council. T^id. sess. 14. c. 5. Nam venialia quibus a gratia Dei non excludimur,
and in quae frequentius labimur, quanquam recte and utiliter citraque omnem
praesumptionem in confessione dicantur, quod piorum h^minum usus demonstrat,
tateri tamen citra culpam, multisque al^is remediis expiari possunt.
Caetera autem peccata a Domino sine confessione sanari. But besides this, I
demand, Whether or no has the Priest a power to remit venial sins, and that
this power (in the words of S. John, Chap. XX.) was given to him by Christ? If
Christ did in these words give him power to remit venial sins, and yet the
penitent is not bound to recount them in particular, or at all to submit them
to his Judicatory; it will follow undeniably, that the giving power of
remission of sins to the Priest, does not infer a necessity in the penitent
to come to confess them. And these things I suppose Vasquez understood well
enough; when he affirms expressly, that it may well stand with the ordinary
power of a Judge, that his power be such as that it be free for the subjects to
submit to it, or to end their controversies another way. And that it was so in
this case, is the doctrine of Vide Vasquez. in 3. tom. 4. q. 90. art. 1. dub.
2. Sect. 3.
Scotus, above cited, and many others. Add to this, the Argument of Vbi supra.
Scotus, The Priest retains no sins, but such, which some way or other are
declared to him to have no true signs of repentance; and yet those which are no
way manifested to the Priest, God retains unto the vengeance of Hell: therefore
neither is that word (whose sins ye remit) precise; that is, If God retains
some which the Priest does not retain, then also he does remit some which the
Priest does not remit; and therefore there is no negative affixed to the
affirmative, which shows that the remission, or retention does not necessarily
depend on the Priest's ministration. So that, supposing it to be true, that the
Priest has a power to remit, or retain sins, as a Judge, and that this power
cannot be exercised without knowing what he is to judge; yet it follows not
from hence, that the people are bound to come this way, and to confess their
sins to them, or to ask their pardon. But

2. The second proposition is also false: for, supposing the Priest by the
words of Christ, has given to him the ordinary power of a Judge; and that, as
such, he has power of remitting and retaining sins: yet this power of judging
may be such, as that it may be performed without enumeration of all the
particulars we remember. For the Judgment the Priest is to make, is not of the
sins, but of the persons. It is not said Quaecunque, but Quorumcunque
remiseritis peccata. Our Blessed Savior in these words did not distinguish two
sorts of sins, one to be remitted, and an other to be retained; so that it
should be necessary to know the special nature of the sins: he only reckoned
one kind, that is, under which all sins are contained. But he distinguished two
sorts of sinners; saying, Quorum, and Quorum; the one of Penitents (according
to the whole design and purpose of the Gospel) and their sins are to be
remitted; Vid. Padre Paolo hist. Conc. Trid. lib. 4.
and an other of Impenitent, whose sins are not to be remitted, but retained.
And therefore it becomes the Ministers of Souls, to know the state of the
penitent, rather than the nature and number of the sins. Neither gave he any
power to punish, but to pardon, or not to pardon. If Christ had intended to
have given to the Priests a power to impose a punishment according to the
quality of every sin; the Priest indeed had been the Executioner of the Divine
wrath: but then, because no punishment in this life can be equal to the demerit
of a sin which deserves the eternal wrath of God; it is certain, the Priest is
not to punish them by way of vengeance. We do not find any thing in the words
of Christ, obliging the Priest directly to impose penances on the penitent
sinner; he may voluntarily submit himself to them if he please, and he may do
very well, if he do so: but the power of retaining sins, gives no power to
punish him whether he will or no; for the power of retaining is rather to be
exerciz'd upon the impenitent, than upon the penitent. Besides this, the word
of [remitting] sins, does not certainly give the Priest a power to impose
penances; for it were a prodigy of interpretation to expound remittere by
punire. But if by [retaining] it be said, this power is given him; then this
must needs belong to the impenitent, who are not remitted; and not to the
penitent, whose sins at that time, they remit, and retain not: unless they can
do both at the same time. But if the punishment designed, be only by way of
Remedy, or of disposing the sinners to true penitence; then if the person be
already truly penitent, the Priest has nothing to do, but to pardon him in the
name of God. Now certainly both these things may be done without the special
enumeration of all his remembered sins. For 1. The penitent may, and often does,
forget many particulars; and then in that case, all that the Priest can expect,
or proceed to judgment upon, is the saying in general, He is truly sorrowful
for them, and for the time to come will avoid them: and if he then absolve the
penitent, as he must, and usually does; it follows, that if he does well (and
he can do no better) he may make a judgment of his penitent without special
enumeration of his sins; and if the Priest pardons no sins but those which are
enumerated, the penitent will be in an evil condition in most cases: but if he
can and does pardon those which are forgotten, then the fpecial enumeration is
not indispensably necessary; for it were a strange thing, if sins should be
easier remitted for being forgotten, and the harder for being remembered; there
being in the Gospel no other condition mentioned, but the confessing, and
forsaking them: and if there be any difference, certainly he, who out of
carelessness of Spirit, or the multitude of his sins, or want of the sharpness
of sorrow (for these commonly are the causes of it) forgets many of his sins,
is in all reason further from pardon, than he whose conscience being sore
wounded, cannot forget that which stings him so perpetually. If he that
remembers most, because he is most penitent be tied to a more severe
Discipline, than he that remembers least; then according to this discipline,
the worst man is in the best condition. But what if the sinner, out of
bashfulness, do omit to enumerate some sin? Is there no consulting with his
modesty? Is there no help for him, but he must confess, or die? S. Ambrose
gives a perfect answer to this case, Lavant lachrymae delictum quod voce pudor
est confiteri, In Lucam. lib. 10. cap. 22.
and veniae fletus consulunt, and verecundae lachrymae sine horrore culpam
loquuntur. Lachrymae crimen sine offensione verecundiae confitentur. And the
same is almost in words affirmed by Maximus Taurinensis. Homil. 2. de
poenitentia Petri.
Lavat lacryma delictum, quod voce pudor est confiteri: lachrymae ergo
verecundiae pariter consulunt and saluti; nec erubescunt in petendo, and
impetrant in rogando. And that this may not seem a propriety of S. Peter's
repentance, because Sacramental Confession was not yet instituted (for that
Bellarmine offers for an answer;) besides that Sacramental Confession was (as I
have made to appear) never instituted, either then, or since then, in
Scripture, by Christ, or by his Apostles; besides this, I say, S. Ambrose
applies the precedent of S. Peter to every one of us. Collat. 20. c. 8.
Flevit ergo amarissime Petrus: flevit ut lachrymis suum posset lavare
delictum; and tu si veniam vis mereri, dilue culpam lachrymis tuam. And to the
same sense also, is that of Cassian; Quod si, verecundia retrahente, revelare
[peccata] coram hominibus erubescis, illi quem latere non possunt, confiteri ea
jugi supplicatione non desinas, ac dicere, Tibi soli peccavi, and malum coram
te feci, qui and absque illius verecundiae publicatione curare, and sine
improperio peccata donare consuevit. To these I shall add a pregnant testimony
of Julianus Pomerius, or of Prosper (de vita contemplativa lib. 2. cap. 7.)
Quod si ipsi sibi Judices fiant, and veluti suae iniquitatis ultores hic in se
voluntariam poenam severissimae animadversionis exerceant, temporalibus poenis
mutaverint aeterna supplicia, and lachrymis ex vera cordis compunctione
fluentibus restinguent aeterni ignis incendia. And this was the opinion of
diverse learned persons in Peter Lombard's time, Lombard. sent. l. 4. d. 7. ad
finem lit. C.
that if men fear to confess lest they be disgraced, or lest others should be
tempted by their evil example; and therefore conceal them to man, and reveal
them to God; they obtain pardon.

Secondly, 2
for those sins which they do enumerate; the Priest by them cannot make a truer
judgment of the penitent's repentance and disposition to amendment, than he
can by his general profession of his true and deep contrition, and such other
humane indications, by which such things are signified. For still it is to be
remembered he is not the judge of the sin, but of the man. For Christ has left
no rules by which the sin is to be judged; no penitential tables, no Chancery
tax, no penitential Canons; neither did his Apostles: and those which were in
use in the Primitive Church, as they were vastly short of the merit of the
sins, so they are very vastly greater than are now in use, or will be endured:
By which it plainly enough appears, that they impose penances at their
pleasure, as the people are content to take them; and for the greatest sins we
see they impose ridiculous penances; and themselves profess they impose but a
part of their penance that is due: which certainly cannot be any compliance
with any law of God, which is always wiser, more just, and more to purpose. And
therefore to exact a special enumeration of all our sins remembered, to enable
the Priest only to impose a part of penance, is as if a Prince should raise an
army of 10000 men to suppress a tumult raised in a little village against the
petty Constable. Besides which, in the Church of Rome they have an old rule
which is to this day in use among them; Sitque modus poenae justae moderatio
culpae;
Quae tanto levior, quanto contritio major.


And therefore, fortiter contritus leviter plectatur; He that is greatly
sorrowful, needs but little penance. By which is to be understood, that the
penance is but to supply the want of internal sorrow; which the Priest can no
way make judgment of, but by such signs as the penitent is pleased to give
him. To what purpose then can it be to enumerate all his sins; which he can do
with a little sorrow, or a great one, with Attrition, or Contrition, and no man
knows it, but God alone; and it may be done without any sorrow at all, and the
sorrow may be put on, or acted; and when the penance is imposed, as it must
needs be less than the sin, so it may be performed without true repentance. And
therefore neither is the imposing penance any sufficient signification of what
the Priest inquires after. And because every deliberate sin deserves more than
the biggest penance that is imposed on any man for the greatest, and in that as
to the sin it self there can be no error in the greatness of it; it follows
that by the particular enumeration the Priest cannot be helped to make his
judgment of the person; and by it or any thing else he can never equally
punish the sin; therefore supposing the Priest to be a judge, the necessity of
particular confession will not be necessary: especially if we consider,

Thirdly, That by the Roman doctrine it is not necessary to salvation that the
penitent should perform any penances, he may defer them to Purgatory if he
please; so that, special Confession cannot be necessary to salvation for the
reason pretended, viz. that the Priest may judge well concerning imposing
penances, since they are necessary only for the avoiding Purgatory, and not
for the avoiding damnation. 4. This further appears in the case of Baptism;
which is the most apparent and evident use of the power of the Keys, it being
truly and properly the intromission of Catachumens into the house of God, and
an admitting them to all the Promises and Benefits of the Kingdom, and, which
is the greatest, the most absolute and most evident remission of all the sins
precommitted; and yet toward the dispensing this pardon, no particular
Confession of sins is previous, by any necessity or Divine Law. Repentance in
persons of choice and discretion is and was always necessary: but because
persons were not tied to confess their sins particularly to a Priest before
Baptism; it is certain, that Repentance can be perfect without this Confession.
And this argument is yet of greater force and persuasion against the Church of
Rome; for since Baptizing is for remission of sins, and is the first act of the
power of the Keys, and the evident way of opening the doors of the house of
God, and yet the power of baptizing is, in the Church of Rome, in the absence
of a Priest, given to a layman, and frequently to a Deacon; it follows, that
the power of the Keys, and a power of remitting sins is no Judiciary act;
unless a Layman be declared capable of the power of judging, and of remitting
sins. 5. 5
If we consider, that without true repentance no sin can be pardoned; and with
it all sins may; and that no one sin is pardoned as to the final state of our
souls, but at the same time all are pardoned: it must needs follow, that it is
not the number of sins, but the condition of the person, the change of his
life, the sorrow of his heart, the truth of his Conversion, and his hatred of
all sin, that he is to consider. If his repentance be a true change from evil
to good, from sin to God, a thousand sins are pardoned as soon as one; and the
infinite mercy of God does equally exceed one sin and one thousand. Indeed, in
order to counsel or comfort, it may be very useful to tell all that grieves the
penitent, all that for which he has no rest, and cannot get satisfaction: but
as to the exercising any other judgment upon the man, either for the present,
or for the future; to reckon up what is past seems not very useful, or at all
reasonable: But as the Priest, who baptizes a Convert, judges of him, as far as
he can, and ought; that is, whether he has laid aside every hindrance, and be
disposed to receive remission of sins by the Spirit of God in Baptism: so it is
in Repentance, the man's conversion and change is to be considered; which
cannot be by what is past, but by what is present, or future.

And now, 3: 3
Although the judicial power of the Priest cannot infer the necessity of
particular Confession; yet if the judicial power be also of another nature than
is supposed, or rather be not properly judicium fori, the judgment of a
tribunal, coercive, poenal, and exterminating by proper effect, and real change
of state and person; then the superstructure, and the foundation too, will be
dug down. And this therefore shall be considered briefly. And here the Scene
is a little changed, and the words of Christ to S. Peter, are brought in as
auxiliaries, to prove the Priest's power to be judicial; and that, with the
words of Christ to his Apostles, John XX, must demonstrate this point. 1.
Therefore I have the testimony and opinion of the Master of the Sentences,
affirming that the Priest's power is declarative, not judicial; the Sentence of
an Ambassador, Sent. lib. 4. did. 18. lit. F.
not of a Judge; Sacerdotibus tribuit potestatem solvendi and ligandi; id est,
ostendendi homines ligatos vel solutos;] The Priest's power of loosing and
binding, is a power of showing and declaring who are bound, and who are loosed.
For when Christ had cured the Leper, he sent him to the Priest, by whose
judgment he was to be declared clean: and when Lazarus was first restored to
life by Christ, then he bade his Disciples loose him and let him go.] And if it
be inquired, To what purpose is the Priest's Solution, if the man be pardoned
already? It is answered; that Although he be absolved before God, yet he is not
accounted loosed in the face of the Church, but by the judgment of the Priest.]
But we have the Sentence of a greater man in the Church, S. Hierom in Matthew.
lib. 3. ad cap. 16.
than Peter Lombard; viz. of S. Hierom himself, who discourses this affair
dogmatically and fully, and so as not to be capable of evasion: speaking of
those words of Christ to S. Peter, I will give to thee the Keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven; whatsoever thou shall bind ^n Earth, shall be bound in Heaven; and
whatsoever thou shall loose in Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven: This place
(says S. Hierom) some Bishops and Priests not understanding, take upon them
something of the superstitiousness of the Pharisees, so as to condemn the
Innocent, or think to acquit the Guilty; whereas God inquires not, what is the
Sentence of the Priest, but the life of the Guilty. In Leviticus, the Lepers
were commanded to show themselves to the Priests, who neither make them
leprous, nor clean; but they discern, who are clean, and who are unclean. As
therefore there, the Priest makes the leprous man clean, or unclean: So here,
does the Bishop, or the Priest bind or loose; i. e. according to their Office,
when he hears the variety of sins, he knows who is to be bound, and who is to
be loosed.] S. Ambrose adds one advantage more, as consequent to the Priest's
absolving of penitents; but expressly declares against the proper judicial
power. [Men give their Ministry in the remission of sins, Homines in
remissione peccatorum ministerium suum exhibent, non jus alicujus potestatis
exercent: Neque enim in suo, sed in Nomine Patris, Filii, and Spiritus Sancti,
peccata dimittuntur. Ist^rogant, Divinitas donat, etc. S. Ambrose: de Spir. S.
lib. 3. cap. 19.
but they exercise not the right of any power: neither are sins remitted by
them in their own, but in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. Men
pray, but it is God who forgives: It is man's obsequiousness, but the bountiful
gift is from God. So likewise, there is no doubt, sins are forgiven in Baptism,
but the operation is of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.] Here, S. Ambrose
affirms the Priest's power of pardoning sins, to be wholly Ministerial, and
Optative or by way of Prayer. Just as it is in Baptism, so it is in Repentance
after Baptism: Sins are pardoned to the truly penitent; but here is no proper
Judicial power. The Bishop prays, and God pardons: the Priest does his
Ministry, and God gives the gift. Here are three witnesses against whom there
is no exception; and what they have said, was good Catholic doctrine in their
ages; that is, from the fourth age after Christ, to the eleventh: How it has
fallen into Heresy since that time, is now not worth inquiring; but yet how
reasonable that old doctrine is, is very fit to consider.

4. Of necessity it must be true; because what ever kind of absolution, or
binding it is, that the Bishops and Priests have power to use; it does it is
work intended, without any real changing of state in the penitent. The Priest
alters nothing; he diminishes no man's right; he gives nothing to him but what
he had before. The Priest baptizes, and he absolves, and he communicates, and
he prays, and he declares the will of God; and, by importunity, he compells men
to come, and if he find them unworthy, he keeps them out; but it is such, as he
finds to be unworthy: Such who are in a state of perdition, he cannot, he ought
not to admit to the Ministeries of life. True it is, he prays to God for
pardon, and so he prays that God will give the sinner the grace of Repentance;
but he can no more give Pardon, than he can give Repentance; he that gives
this, gives that.

And it is so also in the case of Absolution; he can absolve none but those
that are truly penitent: he can give thanks indeed to God on his behalf; but as
that Thanksgiving supposes pardon, so that Pardon supposes repentance: and if
it be true Repentance, the Priest will as certainly find him pardoned, as find
him penitent. And therefore we find in the old Penitentials and Usages of the
Church, that the Priest did not absolve the penitent in the Indicative or
Judicial form. To this purpose it is observed by Goar, Page 676.
in the Euchologion; that now, many do freely assert, and tenaciously defend,
and clearly teach, and prosperously write that the solemn form of reconciling,
Absolvo te a peccatis tuis, is not perhaps above the age of 400 years; and that
the old form of Absolution in the Latin Church, was composed in words of
deprecation, so far forth as we may conjecture out of the Ecclesiastical
history, ancient Rituals, Tradition, and other Testimonies without exception.]
And in the Opuscula of Thomas Aquinas, Opusc. 22.
he tells that a Doctor said to him, that the Optative form, or deprecatory,
was the Usual; and that then it was not thirty years since the Indicative form
of, Ego te Absolvo, was used; which computation, comes near the computation
made by Goar. And this is the more evidently so, in that it appears, that in
the ancient Discipline of the Church, a Deacon might reconcile the penitents,
if the Priest were absent: Aleuin. de Divini Offic. cap. De^jejunio.
Si autem necessitas evenerit, and Presbyter non fuerit praesens, Diaconus
suscipiat poenitentem, ac det Sanctam Communionem: And if a Deacon can minister
this affair, then the Priest is not indispensably necessary, nor his power
judicial and pretorial.

But besides this, the power of the Keys is under the Master in the hands of
the Steward of the house; who is the Minister of Government: and the power of
remitting and retaining being but the verification of the Promise of the Keys,
is to be understood by the same analogy, and is exercised in many instances,
and to many great purposes, though no man had ever dreamt of a judicial power
of absolution of secret sins; viz. in discipline and government, in removing
scandals, in restoring persons overtaken in a fault to the peace of the Church,
in sustaining the weak, in cutting off of corrupt members, in rejecting
heretics, in preaching peace by Jesus Christ, and repentance through his name,
and ministering the word of reconciliation, and interceding in the ministry of
Christ's mediation; that is, being God's Ambassador, he is God's Messenger in
the great work of the Gospel, which is Repentance and Forgiveness. In short,
Binding and Loosing, remitting and retaining, are acts of Government, relating
to public discipline. And of any other pardoning or retaining, no Man has any
power but what he ministers in the Word of God and prayer, unto which the
Ministry of the Sacraments is understood to belong. For what does the Church,
when she binds a sinner, or retains his sin, but separate him from the
communication of public Prayers and Sacraments? according to that saying of
Tertullian, Apolog. c. 39.
Summum futuri judicii praejudicium est, si quis ita deliquerit, ut a
communicatione orationis and conventus and omnis sancti commercii relegetur.
Homil. 50. c. 9.
And the like was said by S. Austin, Versetur ante oculos imago futuri judicii,
ut cum alii accedunt ad altar Dei, quo ipse non accedit, cogitet quam sit
contremiscenda illa poena, qua percipientibus aliis vitam aeternam, alii in
mortem praecipitantur aeternam. And when the Church, upon the sinner's
repentance, does restore him to the benefit of public Assemblies and
Sacraments; she does truly pardon his sins, that is, she takes off the evil
that was upon him for his sins. For so Christ proved his power on Earth to
forgive sins by taking the poor man's palsy away: and so does the Church
pardon his sins by taking away that horrible punishment of separating him from
all the public communion of the Church: and both these are, in their several
kinds, the most material and proper pardons.

But then* is the Church gives pardon propertionable to the evil she inflicts,
which God also will verify, if it be done here in truth, and righteousness; so
there is a pardon, which God only gives. He is the injured and offended
Person, and he alone can remit of his own right. But yet to this pardon the
Church does cooperate by her Ministry. Now what this pardon is we understand
best by the evils that are by him inflicted upon the sinner. For to talk of a
power of pardoning sins, where there is no power to take away the punishment of
sin, is but a dream of a shadow: sins are only then pardoned, when the
punishment is removed. Now who but God alone can take away a sickness, or
rescue a soul from the power of his sins, or snatch him out of the Devils
possession? The Spirit of God alone can do this, It is the spirit that
quickneth, and raises from spiritual death, and gives us the life of God. Man
can pray for the spirit, but God alone can give it; our Blessed Savior
obtained for us the Spirit of God by this way, by prayer; I will pray unto the
Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, even the spirit of truth; and
therefore much less do any of Christ's Ministers convey the spirit to any one,
but by prayer and holy Ministeries in the way of prayer: But this is best
illustrated by the case of Baptism. Sum. part. 4. q. 21. memb. 1.
It is a matter of equal power (said Alexander of Ales) to baptize with
internal Baptism, and to absolve from deadly sin. But it was not fit that God
should communicate the power of baptizing internally unto any, lest we should
place our hope in Man. Tom. 9. operum Aug^st. Scola Parad. cap. 3.
And S. Austin (if at least he be the author of the Scala Paradisi) says, The
office of baptizing, the Lord granted unto many; but the power and authority of
remitting sins in Baptism, he retained unto himself alone; wherefore S. John,
antonomastice and discretive, by way of distinction and singularity, affirms,
that He it is who baptizes with the holy Ghost. And I shall apply this to the
power of the Keys in the ministry of repentance, by the words of S. Cyprian;
De operibus Card^nalibus Christi inter Cypriani opera; sed varius Arn^l^i
Bonaevalle^sis.
Remissio peccatorum, sive per Baptismum sive per alia Sacramenta donetur,
proprie Spiritus Sancti est, and ipsi soli hujus efficientiae privilegium
manet. As therefore the Bishop, or the Priest, can give the holy Ghost to a
repenting sinner; so he can give him pardon, and no otherwise: that is, by
prayer, and the ministry of the Sacraments to persons fitly disposed, who also
can and have received the holy Ghost, without any such ministry of man; as
appears in S. Peter's Question, What hinders these men to be baptized, who have
received the holy Ghost as well as we? And it is done every day, and every
hour, in the Communion of Saints, in the Immissions and visitations from
heaven, which the Saints of God daily receive and often perceive and feel.
Every man is bound by the cords of his own sins, which ropes and bands the
Apostles can loose, imitating therein their Master, who said to them,
Whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. Solvunt autem eos
Apostoli, sermon Dei, Lib. 6. Comment. in Isai. cap. 14.
and testimoniis Scripturarum, and exhortatione virtutum, says S. Hierom. For
the word of God, which is entrusted to the Ministry of the Church, is that
rule and measure by which God will judge us all, at the last day; and therefore
by the word of God we stand or fall, we are bound or loosed: which word when
the Ministers of the Gospel dispense rightly, they bind or loose; and what they
so bind or loose on earth, God will bind and loose in heaven. That is, by the
same measures he will judge the man, by which he has commanded his Ministers
to judge them by; that is, they preach remission of sins to the penitent, and
God will make it good; and they threaten eternal death to the impenitent, and
God will inflict it. But other powers of binding and loosing than what has
been already instanced, those words of Christ prove not. And these powers, and
no other, do we find used by the Apostles. 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20.
To us (says S. Paul) is committed the word of reconciliation: Now then we are
Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in
Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. Christ is the great Minister of
Reconciliation; we are his Ambassadors to the people to that purpose: and we
are to preach to them, and to exhort them; to pray them, and to pray for them;
and we also by our Ministry reconcile them; and we pardon their sins; for God
has set us over the people to that purpose: but then it is also in that manner
that God set the Priest over the leprous; Lev. 13. 44. v. 5. 7.
(...), The priest with pollution shall pollute them; and the priest shall
cleanse him, that is, shall declare him so. And it is in the same manner that
God set the Prophet Jeremy over the nations, Jer. 1. 10.
to root out, and to pull down, and to destroy, to throw down, to build, and to
plant; that is, by putting his word into his mouth to do all this, to preach
all this, to promise or to threaten respectively, all this. The Ministers of
the Gospel do pardon sins, just as they save men; 1 Timothy 4. 16.
This doing, thou shall save thy self, and them that hear thee; that is, by
attending to and continuing in the doctrine of Christ: and he that converts a
sinner from the error of his way, saves a soul from death, and covers a
multitude of sins. Jam. 5. 20.
Bringing the man to repentance, persuading him to turn from vanity to the
living God; thus he brings pardon to him, and salvation. And if it be said,
that a layman can do this: I answer, It is very well for him if he does; and
he can, if it please God to assist him: but the ordinary ministry is appointed
to Bishops and Priests: so that although a layman do it extraordinarily, that
can be no prejudice to the ordinary power of the Keys in the hands of the
Clergy; which is but a ministry of prayer, of the Word and Sacraments:
according to the saying of their own Ferus upon this place; Christ in this word
shows how, and to what use, he at this time gave them the Holy Ghost, John 20.
to wit, for the remission of sins: neither for the Apostles themselves alone;
sed ut eundem Spiritum, eandemque remissionem peccatorum Verbo praedicationis,
and Sacramentis verbo annexis, distribuerent. And again, he brings in Christ
saying, I therefore choose you, and I seal your hearts by the Holy Ghost unto
the word of the Gospel, and confirm you, that going into the world, ye may
preach the Gospel to every Creature, and that ye may distribute that very
remission by the word of the Gospel, and the Sacraments.] For the words of
Christ are general and indefinite; and they are comprehensive of the whole
power and ministry Ecclesiastical: and in those parts of it which are evident,
and confessed, viz. preaching remission of sins and Baptism, a special
enumeration of our sins is neither naturally necessary, nor esteemed so by
custom, nor made so by virtue of these words of Christ; therefore it is no way
necessary, neither have they at all proved it so by Scripture. And to this I
add only what Ambrosius Pelargus, a Divine of the Elector of Triers, said in
the Council of Trent; Hist. Council. T^id. A. D. 155. sub Julio Te^^io.
That the words of our Lord, Quorum remiseritis, were perhaps not expounded, by
any Father, for an institution of the Sacrament of Penance: and that by some
they were understood of Baptism; by others, of any other thing by which pardon
of sins is received.]

But since there is no necessity declared in Scripture of confessing all our
sins to a Priest, no mention of sacramental penance, or confession, it must
needs seem strange that a doctrine of which there is no Commandment in
Scripture, no direction for the manner of doing so difficult a work, no Office,
or Officer described to any such purpose; that a doctrine, I say, of which in
the fountains of salvation there is no spring, should yet become in process of
time to be the condition of salvation: And yet for preaching, praying,
baptizing, communicating, we have precept upon precept, and line upon line; we
have in Scripture three Epistles written to two Bishops, in which the Episcopal
Office is abundantly described; and excellent Canons established; and the parts
of their duty enumerated: and yet no care taken about the Office of Father
Confessor. Indeed we find a pious exhortation to all spiritual persons, that;
If any man be overtaken in a fault, they should restore such a one in the
spirit of meekness; restore him, that is, to the public peace and communion of
the Church, from which by his delinquency he fell; and restore him also, by the
word of his proper Ministry, to the favor of God; by exhortations to him, by
reproving of him, by praying for him: and besides this, we have some little
limits more, which the Church of Rome, if they please, may make good use of in
this Question; 1 Timothy 5. 20.
such as are, That they who sin should be rebuked before all men, that others
also may fear; which indeed is a good warranty for public Discipline, but very
little for private Confession. And Saint Paul charges Timothy, that he should
should lay hands suddenly on no man, that he be not partaker of other men's
sins; which is a good caution against the Roman way of absolving them that
confess, as soon as they have confessed, before they have made their
Satisfactions. The same Apostle speaks also of some that creep into houses, and
lead captive silly women; I should have thought he had intended it against such
as then abused Auricular Confession; it being so like what they do now; but
that S. Paul knew nothing of these lately-introduced practices: and lastly, he
commands every one that is to receive the Holy Communion to examine himself,
and so let him eat: he forgot, it seems, to enjoin them to go to confession to
be examined: which certainly he could never have done more opportunely than
here; and if it had been necessary, he could never have omitted it more
undecently. But it seems, the first Christians were admitted upon other terms
by the Apostles, than they are at this day by the Roman Clergy. And indeed it
were infinitely strange, that since in the Old Testament remission of sins was
given to every one that confessed to God, and turned from his evil way, Isai.
1. 16. 17. 18.
that, Ezekiel. 18. 22.
in the New Testament, Ezekiel. 33. 15. 16.
to which liberty is a special privilege, Isai. 30. 15. secundum.
and the imposed yoke of Christ infinitely more easy than the burden of the
Law; LXX. (...).
and Repentance is the very formality of the Gospel Covenant; and yet that,
pardon of our sins shall not be given to us Christians on so easy terms as it
was to the Jews; but an intolerable new burden shall be made a new condition of
obtaining pardon. And this will appear yet the more strange; when we consider
that all the Sermons of the Prophets concerning Repentance, were not
derivations from Moses's Law, but Homilies Evangelical, and went before to
prepare the way of the Lord; and John Baptist was the last of them; and that,
in this matter, the Sermons of the Prophets were but the Gospel antedated; and
in this affair there was no change but to the better and to a clearer
manifestation of the Divine mercy, and the sweet yoke of Christ: The Disciples
of Christ preached the same doctrine of Repentance that the Baptist did, and
the Baptist the same that the Prophets did, and there was no difference; Christ
was the same in all, and he that commanded his Disciples to fast to God alone
in private, intended that all the parts of Repentance transacted between God
and our consciences, should be as sufficient as that one of Fasting, and that
other of Prayer: and it is said so in all; for if we confess our sins, he is
faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness. It it is God alone that can cleanse our hearts, and he that
cleanses us, he alone does forgive us; and this is upon our confession to him:
his justice and faithfulness, is at stake for it; and therefore it supposes a
promise: which we often find upon our confessions made to God, but it was never
promised upon confession made to the Priest.

But now in the next place if we consider, Whether this thing be reasonable, to
impose such a yoke upon the necks of the Disciples, which upon their Fathers
was not put in the Old Testament, nor ever commanded in the New; we shall find
that although many good things, might be consequent to the religious and free,
and prudent use of Confession; yet by changing into a Doctrine of God, that
which at most, is but a Commandment of man, it will not, by all the contingent
good, make recompense for the intolerable evils it introduces. And here first I
consider, that many times things seem profitable to us, and may minister to
good ends; but God judges them useless and dangerous: for he judges not as we
judge. The worshipping of Angels, and the abstaining from meats, which some
false Apostles introduced, looked well, and pretended to humility, and
mortificatioh of the body; but the Apostle approved them not: and of the same
mind was the succeeding ages of the Church, who condemned the dry Diet, and the
ascetick Fasts of Montanus, though they were pretended only for discipline; but
when they came to be imposed they grew intolerable. Certainly, men lived better
lives, when by the discipline of the Church, sinners were brought to public
stations and penance, than now they do by all the advantages, real or
pretended, from Auricular Confession; and yet the Church thought fit to lay it
aside, and nothing is left but the shadow of it.

2. This whole topic can only by a prudential consideration, and can no way
infer a Divine institution; for though it was as convenient before Christ, as
since, and might have had the same effects upon the public or private good,
then, as now; yet God was not pleased to appoint it in almost forty ages; and
we say, He has not done it yet. However let it be considered, that there being
some things which S. Paul says are not to be so much as named amongst
Christians; it must needs look undecently, that all men and all women should
come and make the Priests Ears a Common-shoar to empty all their filthiness;
and that which a modest man would blush to hear, he must be used to, and it is
the greatest part of his employment to attend to. True it is, that a Physician
must see and handle the impurest Ulcers; but it is, because the Cure does not
depend upon the Patient, but upon the Physician, who by general advertisement
cannot cure the Patient, unless he had an Universal medicine, which the Priest
has; the medicine of Repentance, which can indifferently cure all sins,
whether the Priest know them or no. And therefore, all this filthy
communication is therefore intolerable because it is not necessary: and it not
only pollutes the Priest's Ears, but his Tongue too; for, lest any
circumstance, or any sin be concealed, he thinks himself obliged to
interrogate, and proceed to particular questions in the basest things. Such as
that which is to be seen in Burchard, Lib. 19. decret. de Matrimonio.
and such which are too largely described in Sanchez,; which thing does not
only deturpate all honest and modest conversation, but it teaches men to
understand more sins then ever they (it may be) knew of. And I believe, there
are but few in the world at this day, that did ever think of such a Crime, as
Burchard has taught them by that question; and possibly it might have expired
in the very first instances, if there had been no further notice taken of it. I
need not tell how the continual representment of such things to the Priest,
must needs infect the fancy and the memory with filthy imaginations, and be a
state of temptation to them that are very often young men and vigorous, and
always unmarried and tempted. (...). Aretines Tables do not more pollute the
heart through the eyes, than a foul narrative of a beastly action with all the
circumstances of perpetration do through the ears; for, as it was said of
Thomas Cantipratanus, In vita ejus apud Hagiolog. B^a^ant.
Vexatis exterius auribus, interius tentationum stimulis agitabitur. And Marcus
Eremitae that lived in that age in which this Auricular Confession began to be
the mode of the Latin Church, De ^is qui putant se operibus justificari.
he speaks against it severely. Biblioth. Patram, tom. ^. Gr. Lat.
If thou will offer to God an unreproveable Confession, do not recount thy sins
particularly, for so thou do greatly defile thy mind; but generously endure
their assaults, or what they have brought upon thee. We need no further witness
of it, but the Question and Case of Conscience which Cajetan puts, Opusc.
Cajet. tract. 22.
Vtrum Confessor cognoscens ex his quae audit in Confessione, sequi in seipso
Emissionem seminis sibi displicentem, peccet mortaliter audiendo vel
prosequendo tales Confessiones? The question is largely handled, but not so fit
to be read; but in stead of it, I shall only note the answer of another
Cardinal: Lib. ^. inst. S^cerd. c. ^3. subfig. 5. edit.
Confessarius si forte dum audit Confessiones in tales incidit pollutiones non
ob id tenetur non audire alios, nisi sit periculum complacentiae in pollutione;
Paris. 1619. p. 372.
tunc enim tenetur relinquere confessiones, and auferre peccati occasionem;
secus non. This Question and this Answer I here bring to no other purpose, but
to represent that the Priests dwell in temptation; and that their manner of
receiving Confessions is a perpetual danger, by which he that loves it may
chance to perish. And of this there have been too many sad examples remarked,
evidencing that this private Confession has been the occasion and the
opportunity of the vilest crimes. There happened but one such sad thing in the
ancient Greek Church, which became public by the discipline of public
Confession, but was acted by the opportunity of the private Intercourse; and
that was then thought sufficient to alter that whole discipline: but it is
infinitely more reasonable, to take off the law of private Confession, and in
that manner as it is enjoined; if we consider the intolerable evils which are
committed frequently upon this scene. Erasmus makes a sad complaint of it, that
the penitents do often light upon Priests, who under the pretext of Confession,
In Exomolog. p. 128, 129, etc.
commit things not to be spoken of; and, in stead of Physicians, become
partners, or masters, or disciples of turpitude. The matter is notorious and
very scandalous, and very frequent: insomuch that it produced two Bulls of two
Popes contra sollicitantes in Confessione; the first was of Pius quartus to the
Bishop of Sevil, A. D. 1561. April the 16. The other of Gregory the fifteenth,
1622. August 30. which Bulls take notice of it, and severely prohibit the
Confessors to tempt the women to Undecencies when they come to confession.
Concerning which Bulls, and the sad causes procuring them, even the intolerable
and frequent impieties acted by and in Confessions, who desires to be
plentifully satisfied may please to read the book of Johannes Escobar a Corro,
Videatur etiam Orlandini hist.
a Spanish Lawyer, which is a Commentary on these two Bulls; Societ. J. lib. 9.
and in the beginning he shall find sad complaints and sadder stories. Sect. 70.
But I love not to stir up so much dirt. That which is altogether as
remarkable, and, it may be, much more, is, that this Auricular Confession not
only can, but oftentimes has been made the most advantageous way of plotting,
propagating, and carrying on treasonable propositions and designs. I shall not
instance in that horrid design of the Gunpowder treason; for that is known
every where amongst us; but in the Holy Ligue of France. When the Pulpits
became unsafe for tumultuous and traitorous preachers, the Confessors in
private Confessions did that with more safety; they slandered the King,
endeavored to prove it lawful for Subjects to Covenant or make Leagues and
Confederacies without their King's leave; they sometimes refused to absolve
them, unless they would enter into the Ligue; and persuaded many miserable
persons to be of the faction. But this thing was not done so secretly, but
notice enough was taken of it; and complaint was made to the Bishop, and then
to Franciscus Maurocenus the Cardinal Legate; who gave notice and caution
against it: and the effect it produced was only this; they proceeded
afterward more warily; and began to preach this doctrine; That it was as great
a fault if the Confitent reveal what he hears from the Confessor in Confession,
as if the Priest should reveal the sins told him by the penitent. Hist. l. ^5.
page 100. in Leida. 1646.
This Narrative I have from Thuanus. To which I add one more, related in the
life of Padre Paolo; that Hippolito da Lucca fu in fama sinistra d' haver nelle
confessioni, e raggi onamenti corrotto con larghe promise e gran Speranza
persuaso alla Duchessa d' adherir alla fattione Ecclesiastica.] Hippolitus of
Lucca was evil reported to have in discourse or in confession persuaded the
Duchess of Vrbin against Caesar d' Este, and to have corrupted her into the
faction of the Church. By Card. Aldobrandino ^he Nephew of P. Clement 8.
For which he was made a Bishop, and in Rome was always one of the Prelates
deputed in the examination of that controversy. If it were possible, and if it
could be in the world, I should believe it to be a baser prostitution of
religion to temporal designs, Memoires da Duc de Roban. lib. 1.
which is written of F. Arnold the Jesuit, Confessor to Lewis the thirteenth
of France; that he caused the King at Confession solemnly to swear, never to
dislike what Luines the great favorite did, nor himself to meddle with any
State-affair. Now what advantage the Pope has over Christian Princes in this
particular, and how much they have, and how much more they may suffer by this
Economy, is a matter of great consideration: Admonetur omnis aetas posse
fieri, quod jam factum vidimus.

3. There is yet another very great evil that attends upon the Roman way of
Auricular Confession; and that is, an eternal scruple of conscience, which to
the timorous and to the melancholy, to the pious and considering, and zealous,
is almost unavoidable. For, besides that there is no certainty of distinction
between the mortal and venial sins; there being no Catalogues of one and the
other, save only that they usually reckon but seven deadly sins; and the rest
are, or may be easily by the ignorant supposed to be venial; and even those
sins which are under those seven heads, are not all mortal; for there are
amongst them many ways of changing their mortality into veniality; and,
consequent to all this, they are either tempted to slight most sins, or to be
troubled with perpetual disputes concerning almost every thing: besides this, I
say, there can be no peace (because there can be no certain rule given)
concerning the examination of our Consciences; for who can say, he has done it
sufficiently, or who knows what is sufficient; and yet if it be not sufficient,
then the sins which are forgotten by carelessness, and not called to mind by
sufficient diligence, are not pardoned, and then the penitent has had much
trouble to no purpose. There are some Confessions imperfect but valid, some
invalid for their imperfection, some perfect, and yet invalid: and they that
made the distinction, made the Rule, and it binds as they please; but it can
cause scruples beyond their power of remedy; because there is no certain
principle from whence men can derive peace and a certain determination, some
affirming, and some denying, and both of them by chance, or humor. There are
also many reserved cases; some to the Bishop, some to the Patriarch, some to
the Pope; and when you shall have run through the fire for these before the
Priest, you must run once or twice more; and your first absolution is of no
force: and amongst these reserved cases, there is also great difference; some
are reserved by reason of censures Ecclesiastical, and some by reason of the
greatness of the sin; and these things may be hidden from his eyes, and he
supposing himself absolved, will perceive himself deceived; and absolved but
from one half. Some indeed think, that if the superior absolve from the
reserved cases alone, that grace is given by which all the rest are remitted;
and on the other side, some think if the inferior absolves from what he can,
grace is given of remitting even of the reserved: but this is uncertain, and
all agree, that the penitent is never the nearer but that he is still obliged
to confess the reserved cases to the superior, if he went first to the
inferior; or all to the inferior, in case he went first to the superior,
confessing only the reserved. There are also many difficulties in the
Confession of such things, in which the sinner had partners: for if he confess
the sin so, as to accuse any other, he sins; if he does not, in many cases he
cannot confess the circumstances that alter the nature of the crime. Some
therefore tell him, he may conceal such sins till a fitter opportunity; others
say, he may let it quite along: others yet say, he may get another Confessor;
but then there will come another scruple, whether he may do this with leave, or
without leave; or, if he ask leave whether or no in case it be denied him, he
may take leave in such an accident. Upon these and many other like accounts,
there will arise many more Questions concerning the iteration of his
confession; for if the first confession be by any means made invalid, it must
be done over again. But here in the very beginning of this affair, the penitent
must be sure that his former confession was invalid. For if it was, he cannot
be pardoned unless he renew it; and if it was not, let him take heed: for to
confess the same things twice, and twice to be absolved, it may be is not
lawful; Qaest quod libet Quaest. 6. de confess.
and against it, Cajetan, after the scholastical manner, brings diverse reasons.
But suppose the penitent at peace for this, then there are very many cases, in
which Confession is to be repeated; and though it was done before, yet it must
be done over again. As if there be no manner of contrition, without doubt it
must be iterated; but there are many cases concerning Contrition: and if it be
at all, though imperfect, it is not to be iterated. But what is, and what is
not contrition; what is perfect, and what is imperfect; which is the first
degree that makes the Confession valid, can never be told. But then there is
some comfort to be had; for, the Sacrament of Penance may be true, Cajetan:
sum. verb. Confessio.
and yet without form or life, at the same time. And there are diverse cases, in
which the Confession that is but materially half, may be reduced to that which
is but formally half: and if there be but a propinquity of the mind to a
carelessness concerning the integrity of confession; the man cannot be sure,
that things go well with him. And sometimes it happens that the Church is
satified, when God is not satisfied, as in the case of the informis confessio;
and then the man is absolved, but his sin is not pardoned; and yet, because he
thinks it is, his soul is cozened. And yet this is but the beginning of
scruples. For, suppose the penitent has done his duty, examined himself
strictly, repented sadly, confessed fully, and is absolved formally; yet all
this may come to nothing by reason that there may be some invalidity in the
Ordination of the Priest, by crime, by irregularity, by direct deficiency of
something in the whole Succession and Ordination; or it may be he has not
ordinary, or delegat jurisdiction; for, it is not enough that he is a Priest,
unless he have another authority, Sum. verb. Absolutio.
says Cajetan; besides his Order, he must have Jurisdiction, which is carefully
to be inquired after, by reason of the infinite numbers of Friars, that take
upon them to hear Confessions; or if he have both, yet the use of his power may
be interverted or suspended for the time, and then his absolution is worth
nothing. But here there is some remedy made to the poor distracted penitent;
for by the constitution of the Council of Constance, under Pope Martin the 5th.
though the Priest be excommunicate, the confession is not to be iterated: but
then this also ends in scruples; for this constitution it self does not hold,
if the excommunication be for the notorious smiting of a Clergyman; or if it
be not, yet if the excommunication be denounced, be it for what it will, his
absolution is void: and therefore the penitent should do well to look about
him; especially since, after all this, there may be innumerable deficiencies;
yea some even for want of skill and knowledge in the Confessor; and when that
happens, when the confession is to be iterated, there are no certain Rules but
it must be left to the opinion of another Confessor. And when he comes, the
poor penitent, it may be, is no surer of him than of the other; for if he have
no will to absolve the penitent, let him dissemble it as he list, the
absolution was but jocular, or pretended, or never intended; or, it may be, he
is secretly an Atheist, and laughs at the penitent and himself too, for acting
(as he thinks) such a troublesome, theatrical Nothing; and then the man's sins
cannot be pardoned. And, is there no remedy for all this evil? It is true, the
cases are sad and dangerous, but the Church of Rome has (such is her prudence
and indulgence) found out as much relief as the wit of man can possibly invent.
For though there may be thus many and many more deficiencies; yet there are
some extraordinary ways to make it up as well as it can. For, to prevent all
the contingent mischiefs, let the penitent be as wise as he can, and choose his
man upon whom these defailances may not be observed; For a man in necessity, as
in danger of death, may be absolved by any one that is a Priest; but yet, if
the penitent escape the sickness, or that danger, he must go to him again, or
to somebody else; by which it appears that his affair was left but imperfect.
But some persons have liberty by reason of their dignity, and some by reason of
their condition, as being pilgrims or wanderers; and they have greater freedom,
and cannot easily fall into many nullities; or they may have an explicit, or
an implicit license: but then they must take heed; for, besides many of the
precedent dangers, they must know that the license extends only to the Paschal
Confessions, or the usual; but not the extraordinary or emergent: and moreover,
they can go but to the appointed Confessors, in the places where they are
present; and because under these there is the same danger, as in all that went
before, the little more certainty which I hoped for in some few cases, comes to
nothing. But I go about to reckon the sands on the shore. I shall therefore
sum this up with the words of a famous preacher, Praesat. in lib. Tertul. de
poeniter.
reported by Beatus Rhenanus to have made this observation, that Thomas Aquinas
and Scotus, men too subtle, have made Confession to be such, that, according to
their doctrines, it is impossible to confess: and that the consciences of
penitents, which should be extricated and eased, are (by this means) caught in
a snare, Consult. art. 11. videatur etiam Johannes de Sylva in fine tractat. de
jurejurando.
and put to torments, said Cassander; so that although Confession to a Priest
prudently managed, without scruple, upon the case of a grieved and an unquiet
conscience, and in order to Counsel and the perfections of Repentance, may be
of excellent use; yet to enjoin it in all cases, to make it necessary to
salvation, when God has not made it so; to exact an Enumeration of all our
sins in all cases, and of all persons; to clog it with so many questions and
innumerable inextricable difficulties, and all this, besides the evil manage
and conduct of it, is the rack of Consciences, the slavery of the Church, the
evil snare of the simple, and the artifice of the crafty: it was or might have
been as the brazen serpent, a memorial of duty, but now it is Nehushtan, aes
eorum; something of their own framing.

And this will yet further appear in this, That there Platina, in the life of
Pope Zephyrinus. Idem praeterea instituit, ut omnes Christiani, annos
pubertatis attingentes, singulis annis in solenni die paschae public
communicarent. Quod quidem institutum Innocentius tertius deinceps non ad
Communionem solum, verum etiam ad Confessionem delictorum traduxit. Platina was
the Pope's Secretary, and well understood the interests of that Church, and was
sufficiently versed in the records and monuments of the Popes; and tells, that
as Zephyrinus commanded the Eucharist to be taken at Easter; so Innocent 3.
commanded Confession of sins.] Before this, there was no command, no decree of
any Council or Pope enjoining it: only in the Council of Cabailon, Can. 8. it
was declared to be profitable, that Penance should be enjoined to the penitent
by the Priest, after Confession made to him. But there was no command for it;
and in the second Council of Cabailon, C. 33.
it was but a disputed case, Whether they ought to confess to God alone, or
also to the Priest. Some said one, and some said another, Quod utrumque non
sine magno fructu intra sanctam fit Ecclesiam. In Tom. 2. Conci. Gallic. c. 30.
p. 219.
And Theodulsus Bishop of Orleans, tells the particulars. The Confession we
make to the Priests gives us this help, that, having received his salutary
counsel, by the most wholesome duties of repentance, or by mutual prayers, we
wash away the stains of our sins. But the Confession we make to God alone,
avails us in this, because by how much we are mindful of our sins, by so much
the Lord forgets them; and on the contrary, by how much we forget them, by so
much the Lord remembers them, according to the saying of the prophet, and I
will remember thy sins.] But the Fathers of the Council gave a good account of
these particulars also. Confessio itaque quae Deo fit, purgat peccata: ea vero
quae sacerdoti fit, docet qualiter ipsa purgentur peccata? Deus enim, salutis
and sanitatis Author and Largitor, plerunque hanc praebet suae potentiae
invisibili administratione, Sola contritione, ait glossa, ibid. and habetur de
poenit did. 1. cap. Quidam Deo.
plerunque medicorum operatione: which words are an excellent declaration of
the advantages of Confession to a Priest, but a full argument that it is not
necessary, or that without it pardon of sins is not to be obtained. Gratian
quoting the words cites Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury; but falsely: for it
is in the second Council of Cabailon, and not in Theodore's Penitential. But I
will not trouble the Reader further, in the matter of the Latin Church; in
which it is evident, by what has been already said, there was concerning this
no Apostolical Tradition.

How it was in the Greek Church is only to be inquired. Now we might make as
quick an end of this also, De poenit. did. 5. c. In poenit.
if we might be permitted to take Semeca's word, the gloss of the Canon Law;
which affirm's that, Confession of deadly sins is not necessary among the
Greeks, because no such tradition has not descended unto them. This
acknowledgement and report of the Greeks not esteeming Confession to a Priest
to be necessary, is not only in the Gloss above cited; De poenit. did. 1. c.
Quidam Deo.
but in Gratian himself, and in the more ancient Collection of Canons by
Burchard, and Ivo Carnotensis. Bellarmine fancies that these words [ut Graeci]
are crept into the Text of Gratian out of the Margent. Well! suppose that; but
then how came they into the elder Collections of Burchard, and Ivo? That Is not
to be told; [but creep in they did, some way or other; because they are not in
the Capitular of Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury; and yet from thence this
Canon was taken; and that Capitular was taken from the second Council of
Cabaillon; De poenit. lib. 3. cap. 5.
in which also, there are no such words extant:] So the Cardinal. In which
Bellarmine betrays his carelessness, or his ignorance, very greatly. 1. Because
there is no such thing extant in the world, that any man knows and tells of, as
the Capitular of Theodore. 2. He indeed made a Penitential, a Copy of which is
in Benet College Library in Cambridge, from whence I have received some
Extracts, by the favor and industry of my friends; and another Copy of it, is
in Sir Robert Cotten's Library. 3. True it is, there is in that Penitential no
such words as [ut Graeci] but a direct affirmation, Confessionem suam Deo soli,
si necesse est, licebit agere. 4. That Theodore should take this Chapter out of
the second Council of Cabaillon, is an intolerable piece of ignorance or
negligence in so great a Scholar as Bellarmine; when it is notorious that the
Council was after Theodore, above 120. years. 5. But then lastly, because
Theodore, though he sat in the Seat of Canterbury, yet was a Greek born; his
words are a good Record of the opinion of the Greeks, that Confession of sins
is (if there be need) to be made to God alone. But this I shall prove with
firmer testimonies; not many, Epist. Canon. ad Letorum.
but pregnant, clear and undeniable.

S. Gregory Nyssen observed that the ancient Fathers before him in their
public discipline, did take no notice of the sins of Covetousness, that is,
left them without public penance, otherwise than it was ordered in other sins;
and therefore he interposes his judgment thus. [But concerning these things,
because this is praetermitted by the Fathers, I do think it sufficient to cure
the affections of Covetousness with the public word of doctrine, or
instruction, curing the diseases, as it were, of repletion by the Word. That is
plainly thus: The sins of Covetousness had no Canonical Penances imposed upon
them: and therefore many persons thought but little of them: therefore, to cure
this evil, let this sin be reproved in public Sermons, though there be no
imposition of public penances. So that here is a Remedy without Penances, a
Cure without Confession, a public Sermon instead of a public or private
Judicatory.

But the fact of Nectarius in abrogating the public penitentiary-Priest upon
the occasion of a scandal, does bear much weight in this Question. I shall not
repeat the story; who please, may read it in Socrates, Sozomen, Epiphanius,
Cassiodore, and Nicephorus; and it is known every where. Relect. de poenit.
part. 5. Sect.
Only they who are pinched by it, endeavor to confound it, as Waldensis and
Canus; some by denying it, Ad sextum. p. 31. edit. Salmanticae. 1563. per
Matthiam Gartium.
as Latinus Latinius; others by disputing concerning every thing in it; some
saying, that Nectarius abrogated Sacramental Confession; others, that he
abrogated the public only, so very many say: and a third sort (who yet speak
with most probability,) that he only took away the office of the public
Penitentiary, which was instituted in the time of Decius, and left things as
that Decree found them; that is, that those who had sinned those sins which were
noted in the Penitential Canons, should confess them to the Bishop, or in the
face of the Church, and submit themselves to the Canonical penances. This
passed into the office of the public Penitentiary; and that into nothing, in
the Greek Church. But there is nothing of this that I insist upon; but I put
the stress of this Question upon the product of this. For Eudaemon gave counsel
to Nectarius and he followed it, that he took away the penitentiary Priest,
Lib. 5. cap. 19.
ut liberam daret potestatem uti pro sua quisque conscientia, Eccl. hist. lib.
7^. cap. 16.
ad mysteria participanda accederet. So Socrates, and Sozomen, to the same
purpose; ut Vnicuique liberum permitteret, prout sibi ipse conscius esset and
confideret, ad mysteriorum Communionem accedere, poenitentiarium illum
Presbyterum exauthoravit. Now if Nectarius by this Decree took away Sacramental
confession (as the Roman Doctors call it) then it is a clear case, the Greek
Church did not believe it necessary; if it was only the public Confession
they abolished, then, for ought appears, there was no other at that time; I
mean, none commanded, none under any law, or under any necessity: but whatever
it was that was abolished, private Confession did not by any decree succeed in
the place of it; but every man was left to his liberty, and the dictates of his
own Conscience, and according to his own persuasion, to his fears or his
confidence, so to come and partake of the Divine mysteries. All which is a
plain demonstration, that they understood nothing of the necessity of
Confession to a Priest of all their sins, before they came to the holy
Sacrament.

And in pursuance of this, are those many Exhortations and discourses of S.
Chrysostom, who succeeding Nectarius, by his public doctrine could best inform
us how they understood the consequence of that decree, and of this whole
Question. The sum of whole doctrine is this; It is not necessary to have your
sins revealed, or brought in public, not only in the Congregation, but not to
any one, but to God alone. Homil. 56. sive 8. de Poenit. tom. 1.
Make a scrutiny, and pass a judgment on your sins inwardly in your
Conscience, none being present but God alone that sees all things. And again,
Declare unto God alone thy sin, Homil. 9. de Poenit. sive Homil. 59.
(saying) Against thee only have I sinned and done evil in thy sight; and thy
sin is forgiven thee. Homil. 2. in Psalm. 50.
I do not say, tell to thy fellow servants, who upbraids thee, but tell them to
God who heals thy sins.] And, Homil. Quod peccata non sint evulganda. vid. tom.
57.
that after the abolition of the Penitentiary-Priest nothing was surrogated in
his stead, but pious Homilies and public Exhortations, we learn from those
words of his, [We do not bring the sinners into the midst, and publish their
sins; but having propounded the common doctrine to all, we leave it to the
Conscience of the Auditors, that out of those things which are spoken every one
may find a medicine fitted for his wound.] Homil. de Poenit. and Confessione.
tom. 58. tom. 5.
Let the discussion of thy sins be in the accounts of thy Conscience; let the
judgment be passed without a witness: Homil. 68. tom. 5.
let God alone see thee confessing; God who upbraids not thy sins, but out of
this Confession blots them out.] Have thou sinned, enter into the Church, say
unto God, I have sinned. I exact nothing of thee, but that alone.] Homil. 31.
in Ep. ad Hebr. Homil. 2o. in Matthew.
The same he says in many other places: Now against so many, so clear and
dogmatical testimonies it will be to no purpose to say, that S. Chrysostom
only spoke against the Penitentiary-Priest set over the public penitents;
Homil. 28. in 1 Cor.
and this he did, Homil. 21. ad Pop. Antioch. (...), Homil. 4. de Lazaro.
in pursuance of his predecessors act. For, besides that some of these Homilies
were written before S. Chrysostom was Bishop, viz. his one and twenty Homilies
to the people of Antioch, and the fourth Homily of Lazarus which was preached
at Antioch before he came to Constantinople, when he was but a Priest under
Flavianus his Bishop; and his Homilies on S. Matthew; besides this, it is plain
that he not only speaks against the public judicial Penance and Confession;
but against all, except that alone which is made to God; allowing the
sufficiency of this for pardon, and disallowing the necessity of all other. To
these things Bellarmine, Perron, Petrus de Soto, Vasquez, Valentia, and others,
strive to find out answers; but they neither agree together, neither do their
answers fit the testimonies; as is evident to them that compare the one and the
other, the chief of which I have remarked, in passing by. The best Answers that
can be given are those which Latinus Latinius, and Petavius, give; The first
affirming, that these homilies 1. are not S. Chrysostom's. Or 2. that they are
corrupted by heretics; and the latter confessing they are his, but blames S.
Chrysostom for preaching such things. And to these answers I hope I shall not
need to make any reply. In 3. part. The. tom. 4 q. 90. a. 1. dub. 3. n. 31.
To the two first of Latinus, Vasquez has answered perfectly; and to that of
Petavius, there needs none; Petavius, in stead of answering, making himself a
Judge of S. Chrysostom. I suppose if we had done so in any question against
them, they would have taken it in great scorn and indignation; and therefore we
choose to follow S. Chrysostom, rather than Master Petavius.

I do not deny, but the Roman Doctors do bring many sayings of the Greek and
Latin Fathers, showing the usefulness of Confession to a Priest, and exhorting
and pressing men to it: But their arts are notorious, and evident; and what
(according to the discipline of the Church at that time) they spoke in behalf
of the Exomologesis or public discipline, that these Doctors translate to the
private Confession; and yet what ever we bring out of Antiquity against the
necessity of confession to a Priest, that they will resolvedly understand only
of the public. But, besides what has been said to every of the particulars, I
shall conclude this point with the sayings of some eminent men of their own,
who have made the same observation. In hoc labuntur Theologi quidam parum
attenti, quod, quae veteres illi de hu jusmodi publica and generali
confessione, quae nihil aliud erat quam signis quibusdam and piaminibus ab
Episcopo indictis, se peccatorem, and bonorum communione indignum agnoscere,
In. S. Hierom. Epist. ad Oceanum, sive Epitaph. Fabiolae.
trahunt ad hanc occultam and long diversi generis: So Erasmus. And B.
Rhenanus says, Let no man wonder that Tertullian speaks nothing of the secret
or clancular confession of sins; Praefat. in l. Tertul. de Poeni^.
which, so far as we conjecture, was bred out of the (old) Exomologesis, by the
unconstrained piety of men. For we do not find it at all commanded of old.

The Conclusion of these Premises is this, That the old Ecclesiastic
discipline being passed into desuetude and indevotion, the Latin Church
especially, kept up some little broken planks of it; which so long as charity
and devotion were warm, and secular interest had not turned religion into arts,
did in some good measure supply the want of the old better discipline; but when
it had degenerated into little forms, and yet was found to serve great ends of
power, wealth, and ambition, it passed into new doctrines, and is now bold to
pretend to divine institution, though it be nothing but the Commandment of men,
a snare of Consciences, and a ministry of humane policy; false in the
Proposition, and intolerable in the Conclusion.

There are diverse other instances reducible to this charge, and especially the
Prohibition of Priests marriage, and the abstinence from flesh at certain
times; which are grown up from humane-Ordinances to be established Doctrines,
that is, to be urged with greater severity than the Laws of God; insomuch that
the Church of Rome permits Concubinate and Stews at the same time when she will
not permit chaste Marriages to her Clergy. And for abstinence from flesh at
times appointed, Veluti parricida pene dixerim rapitur ad supplicium, qui pro
piscium carnibus gustarit carnes suillas. Rule of Conscience, lib. 3. cap. 4.
But I shall not now insist upon these; having so many other things to say, and
especially, having already in another place verified this Charge against them
in these Instances. Rule 13. and Rule 19. and 20.
I shall only name one testimony of their own, which is a pregnant Mother of
many instances: Cause. 25. qu. 1. c. Violatores Canonum.
and it is in their own Canon Law. [They that voluntarily violate the Canons,
are heavily judged by the Holy Fathers, and are damned by the holy Ghost, by
whose instinct they were dictated. Dicati prodictati.
. For they do not incongruously seem to blaspheme the holy Ghost.] And a little
after [Such a presumption is manifestly one of the kinds of them that blaspheme
against the holy Ghost.] Now if the laws of their Church, Vide quae supra
annotavi e^ Decreto Gratiani. Sect. 1.
which are discordant enough, and many times of themselves too blameable, be
yet by them accounted so sacred, that it is taught to be a sin against the holy
Ghost, willingly to break them; in the world there cannot be a greater
verification of this charge upon them: it being confessed on all hands, that,
Not every man who voluntarily violates a Divine Commandment does blaspheme the
holy Ghost.

The End of the First Book.
THE SECOND BOOK.
SECTION I.
Of Indulgences.
ONE of the great instances to prove the Roman Religion to be new; not
primitive, not Apostolic, is the foolish and unjustifiable doctrine of
Indulgences. This point I have already handled; so fully and so without
contradiction from the Roman Doctors (except that they have causelessly snarled
at some of the testimonies) that for ought yet appears, that discourse may
remain a sufficient reproof of the Church of Rome until the day of their
reformation. The first testimony I brought, is the confession of a party: for I
affirmed that Bishop Fisher of Rochester did confess, That in the beginning of
the Church there was no use of Indulgences, and that they began after the
people were a while affrighted with the torments of Purgatory.] To this there
are two answers, The first is, that Bishop Fisher said no such words. No?
proferte tabulas. His words are these, In art. 18. contr* Luther.
Who can now wonder that in the beginning of the Primitive Church there was no
use of Indulgences? And again, Indulgences began a while after men trembled at
the torments of Purgatory. These are the words of Roffensis. What in the world
can be plainer? And this is so evident, that Alphonsus a Castro thinks himself
concerned to answer the Objection, Lib. 8. adv. haeres. t^t. Indulgen^iae.
and the danger of such concessions [Neither upon this occasion are Indulgences
to be despised because their use may seem to be received lately in the Church,
because there are many things known to posterity which those Ancient Writers
were wholly ignorant of. Quid ergo mirum si ad hunc modum contigerit de
indulgentiis ut apud priscos nulla sit de iis mentio.] Indeed Antiquity was
wholly ignorant of these things: H^stiensis in summa l. 5. tit. de remiss. Biel
in Canon. Missae. lect. 57. vide Bellarm. l. 1. c. 14. de Indul. Sect. Quod ad
primam.
and as for their Catholic posterity, some of them also did not believe that
Indulgences did profit any that were dead. Amongst these Hostiensis and Biel
were the most noted. But Biel was soon made to alter his opinion; Hostiensis
did not, that I find.

The other answer is, by E. W. That Roffensis says it not so absolutely, but
with this interrogation. Quis jam de indulgentiis mirari potest? Who now can
wonder concerning Indulgences? Wonder! at what? for E. W. is loath to tell it:
But truth must out. Who now can wonder that in the beginning of the Church there
was no use of Indulgences? So Roffensis; which first supposes this; that in the
Primitive Church there was no use of Indulgences; none at all: And this which
is the main question here, is as absolutely affirmed as any thing; it is like a
praecognition to a scientifical discourse. And then the question having
presupposed this, does by direct implication say, it is no wonder that there
should be then no use of Indulgences. That is, it not only absolutely affirms
the thing, but by consequence, the notoreity of it and the reasonableness.
Nothing affirms or denies more strongly than a question. Are not my ways equal,
said God, and are not your ways unequal? that is, It is evident and notorious
that it is so. And by this we understand the meaning of Roffensis; in the
following words [Yet (as they say) there was some very Ancient use of them
among the Romans.] They say, that is, there is a talk of it amongst some or
other; but such they were, whom Roffensis believed not; and that, upon which
they did ground their fabulous report, was nothing but a ridiculous legend,
Dissuasive. 1. part. Sect. 3.
which I have already confuted.

The same doctrine is taught by Antoninus, who confesses that concerning them
we have nothing expressly either in the Scriptures, or in the sayings of the
Ancient Doctors.] And that he said so cannot be denied; but E. W. says, that I
omit what Antoninus adds [That is] I did not transcribe his whole book. But
what is it that I should have added? This. Quamvis ad hoc inducatur illud
Apostoli. 2 Cor. 2. Si quid donavi vobis, propter vos in persona Christi. Now
to this there needs no answer, but this; that it is nothing to the purpose. To
whom the Corinthians forgave any thing; to the same person S. Paul for their
sakes did forgive also. But what then; Therefore the Pope and his Clergy have
power to take off the temporal punishments which God reserves upon sinners
after he has forgiven them the temporal? and that the Church has power to
forgive sins before hand, and to set a price upon the basest crimes and not to
forgive, but to sell Indulgences? and lay up the supernumerary treasures of the
Saints good works, and issue them out by retail in the Market of Purgatory?
Because S. Paul caused the Corinthians to be absolved and restored to the
Churches peace after a severe penance; so great, that the poor man was in
danger of being swallowed up with despair and the subtleties of Satan; does
this prove that therefore all penances may be taken off when there is no such
danger, no such pious and charitable consideration? And yet besides the
inconsequence of all this; S. Paul gave no indulgence, but what the Christian
Church of Corinth (in which at that time there was no Bishop) did first give
themselves. Now the Indulgence which the people give will prove but little
warrant to what the Church of Rome pretends; not only for the former reasons,
but also because the Primitive Church had said nothing expressly concerning
Indulgences; and therefore did not to any such purpose expound the words of S.
Paul; but also because Antoninus himself was not moved by those words to think
they meant any thing of the Roman Indulgences; but mentions it as the argument
of other persons. Just as if I should write that there is concerning
Transubstantiation nothing expressly said in the Scriptures, or in the writings
of the Ancient Fathers; although Hoc est corpus meum be brought in for it:
Would any man in his wits say, that I am of the opinion that in Scripture there
is something express for it, though I expressly deny it? I suppose not.

It appears now that Roffensis and a Castro declared against the Antiquity of
Indulgences; Their own words are the witnesses; and the same is also true of
Antoninus; and therefore the first discourse of Indulgences [in the Dissuasive]
might have gone on prosperously and needed not to have been interrupted. For if
these quotations be true as is pretended, and as now appears, there is nothing
by my Adversaries said in defense of Indulgences, no pretense of an argument in
justification of them; the whole matter is so foul, and yet so notorious that
the novelty of it is plainly acknowleged by their most learned men and but
faintly denied by the bolder people that care not what they say. So that I
shall account the main point of Indulgences to be (for ought yet appears to the
contrary) gained against the Church of Rome.

But there is another appendant Question that happens in by the by; nothing to
the main inquiry, but a particular instance of the usual ways of earning
Indulgences, viz. by going in pilgrimages; which very particularly I affirmed
to be reproved by the Ancient Fathers: and particularly by S. Gregory Nyssen,
in a book or Epistle of his written wholly on this subject, (so I said) and so
Possevine calls it, librum contra peregrinationes; the book against
Pilgrimages. The Epistle is large and learned and greatly dissuasive of
Christians from going in Pilgrimage to Jerusalem. Dominus profectionem in
Hierosylma inter recte facta quae eo (viz. ad regni coelorum haereditatem
consequendam) dirigant non enumeravit; ubi beatitudinem annunciat, tale
studium, talemque operam non est complexus. And again, spiritualem noxam
affricat accuratum vitae genus insistentibus. Non est ista tanto digna studio,
imo est vitanda summo opere. And if this was directed principally to such
persons, who had chosen to live a solitary and private life; yet that was,
because such strict and religious persons where those, whose false show of
piety he did in that instance reprove; but he reproves it by such arguments all
the way, as concern all Christians, but especially women; and answers to an
objection made against himself for going; which he says he did by command, and
public charge, and for the service of the Arabian Churches, and that he might
confer with the Bishops of Palestine. This Epistle of S. Gregory Nyssen de
adeuntibus Hierosolymam was printed at Paris in Greek by Guilielmus Morellus,
and again published in Greek and Latin with a double version by Peter du
Moulin, and is acknowledged by Baronius to be legitimate; Tom. 4. ad A. D. 386.
number. 39.
and therefore there is no denying the truth of the quotation; the Author of
the letter had better to have rubbed his forehead hard and to have answered as
Possevine did [Ab haereticis prodiit liber sub nomine Gregorii Nysseni; Lib. 3.
de cultu SS. cap. 8. Sect. Ad Magdeburgenses.
and Bellarmine being pinched with it, says, Forte non est Nysseni; nec scitur
quis ille verte^^t in sermonem latinum, and forte etiam non invenitur Graece.
All which is refuted by their own parties.

That S. Chrysostom was of the same judgment, 1 Homil. in Philom.
appears plainly in these few words. Namque ad impetrandum nostris secleribus
veniam, non pecunias impendere nec aliud aliquid hujusmodi facere: sola
sufficit bonae voluntatis integritas. A. L. p. 9. n. 23.
Non opus est in longinqua peregrinando transire, nec ad remotissimas ire
nationes, etc. S. Chrysostom, according to the sense of the other Fathers,
teaches a Religion and Repentance wholly reducing us to a good life, a service
perfectly consisting in the works of a good conscience. And in the exclusion of
other external things, he reckons this of Pilgrimages. For, how traveling into
Forain Countries for pardon of our crimes differs from Pilgrimages, I have not
been yet taught.

The last I mentioned is S. Bernard; A. L. ibid. p. 9. number. 24.
his words are these, It is not necessary for thee to pass over Sea to
penetrate the clouds, to go beyond the Alps; there is I say, no great journey
proposed to you; meet God within your self, for the word is nigh unto thee, in
thy mouth and in thy heart, etc. So the Author of the letter acknowledges S.
Bernard to have said in the place quoted: yea but says this objector, Non
oportet o homo maria transfretare, non penetrare nubes, non transalpinare
necesse est. Non grandis inquam tibi ostenditur via: usque temet-ipsum
occurrere Deo tuo.
I might as well have quoted Moses, Deuteronomy. 13. 14.] Well, what if I had quoted
Moses; had it been ever the worse? But though I did not, yet S. Bernard quoted
Moses, and that it seems troubled this Gentleman. But S. Bernards words are
indeed agreeable to the words of Moses, but not all out the same: For Moses
made no prohibition of going to Rome, which I suppose S. Bernard meant by*
transalpinare.

There remains in A. L. yet one cavil, but it is a question of diligence and
not to the point in hand. The authority of S. Austin I marked under the title
of his Sermon de Martyribus. Ibid. number. 25.
But the Gentleman to show his Learning tells us plainly that there is but one
in S. Austins works with that title, to wit his 117. Sermon de diversis, and in
that there is not the least word to any such purpose. All this latter part may
be true, but the first is a great mistake; for if the Gentleman please to look
in the Paris Edition of S. Austin 1571. tom. 10. page 277. he shall find the
words I have quoted. And whereas he talks of 117. Sermons de diversis, and of
one only Sermon de martyribus, I do a little wonder at him to talk so
confidently; whereas in the Edition I speak of, and which I followed, there are
but 49. Sermons, and 17. under the title de diversis, and yet there are six
Sermons that bear the title de Martyribus, but they are to be found under the
title de Sanctis; so that the Gentleman looked in the wrong place for his
quotation; and if he had not mistaken himself he could have had no color for
an objection. But for the satisfaction of the Reader; the words are these in
his 3. Sermon de Martyribus diversis. Non dixit vade in orientem and quaere
justitiam, naviga usque ad occidentem ut accipias indulgentiam. Dimitte inimico
tuo and dimittetur tibi: indulge and indulgetur tibi, da and dabitur tibi;
nihil a te extra te quaerit. Ad teipsum and ad conscientiam tuam te Deus
diriget. In te enim posuit quod requirit. But now let it be considered that all
those charges which are laid against the Church of Rome and her greatest
Doctors respectively in the matter of Indulgences are found to be true; and if
so, let the world judge whether that doctrine and those practices be tolerable
in a Christian Church.

But that the Reader may not be put off with a mere defense of four quotations;
I shall add this; that I might have instanced in worse matters made by the
Popes of Rome to be the pious works, the condition of obtaining Indulgences.
Such as was the Bull of Pope Julius the second, giving Indulgence to him that
meeting a Frenchman should kill him, and another for the killing of a Venetian.
But we need not to wonder at it, since according to the doctrine of Thomas
Aquinas, We ought to say that in the Pope is the fullness of all graces; De
regimine principum l. 3. c. 10. inter opuscula. number. 20.
because he alone bestows a full Indulgence of all our sins; so that what we
say of our chief Prince and Lord (viz. Jesus Christ) does fit him, for we all
have received of his fullness. Which words besides that they are horrid
blasphemy; are also a fit principle of the doctrine and use of Indulgences to
those purposes, and in that evil manner we complain of in the Church of Rome.

I desire this only instance may be added to it, that P. Paul the third, he
that convened the Council of Trent, and Julius the third, for fear (as I may
suppose) the Council should forbid any more such follies, for a farewell to
this game gave an Indulgence to the Fraternity of the Sacrament of the Altar,
Impress. Paris per Philippum Hotot. 1550.
or of the Blessed Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, of such a vastness and
unreasonable folly, that it puts us beyond the Question of Religion, to an
inquiry whether it were not done either in perfect distraction, or with a worse
design to make Religion to be ridiculous, and expose it to a contempt and
scorn. The conditions of the Indulgence are either to visit the Church of S.
Hilary of Charters, to say a Pater Noster, and an Ave Mary every Friday, or at
most to be present at processions and other Divine Service upon Corpus Christi
day. The gift is as many privileges, indults, exemptions, liberties,
immunities, plenary pardon of sins and other spiritual graces as were given to
the Fraternity of the Image of our Savior ad Sancta Sanctorum; the Fraternity
of the Charity and great Hospital of S. James in Augusta of S. John Baptist, of
St. Cosmus and Damianus; of the Florentine Nation, of the Hospital of the Holy
Ghost in Saxia, of the order of S. Austin and S. Champ, of the Fraternities of
the said City; of the Churches of our Lady de populo and de verbo: and all
those which were ever given to them that visited these Churches; or those which
should be ever given hereafter. A pretty large gift. In which there were so
many pardons, quarter pardons, half pardons, true pardons, plenary pardons,
Quarentaines, and years of Quarentaines; that it is a harder thing to number
them, than to purchase them. I shall remark in these some particulars fit to be
considered.

1. That a most scandalous and unchristian dissolution and death of all
Ecclesiastical discipline, is consequent to the making all sin so cheap and
trivial a thing; that the horrible demerits and exemplary punishment and
remotion of scandal and satisfactions to the Church are indeed reduced to
trifling and Mock-penances. He that shall send a servant with a Candle to
attend the Holy Sacrament when it shall be carried to sick people, or shall go
himself, or if he can neither go nor send, if he say a Pater Noster and an Ave;
he shall have a hundred years of true pardon. This is fair and easy. But then,

2. It would be considered what is meant by so many years of pardon, and so
many years of true pardon. I know but of one natural interpretation of it; and
that it can mean nothing, but that some of the pardons are but fantastical,
and not true: and in this I find no fault, save only that it ought to have been
said; that all of them are fantastical.

3. It were fit we learned how to compute four thousand and eight hundred years
of Quarantaines; and remission of a third part of all their sins; for so much
is given to every Brother and Sister of this Fraternity, upon Easter day and
eight days after. Now if a Brother needs not thus many, it would be considered
whether it do not encourage a Brother or a frail Sister to use all their
Medicine and to sin more freely, lest so great a gift become useless.

4. And this is so much the more considerable because the gift is vast beyond
all imagination. The first four days in Lent they may purchase 33000 years of
pardon, besides a plenary remission of all his sins over and above. The first
week of Lent a hundred and three and thirty thousand years of pardon, besides
five plenary remissions of all their sins, and two third parts besides, and the
delivery of one soul out of Purgatory. The second week in Lent a hundred and
eight and fifty thousand years of pardon besides the remission of all their
sins and a third part besides; and the delivery of one soul. The third week in
Lent, 80000 years besides a plenary remission, and the delivery of one soul out
of Purgatory. The fourth week in Lent; threescore thousand years of pardon
besides a remission of two thirds of all their sins; and one plenary remission
and one soul delivered. The fifth week 79000. years of pardon and the
deliverance of two souls, only the 2700. years that is given for the Sunday may
be had twice that day, if they will visit the Altar twice; and as many
Quarantaines. The sixth week 205000. years besides Quarantaines; and four
plenary pardons. Only on Palm Sunday whose portion is 25000. years it may be
had twice that day. And all this is the price of him that shall upon these days
visit the Altar in the Church of S. Hilary. And this runs on to the Fridays,
and many Festivals and other solemn days in the other parts of the year.

5. Though it may be that a Brother may not need all this; at least at that
time, yet that there may be no insecurity, the said Popes give to every Brother
and Sister of the Fraternity, plenary pardon and Indulgence of all their sins
thrice in their life, upon what day and hour they please. I suppose that one of
the times shall be in the article of death; for that is the surest way for a
weak Brother. Vide revie^, d^ Concile de Trent. l. 5. c. 1.
I have read that the Popes do not only give remission of sins already
committed, but also of such as are to be committed. But whether it be so or no;
There is in the Bulls of this Fraternity as good provision; for he, that has a
dormant faculty for* a plenary pardon laying by him to be used at what hour he
please; has a Bull before hand for pardon of sins afterward to be committed
when he has a mind to it.

6. To what purpose is so much wast of the Treasure of the Church? Quorsum
perditio haec? Every Brother or Sister of this Fraternity may have for so many
times visiting the Altar aforesaid, fourteen or fifteen plenary pardons.
Certainly the Popes suppose these persons to be mighty Criminals, that they
need so many pardons, so many plenaries. But two Alls of the same thing is as
much as two Nothings. But if there were not infinite causes of fear that very
many of them were nullities, and that none of them were of any certain avail,
there could be no pretense of reasonableness in dispensing these Jewels with so
loose a hand, and useless a freedom, as if a man did shovel Mustard, or pour
Hogsheads of Vinegar into his friends mouth, to make him swallow a mouthful of
Herbs.

7. What is the secret meaning of it, that in diverse clauses in their Bulls of
Indulgences, Bull. Julii. 3. de an. Jubilii.
they put in this clause, A pardon of all their sins [be they never so heinous]
The extraordinary cases reserved to the Pope; and the consequent difficulty of
getting pardon of such great sins, because it would cost much more money, was or
might be some little restraint to some persons from running easily into the
most horrible impieties; but to give such a loose to this little, and this last
rein and curb; and by an easy Indulgence to take off all, even the most
heinous sins, what is it but to give the Devil an argument to tempt persons
that have any conscience or fear left, to throw off all fear, and to stick at
nothing.

8. It seems hard to give a reasonable account, what is meant by giving a
plenary pardon of all their sins; and yet at the same time an Indulgence of
12000. years, and as many Quarentaines; it seems the bounty of the Church runs
out of a Conduit, though the Vessels be full, yet the water still continues
running and goes into wast.

9. In this great heap of Indulgences (and so it is in very many other) power
is given to a Lay Sister or Brother to free a soul from Purgatory. But if this
be so easily granted, the necessity of Masses will be very little; what need is
there to give greater fees to a Physician when a sick person may be cured with
a Posset and Pepper. The remedy of the way of Indulgences is cheap and easy, a
servant with a Candle, a Pater and an Ave, a going to visit an Altar, wearing
the Scapular of the Carmelites, or the Chord of S. Francis: but Masses for
souls are a dear commodity, five pence or six pence is the least a Mass will
cost in some places; nay it will stand in nine pence in other places. But then
if the Pope can do this trick certainly, then what can be said to John Gersons
question. Arbitrio Papa proprio si clavibus uti
Possit, cur sinit ut poena pios cruciet?
Cur non evacuat loca purgandis animabus
Tradita? The answer makes up the Tetrastic;
sed servus esse fidelis amat.


The Pope may be kind, but he must be wise too; a faithful and wise Steward; he
must not destroy the whole state of the purging Church; if he takes away all
the fuel from the fire; who shall make the Pot boil? This may not be done, Ut
possint superesse quos peccasse poeniteat: Sinners must pay for it, in their
bodies or their purses.

SECTION II.
Of Purgatory.
THat the doctrine of Purgatory as it is taught in the Roman Church is a
Novelty, and a part of their New Religion, is sufficiently attested by the
words of the Cardinal of Rochester, and Alphonsus a Castro; whose words I now
add that he who pleases may see how these new men would fain impose their new
fancies upon the Church, under pretense and title of Ancient and Catholic
verities. The words of Roffensis in his eighteenth article against Luther are
these, A letter to a friend touching Dr. Tailor* Sect. 4. n. 26. p. 10. which
if the Reader please for his curiosity or his recreation to see, he shall find
this pleasant passage, of deep learning, and subtle observation (Dr. Tay. had
said that Roffensis and P. V. affirm, that who so searches the Writings of the
Greek Fathers, shall find that none, or very rarely any one of them ever makes
mention of Purgatory.) Whereas Pol. Virgil affirms no such thing; nor does
Roffensis say, That very rarely any one of them menti^ns it, but only, that in
th^se Ancient Writers, he shall find none, or but very rare mention of it. If
this man were in his wits when he made this answer (an answer which no man can
unriddle, or tell how it opposes the objection) then it is very certain, that
if this can pass among the answers to the Protestants objections, the Papists
are in a very great strait; and have very little to say for themselves: and the
letter to a friend was written by compulsion, and by the shame of confutation;
not of conscience or ingenuous persuasion. No man can be so foolish, as to
suppose this fit to be given in answer to any sober discourse* or if there be
such pitiful people in the Church of Rome, and trusted to write Books in
defense of their Religion; it seems they care not what any man says or proves
against them; if the people be but co^^n'd with a pretended answer; for that
serves the turn, as well as a wiser.
Legate qui velit Graecorum veterum commentarios, and nullum, quantum, opinor;
aut quam rarissimum de purgatorio sermonem inveniet. Sed neque latini simul
omnes, at sensim hujus rei veritatem conceperunt. He that pleases, let him read
the Commentaries of the Old Greeks and (as I suppose) he shall find none, or
very rare mention (or speech) of Purgatory. But neither did all the Latins at
one time, but by little and little conceive the truth of this thing. And again
[Aliquandiu incognitum fuit, sero cognitum Universae Ecclesiae. Deinde
quibusdam pedetentim, partim ex Scripturis, partim ex revelationibus creditum
fuit. For somewhile it was unknown; it was but lately known to the Catholic
Church. Then it was believed by some, by little and little; partly from
Scripture, partly from revelations.] And this is the goodly ground of the
doctrine of Purgatory, founded no question upon tradition Apostolical;
delivered some hundreds of years indeed after they were dead; but the truth is,
because it was forgotten by the Apostles, and they having so many things in
their heads, when they were alive wrote and said nothing of it, therefore they
took care to send some from the dead, who by new revelations should teach this
old doctrine. This we may conjecture to be the aequivalent sense of the plain
words of Roffensis. But the plain words are sufficient without a Commentary.
Lib. 8. cap. 1. de inven. rerum.


Now for Polydore Virgil his own words can best tell what he says, Ego vero
Originem quod mei est muneris quaeritans non reperio ante fuisse, quod sciam,
quum D. Gregorius ad suas stationes id praemii proposuerit. Qua propter in re
parum perspicua, utar testimonio Johannis Roffensis Episcopi, qui in eo opere
quod nuper in Lutherum scripsit, sic de ejusmodi veniarum initio prodit. Multos
fortasse movit indulgentiis istis non usque adeo fidere, quod earum usus in
Ecclesia videatur recentior, and admodum sero apud Christianos repertus. Quibus
ego respondeo, non certo constare a quo primum tradi caeperint. Fuit tamen
nonnullus earum usus (ut aiunt) apud Romanos vetustissimus, quod ex stationibus
intelligi potest and subiit. Nemo certe dubitat orthodoxus an purgatorium sit,
de quo tamen apud priscos nonnull^ vel quam rarissime fiebat mentio. Sed and
Gracis ad hunc usque diem, (...) est creditum esse ^ quam di^ enim nulla fuerat
de purgatorio cura. nemo quaesivit Indulgentias; nam ex illo pendet omnis
indulgentiarum existimatio: si ^oll^^ purgatorium, quorsum indulgentiis opus
erit? caeperunt igitur indulgentiae postquam ad purgatorii cruciat^^ aliquandiu
trepid^tum est.
The words I have put into the Margent because they are many; the sense of them
is this. 1. He finds no use of Indulgences before the stations of S. Gregory;
the consequent of that is, that all the Latin Fathers did not receive them
before S. Gregory's time; and therefore they did not receive them altogether.
2. The matter being so obscure, Polydore chose to express his sense in the
testimony of Roffensis. 3. From him he affirms, that the use of Indulgences is
but new, and lately received amongst Christians. 4. That there is no certainty
concerning their original. 5. They report, that amongst the Ancient Latins
there was some use of them. But it is but a report, for he knows nothing of it
before S. Gregory's time, and for that also he has but a mere report. 6.
Amongst the Greeks it is not to this day believed. 7. As long as there was no
care of Purgatory, no man looked after Indulgences; because if you take away
Purgatory, there is no need of Indulgences. 8. That the use of Indulgences
began after men had a while trembled at the torments of Purgatory.] This if I
understand Latin or common sense, is the doctrine of Polydore Virgil; and to
him I add also the testimony of Alphonsus a Castro. Lib. 8. verb. Indul. vide
etiam lib. 12. lil. purgatorium.
De Purgatorio fere nulla mentio, potissimum apud Graecos scriptores. Qua de
causa usque hodiernum diem purgatorium non est a Graecis creditum. The
consequent of these things is this. If Purgatory was not known to the Primitive
Church; if it was but lately known to the Catholic Church; if the Fathers
seldom or never make mention of it; If in the Greek Church especially there was
so great silence of it, that to this very day it is not believed amongst the
Greeks; then this doctrine was not an Apostolical doctrine, not Primitive, not
Catholic, but an Innovation and of yesterday.

And this is of it self (besides all these confessions of their own parties) a
suspicious matter, because the Church of Rome does establish their doctrine of
Purgatory upon the Ancient use of the Church of praying for the dead. But this
consequence of theirs is wholly vain; because all the Fathers did pray for the
dead, yet they never prayed for their deliverance out of Purgatory, nor ever
meant it. To this it is thus objected, It is confessed that they prayed for
them that God would show them a mercy. E. W. Truth will out. cap. 3. page 23.
Now, Mark well, If they be in heaven they have a mercy, the sentence is given
for Eternal happiness. If in Hell, they are wholly destitute of mercy; unless
there be a third place where mercy can be showed them.] I have according to my
order marked it well; but find nothing in it to purpose. For though the Fathers
prayed for the souls departed that God would show them mercy; yet it was, that
God would show them mercy in the day of judgment, In that formidable and
dreadful day, then there is need of much mercy unto us, says S. Chrysostom.
And methinks this Gentleman should not have made use of so pitiful an argument,
and would not, if he had considered that S. Paul prayed for Onesiphorus, that
God would show him a mercy in that day; that is in the day of judgment, as
generally interpreters Ancient and Modern do understand it, and particularly S.
Chrysostom now cited. The faithful departed are in the hands of Christ as soon
as they die, and they are very well; and the souls of the wicked are where it
pleases God to appoint them to be, tormented by a fearful expectation of the
revelation of the day of judgment; but heaven and hell are reserved till the
day of judgment; Verse. 6.
and the Devils themselves are reserved in chains of darkness unto the judgment
of the great day, says S. Jude; and in that day they shall be sentenced, and
so shall all the wicked, to everlasting fire, which as yet is but prepared for
the Devil and his Angels for ever. But is there no mercy to be showed to them
unless they be in Purgatory? Some of the Ancients speak of visitation of Angels
to be imparted to the souls departed; and the hastening of the day of judgment
is a mercy; and the avenging of the Martyrs upon their adversaries is a mercy
for which the souls under the Altar pray, says S. John in the Revelation: and
the Greek Fathers speak of a fiery trial at the day of judgment through which
every one must pass; and there will be great need of mercy. And after all this;
there is a remission of sins proper to this world, when God so pardons that he
gives the grace of repentance, that he takes his judgments off from us, that
he gives us his holy spirit to mortify our sins, that he admits us to work in
his laboratory, that he sustains us by his power, and promotes us by his grace,
and stands by us favorably while we work out our salvation with fear and
trembling; and at last he crowns us with perseverance. But at the day of
Judgment there shall be a pardon of sins, that will crown this pardon; when God
shall pronounce us pardoned before all the world; and when Christ shall
actually and praesentially rescue us from all the pains which our sins have
deserved; even from everlasting pain: And that is the final pardon, for which
till it be accomplished, all the faithful do night and day pray incessantly:
although to many for whom they do pray, they friendly believe that it is now
certain, that they shall then be glorified. Saepissime petuntur illa quae certo
sciuntur eventura ut petuntur, Contr. haeres. lib. 12. tit. purgator. Jo.
Med^na de poenit. tract. 6. q. 6.
and hujus rei plurima sunt testimonia, said Alphonsus a Castro: and so also
Medina and Bellarmine acknowledge. Cod. de oratione.
The thing is true, they say; but if it were not, Bellar. de purgat. lib. 2.
cap. 5.
yet we find that de facto they do pray Domine Jesu Christ, rex gloriae libera
animas Fidelium defunctorum de poenis Inferni and de profundo lacu: libera eos
de ore leonis, ne abforbeat eos Tartarus, ne cadant in obscurum. So it is in
the Masses pro defunctis. Vide missam in commemorationem omnium defunctorum.
And therefore this Gentleman talking that in Heaven all is remitted, and in
Hell nothing is forgiven, and from hence to conclude that there is no avoiding
of purgatory; is too hasty a conclusion: let him stay till he comes to Heaven,
and the final sentence is past, and then he will (if he finds it to be so) have
reason to say what he does; but by that time the dream of Purgatory will be
out; and in the mean time let him strive to understand his Mass Book better. S.
Austin thought he had reason to pray for pardon and remission for his Mother;
for the reasons already expressed, though he never thought his Mother was in
Purgatory. It was upon consideration of the dangers of every soul that dies in
Adam; and yet he affirms she was even before her death alive unto Christ. And
therefore she did not die miserable, nor did she die at all (said her son,)
Confess. lib. 9. cap. 12. and 13.
Hoc and documentis ejus morum, and fide non ficta, rationibus certis
tenebamus; and when he did pray for her; Credo jam feceris quod te rogo, sed
voluntaria oris mei approba Domine: which will yet give another answer to this
confident Gentleman; S. Austin prayed for pardon for his Mother, and did
believe the thing was done already; but he prayed to God to approve that
voluntary oblation of his mouth. So that now all the objection is vanished; S.
Austin prayed (besides many other reasons) to manifest his kindness, not for
any need she had. But after all this, was not S. Monica a Saint? Is she not put
in the Roman Calendar, and the fourth of May appointed for her festival? And do
Saints, do Canonized persons use to go to Purgatory? But let it be as it will,
I only desire that this be remembered against a good time; that here it is
confessed that prayers were offered for a Saint departed. I fear it will be
denied by and by.

But 2. The Fathers made prayers for those who by the confession of all sides
never were in Purgatory; for the Patriarchs, Apostles, etc. and especially for
the Blessed Virgin Mary; this which is a direct and perfect overthrow of the
Roman doctrine of Purgatory, and therefore if it can be made good, they have no
probability left, upon the confidence of which they can plausibly pretend to
Purgatory. I have already offered something in proof of this, which I shall now
review, Letter page 11. n. 31.
and confirm fully. I begin with that of Durantus, whom I alleged as
confessing that they offered But then it is to be remembered, that they made
prayers, and offered for those who by the confession of all sides never were in
Purgatory: so we find in Epiphanius, S. Cyril, the Canon of the Greeks, and so
(viz. that they offered) is acknowledged by their own Dura^us. Disswasive, page
27. line 30. etc. Lib. 2. de ritibus cap. 35.
for the Patriarchs, and Prophets, and the Blessed Virgin: I intend him for no
more; for true it is, he denies that the Church prayed for them, but that they
communicated and offered sacrifice for them, even for the Blessed Virgin Mary
her self, this he grants. I have alleged him a little out of the order,
because observing where Durantus and the Roman Doctors are mistaken, and with
what boldness they say, that offering for them is only giving thanks, and that
the Greek Fathers did only offer for them Eucharists, but no Prayers; I thought
it fit first to reprove that initial error, viz. [that Communicantes, and
offerentes pro sanctis is not Prayer;] and then to make it clear that they did
really pray, for mercy, for pardon, for a place of rest, for eternal glory for
them who never were in Purgatory, for it is a great ignorance to suppose, that
when it is said the sacrifice or oblation is offered, it must mean only
thanksgiving. For it is called in S. Dionys, (...), an Eucharistical prayer;
and the Lords Supper is a sacrifice in genere orationis, and by themselves is
intended as propitiatory for the quick and dead. Lib. 1: Epist. 9.
And S. Cyprian speaking of Bishops, being made Executors of Testaments, says,
Si quis hoc fecisset, non offerretur pro eo, nec sacrificium pro dormitione
ejus celebratur. Neque enim ad altar Dei meretur nominari in sacerdotum prece,
qui ab altari sacerdotes avocare voluit. Where offerre and celebrare
sacrificium pro dormitione is done sacerdotum prece, it is the oblation and
sacrifice of prayer: and S. Cyprian presently after joins them together, pro
dormitione ejus oblatio aut deprecatio. And if we look at the forms in the old
Roman Liturgy used in the days of Pope Innocent the third we shall find this
well expounded, prosit huic sancto vel illi talis oblatio ad gloriam. They
offered, but the offering it self was not Eucharistical but deprecatory. And so
it is also in the Armenian Liturgy published at Crackow: per hanc etiam
oblationem da aeternam pacem omnibus qui nos praecesserunt in fide Christi,
sanctis Patribus, Patriarchis, Apostolis, Prophetis, Martyribus, etc. which
testimony does not only evince, that the offering sacrifices and oblations for
the Saints, did signify praying for them; but that this they did for all
Saints whatsoever. And concerning S. Chrysostom, Lib. 6. biblioth. Annot. 47.
that which Sixtus Senensis says is material to this very purpose. Et in
Liturgia Divini sacrificii ab eo edita, and in variis homiliis ab eodem
approbata, conscripsit formulam precandi, and offerendi; pro omnibus fidelibus,
defunctis, and praecipue pro animabus beatorum, in haec verba, offerrimus tibi
rationalem hunc cultum pro in fide requiescentibus Patribus, Patriarchis,
Prophetis, Apostolis and Martyribus, etc. By which confession it is
acknowledged not only that the Church prayed for Apostles and Martyrs, but that
they intended to do so, when they offered the Sacramental oblations; and
offerimus is offerimus tibi preces. Now since it is so, I had advantage enough
in the confession of their own Durantus, that he acknowledged so much, that the
Church offered sacrifice for Saints. Now though he presently kicked this down
with his foot, and denied that they prayed for Saints departed; I shall yet
more clearly convince him and all the Roman contradictors of their bold and
unreasonable error in this affair. Epiphanius is the first I mentioned as a
witness, Haeres. 75.
but because I cited no words of his, and my adversaries have cited them for
me, but imperfectly, and left out the words where the argument lies, I shall
set them down at length. (...), etc. We make mention of the just and of
sinners, for sinners that we may implore the mercy of God for them. For the
just, the Fathers, the Patriarchs, the Prophets, Evangelists and Martyrs,
Confessors, Bishops and Anachorets, that prosecuting the Lord Jesus Christ with
a singular honor, we separate these from the rank of other men, and give due
worship to his Divine Majesty, while we account that he is not to be made equal
to mortal men, (...), although they had a thousand times more righteousness
than they have.] Now first here is mention made of all in their prayers and
oblations, and yet no mention made that the Church prays for one sort, and only
gives thanks for the other, Letter page 10. Truth will out, page 25.
(as these Gentlemen the objectors falsely pretend.) But here is a double
separation made of the righteous departed; one is from the worser sort of
sinners, the other from the most righteous Savior. True it is, they believed
they had more need to pray for some than for others; but if they did not pray
for all, when they made mention of all, how did they honor Christ by
separating their condition from his? Is it not lawful to give thanks for the
life and death, for the resurrection, holiness and glorification of Christ? And
if the Church only gave thanks for the departed Saints, and did not pray for
mercy for them too, how are not the Saints in this made equal to Christ? So
that I think the testimony of Epiphanius is clear and pertinent: In Psalm. 36.
Conc. 2. To. 8. p. 120.
To which greater light is given by the words of S. Austin, Who is he for whom
no man prays, but only he who interceeds for all men? viz. our Blessed Lord.
And there is more light yet, by the example of S. Austin, who though he did
most certainly believe his Mother to be a Saint, and the Church of Rome
believes so too, yet he prayed for pardon for her. Now by this it was that
Epiphanius separated Christ from the Saints departed, for he could not mean any
thing else; and because he was then writing against Aerius who did not deny it
to be lawful to give God thanks for the Saints departed, but affirmed it to be
needless to pray for them, viz. he must mean this of the Churches praying for
all her dead, or else he had said nothing against his adversary, or for his own
cause.

S. Cyril (though he be confidently denied to have said what he did say yet) is
confessed to have said these words, A. L p. 11.
Then we pray for the deceased Fathers and Bishops, and finally for all who
among us have departed this life. Believing it to be a very great help of the
souls, Mysta. Catech. 5.
for which is offered the obsecration of the holy and dreadful sacrifice.] If
S. Cyril means what his words signify, then the Church did pray for departed
Saints; for they prayed for all the departed Fathers and Bishops, it is hard if
amongst them there were no Saints: but suppose that, yet if there were any
Saints at all that died out of the militant Church, yet the case is the same;
for they prayed for all the departed: And 2. They offered the dreadful
sacrifice for them all. 3. They offered it for all in the way of prayer. 4. And
they believed this to be a great help to souls. Now unless the souls of all
Saints that died then, went to Purgatory (which I am sure the Roman Doctors
dare not own) the case is plain that prayer, and not thanksgivings only were
offered by the Ancient Church for souls, who by the Confession of all sides
never went to Purgatory; and therefore praying for the dead is but a weak
argument to prove Purgatory. Nicolaus Cabasilas has an evasion from all this;
as he supposes, for (...), which is the word used in the memorials of Saints,
does not always signify praying for one, but it may signify giving of
thanks; This is true, but it is to no purpose; for when ever it is said (...)
we pray for such a one, that must signify to pray for, and not to give thanks,
and that is our present case: and therefore no escape here can be made; the
words of S. Cyril are very plain.

The third allegation is of the Canon of the Greeks; which is so plain, evident
and notorious, and so confessed even by these Gentlemen the objectors, that I
will be tried by the words which the Author of the letter acknowledges. So it
is in the Liturgy of S. James, Remember all Orthodox from Abel the just unto
this day, make them to rest in the land of the living, in thy Kingdom, and the
delights of Paradise. Thus far this Gentleman quoted S. James, and I wonder
that he shall urge a conclusion manifestly contrary to his own allegation. Did
all the Orthodox from Abel to that day go to Purgatory? Certainly Abraham, and
Moses, and Elias, and the Blessed Virgin did not, and S. Stephen did not, and
the Apostles that died before this Liturgy was made did not, and yet the Church
prayed for all Orthodox, prayed that they might rest in the land of the living,
etc. and therefore they prayed for such which by the confession of all sides
never went to Purgatory. In the other Liturgies also, the Gentleman sets down
words enough to confute himself, as the Reader may see in the letter if it be
worth the reading. But because he sets down what he list, and makes breaches
and Rabbet holes to pop in as he please, I shall for the satisfaction of the
Reader set down the full sense and practice of the Greek Canon in this question.

And first for S. James his Liturgy, Biblioth. Sanct. 1. 6. Annot. 345* Sect.
Jacob. Apostolus.
which, being merrily disposed and dreaming of advantage by it, he is pleased
to call the Mass of S. James, Sixtus Senensis gives this account of it [ James
the Apostle in the Liturgy of the Divine sacrifice prays for the souls of
Saints resting in Christ, so that he shows they are not yet arrived at the
place of expected blessedness. But the form of the prayer is after this manner,
Domine Deus noster, etc. O Lord our God remember all the Orthodox, and them
that believe rightly in the faith from Abel the just unto this day. Make them
to rest in the region of the living, in thy Kingdom, in the delights of
Paradise, in the bosom of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob our Holy Fathers; from
whence are banished grief, sorrow and sighing, where the light of thy
countenance is president and perpetually shines.]

In the Liturgy of S. Basil, Basilii (...) ab Andrea Masio ex Syriaco conversa.
which he is said to have made for the Churches of Syria, is this prayer, [Be
mindful, O Lord, of them which are dead and departed out of this life, and of
the Orthodox Bishops, which from Peter and James the Apostles unto this day,
have clearly professed the right word of faith, and namely, of Ignatius,
Dionysius, Julius and the rest of the Saints of worthy memory. Nay, not only
for these, but they pray for the very Martyrs. O Lord remember them who have
resisted (or stood) unto blood for religion, and have fed thy holy flock with
righteousness and holiness.] Certainly this is not giving of thanks for them,
or praying to them, but a direct praying for them, even for holy Bishops,
Confessors, Martyrs, that God (meaning in much mercy) would remember them, that
is, make them to rest in the bosom of Abraham, in the region of the living, as
S. James expresses it.

And in the Liturgies of the Churches of Egypt attributed to S. Basil, Greg.
Naz. and S. Cyril, the Churches pray; [Be mindful O Lord of thy Saints,
vouchsafe to receive all thy Saints which have pleased thee from the beginning,
our Holy Fathers, the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors,
Preachers, Evangelists, and all the Souls of the just which have died in the
faith, but chiefly of the holy, glorious and perpetual Virgin Mary the Mother
of God, of S. John Baptist the forerunner and Martyr, S. Stephen the first
Deacon and first Martyr, S. Mark Apostle, Evangelist and Martyr.]

Of the same spirit were all the Ancient Liturgies or Missals, and particularly
that under the name of Saint Chrysostom is most full to this purpose; Let us
pray to the Lord for all that before time have labored and performed the holy
offices of Priesthood. For the memory and remission of sins of them that built
this holy house, and of all them that have slept in hope of the resurrection
and eternal life in thy society: of the Orthodox Fathers and our Brethren.
(...) O thou lover of men pardon them.] And again, [moreover we offer unto thee
this reasonable service for all that rest in faith, our Ancestors, Fathers,
Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles, Preachers, Evangelists, Martyrs, etc.
especially the most holy and unspotted Virgin Mary] and after concludes with
this prayer [Remember them all who have slept in hope of Resurrection to
Eternal life, and make them to rest where the light of thy countenance looks
over them.] Add to these if you please, the Greek Mass of S. Peter: To them, O
Lord, and to all that rest in Christ, we pray that thou indulge a place of
refreshing light and peace.] So that nothing is clearer than that in the Greek
Canon they prayed for the souls of the best of all the Saints, whom yet because
no man believes they ever were in Purgatory; it follows that prayer for the
dead used by the Ancients does not prove the Roman Purgatory.

To these add the doctrine and practice of the Greek Fathers: Eccles. hier.
Cap. 7. in theoria.
Dionysius speaking of a person deceased, whom the Ministers of the Church had
publicly pronounced to be a happy man, and verily admitted into the society of
the Saints, that have been from the beginning of the world, yet the Bishop
prayed for him, that God would forgive him all the sins which he had committed
through humane infirmity, and bring him into the light and region of the
living, into the bosoms of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, where pain and sorrow and
sighing have no place; To the same purpose is that of S. Gregory Naz. Naz. in
fu^^s Caesarii. orat. 10.
in his funeral Oration upon his Brother Caesarius, of whom he had expressly
declared his belief, that he was rewarded with those honors which did befit a
new ^reated soul; yet he presently prays for his soul; Now, O Lord, receive
Caesarius. I hope I have said enough concerning the Greek Church, their
doctrine and practice in this particular: and I desire it may be observed, that
there is no greater testimony of the doctrine of a Church than their Liturgy.
Their Doctors may have private opinions which are not against the doctrine of
the Church; but what is put into their public devotions, and consigned in
their Liturgies, no man scruples it, but it is the confession and religion of
the Church.

But now that I may make my Reader some amends for his trouble in reading the
trifling objections of these Roman adversaries, and my defenses; I shall also
Greek Church, but it is so to this very day in the Latin Church. In the old
Latin Missal we have this prayer, Missa latina Antiqua edit. Argentinae. 1557.
page 52.
[Suscipe sancta Trinitas hanc oblationem quam tibi offerimus pro omnibus in
tui nominis confessione defunctis, ut te dextram auxilii tui porrigente vitae
perennis requiem habeant, and a poenis impiorum segregati semper in tuae laudis
laetitia perseverent. And in the very Canon of the Mass, which these Gentlemen
I suppose (if they be Priests) cannot be ignorant in any part of, they pray,
Memento Domine famulorum famularumque tuarum qui nos praecesserunt cum signo
fidei, and dormiunt in somno pacis. Ipsis Domine and omnibus in Christo
quiescentibus, locum refrigerii, lucis and pacis, ut indulgeas deprecamur.
Unless all that are at rest in Christ go to Purgatory, it is plain that the
Church of Rome prays for Saints, who by the confession of all sides never were
in Purgatory. I could bring many more testimonies if they were needful; but I
sum up this particular with the words of S. Austin: De curapto mortuis, cap. 4.
Non sunt praetermittendae supplicationes pro spiritibus mortuorum; quas
faciendas pro omnibus in Christiana and Catholica societate defunctis etiam
tacitis nominibus quorumque, sub generali commemoratione suscepit Ecclesia. The
Church prays for all persons that died in the Christian and Catholic faith. And
therefore I wonder how it should drop from S. Austins pen, De verbis Apostoli
Sermon. 17.
Injuriam facit Martyri qui orat pro Martyr. But I suppose he meant it only in
case the prayer was made for them, as if they were in an uncertain state, and
so it is probable enough, but else his words were not only against himself in
other places, but against the whole practice of the ancient Catholic Church. I
remember that when it was asked of Pope Innocent by the Archbishop of Lions,
Sacramentarium Gregor. antiquum.
why the prayer that was in the old Missal for the soul of Pope Leo; Annue
nobis Domine, animae famuli tui Leonis haec profit oblatio, it came to be
changed into Annue nobis Domine ut intercessione famuli tui Leonis haec profit
oblatio; Pope Innocent answered him, that who changed it or when, he knew not,
but he knew how, that is, he knew the reason of it, because the authority of
the Holy Scripture said, he does injury to a Martyr that prays for a Martyr,
the same thing is to be done for the like reason concerning all other Saints.]
The good man had heard the saying somewhere, but being little used to the
Bible, he thought it might be there, because it was a pretty saying. However
though this change was made in the Mass-books, and prayer for the soul of S.
Leo, was changed into a prayer to S. Leo Vide Missal. Roman. Paris 1529.
; and the Doctors went about to defend it as well as they could, Cap. cum
Marthae. Extrav. de celebrat Missarum in Glosla.
yet because they did it so pitifully, they had reason to be ashamed of it; and
in the Missal reformed by order of the Council of Trent, it is put out again,
and the prayer for S. Leo put in again Missale Romans in decreto Council Trid.
restit. in festo S. Leonis.
, That by these offices of holy atonement (viz. the celebration of the Holy
Sacrament) a blessed reward may accompany him, and the gifts of thy grace may
be obtained for us.

Roman doctrine of Purgatory, viz. How is Purgatory a Primitive and Catholic
doctrine, when generally the Greek and many of the Latin Fathers taught, that
the souls departed in some exterior place expect the day of judgment, but that
no soul enters into the supreme heaven, or the place of Eternal bliss till the
day of judgment; but at that day, say many of them, all must pass through the
universal fire. To these purposes respectively the words of very many Fathers
are brought by Sixtus Senensis; to all which being so evident and apparent, the
Gentlemen that write against the Dissuasive are pleased not to say one word,
Letter to a friend, page 12.
but have left the whole fabric of the Roman Purgatory to shift for it self
against the battery of so great authorities, only one of them, striving to find
some fault, says, that the Dissuader quotes Sixtus Senensis, as saying, That
Pope John the 22. not only taught and declared the doctrine (that before the
day of judgment the souls of men are kept in certain receptacles) but commanded
it to be held by all, as says Adrian in 4. Sent. when Sixtus Senensis says
not so of Pope John, etc. but only reports the opinion of others. To which I
answer, that I did not quote Senensis as saying any such thing of his own
authority. For besides that in the body of the discourse there is no mention at
all of John 22. in the margent, also it is only said of Sixtus, Enumerat S.
Jacobum Apostolum -- and Johannem Pontif. Romans but I add of my own afterward,
that Pope John not only taught and declared that sentence, And these are the
words of Senensis concerning P. John 22. and P. Adrian.
but commanded it to be held by all men, as says Adrian. Now although in his
narrative of it, Adrian begins with novissime fertur, it is reported, yet
Senensis himself when he had said, Pope John is said to have decreed this; he
himself adds that Ocham and Pope Adrian are witnesses of this decree. 2. Adrian
is so far a witness of it, that he gives the reason of the same, even because
the University of Paris refused to give promotion to them who denied, or did
refuse to promise for ever to cleave to that opinion. 3. Ocham is so fierce a
witness of it, that he wrote against Pope John the 22. for the opinion. 4.
Though Senensis be not willing to have it believed; yet all that he can say
against it, is, that apud probatos scriptores non est Undequaque certum. 5. Yet
he brings not one testimony out of antiquity, against this charge against Pope
John, only he says, that Pope Benedict XI. affirms, that John being prevented
by death could not finish the decree. 6. But this thing was not done in a
corner, the acts of the University of Paris and their fierce adhering to the
decree were too notorious. 7. And after all this it matters not whether it be
so or no, when it is confessed that so many Ancient Fathers expressly teach the
doctrine contrary to the Roman, as it is this day, and yet the Roman Doctors
are not what they say, insomuch that S. Bernard having fully and frequently
taught, That no souls go to Heaven till they all go, neither the Saints without
the common people, nor the spirit without the flesh; that there are three
states of souls, one in the tabernacles (viz. of our bodies) a second in atriis
or outward Courts, and a third in the house of God; Alphonsus a Castro
admonishes that this sentence is damned; and Sixtus Senensis adds these words,
(which thing also I do not deny) yet I suppose he ought to be excused ob
ingentem numerum illustrium Ecclesiae patrum, for the great number of the
illustrious Fathers of the Church, Annot. 345.
who before by their testimony did seem to give authority to this opinion.

Roman Purgatory is but a new article of faith, is therefore certain, because
it was no article of faith in S. Austins time, for he doubted of it. And to
this purpose I quoted in the margent two places of S. Austin. Enchirid. cap.
68, 69.
The words I shall now produce, because they will answer for themselves. In the
68. chapter of his Manual to Laurentius he takes from the Church of Rome their
best armor in which they trusted, 1 Cor. 3.
and expounds the words of S. Paul, he shall be saved yet so as by fire] to
mean only the loss of such pleasant things as most delighted them in this
world. And in the beginning of the next chapter he adds, Tale aliquid etiam
post hanc vitam fieri incredibile non est, and utrum ita sit qu^ri potest.
[That such a thing may also be done after this life is not incredible, and
whether it be so or no it may be inquired, and aut inveniri aut latere, and
either be found or lie hid. Now what is that which thus may, or may not be
found out? This, that [some faithful by how much more or less they loved
perishing goods, by so much sooner or later they shall be saved by a certain
Purgatory fire.] This is it which S. Austin says is not incredible, only it may
be inquired whether it be so or no. And if these be not the words of doubting,
[it is not incredible, such a thing may be, it may be inquired after, it may be
found to be so, or it may never be found, but lie hid] then words signify
nothing: yea [but the doubting of S. Austin does not relate to the matter or
question of Purgatory, but to the manner of the particular punishment, viz.
whether or no that pain of being troubled for the loss of their goods be not a
part of the Purgatory flames? (says E. W. E. W. page 28.
) A goodly excuse! as if S. Austin had troubled himself with such an
impertinent Question, whether the poor souls in their infernal flames be not
troubled that they left their lands and money behind them? Indeed it is possible
they might wish some of the waters of their springs or fishponds to cool their
tongues: but S. Austin surely did not suspect that the tormented Ghosts were
troubled they had not brought their best clothes with them, and money in their
purses; This is too pitiful and strained an answer; the case being so evidently
clear, that the thing S. Austin doubted of was, since there was to some of the
faithful, who yet were too voluptuous or covetous persons, a Purgatory in this
world, even the loss of their Goods which they so loved, and therefore being
lost so grieved for, whether or no they should not also meet with another
Purgatory after death: that is, whether besides the punishment suffered here,
they should not be punished after death; how? by grieving for the loss of their
goods? Ridiculous! what then, S. Austin himself tells us, by so much as they
loved their goods more or less, by so much sooner or later they shall be saved.
And what he said of this kind of sin, viz. too much worldliness, with the same
reason he might suppose of others; this he thought possible, but of this he was
not sure, and therefore it was not then an article of faith, and though now the
Church of Rome has made it so, yet it appears that it was not so from the
beginning, but is part of their new fashioned faith. And E. W. striving so
impossibly, and so weakly to avoid the pressure of this argument, should do
well to consider, whether he have not more strained his Conscience, than the
words of S. Austin. But this matter must not pass thus. S. Austin repeats this
whole passage verbatim in his answer to the 8. Quest. of Dulcitius, Qu. 1. and
still answers in this and other appendant Questions of the same nature, viz.
whether prayers for the dead be available, etc. Quest. 2. and whether upon the
instant of Christ's appearing, De octo Quest. Dulcit. Qu. 3.
he will pass to judgment, Qu. 3. In these things which we have described, our
and the infirmity of others may be so exercised and instructed, nevertheless
that they pass not for Canonical authority. And in the answer to the first
Question he speaks in the style of a doubtful person [whether men suffer such
things in this life only, or also such certain judgments follow even after this
life, this Understanding of this sentence, is not as I suppose abhorrent from
truth.] The same words he also repeats in his book de fide and operibus, Chap.
16. There is yet another place of S. Austin, in which it is plain he still is a
doubting person in the Question of Purgatory. His sense is this; S. Aug. de
civit. Dei. lib. 21 cap. 26.
After the death of the body until the resurrection, if in the interval the
spirits of the dead are said to suffer that kind of fire, which they feel not,
who had not such manners and loves in their lifetime, that their wood, hay and
stubble ought to be consumed; but others feel who brought such buildings along
with them, whether there only, or whether here and there, or whether therefore
here that it might not be there, that they feel a fire of a transitory
tribulation burning their secular buildings, (though escaping from damnation) I
reprove it not; for peradventure it is true.] So S. Austin, peradventure yea,
is always, peradventure nay; and will the Bigots of the Roman Church be content
with such a confession of faith as this of S. Austin in the present article? I
believe not.

But now after all this, I will not deny but S. Austin was much inclined to
believe Purgatory fire, and therefore I shall not trouble my self to answer the
citations to that purpose, which Bellarmine, and from him these transcribers
bring out of this Father, though most of them are drawn out of Apocryphal,
spurious and suspected pieces, as his Homilies de S. S. etc. yet that which I
urge is this, that S. Austin did not esteem this to be a doctrine of the
Church, no article of faith, but a disputable opinion; and yet though he did
incline to the wrong part of the opinion, yet it is very certain that he
sometimes speaks expressly against this doctrine, and other times speaks things
absolutely inconsistent with the opinion of Purgatory, which is more than an
argument of his confessed doubting; for it is a declaration that he understood
nothing certain in this affair, but that the contrary to his opinion was the
more probable. And this appears in these few following words. De C. Dei. lib.
21. c. 13.
S. Austin has these words; some suffer temporary punishments in this life
only, others after death, others both now and then: Bellarmine, and from him
Diaphanta urges this as a great proof of S. Austins doctrine. But he destroys
it in the words immediately following, and makes it useless to the hypothesis
of the Roman Church; This shall be before they suffer the last and severest
judgment (meaning as S. Austin frequently does such sayings, of the General
conflagration at the end of the world.) But whether he does so or no, Ibid.
yet he adds; But all of them come not into the everlasting punishments, which
after the Judgment shall be to them who after death suffer the temporary.] By
which doctrine of S. Austin, viz. that those who are in his Purgatory shall
many of them be damned; and the temporary punishments after death, do but usher
in the Eternal after judgment; he destroys the salt of the Roman fire, who
imagines that all that go to Purgatory shall be saved: Therefore this testimony
of S. Austin, as it is nothing for the avail of the Roman Purgatory, so by the
appendage it is much against it, which Coquaeus, Torrensis, and especially
Cardinal Perron, observing, have most violently corrupted these words, by
falsely translating them. So Perron, Tous ceux qui souffrent des peines
temporelles apres la mort, ne viennent pas aux peines Eternelles qui auront
tien apres le judgment, which reddition is expressly against the sense of S.
Austins words.

2. But another hypothesis there is in S. Austin, to which without dubitation
he does peremptorily adhere, which I before intimated, viz. that although he
admit of Purgatory pains after this life, yet none but such as shall be at the
day of Judgment, Purgatorias autem poenas nullas futuras opinetur, nisi ante
illud ultimum tremendumque judicium. Cap. 16.
[Whoever therefore desires to avoid the eternal pains, let him be not only
baptized, but also justified in Christ, and truly pass from the Devil into
Christ. But let him not think that there shall be any Purgatory pains but
before that last and dreadful Judgment] meaning not only that there shall be
none to cleanse them after the day of judgment, but that then, at the approach
of that day the General fire shall try and purge: And so himself declares his
own sense; In Psalm. 6.
All they that have not Christ in the foundation are argued or reproved; when?
in the day of Judgment; but they that have Christ in the foundation are
changed, that is purged, who build upon this foundation wood, hay, stubble.] So
that in the day of Judgment the trial and escape shall be; for then shall the
trial and the condemnation be. But yet more clear are his words De C. D. lib.
16. c. 24. and lib. 20. c. 25.
in other places: So, at the setting of the Sun, that is, at the end (viz. of
the world) the day of judgment is signified by that fire, dividing the carnal
which are to be saved by fire, and those who are to be damned in the fire;]
nothing is plainer that that S. Austin understood that those, who are to be
saved so as by fire, are to be saved by passing through the fire at the day of
judgment; that was his opinion of Purgatory. And again [out of these things
which are spoken it seems more evidently to appear, that there shall be certain
purgatory pains of some persons in that judgment. For what thing else can be
understood, where it is said, who shall endure the day of his coming, etc.

3. S. Austin speaks things expressly against the doctrine of Purgatory; [know
ye that when the soul is plucked from the body presently it is placed in
Paradise, according to its good deservings, or else for her sins is thrown
headlong in inferni Tartara, Aug. tam. 9. de vanitate saeculi, c. 1. and de
consolatione mortuorum Sermon. 2. cap. 1.
into the hell of the damned; for I know not well how else to render it.] And
again [the soul retiring is received by Angels and placed either in the bosom
of Abraham, if she be faithful, or in the custody of the infernal prison, De
D^gmat. 6. Eccles. cap. 79.
if it be sinful, until the appointed day comes, in which she shall receive her
body:] pertinent to which is that of S. Austin, Aut Augustini aut Gennadii.
if he be Author of that excellent book de Eccles. dogmatibus, which is imputed
to him. [After the ascension of our Lord to the Heavens, the souls of all the
Saints are with Christ, and going from the body go unto Christ, expecting the
resurrection of their body.]

But I shall insist no further upon these things; I suppose it very apparent,
that S. Austin was no way confident of his fancy of Purgatory, and that if he
had fancied right, yet it was not the Roman Purgatory that he fancied. There is
only one objection which I know of, which when I have cleared I shall pass on
to other things. S. Austin, speaking of such who have lived a middle kind of an
indifferent pious life, says, Constat autem, etc. but it is certain, that such
before the day of judgment being purged by temporal pains which their spirit
suffer, when they have received their bodies, shall not be delivered to the
punishment of Eternal fire;] here is a positive determination of the article,
by a word of confidence, and a full certificate; and therefore S. Austin in
this article was not a doubting person. To this I answer, it may be he was
confident here, but it lasted not long; this fire was made of straw and soon
went out; for within two Chapters after, he expressly doubts, as I have proved.
2. These words may refer to the purgatory fire at the general conflagration of
the world; and if they be so referred, it is most agreeable to his other
sentiments. 3. This Constat, or decretory phrase, and some lines before or
after it, are not in the old books of Bruges and Colein, nor in the copies
printed at Friburg; and Ludovicus vives supposes they were a marginal note
crept since into the Text. Now this objection being removed, Contra Pharis.
tit. 8.
there remains no ground to deny, that S. Austin was a doubting person in the
article of Purgatory. And this Erasmus expressly affirmed of him; In exposit
precationis missae. Advers. haeres. lib. 12. tit. Purgatorium.
and the same is said of him by Hofmeister, but modestly; and against his
doubting in his Enchiridion he brings only a testimony in behalf of prayer for
the dead, which is nothing to the purpose; and this is also sufficiently noted
by Alphonsus a Castro, In Cathol. Romao pacifico 9* de purgat.
and by Barnesius. Well! but suppose S. Austin did doubt of Purgatory? This is
no warranty to the Church of England, for she does not doubt of it as S. Austin
did, but plainly condemns it. So one of my adversaries objects; To which I
answer, that the Church of England may the rather condemn it, because S. Austin
doubted of it; for if it be no Catholic doctrine, it is but a School point, and
without prejudice to the faith may be rejected. But 2. I suppose the Church of
England would not have troubled her self with the doctrine, if it had been left
as S. Austin left it; that is, but as a mere uncertain opinion, but when the
wrong end of the opinion was taken, and made an article of faith, and damnation
threatened to them that believed it not; she had reason to consider it, and
finding it to be chaff, wholly to scatter it away. 3. The Church of England is
not therefore to be blamed, if in any case she see more than S. Austin did, and
proceed accordingly; for it is certain the Church of Rome does decree against
diverse things, of which S. Austin indeed did not doubt, but affirmed
confidently; I instance in the necessity of communicating infants, and the
matter of appeals to Rome.

The next Authority to be examined is, that of Otho Frisnigensis, concerning
which there is a heavy quarrel against the Dissuasive, for making him to speak
of a Purgatory before, whereas he speaks of one after the day of judgment, with
a Quidam asserunt, some affirm it, viz. that there is a place of Purgatory
after death; nay but you are deceived says E. W. and the rest of the
adversaries; he means that some affirm there is a place of Purgatory after the
day of judgment. Now truly that is more than I said; but that Otho said it, is
by these men confessed. But his words are these; [I think it ought to be
searched, Esse quippe apud inferos locum purgationum in quo salvandi vel
tenebris tantum afficiantur, vel expiationis igne decoquantur quidam asserunt.
whether the judgment being passed, besides the lower hell, there remain a
place for lighter punishments; for that there is (below, or) in hell a
Purgatory place, in which they that are to be saved are either affected
(a^ficiantur, invested, punished) with darkness only, or else are boiled in the
fire of expiation, some do affirm.] What is or can be more plainly said of
Purgatory; for the places of Scripture brought to confirm this opinion are
such, which relate to the interval between death and the last judgment; juxta
illud Patriarchae, lugens descendum ad inferos; and illud Apostoli, ipse autem
salvus erit, sic tamen quasi per ignem; I hope the Roman Doctors will not deny,
but these are meant of Purgatory before the last day: and therefore so is the
opinion for the proof of which these places are brought. 2. By post judicium,
in the title, and transacto judicio in the Chapter, Otho means the particular
judgment passing upon every one at their death: which he in a few lines after
calls terminatis in judicio causis singulorum. 3. He must mean it to be before
the last great day; because that which he says, some do affirm, quidam
asserunt; is, that those which are salvandi, to be saved hereafter, are either
in darkness or in a Purgatory fire; which therefore must be meant of the
interval; for after the day of judgment is passed, and the books shut, and the
sentence pronounced, none can be saved that are not then acquitted, unless
Origens opinion of the salvation of Devils and damned souls be reintroduc'd.
which the Church before Otho many ages had exploded, and therefore so good and
great a person would not have thought that fit to be then disputed: and it was
not then a Question, nor a thing Undetermined in the Church. 4. Whether Otho
means it of a Purgatory before or after the day of the last judgment, it makes
very much against the present Roman doctrine; for Otho applies the Question to
the case of infants dying without Baptism; now if their Purgatory be before the
day of judgment, then I quoted Otho according to my own sense and his; but if
he means it to be after the day of judgment, then the limbus infantum of the
Roman Church is vanished. (for the scruple was moved about infants) Quid de
parvulis qui solo Originali delicto tenentur fiet? and there is none such till
after dooms day; so that let it be as it will, the Roman Church is a loser, and
therefore let them take their choice on which side they will fall.

But now after S. Austins time; especially in the time of S. Gregory, and
since, there were many strange stories told of souls appearing after death, and
telling strange things of their torments below; many of which being gathered
together by the speculum exemplorum, the legend of Lombardy and others, some of
them were noted by the Dissuasive to this purpose to show, that in the time
when these stories were told, the fire of Purgatory did not burn clear; but
they found Purgatory in baths, in Eves of houses, in frosts and cold rains,
upon spits rosting like Pigs or Geese, upon pieces of Ice. Now to this there is
nothing said; but that in the place quoted in the speculum there is no such
thing: which saying as it was spoken invidiously, so it was to no purpose; for
if the objector ever has read the distinction which is quoted, throughout; he
should have found the whole story at large. It is the 31. example page 205.
Col. 1. printed at Doway 1603. And the same words are exactly in an Ancienter
edition printed at the Imperial Town of Hagenaw 1519. Impensis Johannis Rynman.
But these Gentlemen care not for the force of any argument, if they can any way
put it off from being believed upon any foolish pretense.

But then as to the thing it self, Post hoc apparuit eidem presbytero columna
quaedam jubaris immensi, cujus claritas ultra communem solis valentiam,
coruscare videbatur, de coel^ usque ad terram porrecta, per quam anima quaedam
Angelico ductu ad sydera contendebat. Sciscitante vero presbytero, quidnam hoc
esset Respondit alter, ipsa est anima Constantini quondam Judicius and domini
Turritani, haec autem per novem annos ventis and pluviis and algoribus semper
exposita a die exitus sui usque nunc in stillicidi^ domus suae constitit,
ibique suorum excessuum poenas luit, sed qui misericors and liberalis in
pauperes extitit, and judicium injuria^ patientibus fecit, in super etiam de
malis quae commisit confessa and poenitens a corpore exivit, idcirco
misericordiam a Deo consecuta, hodierna die meretur ab omnibus malis liberari,
etc. Haec and multa alia sacerdos ille vidit and audivit de secretis alterius
vitae.
though learned men deny the Dialogues of S. Gregory, from whence many of the
like stories are derived, to be his, as Possevine confesses, and Melchior Canus
though a little timorously affirms; yet I am willing to admit them for his, but
yet I cannot but note; that those Dialogues have in them many foolish,
ridiculous and improbable stories, but yet they and their like are made a great
ground of Purgatory; but then the right also may be done to S. Gregory, his
doctrine of Purgatory cannot consist with the present article of the Church of
Rome, so fond they are in the alleging of authorities; that they destroy their
own hypothesis by their undiscerning quotations. For 1. S. Gregory P. affirms
that which is perfectly inconsistent with the whole doctrine of Purgatory. S.
Greg. M. lib. 13. in. Jobum. c. 15. c: 17.
For he says, That it is a fruit of our redemption by the grace of [Christ] our
author, that when we are drawn from our dwelling in the body, Mox, forthwith we
are lead to celestial rewards; and a little after speaking of those words of
Job, Cum constat quod apud inferos justi non in locupoenalibus, sed in
superiori quietis sinu tenerentur, magna nobis o^oritur question quidnam sit
quod B. Job. asserit.
In profundissimum infernum descendunt omnia mea] he says thus [Since it is
certain that in the lower region the just are not in poenal places, but are
held in the superior bosom of rest, a great question arises, what is the
meaning of Blessed Job.] If Purgatory can stand with this hypothesis of S.
Gregory, then fire and water can be reconciled. This is the doctrine of S.
Gregory in his own works: for whether the Dialogues under his name be his or
no, I shall not dispute; but if I were studying to do honor to his memory, I
should never admit them to be his, and so much the rather because the doctrine
of the Dialogues contradicts the Doctrine of his Commentaries, and yet even the
Purgatory which is in the Dialogues is unlike that which was declared at Basil;
Lib. 4. Dialog. c. 39.
for the Gregorian Purgatory supposed only an expiation of small and light
faults, as immoderate laughter, impertinent talking, Cap. 46.
which nevertheless he himself says are expiable by fear of death; In summa
sacram.
and Victoria, and Jacobus de Graffis say, are to be taken away by beating the
breast, holy water, Eccles. n. 110.
the Bishops blessing; Decis. cas. conf^ient. part 1. lib. 1. c. 6. n 10.
and S. Austin says they are to be taken off by daily saying the Lords prayer;
and therefore being so easily, so readily, so many ways to be purged here, it
will not be worth establishing a Purgatory for such alone, but he admits not of
any remaining punishment due to greater sins forgiven by the blood of Christ.
But concerning S. Gregory I shall say no more, but refer the Reader to the
Apology of the Greeks, who affirm that S. Gregory admitted a kind of Purgatory,
but whether allegorically or no, or thinking so really, they know not; but what
he said was (...), and by way of dispensation, and as it were constrained to
it, by the arguments of those who would have all sins expiable after death,
against whom he could not so likely prevail, if he had said that none was; and
therefore he thought himself forced to go a middle way, and admit a Purgatory
only for little or venial sins, which yet will do no advantage to the Church of
Rome. And besides all this, S. Gregory or whoever is the Author of these
Dialogues has nothing definite, or determined, concerning the time, manner,
measure or place; so wholly new was this doctrine then, that it had not gotten
any shape or feature.

Next I am to account concerning the Greeks, whom I affirm always to have
differed from the Latins, since they had forged this new doctrine of Purgatory
in the Roman laboratories: The letter page 14.
and to prove something of this, I affirmed that in the Council of Basil they
published an Apology directly disapproving the doctrine of Purgatory.] Against
this, up starts a man fierce and angry, and says there was no such Apology
published in the Council of Basil, for he had examined it all over, and can
find no such Apology. I am sorry for the Gentleman's loss of his labor, but if
he had taken me along with him, I could have helped the learned man. This
Apology was written by Marcus Metropolitan of Ephesus as Sixtus Senensis
confesses, Biblioth. lib. 6.
and that he offered it to the Council of Basil. Annot. 259.
That it was given and read to the deputies of the Council, Lib. 2. p. 186.
June 14. 1438. is attested by Cusanus, and Martinus Crusius in his
Turco-Graecia. But it is no wonder if this over-learned author of the letter
missed this Apology in his search of the Council of Basil, for this is not the
only material thing that is missing in the editions of the Council of Basil;
for Linwood that great and excellent English Canonist made an appeal in that
Council, and prosecuted it with effect in behalf of King Henry of England, Cum
in temporalibus non recognoscat superiorem in terris, etc. But nothing of this
now appears, though it was then registered, but it is no new thing to forge or
to suppress acts of Councils: But besides this, I did not suppose he would have
been so indiscreet as to have looked for that Apology in the editions of the
Council of Basil, but it was delivered to the Council by the Greeks, and the
Council was wise enough not to keep that upon public record; however if the
Gentleman please to see it, he may have it among the Booksellers, if he will
please to ask for the Apologia Graecorum de igne purgatorio published by
Salmasius; it was supposed to be made by Marc Archbishop, P. 93.
but for saving the Gentleman's charge or trouble, I shall tell him a few words
out of that Apology which will serve his turn, (...), etc. For these reasons
the doctrine of a Purgatory fire is to be cast out of the Church, as that which
slackens the endeavors of the diligent, as persuading them not to use all
means of contention to be purged in this life, since another purgation is
expected after it. And it is infinitely to be wondered at the confidence of
Bellarmine (for as for this objector, De purgat^rio lib. 1. c. 15. Sect.
it matters not so much) that he should in the face of all the world say, Ad
secundum dico.
that the Greek Church never doubted of Purgatory: whereas he has not brought
one single, true and pertinent testimony out of the Greek Fathers for the Roman
doctrine of Purgatory, but is forced to bring in that crude allegation of their
words for prayer for the dead, which is to no purpose, as all wise men know;
Indeed he quotes the Alchoran* for Purgatory, Bellar. lib. 1. c. 11. Sect. de
Mahumetanis.
an authentic author (it seems) to serve such an end. But besides this, two
memorable persons of the Greek Church, Nilus Archbishop of Thessalonica, and
Marc Archbishop of Ephesus, have in behalf of the Greek Church written against
the Roman doctrine in this particular. And it is remarkable that the Latins
were and are so put to it to prove Purgatory fire from the Greek Fathers, that
they have forged a citation from Theodoret, In 1 Cor. 3.
which is not in him at all, but was first cited in Latin by Tho. Aquinas
either out of his own head, or cosen'd by some body else; And quoted so by
Bellarmine Lib. 1. de purgat. c. 5. Sect. ex Graecis
, which to wise men cannot but be a very great argument of the weakness of the
Roman cause in this Question from the Greek Fathers, and that Bellarmine saw
it, but yet was resolved to run through it and outface it; but Nilus taking
notice of it, says that there are no such words in Theodoret in the many copies
of his works which they had. In Greek it is certain they are not, and Gagneius
first translated them into Greek to make the cheat more prevalent, but in that
translation makes use of those words of the wisdom of Solomon, Sap. 3. v. 6.
(...), as gold in the furnace (meaning it of the affliction of the righteous
in this world) but unluckily he made use of that Chapter: In the first verse of
which chapter, it is said, The souls of the righteous are in the hands of God,
and no torment shall touch them, which is a testimony more pregnant against the
Roman Purgatory, than all that they can bring from the Greek Fathers for it.
And this Gentleman confutes the Dissuasive, as he thinks, by telling the story
according as his own Church has set it down, who as with subtle and potent
arts they forced the Greeks to a seeming Union, so they would be sure not to
tell the world in their own records how unhandsomely they carried themselves.
But besides this, the very answer which the Archbishop of Ephesus gave to the
Latins in that Council (and which words the objector here sets down and
confesses) are a plain confutation of himself, for the Latins standing for a
Purgatory fire, temporary; the Archbishop of Ephesus denies it, saying, That
the Italians, confess a fire, both in the present world and purgatory by it
(that is, before the day of Judgment) and in the world to come, but not
Purgatory but Eternal; But the Greeks hold a fire in the world to come only,
(meaning Eternal) and a temporary punishment of souls, that is, that they go
into a dark place, and of grief, but that they are purged, that is, delivered
from the dark place, by Priests prayers and sacrifices, and by alms, but not by
fire.] Then they fell on disputing about Purgatory fire, to which the Greeks
delayed to answer: And afterward being pressed to answer, they refused to say
any thing about Purgatory, and when they at the upshot of all were utcunque
United, Joseph the Patriarch of C. P. made a most pitiful confession of
Purgatory in such general and crafty terms, as sufficiently showed, that as the
Greeks were forced to do something, so the Latins were content with any thing,
for by those terms, the Question between them was no way determined, Romae
veteris Papam Domini nostri Jesu Christi vicarium esse concedere, atque
animarum purgationem esse non in^icior. He denied not that there is a
Purgatory. No, for the Greeks confessed it, in this world before death, and
some of them acknowledged a dark place of sorrow after this life, but neither
fire nor Purgatory; for the purgation was made in this world, and after this
world by the prayers of the Priests, and the alms of their friends, the
purgation was made, not by fire, as I cited the words before. The Latins told
them there should be no Union without it; The Greek Emperor refused, and all
this the objector is pleased to acknowledge; but after a very great bussle
made, and they were forced to patch up a Union, hope to get assistance of the
Latins: But in this also they were cosen'd, and having lost C. P. many of the
Greeks attributed that fatal loss to their dissembling Union made at Florence;
and on the other side the Latins imputed it to their opinion of the procession
of the Holy Ghost: however, the Greek Churches never admitted that union as is
averred by Laonicus Chalcondylas, de rebus Turcicis. lib. 1. non long ab
initio. And it is a strange thing that this affair, of which all Europe was
witness, should with so little modesty be shuffled up, and the Dissuasive
accused for saying that which themselves acknowledge. But see what some of
themselves say, Unus est ex notissimis Graecorum and Armenorum erroribus quo
docent nullum esse purgatorium, quo animae ex hac luce migrantes purgentur
sordibus quas in hoc corpore contraxerunt, Lib. 12. tit purgatorium.
says Alphonsus a Castro. It is one of the most known errors of the Greeks and
Armenians that they teach there is no Purgatory: And Aquinas writing contra
Graecorum errores labors to prove Purgatory: See Binius tom. 4. Council.
And Archbishop Antoninus who was present at the Council of Florence, after he
had rejected the Epistle of Eugenius, adds, Errabant Graeci purgatorium
negantes quod est haereticum, Add to these the testimony of Roffensis and
Polydore Virgil before quoted, Art. 18. contr. Luther.
Usque ad hunc diem Graecis non est creditum purgatorium: and Gregory de
Valentia. Disp. 11. Qu. 1. punctum. 1. Sect. 5.
says, Express autem purgatorium negarunt Waldenses haeretici, De locis
animarum post mortem.
ut refert Guido Carmelita in summa de haeresi: Item schismatici Graeci
recentiores, ut ex concilio Florentino apparet. And Alphonsus a Castro Lib. 8.
adv. haeres. tit. Indulgentiae.
says, Unto this very day, Purgatory is not believed by the Greeks. And no
less can be imagined, since their prime and most learned Prelate, besides what
he did in the Council, did also after the Council publish an Encyclical Epistle
against the definition of the Council, as may be seen in Binius his narrative
of the Council of Florence: By all which appears how notoriously scandalous is
the imputation of falsehood laid upon the Dissuasive by this objector; who by
this time is warm with writing, and grows uncivil, being like a baited Bull,
beaten into choler with his own tail, and angered by his own objections.

But the next charge is higher; it was not only doubted of in S. Austins time,
and since; but the Roman doctrine of Purgatory without any haesitation or
doubting is against the express doctrines delivered by diverse of the Ancient
Fathers; and to this purpose some were remarked in the Dissuasive, which I
shall now verify and add others very plain and very considerable.

S. Cyrian exhorts Demetrianus to turn to Christ while this world lasts, Ad
Demetrian.
saying, Sect. 16. and Sect. 22.
that after we are dead there is no place of repentance, no place of
satisfaction.] To this the letter Page 17.
answers; It is not said when we are dead, but when you are dead, meaning that
this is spoken to heathens, not to Christians. As if quando istinc excessum
fuerit, being spoken impersonally, does not mean indefinitely all the world,
and certainly it may as well one as the other, Christians as well as Heathens,
for Christians may be in the state of deadly sin, and aversion from God as well
as Heathens, and then this admonition and reason fits them as well as the
other. E. W Page 32.
. answers, that S. Cyprian means that after death there is no meritorious
satisfaction; he says true indeed, there is none that is meritorious, neither
before nor after death, but this will not serve his turn, for S. Cyptrian says,
that after death there is none at all; no place of satisfaction] of any kind
whatsoever, no place of wholesome repentance. And therefore it is vain to say
that this Council was only given to Demetrianus, who was a Heathen; for if he
had been a Christian, he would or at least might have used the same argument,
not to put any part of his duty off upon confidence of any thing to be done or
suffered after this life. For his argument is this, this is the time of
repentance, after death it is not; now you may satisfy (that is, appease) the
Divine anger, after this life is ended, nothing of this can be done. For S.
Cyrian does not speak this dispensative, Donec aevi temporalis fine completo ad
aeternae vel mortis vel immortalitatis hospitia dividamur. Ibid.
or by relation to this particular case, but assertive, he affirms expressly
speaking to the same Demetrian; [that when this life is finished we are
divided, either to the dwelings of death or of immortality. And that we may see
this is not spoken of impenitent pagans only, Sect. 16.
as the letter to a friend dreams, S. Cyprian renews the same caution and
advice to the lapsed Christians: Sermon. de lapsis.
[O ye my Brethren let every one confess his sin, Confiteantur singuli vos
fratres delictum suum, dum adhuc qui deliquit i^ saeculo est, dum admit^i
confessio ejus potest, dum satisfactio, and remissio facta per sacerdotes apud
Dominum grata est.
while he that has sinned is yet in this world, while his confession can be
admitted, while satisfaction and pardon made by the Priests is grateful with
God.] If there had been any thought of the Roman Purgatory in S. Cyprians time,
he could not in better words have impugned it, than here he does. All that have
sinned must here look to it, here they must confess, here beg pardon, here make
amends and satisfy, afterward neither one nor the other shall be admitted.
Now if to Christians also there is granted no leave to repent, no means to
satisfy, no means of pardon after this life, these words are so various and
comprehensive that they include all cases; and it is plain S. Cyprian speaks it
indefinitely, there is no place of repentance, no place of satisfaction; none
at all, neither to Heathens nor to Christians. But now let these words be set
against the Roman doctrine, viz. that there is a place called Purgatory, in
which the souls tormented do satisfy, and come not out thence till they have
paid, (viz. by sufferings, or by suffrages) the utmost farthing, and then see
which we will follow: for they differ in all the points of the Compass. And
these men do nothing but betray the weakness of their cause by expounding S.
Cyprian to the ^ense of new distinctions, made but yesterday in the forges of
the Schools. And indeed the whole affair upon which the answer of Bellarmine
relies, which these men have translated to their own use, is unreasonable. For
is it a likely business, that when men have committed great crimes they shall
be pardoned here by confession, and the ministeries of the Church, etc. and yet
that the venial sins though confessed in the general, and as well as they can
be, and the party absolved, yet there should be prepared for their expiation
the intolerable torments of hell fire for a very long time; and that for the
greater sins, for which men have agreed with their adversary in the way, and
the Adversary has forgiven them, yet that for these also they should be cast
into prison, from whence they shall not come till the utmost farthing be paid;
that is against the design of our Blessed Saviors Counsel, for if that be the
case, then though we and our adversaries are agreed upon the main, and the debt
forgiven, yet nevertheless we may be delivered to the tormentors. But then
concerning the sense of S. Cyprian in this particular, no man can doubt that
shall have but read his excellent treatise of mortality: that he could not, did
not admit of Purgatory after death before the day of judgment, for he often
said it in that excellent treatise which he made to comfort and strengthen
Christians against the fear of death; that immediately after death we go to God
or the Devil: and therefore it is for him only to fear to die, who is not
willing to go to Christ, and he only is to be unwilling to go to Christ who
believes not that he begins to reign with Christ.] That we in the mean time
die, we pass over by death to immortality. It is not a going forth, but a pass
over, and when our temporal course is run, a going over to immortality. ^ Let
us embrace that day, which assigns every one of us to our dwelling, and
restores those which are snatched from hence, and are disintangled from the
snares of the world to Paradise, and the Heavenly kingdom.] There are here many
other things so plainly spoken to this purpose, that I wonder any Papist should
read that treatise, and not be cured of his infirmity.

To the same purpose is that of S. Dionys, S. Dionys.
calling death the end of holy agonies;] and therefore it is to be supposed
they have no more agonies to run through immediately after death. To this E. W.
answers; that S. Denis means, Page 32.
that death is the end of all the agonies of this life. A goodly note! and
never revealed till then and now; as if this were a good argument to encourage
men to contend bravely, and not to fear death, because when they are once dead,
they shall no more be troubled with the troubles of this life; indeed you may
go to worse, and death may let you into a state of being as bad as hell, and of
greater torments than all the pains of this world put together amount to.] But
to let alone such ridiculous subterfuges, see the words of S. Dionys, [They
that live a holy life, looking to the true promises of God, as if they were to
behold the truth it self in that resurrection which is according to it, with
firm and true hope, and in a Divine joy come to the sleep of death, as to an
end of all holy contentions;] now certainly if the doctrine of Purgatory were
true, and that they who had contended here, and for all their troubles in this
world were yet in a tolerable condition, should be told, that now they shall go
to worse, he that should tell them so would be but one of Jobs comforters. No,
the servant of God [coming to the end of his own troubles (viz. by death) is
filled with holy gladness, and with much rejoicing ascends to the way of Divine
regeneration, ^ viz. to immortality] which word can hardly mean, that they
shall be tormented a great while in hell fire.

The words of Justin Martyr, Justin Martyr resp. ad Quest. 75.
or whoever is the Author of those Questions and Answers imputed to him,
affirms that presently after the departure of the soul from the body, a
distinction is made between the just and unjust, for they are brought by Angels
to places worthy of them; the souls of the just to Paradise, where they have
the conversation and sight of Angels and Archangels, but the souls of the
unrighteous to the places in Hades, ^ the invisible region or Hell. ^ Against
these words because they pinch severely, Page* 33.
E. W. thinks himself bound to say something; and therefore 1. whereas Justin
Martyr says, after our departure presently there is a separation made, he
answers, that Justin Martyr means here to speak of the two final states after
the day of judgment, for so it seems he understands (...), or presently after
death, to mean the day of judgment; of the time of which neither men nor Angels
know any thing. And whereas Justin Martyr says, that presently the souls of the
righteous go to Paradise, Page 33.
E. W. answers: 2. That Justin does not say that all just souls are carried
presently into Heaven; no, Justin says, into Paradise, true, but let it be
remembered that it is so a part of Heaven, as limbus infantum is by themselves
called a part of hell; that is, a place of bliss; the region of the blessed.
But 3. Justin says that presently there is a separation made, but he says not
that the souls of the righteous are carried to Paradise.] That Is the next
answer, which the very words of Justin do contradict. There is presently a
separation made of the just and unjust, for they are by the Angels carried to
the places they have deserved. This is the separation which is made, one is
carried to Paradise, the other to a place in hell. But these being such pitiful
offers at answering, the Gentleman tries another way, and says, 4. That this
affirmative of Justin contradicts another saying of Justin, which I cited out
of Sixtus Senensis, that Justin Martyr and many other of the Fathers, affirmed
that the souls of men are kept in secret receptacles, reserved unto the
sentence of the great day; and that before then no man receives according to
his works done in this life. To this I answer, that one opinion does not
contradict another; for though the Fathers believed that they who die in the
Lord rest from their labors, and are in blessed places, and have antepasts of
joy and comforts, yet in those places they are reserved unto the judgment of
the great day: The intermedial joy or sorrow respectively of the just and
unjust does but antidate the final sentence; and as the comforts of Gods spirit
in this life are indeed graces of God and rewards of piety, as the torments of
an evil conscience are the wages of impiety, yet as these do not hinder, but
that the great reward is given at doomsday and not before, so neither do the
joys which the righteous have in the interval. They can both consist together,
and are generally affirmed by very many of the Greek and Latin Fathers. E. W.
page 36.
And methinks this Gentleman might have learned from Sixtus Senensis how to
have reconciled these two opinions; for he quotes him, saying there is a double
beatitude, the one imperfect of soul only, the other consummate and perfect of
soul and body. The first the Fathers called by several names of Sinus Abrahae,
Atrium Dei, sub Altar, etc. The other, perfect joy, the glory of the
resurrection, etc. But it matters not what is said, or how it be contradicted,
so it seem but to serve a present turn. But at last, if nothing of this will
do, these words are not the words of Justin, for he is not the Author of the
Questions and Answers ad orthodoxos. To which I answer, it matters not whether
they be Iustins or no: But they are put together in the collection of his
works, and they are generally called his, and cited under his name, and made
use of by Bellarmine Lib. de baptis. c. 25. and 26. lib. de confirmat* c. 5 l.
3. de Euchar. c. 6.
, when he supposes them to be to his purpose. However the Author is Ancient and
Orthodox, and so esteemed in the Church, and in this particular speaks
according to the doctrine of the more Ancient Doctors; well! but how is this
against Purgatory? says E. W. P. 36. line 29.
for they may be in secret receptacles after they have been in Purgatory. To
this I answer, that he dares not teach that for doctrine in the Church of Rome,
who believes that the souls delivered out of Purgatory go immediately to the
heaven of the Blessed, and therefore if his book had been worth the perusing by
the Censors of books, he might have been questioned, and followed Mr. Whites
fortune. And he adds, it might be afterward according to Origens opinion; that
is, Purgatory might be after the day of judgment, for so Origin held, that all
the fires are Purgatory, and the Devils themselves should be saved. Thus this
poor Gentleman thinking it necessary to answer one argument against Purgatory
brought in the dissuasive, cares not to answer by a condemned heresy, rather
than reason shall be taught by any son of the Church of England. But however,
the very words of the Fathers cross his slippery answers so, that they thrust
him into a corner; for in these receptacles the godly have joy, and they enter
into them as soon as they die, and abide there till the day of judgment.

S. Ambrose is so full, De bono mortis cap. 4.
pertinent and material to the Question in hand, and so destructive of the
Roman hypothesis, that nothing can be said against it. His words are these,
[therefore in all regards death is good because it divides those that were
always fighting, that they may not impugn each other, and because it is a
certain port to them, who being tossed in the sea of this world require the
station of faithful rest; and because it makes not our state worse, but such as
it finds every one, such it reserves him to the future judgment, and nourishes
him with rest, and withdraws him from the envy of present things, and composes
him with the expectation of future things.] E. W. Page 34.
thinking himself bound to say something to these words; answers, It is an
excellent saying, for worse he is not, but infinitely better, that quit off the
occasions of living here, is ascertained of future bliss hereafter, which is
the whole drift of the Saint in that Chapter: Read it, and say afterward if I
say not true.] It is well put off. But there are very many that read him, who
never will or can examine what S. Ambrose says, and withal such he hopes* to
escape. But as to the thing: That death gives a man advantage, and by its own
fault no disadvantage is indeed not only the whole drift of that Chapter, but
of that whole book. But not for that reason only is a man the better for death,
but because it makes him not worse in order to Eternity; nay, it does not alter
him at all as to that, for as death finds him, so shall the judgment find him
(and therefore not purified by Purgatory) for such he is reserved; and not only
thus, but it cherishes him with rest, which would be very ill done if death
carried him to Purgatory. Now all these last words and many others, E. W. is
pleased to take no notice of, as not being for his purpose. But he that pleases
to see more, may read the 12. and 18. Chapters of the same Treatise.

S. Gregorie's saying, S. Greg. Nazianz. orat. 15. in plagam grandi^is. (...).
that after this life there is no purgation, can no way be put off by any
pretenses. For he means it of the time after death before the day of judgment,
which is directly opposed to the doctrine of the Church of Rome; and unless you
will suppose that S. Gregory believed two Purgatories, it is certain he did not
believe the Roman; for he taught that the purgation which he calls Baptism by
fire, and the saving, yet so as by fire, was to be performed at the day of
judgment: and the curiosity of that trial is the fierceness of that fire, as
Nicetas expounds S. Gregory's words in his oration in sancta lumina. So that S.
Gregory affirming that this world is the place of purgation, and that after
this world there is no purgation, could not have spoken any thing more direct
against the Roman Purgatory.

S. Hilary, In Psalm.
and S. Macarius speak of two states after death, and no more. True says E. W.
but they are the two final states. That is true too, in some sense, for it is
either of eternal good, or evil; but to one of these states they are consigned
and determined at the time of their death, at which time every one is sent
either to the bosom of Abraham, or to a place of pain, where they are reserved
to the sentence of the great day. S. Hillary's words are these [There is no
stay or delaying. For the day of judgment is either an eternal retribution of
beatitude or of pain: But the time of our death has every one in his laws
whiles either Abraham (viz. the bosom of Abraham) or pain reserves every one
unto the Judgment.] These words need no Commentary. He that can reconcile these
to the Roman Purgatory, Homil. 22. vide etiam homil. 26.
will be a most mighty man in controversy. And so also are the words of S.
Macarius, when they go out of the body, the quires of Angels receive their
souls, and carry them to their proper place (...) to a pure world, and so lead
them to the Lord.] Such words as these are often repeated by the Holy Fathers,
and Doctors of the Ancient Church; I sum them up with the saying of S.
Athanasius, De Virgin:
(...), etc. It is not death that happens to the righteous, but a translation:
For they are translated out of this world into everlasting rest. And as a man
would go out of prison, so do the Saints go out of this troublesome life, unto
those good things which are prepared for them.] Now let these and all the
precedent words be confronted against the sad complaints made for the souls in
Purgatory by Joh. Gerson, in his querela defunctorum, and Sr. Tho. More in his
supplication of souls, and it will be found that the doctrine of the Fathers
differs from the doctrine of the Church of Rome as much as heaven and hell,
rest and labor, horrid torments and great joy. I conclude this matter of
quotations by the saying of Pope Leo, Letter p. 18.
which one of my adversaries could not find, because the printer was mistaken;
It is the 91. Epistle, so known, and so used by the Roman writers in the Qu. of
Confession, that if he be a man of learning it cannot be supposed, but he knew
where to find them. The words are these But if any of them, for whom we pray
unto the Lord being intercepted by any obstacle, falls from the benefit of the
present Indulgences, and before he comes to the constituted remedies shall end
his temporal life by humane condition (or frailty) that which abiding in the
body he has not received, being out of the flesh he cannot. Now against these
words of S. Leo, set the present doctrine of the Church of Rome; [that what is
not finished of penances here, a man may pay in Purgatory] and let the world
judge whether S. Leo was in this point a Roman Catholic. Indeed S. Leo forgot
to make use of the late distinction of sins venial and mortal, of the
punishment of mortal sins remaining after the fault is taken away; but I hope
the Roman Doctors will excuse the Saint, because the distinction is but new and
modern. But this Testimony of S. Gregory must not go for a single Testimony:
That, which abiding in the body could not be received, out of the body cannot;
that is, when the soul is gone out of the body, as death finds them, so shall
the day of judgment find them. And this was the sense of the whole Church; for
after death there is no change of state before the General Trial: no passing
from pain to rest in the state of separation, and therefore either there are no
Purgatory pains, or if there be, there is no ease of them before the day of
judgment; and the Prayers and Masses of the Church cannot give remedy to one
poor soul; and this must of necessity be confessed by the Roman Doctors, or
else they must show that ever any one Catholic Father did teach, that after
death, and before the day of Judgment, any souls are translated into a state of
bliss out of a state of pain: that is, that from Purgatory they go to heaven
before the day of Judgment. He that can show this, will teach me what I have
not yet learned, but he that cannot show it, must not pretend that the Roman
doctrine of Purgatory was ever known to the Ancient Fathers of the Church.

SECTION III.
Of Transubstantiation.
THE purpose of the Dissuasive was to prove the doctrine of Transubstantiation
to be new, neither Catholic nor Apostolic. In order to which I thought nothing
more likely to persuade or dissuade, than the testimonies of the parties
against themselves. And although I have many other inducements (as will appear
in the sequel;) yet by so earnestly contending to invalidate the truth of the
quotations, the Adversaries do confess by implication, if these sayings be as
is pretended, then I have evinced my main point, viz. that the Roman doctrines,
as differing from us, are novelties, and no parts of the Catholic faith.

Thus therefore the Author of the letter begins. He quotes Scotus, P. 18.
as declaring the doctrine of Transubstantiation is not expressed in the Canon
of the Bible; which he says not. To the same purpose he quotes Ocham, but I
can find no such thing in him. To the same purpose he quotes Roffensis but he
has no such thing.] But in order to the verification of what I said, I desire
it be first observed what I did say, for I did not deliver it so crudely as
this Gentleman sets it down: For 1. These words [the doctrine of
Transubstantiation is not expressed in the Canon of the Bible] are not the
words of all them before named, they are the sense of them all, but the words
but of one or two of them. 2. When I say that some of the Roman Writers say
that Transubstantiation is not expressed in the Scripture, I mean, and so I
said plainly, [as without the Churches declaration to compel us to admit of
it.] Now then for the quotations themselves, I hope I shall give a fair
account. 1. The words quoted, Lect. 40. in Can. Missae.
are the words of Biel, when he had first affirmed that Christ's body is
contained truly under the bread, and that it is taken by the faithful (all
which we believe and teach in the Church of England) he adds; Tamen quomodo ibi
sit Christi corpus, an per conversionem alicujus in ipsum (that is, the way of
Transubstantiation) an sine conversione incipiat esse Corpus Christi cum pane,
manentibus substantia and accidentibus panis non invenitur expressum in Canone
Biblii: and that is the way of Consubstantiation; so that here is expressly
taught what I affirmed was taught, that the Scriptures did not express the
doctrine of Transubstantiation; and he adds, that concerning this, there were
Anciently diverse opinions. Thus far the quotation is right: But of this man
there is no notice taken. But what of Scotus? He says no such thing; well
suppose that, yet I hope this Gentleman will excuse me for Bellarmines sake,
who says the same thing of Scotus as I do, and he might have found it in the
Margent against the quotation of Scotus if he had pleased. Lib. 3. de Euchar.
c. 23.
His words are these [Secondly he says (viz. Sect. Secundo dicit.
Scotus) that there is not extant any place of Scripture so express, without
the declaration of the Church, that it can compel us to admit of
Transubstantiation: And this is not altogether improbable: For though the
Scriptures which we brought above seem so clear to us, that it may compel a man
that is not wilful, yet whether it be so or no, it may worthily be doubted,
since most learned and acute men (such as Scotus eminently was) believe the
contrary.] Well! But the Gentleman can find no such thing in Ocham: I hope he
did not look far, for OCham is not the man I mean; however the printer might
have mistaken, but it is easily pardonable, because from O. Came. meaning Odo
Cameracensis, it was easy for the printer or transcriber to write Ocam, as
being of more public name; But the Bishop of Cambray is the man, that followed
Scotus in this opinion, Vbi suprae.
and is acknowledged by Bellarmine to have said the same that Scotus did, he
being one of his docti and acutissimi viri there mentioned. Contra. Captiv.
Now if Roffensis have the same thing too, Babyl. c. 1.
this Author of the letter will have cause enough to be a little ashamed: And
for this, I shall bring his words, speaking of the whole institution of the
Blessed Sacrament by our Blessed Savior, he says, [Neque ullum hic verbum
positum est quo probetur in nostra Missa veram fieri carnis and sanguinis
Christi praesentiam. I suppose I need to say no more to verify these
citations, but yet I have another very good witness to prove that I have said
true; and that is Salmeron who says that Scotus out of Innocentius reckons
three opinions] not of heretics, Tom. 9. tract. 16. p. 108. p. ^10.
but of such men who all agreed in that which is the main; but he adds, [Some
men and writers believe that this article cannot be proved against a heretic,
by Scripture alone, or reasons alone. Lib. 1. de Euchar. c. 34.
And so Cajetan is affirmed by Suarez and Alanus to have said; and Melchior
Canus; perpetuam Mariae virginitatem -- conversionem panis and vini in corpus
and sanguinem Christi -- non ita expressa in libris Canonicis invenies, Page
37. vide Letter. p. 18.
sed adeo tamen certa in fide sunt ut contrariorum dogmatum authors Ecclesia
haereticos judicarit. So that the Scripture is given up for no sure friend in
this Q. the article wholly relies upon the authority of the Church, viz. of
Rome, who makes faith, and makes heresies as she please. But to the same
purpose is that also which Chedzy said in his disputation at Oxford; In what
manner Christ is there, whether with the bread Transelemented or
Transubstantiation the Scripture in open words, tells not.]

But I am not likely so to escape, Page 38.
for E. W. See also the letter to a friend, p. 19.
talks of a famous or rather infamous quotation out of Peter Lombard, and adds
foul and uncivil words, which I pass by: but the thing is this; that I said,
Petrus Lombardus could not tell whether there was a substantial change or no. I
did say so, and I brought the very words of Lombard to prove it, and these very
words E. W. himself acknowledges. Si autem quaeritur qualis fit ista conversio,
an formalis an substantialis, vel alterius generis, definire non sufficio: [I
am not able to define or determine whether that change be formal or
substantial:] So far E. W. quotes him, but leaves out one thing very material,
viz. whether besides formal, or substantial, it be of another kind. Now E. W.
not being able to deny that Lombard said this, takes a great deal of useless
pains, not one word of all that he says being to the purpose, or able to make
it probable that Peter Lombard did not say so, or that he did not think so. But
the thing is this: Biel reckoned three opinions which in Lombards time were in
the Church; the first of Consubstantiation which was the way which long since
then, Luther followed. The second that the substance of bread is made the flesh
of Christ, but ceases not to be what it was. But this is not the doctrine of
Transubstantiation for that makes a third opinion, which is that the substance
of bread ceases to be, and nothing remains but the accident. Quartam opinionem
addit Magister, that is, Peter Lombard adds a fourth opinion; that the
substance of bread is not converted, but is annihilated: this is made by Scotus
to be the second opinion] Now of these four opinions, all which were then
permitted and disputed; Vbi supra.
Peter Lombard seems to follow the second; but if this was his opinion it was
no more, for he could not determine whether that were the truth or no. But
whether he does or no truly, I think it is very hard for any man to tell; for
this question was but in the forge, not polished, not made bright with long
handling. And this was all that I affirmed out of the Master of Sentences, I
told of no opinion of his at all, but that in his time they did not know
whether it (viz. the doctrine of Transubstantiation) were true or no, that is,
the generality of the Roman Catholics did not know: and he himself could not
define it. And this appears unanswerably by Peter Lombards bringing their
several sentiments in this article: and they that differ in their judgments
about an article, and yet esteem the others Catholic, may think what they
please, but they cannot tell certainly what is truth. But then as for Peter
Lombard himself, all that I said of him was this, that he could not tell, he
could not determine whether there was any substantial change or no. If in his
after discourse he declares that the change is of substances, he told it for no
other than as a mere opinion: if he did, let him answer for that, not I; for
that he could not determine it, himself expressly said it, in the beginning of
the eleventh distinction. And therefore these Gentlemen would better have
consulted with truth and modesty, if they had let this alone, and not have made
such an outcry against a manifest truth. Now let me observe one thing which
will be of great use in this whole affair, and demonstrate the change of this
doctrine. These three opinions were all held by Catholics, Innocent. de offic.
Mis. part. 3. cap. 18.
and the opinions are recorded not only by Pope Innocentius 3. but in the gloss
of the Canon Law it self. Cap. cum Martha in gloss. ^^trav. de celebr. miss.
For this opinion was not fixed and settled, nor as yet well understood, but
still disputed (as we see in Lombard and Scotus:) And although they all agreed
in this (as Salmeron observes of these three opinions, as he cites them out of
Scotus) that the true body of Christ is there, because to deny this were
against the faith; and therefore this was then enough to cause them to be
esteemed Catholics, because they denied nothing which was then against the
faith, but all agreed in that, yet now the case is otherwise; for whereas one
of the opinions was, that the substance of bread remains, and another opinion,
that the substance of bread is annihilated, but is not converted into the body
of Christ; now both of these opinions are made heresy, and the contrary to
them, which is the third opinion passed into an article of faith. Vbi supra.
Quod vero ibi substantia panis non remanet, jam etiam ut articulus fidei
definitum est, and conversionis sive transubstantiationis nomen evictum. So
Salmeron. Now in Peter Lombards time; if they who believed Christ's real
presence were good Catholics, though they believed no Transubstantiation or
Consubstantiation, that is, did not descend into consideration of the manner,
why may they not be so now? Is there any new revelation now of the manner? Or
why, is the way to Heaven now made narrower than in Lombards time? For the
Church of England believes according to one of these opinions; and therefore is
as good a Catholic Church as Rome was then, which had not determined the
manner. Nay if we use to value an article the more, by how much the more
Ancient it is, certainly it is more honorable that we should reform to the
Ancient model, rather than conform to the new. However, this is also plainly
consequent to this discourse of Salmeron; The abettors of those three opinions,
some of them do deny something that is of faith, therefore the faith of the
Church of Rome now is not the same it was in the days of Peter Lombard. Lastly,
this also is to be remarked, that to prove any ancient Author to hold the
doctrine of Transubstantiation, as it is at this day an article of faith at
Rome, it is not enough to say, that Peter Lombard, or Durand, or Scotus, etc.
did say that where bread was before, there is Christ's body now; for they may
say that and more, and yet not come home to the present article; and therefore
E. W. does argue weakly, when he denies Lombard to say one thing, [viz. that he
could not define whether there was a substantial change or no, (which indeed he
spoke plainly) because he brings him saying something as if he were resolved
the change were substantial, which yet he speaks but obscurely. And the truth
is, this question of Transubstantiation is so intricate and involved amongst
them, seems so contrary to sense and reason, and does so much violence to all
the powers of the soul, that it is no wonder, if at first the Doctors could not
make any thing distinctly of it. However, whatever they did make of it, certain
it is they more agreed with the present Church of England, than with the
present Church of Rome; for we say as they said, Christ's body is truly there,
and there is a conversion of the Elements into Christ's body, for what before
the Consecration in all senses was bread, is after Consecration in some sense,
Christ's body; but they did not all of them say, that the substance of bread was
destroyed, and some of them denied the conversion of the bread into the flesh
of Christ; which whosoever shall now do, will be esteemed no Roman Catholic.
E. W. page 37.
And therefore it is a vain procedure to think they have proved their doctrine
of Transubstantiation out of the Fathers also; if the Fathers tell us, [That
bread is changed out of his nature into the body of Christ: that by holy
invocation it is no more common bread: that as water in Cana of Galilee was
changed into wine; so in the Evangelist, wine is changed into blood: That bread
is only bread before the sacramental words, but after consecration is made the
body of Christ.] For though I very much doubt, all these things in equal and
full measures cannot be proved out of the Fathers, yet suppose they were, yet
all this comes not up to the Roman Article of Transubstantiation: All those
words are true in a very good sense, and they are in that sense believed in the
Church of England; but that the bread is no more bread in the natural sense,
and that it is naturally nothing, but the natural body of Christ, that the
substance of one is passed into the substance of the other, this is not
affirmed by the Fathers, neither can it be inferred from the former
propositions, if they had been truly alleged; and therefore all that is for
nothing, and must be intended only to cosen and amuse the Reader that
understands not all the windings of this labyrinth.

In the next place, I am to give an account of what passed in the Lateran
Council upon this article. For says E. W. Page 37.
the doctrine of Transubstantiation was ever believed in the Church, though
more fully and explicitly declared in the Lateran Council. But in the
Dissuasive it was said, Letter to a friend page 18.
that it was but pretended to be determined in that Council, where many things
indeed came then in consultation, yet nothing could be openly decreed. Nothing,
(says Platina) that is, says my Adversary, nothing concerning the holy land,
and the aids to be raised for it: but for all this, there might be a decree
concerning Transubstantiation. To this I reply, that it is as true that nothing
was done in this question, as that nothing was done in the matter of the Holy
War; for one was as much decreed as the other. For if we admit the acts of the
Council, that of giving aid to the Holy Land was decreed in the 69. Canon, Ad
liberandum terram sanctam de manibus impiorum. Extrav. de Judaeis and
Saracenis. Cum sit.
alias 71. So that this answer is not true: But the truth is, neither the one
nor the other was decreed in that Council. For that I may inform this Gentleman
in a thing which possibly he never heard of; this Council of Lateran was never
published, nor any acts of it till Cochlaeus published them A. D. 1538. For
three years before this John Martin published the Councils, and then there was
no such thing as the acts of the Lateran Council to be found. But you will say,
how came Cochlaeus by them? Vide praefat. Later. Council. secundum p. Crab.
To this the answer is easy: There were read in the Council sixty Chapters,
which to some did seem easy, to others burdensome; but these were never
approved, but the Council ended in scorn and mockery, and nothing was
concluded, neither of faith nor manners, nor war, nor aid for the Holy Land,
but only the Pope got money of the Prelates to give them leave to depart. But
afterward Pope Gregory IX. put these Chapters, or some of them into the
Decretals; but does not entitle any of these to the Council of Lateran, but
only to Pope Innocent in the Council, which Cardinal Perron ignorantly, or
wilfully mistaking, affirms the contrary. But so it is that Platina affirms of
the Pope plurima decreta retulit, improbavit Joachimi libellum, damnavit
errores Almerici. The Pope recited 60. heads of decrees in the Council, but no
man says the Council decreed those heads. Now these heads Cochlaeus says he
found in an old book in Germany. And it is no ways probable, that if the
Council had decred those heads, that Gregory IX. who published his Uncles
decretal Epistles, which make up so great a part of the Canon Law, should omit
to publish the decrees of this Council; or that there should be no acts of this
great Council in the Vatican, and that there should be no publication of them
till about 300. years after the Council, and that out of a blind corner, and an
old unknown Manuscript. But the book shows its original, it was taken from the
Decretals; for it contains just so many heads, viz. LXXII. and is not any thing
of the Council in which only were recited L. X. heads, and they have the same
beginnings and endings, and the same notes and observations in the middle of
the Chapters: which shows plainly they were a mere force of the Decretals. The
consequent of all which is plainly this, that there was no decree made in the
Council, but every thing was left unfinished, and the Council was affrighted by
the warlike preparations of them of Genoa and Pisa, and all retired. Concerning
which affair, the Reader that desires it may receive further satisfaction, if
he read the Antiquitates Britannicae in the life of Stephen Langton out of the
lesser History of Matthew Paris; Vide Matthew. Paris, ad A. D. 1215. and Na^cteri
generat. 41. ad eundem annum. Et Sabellicum E^^ead. 9. lib. 6. and Godfridum
Monachum ad A. D. 1215.
as also Sabellicus, and Godfride the Monk. But since it is become a question
what was or was not determined in this Lateran Council, I am content to tell
them that the same authority, whether of Pope or Council which made
Transubstantiation an article of faith, made Rebellion and Treason to be a duty
of Subjects; for in the same collection of Canons they are both decreed and
warranted under the same signature, the one being the first Canon, and the
other the third.

The use I shall make of all is this; Scotus was observed above to say, that in
Scripture there is nothing so express as to compel us to believe
Transubstantiation, meaning, that without the decree and authority of the
Church, the Scripture was of it self insufficient. And some others as Salmeron
notes, Tract. 16. tom. 9. p. 110.
affirm, that Scripture and Reason are both insufficient to convince a heretic
in this article; this is to be proved ex Conciliorum definitione, and Patrum
traditione, etc. by the definition of Councils, and tradition of the Fathers,
for it were easy to answer the places of Scripture which are cited, and the
reasons. Now then, since Scripture alone is not thought sufficient, nor reasons
alone, if the definitions of Councils also shall fail them, they will be
strangely to seek for their new article. Now for this their only Castle of
defense is the Lateran Council. Indeed Bellarmine produces the Roman Council
under Pope Nicholas the second, in which Berengarius was forced to recant his
error about the Sacrament, but he recanted it into a worse error, and such
which the Church of Rome disavows at this day: And therefore ought not to
pretend it as a patron of that doctrine which she approves not. And for the
little Council under Greg. 7. it is just so a general Council, as the Church of
Rome is the Catholic Church, or a particular is an Universal. But suppose it so
for this once; yet this Council meddled not with the modus, viz.
Transubstantiation, or the ceasing of its being bread, but of the Real Presence
of Christ under the Elements, which is no part of our question. Berengarius
denied it, but we do not, when it is rightly understood. Pope Nicholaus himself
did not understand the new article; for it was not fitted for publication until
the time of the Lateran Council, and how nothing of this was in that Council
determined, I have already made appear: and therefore as Scotus said, the
Scripture alone could not evict this article; so he also said in his argument
made for the Doctors that held the first opinion mentioned before out of
Innocentius: Nec invenitur ubi Ecclesia istam veritatem determinet solenniter.
Neither is it found where the Church has solemnly determined it. And for his
own particular, though he was carried into captivity by the symbol of Pope
Innocent 3. for which by that time was pretended the Lateran Council; Lib. 3.
de Euchar. c. 23. Sect. Vnum tamen.
yet he himself said, that before that Council it was no article of faith: and
for this thing Bellarmine reproves him, and imputes ignorance to him, saying,
that it was because he had not read the Roman Council under Greg. 7. Scotus
negat doctrinam de conversione and transubst. esse antiquam. Henriquez lib. 8.
c. 23. in Marg. ad liter. h.
nor the consent of the Fathers. And to this purpose I quoted Henriquez,
saying, that Scotus says the doctrine of Transubstantiation is not ancient;
the Author of the Letter denies that he says any such thing of Scotus: But I
desire him to look once more, and my Margent will better direct him.

What the opinion of Durandus was in this Question, if these Gentlemen will not
believe me, let them believe their own friends. But first let it be considered
what I said, viz. that he maintained (viz. in disputation) that even after
consecration the very matter of bread remained. 2. That by reason of the
Authority of the Church, it is not to be held. 3. That nevertheless it is
possible it should be so. 4. That it is no contradiction, that the matter of
bread should remain, and yet it be Christ's body too. 5. That this were the
easier way of solving the difficulties. That all this is true, I have no better
argument than his own words, which are in his first question of the eleventh
distinction in quartum numb. 11. and n. 15. For indeed the case was very hard
with these learned men, who being pressed by authority, did bite the file, and
submitted their doctrine, but kept their reason to themselves: and what some in
the Council of Trent observed of Scotus, was true also of Durandus and diverse
other Schoolmen, with whom it was usual to deny things with a kind of
courtesy. And therefore Durandus in the places cited, though he disputes well
for his opinion, yet he says the contrary is modus tenendus de facto. But
besides that his words are, as I understand them plain and clear to manifest
his own hearty persuasion, yet I shall not desire to be believed upon my own
account, for fear I be mistaken; but that I had reason to say it, Summa. l. 8.
c. 23. p. 448. lit. C in Marg.
Henriquez shall be my warrant: Durandus did. qu. 3. ait esse probabile sed
absque assertione, etc. He says it is probable, but without assertion, that in
the Eucharist the same matter of bread remains without quantity. And a little
after he adds out of Cajetan, Paludanus and Soto, that this opinion of Durandus
is erroneous, but after the Council of Trent it seems to be heretical: And yet
(he says) it was held by Aegidius, and Euthymius, who had the good luck it
seems, to live and die before the Council of Trent, otherwise they had been in
danger of the inquisition for heretical pravity. But I shall not trouble my
self further in this particular; Lib. 3. de Euchar. cap. 13.
I am fully vindicated by Bellarmine himself, who spends a whole Chapter in the
confutation of this error of Durandus, viz. that the matter of bread remains,
he endeavors to answer his arguments, and gives this censure of him. Itaque
sententia Durandi haeretica est; Therefore the sentence of Durandus is
heretical, although he be not to be called a heretic, because he was ready to
acquiesce in the judgment of the Church. So Bellarmine, who if he say true,
that Durandus was ready to submit to the judgment of the Church, then he does
not say true when he says the Church before his time had determined against
him: but however, that I said true of him, when I imputed this opinion to him,
Bellarmine is my witness. Thus you see I had reason for what I said, and by
these instances it appears how hardly, and how long the doctrine of
Transubstantiation was before it could be swallowed.

But I remember that Salmeron tells of diverse, who distrusting of Scripture and
reason, had rather in this point rely upon the tradition of the Fathers, and
therefore I descended to take from them this armor in which they trusted. And
first, to ease a more curious inquiry, which in a short dissuasive was not
convenient, I used the abbreviature of an adversaries confession. For Alphonsus
a Castro confessed that in ancient writers there is seldom any mention made of
Transubstantiation:] Letter. p. 21.
one of my adversaries says this is not spoken of the thing, but of the name of
Transubstantiation, but if a Castro meant this only of the word, he spoke
weakly when he said, that the name or word was seldom mentioned by the
Ancients. 1. Because it is false that it was seldom mentioned by the Ancients,
for the word was by the Ancient Fathers never mentioned. 2. Because there was
not any question of the word where the thing was agreed; and therefore as this
saying so understood had been false, so also if it had been true, it would have
been impertinent. 3. It is but a trifling artifice to confess the name to be
unknown, and by that means to insinuate that the thing was then under other
names; It is a secret cosenage of an unweary Reader to bribe him into peace and
contentedness for the main part of the Question, by pleasing him in that part
which it may be makes the biggest noise, though it be less material. 4. If the
thing had been mentioned by the Ancients, they need not, would not, ought not
to have troubled themselves and others by a new word; to have still retained
the old proposition under the old words, would have been less suspicious, more
prudent and ingenious: but to bring in a new name is but the cover for a new
doctrine; and therefore S. Paul left an excellent precept to the Church to
avoid prophanas vocum novitates, the profane newness of words, that is, it is
fit that the mysteries revealed in Scripture should be preached and taught in
the words of the Scripture, and with that simplicity, openness, easiness, and
candor, and not with new and unhallowed words, such as is that of
Transubstantiation. 5. A Castro did not speak of the name alone; but of the
thing also, de transubstantiatione panis in Corpus Christi; of the
Transubstantiation of bread into Christ's body; of this manner of conversion,
that is, of this doctrine; now doctrines consist not in words but things,
however his last words are faint and weak and guilty; for being convinced of
the weakness of his defense of the thing, he left to himself a subterfuge of
words.

But let it be how it will with a Castro, whom I can very well spare if he will
not be allowed to speak sober sense, and as a wise man should, we have better
and fuller testimonies in this affair; That the Fathers did not so much as
touch the matter or thing of Transubstantiation, said the Jesuits in prison, as
is reported by the Author of the modest discourse; And the great Erasmus who
lived and died in the Communion of the Church of Rome, and was as likely as any
man of his age to know what he said, gave this testimony in the present
Question; In synaxi transubstantiationem sero definivit Ecclesia, In priorem
Epist. ad Corinthios. citante etiam Salmeron. tom. 9. tract. 16. p. 108.
and re and nomine veteribus ignotam. In the Communion the Church has but
lately defined Transubstantiation, which both in the thing and in the name was
unknown to the Ancients.

Now this was a fair and friendly inducement to the Reader to take from him all
prejudice, Videat lector Picherellum exposit: verborum institutionis coenae
Domini, and ejusdem dissertationem de Missa.
which might stick to him by the great noises of the Roman Doctors, made upon
their pretense of the Fathers being on their side; yet I would not so rely upon
these testimonies, but that I thought fit to give some little Essay of this
doctrine out of the Fathers themselves.

To this purpose is alleged Justin M. saying of the Eucharist, that it was a
figure, which our Lord commanded to do in remembrance of his Passion] These
were quoted not as the words, but as the doctrine of that Saint; and the Letter
will needs suppose me to mean those words, which are (as I find) in 259, and
260. page of the Paris edition; 1615.
[The oblation of a Cake was a figure of the Eucharistical bread which the Lord
commanded to do in remembrance of his Passion.] These are Justins words in that
place, with which I have nothing to do (as I shall show by and by:) But because
Card. Perron intends to make advantage of them, I shall wrest them first out of
his hands, and then give an account of the doctrine of this holy man in the
present article; both out of this place and others. [(...), The oblation of a
Cake was a figure of the bread of the Eucharist, which our Lord delivered us to
do; therefore says the Cardinal, the Eucharistical bread is the truth, since
the Cake was the figure or the shadow.] To which I answer, that though the Cake
was a figure of the Eucharistical bread, yet so might that bread be a figure of
something else: Just as baptism, I mean, the external rite, which although it
self be but the outward part, and is the (...), or figure of the inward washing
by the spirit of grace, and represents our being buried with Christ in his
death, yet it is an accomplishment in some sense of those many figures, by
which (according to the doctrine of the Fathers) it was prefigured. Such as in
S. Peter the waters of the deluge, in Tertullian were the waters of Jordan into
which Naaman descended, in S. Austin the waters of sprinkling: These were
types, and to these baptism did succeed, and represented the same thing which
they represented, and effected or exhibited the thing it did represent, and
therefore in this sense they prefigur'd baptism: And yet that this is but a
figure still, we have S. Peter's warrant; The like figure whereunto even baptism
does also now save us (not the putting away the filth of the flesh, 1 Pet. 3.
21.
but the answer of a good conscience toward God. The waters of the flood were
(...) a type of the waters of baptism; the waters of baptism were (...), that
is, a type answering to a type: and yet even here there is a typical
representing, and signifying part, and beyond that there is the veritas, or the
thing signified by both. So it is in the oblation of the Cake, and the
Eucharistical bread, that was a type of this, and this the (...), or
correspondent of that; a type answering to a type, a figure to a figure; and
both of them did and do respectively represent a thing yet more secret. For as
S. Austin said, these and those are diverse in the sign, but equal in the thing
signified, diverse in the visible species, but the same in the intelligible
signification; those were promissive, and these demonstrative, or as others
express it, those were pronunciative, and these of the Gospel are contestative.
A. D. 1547.
So Friar Gregory of Padua noted in the Council of Trent: And that this was the
sense of Justin M. appears to him that considers what he says. 1. He does not
say the Cake is a type of the bread, but the oblation of the Cake, that is,
that whole rite of offering a Cake after the Leper was cleansed in token of
thankfulness, and for his legal purity, was a type of the bread of the
Eucharist, which for the remembrance of the passion which he suffered for these
men whose minds are purged from all perverseness, Jesus Christ our Lord
commanded to make or do.] To do what? To do bread? or to make bread? No, but to
make bread to be Eucharistical, to be a memorial of the Passion, to represent
the death of Christ: so that it is not the Cake and the bread that are the type
and the Antitype; but the oblation of the Cake, was the figure, and the
Celebration of Christ's memorial, and the Eucharist are the thing presignified
and prefigur'd; But then it remains, that the Eucharistical bread is but the
instrument of a memorial or recordation, which still supposes something beyond
this, and by this to be figured and represented. For as the Apostle says, Our
Fathers did eat of the same spiritual meat, that is, they eat Christ, but they
eat him in figure, that is, in an external symbol: so do we, only theirs is
abolished, and ours succeeds the old, and shall abide for ever. Nay the very
words used by Justin M. do evince this, it is (...), when it is an Eucharist,
it is still but bread; and therefore there is a body of which this is but an
outward argument, a vehicle, a chanel and conveyance, and that is the body of
Christ; for the Eucharistical bread is both bread, and Christ's body too. For it
is a good argument to say, this is bread Eucharistical, therefore this is
bread; and if it be bread still, it must be a figure of the bread of life; and
this is that which I affirmed to be the sense of Justin M. The like expression
to this is in his second Apology; It is not common bread, meaning, that it is
sanctified and made Eucharistical. But here, it may be, the argument will not
hold; it is not common bread, therefore it is bread: for I remember that
Cardinal Perron has some instances against this way of arguing. For the Dove
that descended upon Christ's head was not a common Dove, and yet it follows not;
therefore this was a Dove. The three that appeared to Abraham were not common
men; therefore they were men, it follows not. This is the sophistry of the
Cardinal, for the confutation of which I have so much Logic left as to prove
this to be a fallacy, and it will soon appear if it be reduced to a regular
proposition. This bread is not common, therefore this bread is extraordinary
bread, A propositione tertii adjecti, ad propositionem secundi adjecti valet
consequentia, si subjectum supponat realiter. Reg. Dialect. Vide Sect. 5. n.
10. Of Christ's real presence and spiritual.
but therefore this is bread still; here the Consequence is good; and is so
still, when the subject of the proposition is something real, and not in
appearance only: Because whatsoever is but in appearance and pretense, is a
Non-Ens in respect of that real thing which it counterfeits. And therefore it
follows not, This is not a common dove; therefore it is a Dove; because if this
be modeled into a right proposition, nihil supponit; there is no subject in it,
for it cannot in this case be said, This Dove is no common Dove; but this which
is like a Dove, is not a common Dove; and these persons which look like men,
are not common men. And the rule for this and the reason too is, Non entis
nulla sunt praedicata. To which also this may be added, that in the proposition
as C. Perron expresses it, the negation is not the adjective, but the
substantive part of the praedicate; It is no common Dove; where the negative
term relates to the Dove, not to common; It is no Dove, and the words not
common are also aequivocal, and as it can signify extraordinary, so it can
signify Natural. But if the subject of the proposition be something real, then
the consequent is good; as if you bring a Pigeon from Japan, all red, you may
say, This is no common Pigeon, and your argument is still good; therefore it is
a Pigeon. So if you take sugared bread, or bread made of Indian wheat, you
saying this is no common bread, do mean it is extraordinary or unusual, but it
is bread still; and so if it be said, this bread is Eucharistical, it will
follow rightly, therefore this is bread. For in this case the praedicate is
only an infinite or Negative term, but the subject is supposed and affirmed.
And this is also more apparent if the proposition be affirmative, and the terms
be not infinite, as it is in the present case; This bread is Eucharistical. I
have now I suppose cleared the words of Justin M. and expounded them to his own
sense and the truth, but his sense will further appear in other words which I
principally rely upon in this quotation. For speaking that of the Prophet Isai,
Panis dabitur ei, and aqua ejus fidelis; he has these words, It appears
sufficiently [That in this prophecy he speaks of bread which our Lord Christ
has delivered to us to do (...) for a memorial that he is made a body for them
that believe in him, for whose sake he was made passible; and of the Cup which
for the recordation of his blood he delivered to them to do, that is [give
thanks] or celebrate the Eucharist.] These are the words of Justin: Where 1.
According to the first simplicity of the primitive Church, he treates of this
mystery according to the style of the Evangelists and S. Paul, and indeed of
our Blessed Lord himself, commanding all this whole mystery to be done in
memory of him. 2. If S. Justin had meant any thing of the new fabric of this
mystery he must have said, Page 296.
(...), the bread made his body, though this also would not have done their
work for them; but when he says, he gave the bread only for the remembrance of
his being made a body, the bread must needs be the sign, figure and
representation of that body. 3. Still he calls it bread even then when Christ
gave it; still it is wine when the Eucharist is made, when the faithful have
given thanks; and if it be bread still, we also grant it to be Christ's body,
and then there is a figure and the thing figured, the one visible and the other
invisible; and this is it which I affirmed to be the sense of Justin Martyr.
Oration 2. in Pascha.
And it is more perfectly explicated by Saint Greg. Naz. calling the Paschal
Lamb a figure of a figure, of which I shall yet give an account in this
Section. But to make this yet more clear, (...), etc. We do not receive these
as common bread or common drink; but as by the word of God, Jesus Christ our
Lord was made flesh, and for our salvation had flesh and blood: so are we
taught, that that very nourishment on which by the prayers of his word thanks
are given, by which our flesh and blood are nourished by change, is the flesh
and blood of the incarnate Jesus.] Here S. Justin compares the consecration of
the Eucharist by prayer to the incarnation of Christ, the thing with the thing,
to show it is not common bread, but bread made Christ's body; he compares not
the manner of one with the manner of the other (as Cardinal Perron would fain
have it believed Sic solem^^ loqui: ficut panis est vita corporis: ita verbum
Dei est vita animae. Non scil. eundem conversionis aut nutriendi modum connot
ando, sed similem and analogicum effectum ^triusque nutrimenti observando.
) for if it were so, it would not only destroy an article of Christian faith,
but even of the Roman too; for if the changes were in the same manner, then
either the man is Transubstantiated into God, or else the bread is not
Transubstantiated into Christ's body; but the first cannot be, because it would
destroy the hypostatical Union, and make Christ to be one nature as well as one
person; but for the latter part of the Dilemma, viz. that the bread is not
Transubstantiated, whether it be true or false it cannot be affirmed from
hence: and therefore the Cardinal labors to no purpose, and without
consideration of what may follow. But now these words make very much against
the Roman hypothesis, and directly proves the (...) the consecrated bread, that
is, after it is consecrated to be natural nourishment of the body, and
therefore to be Christ's body only spiritually, and Sacramentally: unless it can
be two substances at the same time; Christ's body and bread in the Natural
sense, which the Church of Rome at this day will not allow; and if it were
allowed, it would follow that Christ's body should be Transubstantiated into our
body, and suffer the very worst changes which in our eating and digestion and
separation happen to common bread. This argument relies upon the concurrent
testimony of many of the ancient Fathers besides Justin Martyr, Lib. 4. c. 34.
and lib. 5. c. 2.
especially S. Irenaeus, and certainly destroys the whole Roman article of
Transubstantiation; for if the Eucharistical bread nourishes the body, then it
is still the substance of bread: for accidents do not nourish, and quantity or
quality is not the subject or term of Nutrition; but reparation of substance by
a substantial change of one into another. But of this enough.

Eusebius is next alleged in the Dissuasive, but his words, though pregnant
and full of proof against the Roman hypothesis are by all the Contra-scribers
let alone, A. L.
only one of them says, that the place of the quotation is not rightly marked,
for the first three chapters are not extant: well! but the words are; and the
last chapter is, which is there quoted, and to the 10. chapter the Printer
should have more carefully attended, and not omit the Cipher, which I suppose
he would, if he had foreseen he should have been written against by so learned
an adversary. But to let them agree as well as they can, the words of Eusebius,
Demonstr. Evang. l. 1. c. ult. (...). The Apostle received a command according
to the constitution of the N. T. to make a memory of this sacrifice upon the
table by the symbols of his body and healthful blood.) So the words are
translated in the Dissuasive. But the letter translates them thus. Seeing
therefore we have received the memory of this sacrifice to be celebrated in
certain signs on the Table, and the memory of that body and healthful blood, as
is the institute of the new Testament.)
out of his last chapter, I translated as well as I could; the Greek words I
have set in the Margent, that every one that understands may see I did him
right; and indeed to do my Adversary right, when he goes about to change, not
to mend the translation, he only changes the order of the words, but in nothing
does he mend his own matter by it: for he acknowledges the main Question, viz.
that the memory of Christ's sacrifice is to be celebrated in certain figns on
the Table; but then that I may do my self right, and the question too;
whosoever translated these words for this Gentleman has abused him, and made
him to render (...) as if it were (...), and has made (...) to be governed by
(...), which is so far off it, and has no relation to it, and not to be
governed by (...) with which it is joined, and has made (...) to be governed
by (...), when it has a substantive of its own [(...),] and he repeats (...)
once more than it is in the words of Eusebius, only because he would not have
the Reader suppose that Eusebius called the consecrated Elements, the symbols
of the body and blood. But this fraud was too much studied to be excusable upon
the stock of humane infirmity, or an innocent persuasion. But that I may
satisfy the Reader in this Question, so far as the testimony and doctrine of
Eusebius can extend, he has these words fully to our purpose. Lib. 5. c. 3.
(...)]
[First, our Lord and Savior, and then after him his Priests of all Nations
celebrating the spiritual sacrifice according to the Ecclesiastic Laws, by the
bread and the wine signify the mysteries of his body and healing blood.] Et
lib. 8. c. 1. (...).] Et Paulo post: (...).]
And again, [By the wine which is the symbol of his blood, he purges the old
sins of them who were baptized into his death, and believe in his blood.]
[Again he gave to his Disciples the symbols of the divine Economy, commanding
them to make the image (figure or representation) of his own body.] [(...).]
And again, [He received not the sacrifices of blood, nor the slaying of diverse
beasts instituted in the Law of Moses, (...).
but ordained we should use bread, the symbol of his own body.] So far I
thought fit to set down the words of Eusebius, to convince my Adversary that
Eusebius is none of theirs, but he is wholly ours in the doctrine of the
Sacrament.

S. Macarius is cited in the Dissuasive in these words, Macarius homil. 27.
[In the Church is offered bread and wine, the Antitype of his flesh and blood,
and they that partake of the bread that appears, do spiritually eat the flesh
of Christ.] Page 22.
A. L. says, Macarius says not so, but rather the contrary, viz. bread and
wine exhibiting the Exemplar [or an antitype] his flesh and blood.] Now
although I do not suppose many learned or good men will concern themselves with
what this little man says; yet I cannot but note [that they who gave him this
answer, may be ashamed,] for here is a double satisfaction in this little
answer. First, he puts in the word exhibiting of his own head, there being no
such word in S. Macarius in the words quoted. 2. He makes (...) to be put with
(...) by way of apposition, expressly against the mind of S. Macarius, and
against the very Grammar of his words. And after all, he studies to abuse his
Author, and yet gets no good by it himself; for if it were in the words as he
has invented it, or some body else for him, yet it makes against him as much,
saying, bread and wine exhibit Christ's body; which is indeed true, though not
here said by the Saint, but is directly against the Roman article, because it
confesses that to be bread and wine by which Christ's body is exhibited to us:
but much more is the whole testimony of S. Macarius, which in the Dissuasive
are translated exactly, as the Reader may see by the Greek words cited in the
Margent.

There now only remains the authority of S. Austin, Page ibid.
which this Gentleman would fain snatch from the Church of England, and assert
to his own party. I cited five places out of S. Austin, to the last of which
but one, he gives this answer; that S. Austin has no such words in that book,
that is, in the 10. book against Faustus the Manichee. Concerning which, I am
to inform the Gentleman a little better. These words [that which by all men is
called a sacrifice, is the sign of the true sacrifice] are in the 10. book of
S. Austin de C. D. cap. 5. and make a distinct quotation, and ought by the
Printer to have been divided by a colume, as the other. But the following words
[in which the flesh of Christ after his assumption is celebrated by the
sacrament of remembrance,] are in the 20. book cap. 21. against Faustus the
Manichee Hujus sacrificii caro and sanguis ante adventum Christi per victimas
similitudinum promittebatur: in passione Christi per ipsa^ veritatem
reddebatur, [ po^ ascensum Christi per sacramentum memoriae celebratur.] lib.
20. c. 21. contr. Faustum Manich.
All these words and diverse others of S. Austin I knit together into a close
order, like a continued discourse; but all of them are S. Austins words, as
appears in the places set down in the Margent. But this Gentleman cared not for
what was said by S. Austin, he was as well pleased that a figure was false
Printed; but to the words he has nothing to say. To the first of the other
four only he makes this crude answer; that S. Austin denied not the real eating
of Christ's body in the Eucharist, but only the eating it in that gross, carnal,
and sensible manner, as the Capharnaites conceived. To which I reply, that it
is true, that upon occasion of this error S. Austin did speak those words: and
although the Roman error be not so gross and dull as that of the Capharnaites,
yet it was as false, as unreasonable, and as impossible. And be the occasion of
the words what they are, or can be, yet upon this occasion S. Austin spoke
words, which as well confute the Roman error as the Capharnaitical. For it is
not only false which the men of Capernaum dreamt of, but the antithesis to this
is that which S. Austin urges, and which comes home to our question, [I have
commended to you a sacrament which being spiritually understood shall quicken
you:] But because S. Austin was the most diligent expounder of this mystery
among all the Fathers, I will gratify my Adversary, or rather indeed my
Unpraejudicate Readers, by giving some other very clear and unanswerable
evidences of the doctrine of S. Austin, agreeing perfectly with that of our
Church. [At this time after manifest token of our liberty has shined in the
resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, De doctr. Christ. lib. 3. cap. 9.
we are not burdened with the heavy operation of signs, but some few instead of
many, but those most easy to be done, and most glorious to be understood, and
most pure in their observation, our Lord himself, and the Apostolical
discipline has delivered: such is the sacrament of Baptism, and the
celebration of the body and blood of our Lord, which when every one takes, he
understands whether they may be referred, that he may give them veneration, not
with carnal service, but with a spiritual liberty. For as to follow the letter,
and to take the signs for the things signified by them, is a servile infirmity;
so to interpret the signs unprofitably is an evil wandering error. But he that
understands not what the sign signifies, but yet understands it to be a sign,
is not pressed with servitude. But it is better to be pressed with unknown
signs so they be profitable, than by expounding them unprofitably to thrust our
necks into the yoke of slavery, from which they were brought forth.] All this
S. Austin spoke concerning the sacramental signs, the bread and the wine in the
Eucharist; and if by these words he does not intend to affirm, that they are
the signs signifying Christ's body and blood; let who please to undertake it
make sense of them, for my part I cannot.

To the same purpose are these other words of his, Epist. 23.
[Christ is in himself once immolated, and yet in the sacrament he is
sacrificed not only in the solennities of Easter, but every day with the
people. Neither indeed does he lie who being asked, shall answer, that he is
sacrificed: For if the sacraments have not a similitude of those things of
which they are sacraments, they were altogether no sacraments; but commonly for
this similitude they take the names of the things themselves, sicut ergo
secundum quendam modum, etc. As therefore after a certain manner the sacrament
of the body of Christ is the body of Christ, the sacrament of the blood of
Christ is the blood of Christ; so the sacrament of faith (viz. Baptism) is
faith.] Christ is but once immolated or sacrificed in himself, but every day in
the sacrament; that properly, this in figure; that in substance, this in
similitude; that naturally, this sacramentally and spiritually. But therefore
we call this mystery a sacrifice, as we call the Sacrament Christ's body, viz.
by way of similitude or after a certain manner, for upon this account the names
of the things are imputed to their very figures. This is S. Austins sense:
which indeed he frequently so expresses. Now I desire it may be observed, that
oftentimes when S. Austin speaking of the Eucharist, calls it the body and
blood of Christ; he oftentimes adds by way of explication, that he means it, in
the Sacramental, figurative sense; but when ever he calls it, the figure or the
Sacrament of Christ's body, he never offers to explain that by any words, by
which he may signify such a real or natural being of Christ's body there, as
the Church of Rome dreams of; but he ought not, neither would he have given
offense or Umbrage to the Church, by any such incurious and loose handling of
things, if the Church in his age had thought of it otherwise, than that it was
Christ's body in a Sacramental sense.

Though I have remarked all that is objected by A. L. yet E. W. is not
satisfied with the quotation out of Greg. Naz. not but that he acknowledges it
to be right, P. 41. Orat. 2. in pascha. Jam vero paschlis participes erimus,
nunc quidem adhuc typice, tametsi apertius licet quam in veteri; legale
siquidem pascha (nec enim dicere verebor) figurae figurae erat obscurior.
for he sets down the words in Latin; but they conclude nothing against
Transubstantiation. Why so? because, though the Paschal was a type of a type, a
figure of a figure, yet [in S. Gregory's sense Christ concealed under the
species of bread may be rightly called a figure of its own self, more clearly
hereafter to be showed us in heaven.] To this pitiful answer the reply is
easy. S. Gregory clearly enough expresses himself, that in the immolation of
the Passover Christ was figured; that in the Eucharist he still is figured,
there more obscurely, here more clearly, but yet still but typically, or in
figure; nunc quidem adhuc typice: here we are partakers of him typically.
Afterward we shall see him perfectly, meaning in his Fathers Kingdom. So that
the Saint affirms Christ to be received by us in the Sacrament after a
figurative, or typical manner: and therefore, not after a substantial, as that
is opposed to figurative. Now of what is this a type? of himself to be more
clearly seen in heaven hereafter. It is very true, it is so; for this whole
ceremony, and figurative, ritual receiving of Christ's body here, does prefigure
our more excellent receiving and enjoying him hereafter; but then it follows
that the very proper substance of Christ's body is not here; for figure or
shadow and substance cannot be the same, to say a thing that is present is a
figure of it self hereafter, is to be said by no man but him that cares not
what he says. Lib. de Synod.
Nemo est sui ipsius imago, says S. Hilary; and yet if it were possible to be
otherwise, yet it is a strange figure or sign of a thing, that what is
invisible should be a sign of what is visible. De Euchar. l. 2. c. 15. Sect.
est igitur tertia.
Bellarmine, being greatly put to it by the Fathers calling the Sacrament the
figure of Christ's body, says, it is in some sense a figure of Christ's body on
the Cross; and here E. W. would affirm out of Naz. that it is a figure of
Christ's body glorified. Now suppose both these dreamers say right, then this
Sacrament which whether you look forwards or backwards is a figure of Christ's
body; cannot be that body of which so many ways it is a figure. So that the
whole force of E. W s. answer is this, that if that which is like be the same,
then it is possible that a thing may be a sign of it is self, and a man may be
his own picture, and that which is invisible may be a sign to give notice to
come see a thing that is visible.

I have now expedited this topic of Authority in in this Question, amongst the
many reasons I urged against Transubstantiation: E. W. p. 42.
(which I suppose to be unanswerable, and if I could have answered them my
self, I would not have produced them;) these Gentlemen my adversaries are
pleased to take notice but of one; But by that it may be seen how they could
have answered all the rest, if they had pleased. The argument is this, every
consecrated wafer (says the Church of Rome) is Christ's body; and yet this
wafer is not that wafer, therefore either this, or that is not Christ's body, or
else Christ has two natural bodies; for there are two Wafers.] To this is
answered, the multiplication of wafers does not multiply bodies to Christ, no
more than head and feet infer two souls in a man, or conclude there are two
Gods, one in heaven, and the other in earth, because heaven and earth are more
distinct than two wafers. To which I reply, that the soul of man is in the head
and feet as in two parts of the body which is one and whole, and so is but in
one place, and consequently is but one soul. But if the feet were parted from
the body by other bodies intermedial, then indeed, if there were but one soul
in feet and head, the Gentleman had spoken to the purpose. But here these
wafers are two entire wafers, separate the one from the other; bodies
intermedial put between; and that which is here is not there; and yet of each
of them it is affirmed, that it is Christ's body; that is, of two wafers, and of
two thousand wafers, it is at the same time affirmed of every one that it is
Christ's body. Now if these wafers are substantially not the same, not one, but
many; and yet every one of these many is substantially and properly Christ's
body, then these bodies are many, for they are many of whom it is said, every
one distinctly and separately, and in its self is Christ's body. 2. For his
comparing the presence of Christ in the wafer, with the presence of God in
heaven, it is spoken without common wit or sense; for does any man say that God
is in two places, and yet be the same-one God? Can God be in two places that
cannot be in one? Can he be determined and numbered by places, that fills all
places by his presence? or is Christ's body in the Sacrament, as God is in the
world, that is, repletive, filling all things alike, spaces void and spaces
full, and there where there is no place, where the measures are neither time
nor place, but only the power and will of God. This answer, besides that it is
weak and dangerous, is also to no purpose, unless the Church of Rome will pass
over to the Lutherans and maintain the Ubiquity of Christ's body. In Ps. 33.
Yea but S. Austin says of Christ, Ferebatur in manibus suis, etc. he bore
himself in his own hands: and what then? Then though every wafer be Christ's
body, yet the multiplication of wafers does not multiply bodies: for then there
would be two bodies of Christ, when he carried his own body in his hands. To
this I answer, that concerning S. Austins mind we are already satisfied, but
that which he says here is true, as he spoke and intended it; for by his own
rule, the similitudes and figures of things are oftentimes called by the name
of those things whereof they are similitudes: Christ bore his own body in his
own hands, when he bore the Sacrament of his body; for of that also it is true,
that it is truly his body in a Sacramental, spiritual, and real manner, that
is, to all intents and purposes of the holy spirit of God. According to the
words of S. Austin cited by P. Lombard, Lib. 3. de Trin. c. 4. in fine P.
Lombard did. 11. lib. 4. ad finem. lit. C.
[We call that the body of Christ which being taken from the fruits of the
Earth, and consecrated by mystic prayer, we receive in memory of the Lords
Passion; which when by the hands of men it is brought on to that visible shape,
it is not sanctified to become so worthy a Sacrament, but by the spirit of God
working invisibly.] If this be good Catholic doctrine, and if this confession
of this article be right, the Church of England is right; but then when the
Church of Rome will not let us alone in this truth and modesty of confession,
but impose what is unknown in Antiquity, and Scripture, and against common
sense, and the reason of all the world; Christ's real and spiritual presence in
the Sacrament against the doctrine of Transubstantiation, printed at London by
R. Royston.
she must needs be greatly in the wrong. But as to this question, I was here
only to justify the Dissuasive; I suppose these Gentlemen may be fully
satisfied in the whole inquiry, if they please to read a book I have written on
this subject entirely, of which hitherto they are pleased to take no great
notice.

SECTION IV.
Of the half Communion.
WHen the French Ambassador in the Council of Trent A. D. 1561. made instance
for restitution of the Chalice to the Laity, among other oppositions the
Cardinal S. Angelo answered; that he would never give a cup full of such deadly
poison to the people of France, instead of a medicine, and that it was better
to let them die, than to cure them with such remedies. The Ambassador being
greatly offended, replied: that it was not fit to give the name of poison to
the blood of Christ, and to call the holy Apostles poysoners, and the Fathers
of the Primitive Church, and of that which followed for many hundred years, who
with much spiritual profit have ministered the cup of that blood to all the
people: this was a great and a public, yet but a single person, that gave so
great offense.

One of the greatest scandals that ever were given to Christendom was given by
the Council of Constance; Sess. 13.
which having acknowledged that Christ administered this venerable Sacrament
under both kinds of bread and wine, and that in the Primitive Church this
Sacrament was received of the faithful under both kinds, yet the Council not
only condemns them as heretics, and to be punished accordingly, who say it is
unlawful to observe the custom and law of giving it in one kind only; but
under pain of excommunication forbids all Priests to communicate the people
under both kinds. This last thing is so shameful and so impious, that A. L.
directly denies that there is any such thing: which if it be not an argument of
the self-conviction of the man, and a resolution to abide in his error, and to
deceive the people even against his knowledge, let all the world judge: for the
words of the Councils decree, as they are set down by Carranza, Lugduni. A. D.
1600. apud Hiratium Cardon. p. 440.
at the end of the decree are these [Item praecipimus sub poena
excommunicationis quod nullus presbyter communicet populum sub utraque specie
panis and vini.] I need say no more in this affair: To affirm it necessary to
do in the Sacraments what Christ did, is called heresy; and to do so is
punished with excommunication. But we who follow Christ, hope we shall
communicate with him, and then we are well enough, especially since the very
institution of the Sacrament in both kinds, is a sufficient Commandment to
minister and receive it in both kinds. For if the Church of Rome upon their
supposition, only, that Christ did barely institute confession, do therefore
urge it as necessary, it will be a strange partiality, that the confessed
institution by Christ of the two Sacramental species, shall not conclude them
as necessary, as the other upon an Unprov'd supposition. And if the institution
of the Sacrament in both kinds be not equal to a command, then there is no
command to receive the bread, or indeed, to receive the Sacrament at all: but
it is a mere act of supererogation, that the Priests do it at all, and an act
of favor and grace, that they give even the bread it self to the Laity.

But besides this, it is not to be endured that the Church of Rome only binds
her subjects to observe the decree of abstaining from the cup jure humano, and
yet they shall be bound jure Divino to believe it to be just, and specially
since the causes of so scandalous an alteration are not set down in the decree
of any Council; and those which are set down by private Doctors, besides that
they are no record of the Church, they are ridiculous, A. D. 1562.
weak and contemptible. But as Granatensis said in the Council of Trent this
affair can neither be regulated by Scripture nor traditions, (for surely it is
against both) but by wisdom; wherein because it is necessary to proceed to
circumspection, I suppose the Church of Rome will always be considering,
whether she should give the chalice or no; and because she will not acknowledge
any reason sufficient to give it, she will be content to keep it away without
reason: And which is worse, the Church of Rome excommunicates those Priests
that communicate the people in both kinds; Vide Preface to the Dissuasive part
1. Canon comperimus de consecrat. did. 2.
but the Primitive Church excommunicates them that receive but in one kind. It
is too much that any part of the Church should so much as in a single instance
administer the Holy Sacrament otherwise than it is in the institution of
Christ; there being no other warrant for doing the thing at all, but Christ's
institution, and therefore no other way of learning how to do it, but by the
same institution by which all of it is done. And if there can come a case of
necessity, (as if there be no wine, or if a man cannot endure wine) it is then
a disputable matter whether it ought or not to be omitted; for if the necessity
be of Gods making, he is supposed to dispense with the impossibility: But if a
man alters what God appointed he makes to himself a new institution; for which
in this case there can be no necessity, nor yet excuse. But suppose either one
or other; yet so long as it is, or is thought a case of necessity, the thing
may be hopefully excused, if not actually justified; and because it can happen
but seldom, the matter is not great: let the institution be observed always
where it can. But then in all cases of possibility let all prepared Christians
be invited to receive the body and blood of Christ according to his
institution; or if that be too much, at least let all them that desire it, be
permitted to receive it in Christ's way: But that men are not suffered to do so,
that they are driven from it, that they are called heretic for saying it is
their duty to receive it as Christ gave it and appointed it, that they should
be excommunicated for desiring to communicate in Christ's blood, by the symbol
of his blood, according to the order of him that gave his blood; this is such a
strange piece of Christianity, that it is not easy to imagine what Antichrist
can do more against it, unless he take it all away. I only desire those persons
who are here concerned to weigh well the words of Christ, and the consequents
of them: He that breaks one of the least of my Commandments, and shall teach
men so, (and what if he compel men so?) shall be called the least in the
Kingdom of God.

To the Canon last mentioned it is answered, that the Canon speaks not of
receiving the sacrament by the communicants, but of the consummating the
sacrifice by the Priest. To this I reply, that it is true that the Canon was
particularly directed to the Priests, by the title which themselves put to it;
but the Canon meddles not with the consecrating or not consecrating in one
kind, but of receiving; for that is the title of the Canon. The Priest ought
not to receive the body of Christ without the blood; and in the Canon it self,
Comperimus autem quod quidam sumpta corporis sacri portione, a calice sacrati
cruoris abstineant. By which it plainly appears, that the consecration was
entire; for it was calix sacrati cr^ioris, the consecrated chalice, from which
out of a fond superstition some. Priests did abstain; the Canon therefore
relates to the sumption or receiving, not the sacrificing (as these men love to
call it) or consecration, and the sanction it self speaks indeed of the
reception of the sacrament, but not a word of it as it is in any sense a
sacrifice; aut integra sacramenta percipiant, aut ab integris arceantur. So
that the distinction of sacrament and sacrifice in this Question will be of no
use to the Church of Rome. For if Pope Gelasius (for it was his Canon) knew
nothing of this distinction, it is vainly applied to the expounding of his
words; but if he did know of it, then he has taken that part which is against
the Church of Rome; for of this mystery as it is a sacrament Gelasius speaks,
which therefore must relate to the people as well as to the Priest. And this
Canon is to this purpose quoted by Cassander. In consult. de sacra Commun.
And 2. no man is able to show that ever Christ appointed one way of receiving
to the Priest, and another to the people. The law was all one, the example the
same, the Rule is simple and Uniform, and no appearance of difference in the
Scripture, or in the Primitive Church: so that though the Canon mentions only
the Priest, yet it must by the same reason mean all; there being at that time
no difference known. 3. It is called sacrilege to divide one and the same
mystery; meaning that to receive one without the other, is to divide the body
from the blood, (for the dream of concomitancy was not then found out) and
therefore the title of the Canon is thus expressed, Corpus Christi sine ejus
sanguine sacerdos non debet accipere; and that the so doing, viz. by receiving
one without the other, cannot be without sacrilege. 4. Now suppose at last,
that the Priests only are concerned in this Canon, yet even then also they are
abundantly reproved, because even the Priests in the Church of Rome (unless
they consecrate) communicate but in one kind. 5. It is also remarkable, that
although in the Church of Rome there is great use made of the distinction of
its being sometime a sacrifice, sometime only a sacrament, as Friar Ant.
Mondolphus said in the Council of Trent, yet the arguments, by which the Roman
Doctors do usually endeavor to prove the lawfulness of the half communion, do
destroy this distinction, viz. that of Christ's ministering to the Disciples at
Emaus, and S. Paul in the Ship, in which either there is no proof or no
consecration in both kinds, and consequently no sacrifice: for there is mention
made only of blessing the bread, for they received that which was blessed; and
therefore either the consecration was imperfect, or the reception was entire.

To this purpose also the words of S. Ambrose are severe, and speak clearly of
communicants without distinction of Priest and People: which distinction,
though it be in this article nothing to the purpose, yet I observe it to
prevent such trifling cavils, which my Adversaries put me often to fight with.
His words are these: [He (viz. the Apostle S. Paul) says, In Corinth. 11.
Indignum dicet esse Domino qui aliter mysterium celebrat quam ab eo traditum
est. Non enim potest devotus esse qui aliter praesumit quam datum est ab
Authore. Ideoque praemonet ut secundum ordinem traditum devota men's sit
accedentis ad Eucharistiam Domini: quoniam futurum est judicium, ut quemadmodum
accedit unusquisque. veddat causas in Die Domini Jesu Christi, quia sine
disciplina traditionis and conversationis qui accedunt rei sunt corporis and
sanguinis Domini.
that he is unworthy of the Lord who otherwise celebrates the mystery than it
was delivered by him. For he cannot be devout that presumes otherwise than it
was given by the Author: Therefore he before admonishes, that according to the
order delivered, the mind of him that comes to the Eucharist of our Lord be
devout; for there is a judgment to come, that as every one comes, so he may
render an account in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ, because they who come
without the discipline of the delivery (or tradition) and of conversation are
guilty of the body and blood of our Lord.] One of my Adversaries says these
words of S. Ambrose are to be understood only of the Priest: A. L. p* 4.
and it appears so, by the word celebrat, not recipit; he that celebrates
otherwise than is delivered by Christ. To this I answer, that first it is
plain, and S. Ambrose so expresses his meaning to be of all that receive it,
for so he says [that the mind of him that comes to the Eucharist of our Lord
ought to be devout.] 2. It is an ignorant conceit, that S. Ambrose by celebrat,
means the Priest only, because he only can celebrate. For however the Church of
Rome does now almost impropriate that word to the Priest, yet in the Primitive
Church it was no more than recipit or accedit ad Eucharistiam, which appears
not only by S. Ambrose his expounding it so here, Sermon. 1. de eleemos.
but in S. Cyprian, speaking to a rich Matron, Locuples and dives Dominicum
celebrare te credis, and corban omnino non respicis? Do thou who art rich
and opulent suppose that you celebrate the Lords Supper, (or sacrifice) who
regardest not the poor man's basket? Celebrat is the word, and receive must
needs be the signification, and so it is in S. Ambrose; and therefore I did (as
I ought) translate it so. 3. It is yet objected, that I translate [aliter quam
ab eo traditum est] otherwise than he appointed; whereas it should be,
otherwise than it was given by him. And this surely is a great matter, and the
Gentleman is very subtle. But if he be asked, whether or no Christ appointed it
to be done as he did, to be given as he gave it? I suppose this deep and wise
note of his will just come to nothing. But ab eo traditum est, of it self
signifies, appointed; for this he delivered not only by his hands, but by his
commandment of Hoc facite; that was his appointment. Now that all this relates
to the whole institution and doctrine of Christ in this matter, and therefore
to the duplication of the Elements, the reception of the chalice, as well as
the consecrated bread, appears first by the general terms; qui aliter mysterium
celebrat, he that celebrates otherwise than Christ delivered. 2. These words
are a Commentary upon that of Saint Paul, He that eats this bread, and drinks
the Cup of the Lord Unworthily, is guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.]
Now hence S. Ambrose arguing that all must be done, as our Lord delivered, says
also that the bread must be eaten, and the cup drunk as our Lord delivered: and
he that does not do both, does not do what our Lord delivered. 3. The
conclusion of S. Ambrose is full to this particular: They are guilty of the
body and blood of Christ, who came without the discipline of the delivery and
of conversation, that is, they who receive without due preparation, and not
after the manner it was delivered, that is, under the differing symbols of
bread and wine. To which we may add that observation of Cassander, Disp. 5. de
sacra coena.
and of Vossius; that the Apostles represented the persons of all the faithful,
and Christ saying to them, take and eat, he also said, Drink ye all of this;
he said not, Eat ye all of this; and therefore if by virtue of these words,
Drink ye all of this, the Laity be not commanded to drink, it can never be
proved that the Laity are commanded to eat; Omnes is added to bibite, but it is
not expressly added to Accipite and Comedite, Lib. de corp. and sang. Domini.
cap. 15.
and therefore Paschasius Radbertus, who lived about eight hundred and twenty
years after Christ's incarnation, so expounds the precept without any
haesitation, Bibite ex hoc omnes, i. e. tam Ministri quam reliqui credentes,
Drink ye all of this, as well they that Minister, as the rest of the believers.
And no wonder, since for their so doing they have the example and institution
of Christ; by which as by an irrefragable and undeniable argument, the Ancient
Fathers used to reprove and condemn all usages which were not according to it.
For says Saint Cyprian, [If men ought not to break the least of Christ's
commandments, Epist. 63.
how much less those great ones which belong to the Sacrament of our Lords
passion and redemption, or to change it into any thing but that which was
appointed by him?] Now this was spoken against those who refused the hallowed
wine, but took water instead of it; and it is of equal force against them that
give to the Laity no cup at all; but whatever the instance was or could be, S.
Cyprian reproves it upon the only account of prevaricating Christ's institution.
The whole Epistle is worth reading for a full satisfaction to all wise and
sober Christians; Ab eo quod Christus Magister and praecepit and gessit humana
and novella institutione decedere, by a new and humane institution to depart
from what Christ our Master commanded and did; that the Bishops would not do;
tamen quoniam quidam, etc. because there are some who simply and ignorantly [In
calice Dominico sanctificando and plebi ministrando non hoc faciunt quod Jesus
Christus Dominus and Deus noster sacrificii hujus author and Doctor fecit and
docuit, etc.] In sanctifying the cup of the Lord, and giving it to the people
do not do what Jesus Christ did and taught, viz. they did not give the cup of
wine to the people; therefore S. Cyprian calls them to return ad radicem and
originem traditionis Dominicae, to the root and original of the Lords delivery.
Now besides that S. Cyprian plainly says, that when the chalice was sanctified,
it was also ministered to the people; I desire it be considered, whether or no
these words do not plainly reprove the Roman doctrine and practice, in not
giving the consecrated chalice to the people: Do they not recede from the root
and original of Christ's institution? Do they do what Christ did? Do they teach
what Christ taught? Is not their practice quite another thing than it was at
first? Did not the Ancient Church do otherwise than these men do? And thought
themselves obliged to do otherwise? They urged the doctrine and example of our
Lord, and the whole Economy of the Mystery was their warrant and their reason:
for they always believed that a peculiar grace and virtue was signified by the
symbol of wine; and it was evident that the chalice was an excellent
representment and memorial of the effusion of Christ's blood for us, and the
joining both the symbols signifies the entire refection and nourishment of our
souls, bread and drink being the natural provisions; and they design and
signify our redemption more perfectly, the body being given for our bodies,
and the blood for the cleansing our souls, the life of every animal being in
the blood: and finally, this in the integrity, signifies and represents Christ
to have taken body and soul for our redemption. For these reasons the Church of
God always in all her public communions gave the chalice to the people for
above a thousand years. This was all I would have remarked in this so evident a
matter, but that I observed in a short spiteful passage of E. W. Page 44. a
notorious untruth spoken with ill intent concerning the Holy Communion as
understood by Protestants. The words are these, [seeing the fruit of Protestant
Communion is only to stir up faith in the receiver, I can find no reason why
their bit of bread only, may not as well work that effect, as to taste of their
wine with it.] To these words, 1. I say, that although stirring up faith is one
of the Divine benefits and blessings of the Holy Communion, yet it is falsely
said, that the fruit of the Protestant Communion is only to stir up faith. For
in the Catechism of the Church of England it is affirmed, that the body and
blood of Christ are verily and indeed taken and received of the faithful in the
Lords Supper; and that our souls are strengthened and refreshed by the body and
blood of Christ, as our bodies are by the bread and wine,] and that of stirring
up our faith is not at all mentioned: So ignorant, so deceitful, or deceived is
E. W. in the doctrine of the Church of England. But then as for his foolish
sarcasm, calling the hallowed Element a bit of bread, which he does in scorn;
he might have considered, that if we had a mind to find fault whenever his
Church gives us cause, that the Papists wafer is scarce so much as a bit of
bread, it is more like Marchpane than common bread, and besides that (as
Salmeron acknowledges) anciently, Salmer. in 11. Cor. 10. disp. 17. page 138.
Olim ex pane uno sua cuique particula frangi consueverat, that which we in our
Church do was the custom of the Church; out of a great loaf to give particles
to every communicant, by which the Communication of Christ's body to all the
members is better represented, Durand. ration. Divin. offic. l. 4. c. 53.
and that Durandus affirming the same thing, says that the Grecians continue it
to this day; besides this (I say) the Author of the Roman order (says
Cassander) took it very ill, Cassand. liturg. c. 27. Sect. Et cum mensa.
that the loaves of bread offered in certain Churches for the use of the
sacrifice should be brought from the form of true bread to so slight and
slender a form, which he calls Minutias nummulariarum oblatarum, scraps of
little penies or pieces of money,] and not worthy to be called bread, being
such which no Nation ever used at their meals for bread. But this is one of the
innovations which they have introduced into the religious Rites of
Christianity, and it is little noted, they having so many greater changes to
answer for.

But it seems this Section was too hot for them, they loved not much to meddle
with it; and therefore I shall add no more fuel to their displeasure, but
desire the Reader, who would fully understand what is fit to be said in this
Question, Lib. 2. Chap. 3. Rule 9.
to read it in a book of mine which I called Ductor dubitantium, or the Cases
of Conscience; only I must needs observe, that it is an unspeakable comfort to
all Protestants, when so manifestly they have Christ on their side in this
Question against the Church of Rome. To which I only add, that for above 700.
years after Christ, it was esteemed sacrilege in the Church of Rome to abstain
from the Cup, and that in the ordo Romanus the Communion is always described
with the Cup; how it is since, and how it comes to be so, is too plain. But it
seems the Church has power to dispense in this affair, because S. Paul said,
that the Ministers of Christ are dispensers of the mysteries of God: as was
learnedly urged in the Council of Trent in the doctrine about this question.

SECTION. V.
Of the Scriptures and Service in an unknown Tongue.
THe Question being still upon the novelty of the Roman doctrines, and
Practices; I am to make it good that the present article and practice of Rome
is contrary to the doctrine and practice of the Primitive Church. E. W. p. 45.
and A. L. p. 25
To this purpose I alleged S. Basil in his Sermon or book de variis scripturae
locis: But say my adversaries, there is no such book.] Well! was there such a
man as S. Basil? If so, we are well enough; and let these Gentlemen be pleased
to look into his works printed at Paris 1547. by Carola Guillard, and in the
130. page, he shall see this Book, Sermon, Recordemini quae^, ex his
spiritualibus sermonibus qui lecti sunt medicinae. Reminiscamini earum quae
sunt in psalmis monitionum proverbialia praecepta, historiae pulchritudinem,
examplaque investigate. His addite Apostolica mandata. In omnibus vero tanquam
coronida, perfectionemque verba evangelica conjungite, ut ex omnibus utilitatem
capientes, ad id demum convertatis and revertamini ad quod quisque jucunde est
affectus, and ad quod obeundum gratiam a spiritu sancto accepit.
or Homily, in aliquot scripturae locis, at the beginning of which he has an
exhortation in the words placed in the Margent, there we shall find the lost
Sheep: The beginning of it is an exhortation to the people, congregated to get
profit and edification by the Scriptures read at morning prayer, the Monitions
in the Psalms, the precepts of the Proverbs; Search ye the beauty of the
history, and the examples, and add to these the precepts of the Apostles. But
in all things join the words of the Gospel, as the Crown and perfection, that
receiving profit from them all, ye may at length turn to that to which every
one is sweetly affected, and for the doing of which he has received the grace
of the Holy Spirit.]

Now this difficulty being over, all that remains for my own justification is,
that I make it appear that S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, S. Austin, Aquinas and
Lyra do respectively exhort to the study of the Scriptures, exhorting even the
Laity to do so, and testify the custom of the Ancient Church in praying in a
known tongue, and commending this as most useful, and condemning the contrary
as being useless and without edification. I shall in order set down the
doctrine they deliver in their own words, and then the impertinent cavils of
the adversaries will of themselves come to nothing.

S. Chrysostom commenting upon S. Paul's words concerning preaching and praying
for edification, 35. Homil. in 1 Cor. 14. chap.
and so as to be understood; coming to those words of S. Paul, If I pray with
my tongue, my spirit prays but my mind is without fruit [you see (says he)
how a little extolling prayer he shows, that he who is such a one (viz. as the
Apostle there describes) is not only unprofitable to others, but also to
himself, since his mind is without fruit.] Now if a man praying what he
understands not, does not, cannot profit himself; how can he that stands by,
who understands no more, be profited by that which does him that speaks no
good? For God understands though he does not, and yet he that so prays reaps no
benefit to himself, and therefore neither can any man that understands no more.
The affirmation is plain, and the reason cogent: To the same purpose are the
words of S. Chrysostom which A. L. himself quotes out of him [If one speaks in
only the Persian tongue, Page 25.
or some other strange tongue, but knows not what he says, certainly he will
be a barbarian even to himself, and not to another only, because he knows not
the force of the words.] This is no more than what S. Paul said before him; but
they all say, that he who hears and understands not whether it be the speaker
or the scholar, In 1 Cor. 14.
is but a Barbarian. Thus also S. Ambrose in his Commentary upon the words of
S. Paul [The Apostle says, Vtilius dicit (Apostolus) paucis verbis in apertion^
sermonis loqui, quod omnes intelligant, quam prolxam orationem habere in
obscuro. Imperitus enim audiens quod non intelligit, nescit finem erationis,
and non respondet Amen, id est, verum, ut confirmetur benedictio. Et in haec
verba Nam tu quidem been gratias agis] De eo dicit qui cognita sibi loquitur
quia scit quid dicit, (sed alius non aedificatur) si utique ad Ecclesiam
aedificandam convenitis, ea debent dici quae intelligant audientes. Nam quid
prodest ut lingua loquatur quam solus scit, ut qui audit, nihil proficiat. Ideo
tacere debet in Ecclesia, ut ii loquantur qui prosunt audientibus.
It is better to speak a few words, that are open or understood, that all may
understand, than to have a long oration in obscurity: That Is his sense for
reading and preaching: Now for prayer he adds, [The unskilful man hearing what
he understands not, knows not when the prayer ends, and answers not Amen, that
is, so be it, or it is true, that the blessing may be established: and a little
after, If ye meet together to edify the Church, those things ought to be said,
which the hearers may understand. For what profit is it to speak with a tongue,
when he that hears is not profited? Therefore he ought to hold his peace in the
Church, that they who can profit the hearers may speak. S. August. in 2.
Comment. in ps. 18. Deprecati Dominum ut ab occultis nostris mundet nos, and ab
alienis parcat servis suis, quid hoc sit intelligere debemus, ut humana rati^ne
non quasi avium voce cantemus. Nam and Meruli, and Psittaci, and Corvi, and
Picae, and hujusmodi volucres saepe ab hominibus docentur sonare quod nesciunt.
Scienter autem cantare non avi sed homini Divina voluntate concessum est. Et
paulo post. Nos autem qui in Ecclesia divina eloquia cantare didicimus simul
etiam instare debemus esse quod scriptum est, Beatus populus qui intelligit
jubilationem: proinde charissimi quod consona voc^ cantavimus, sereno etiam
cord nosse ac videre debemus.
S. Austin compares singing in the Church without understanding to the
chattering of Parrots and Magpies, Crows and Jackdawes. But to sing with
understanding is by the will of God given to man. And we who sing the Divine
praises in the Church, must remember that it is written, Blessed is the people
that understands singing of praises. Therefore most beloved, what with a joined
voice we have sung we must understand and discern with a serene heart.] To the
same purpose are the words of Lyra and Tho. Aquin. in 1 Cor. 14. Ille qui
intelligit reficitur, and quantum ad intellectum and quantum ad affectum; sed
men's ejus qui non intelligit, est sine fructu refectionis. And again, quantum
ad fructum devotionis spiritualis privatur qui non atendit ad ea quae orat, seu
non intelligit. Lyra. Caeterum hic consequenter idem ostendit in oratione
publica, quia si populus intelligat orationem seu benedictionem facerdnis,
m^lius reducitur in Deum and devotius Amen. And again, propter quod in Ecclesia
primitiva benedictiones and coeterae omnia lege communia * fiebant in vulgari.
* For of common things, that is, things in public the Diss^asive speaks, Common
prayers, common preachings, Common Eucharists and thanksgivings, common
blessings. All these and all other public and common things being used in the
vulgar tongue in the Primitive; Communia and omnia are equivalent, but Communia
is Lyra' s word.
Aquinas, which I shall not trouble the Reader withal here, but have set them
down in the Margent, that the strange confidence of these Romanists out-facing
notorious and evident words may be made, if possible, yet more conspicuous.

In pursuance of this doctrine of S. Paul and the Fathers, the Primitive
Christians in their several ages and Countries were careful, that the Bible
should be translated into all languages where Christianity was planted. That
the Bibles were in Greek is notorious; and that they were used among the people
S. Chrysostom homil. 1. in Joh. 8. is witness, that it was so, or that it ought
to be so. For he exhorts, Vacemus ergo scripturis dilectissimi, etc. Let us set
time apart to be conversant in the Scripture, at least in the Gospels, let us
frequently handle them to imprint them in our minds, which because the Jews
neglected they were commanded to have their books in their hands, but let us
not have them in our hands, but in our houses and in our hearts] by which words
we may easily understand that all the Churches of the Greek communion had the
Bible in their vulgar tongue, and were called upon to use them as Christians
ought to do, that is to imprint them in their hearts: Homil. 1. in 8. Johan.
Videat. lector. s. Basil. in Ascert. in 278. resp. in regul. brevior. and
Cassidore.
and speaking of S. John and his Gospel, he says that the Syrians, Indians,
Persians and Ethiopians and infinite other nations, (...); they grew wise by
translating his (S. John's) doctrines into their several languages. De doctrine:
Christiana lib. 2. c. 5. Ex quo factum est, ut etiam scriptura divina, qua
tantis morbis humanarum voluntatum subvenitur, ab una lingua profecta, quae
opportune potuit per ^rbem terrarum disseminari, per varias interpretum linguas
long lateque diffusainnotesceret gentibus ad salutem. Theodoret. lib. 5. de
curand. Graec. affect. Nos autem verbis Apostolicae propheticaeque doctrinae
inexhaustum robur manifest ostendimus. Vniversa enim facies terrae
quantacunque soly subiicitur, ejusmodi verborum plena jam est. Hebraei vero
libri non modo in Graecum idioma conversi sunt, sed in Romanam quoque linguam,
Egyptiam, Persicam, Indicam, Armenicamque and Scythicam, atque adeo
Sauromaticam, semelque ut dicam in linguas omnes quibus ad hunc diem nationes
utuntur.
But it is more that S. Austin says, The divine Scripture by which help is
supplied to so great diseases proceeded from one language which opportunely
might be carried over the whole world, that being by the various tongues of
interpreters scattered far and wide, it might be made known to the Nations for
their salvation. And Theodoret speaks yet more plainly, [we have manifestly
shown to you the inexhausted strength of the Apostolic and prophetic doctrine;
for the Universal face of the earth, whatsoever is under the sun is now full of
those words. For the Hebrew books are not only translated into the Greek idiom,
but into the Roman tongue, the Egyptian, Persian, Indian, Armenian, Scythian,
Sauromatic languages, and that I may speak once for all, into all tongues which
at this day the Nations use.] By these authorities of these Fathers we may
plainly see how different the Roman doctrine and practice is from the sentiment
and usages of the Primitive Church, and with what false confidence the Roman
adversaries deny so evident truth, having no other way to make their doctrine
seem tolerable, but by out-facing the known sayings of so many excellent
persons; and especially of S. Paul, who could not speak his mind in apt and
intelligible words: if he did not in his Epistle to the Corinthians exhort the
Church to pray Quamvis per se bonum sit ut officia divina celebrentur ea lingua
quam plebs intelligat, id enim per se confert ad aedificationem, ut been probat
hic locus. Estius in 1. ep. Corin. cap. 14.
and prophecy so as to be understood by the Catechumens, and by all the people;
that is, to do otherwise than they do in the Roman Church: Christianity is a
simple, wise, intelligible and easy Religion; and yet if a man will resolve
against any proposition, he may wrangle himself into a puzzle, and make himself
not to understand it so, though it be never so plain; what is plainer than the
testimony of their own Cajetan [that it were more for the edification of the
Church that the prayers were in the vulgar tongue.] Respon ad artic. pacis.
magis fore ad aedificationem Ecclesiae, ut preces vulgari lingua conciperentur.
Ex hac doctrina Pauli, habetur quod melius ad aedificationem Ecclesiae est
orationes publicas quae audiente populo dicuntur, dici lingua communi Clericis
and populo, quam dici latina. Idem in 1 Cor. 14.
He says no more than S. Paul says; and he could not speak it plainer. And
indeed no man of sense can deny it, unless he affirms at the same time that it
is better to speak what we understand not, than what we do; or that it were
better to serve God without that noble faculty than with it; that is, that the
way of a Parrot, and a Jackdaw, were better than the way of a man; and that in
the service of God, the Priests and the people are to differ as a man and a
bird.

But besides all this; was not Latin it self when it was first used in Divine
service the common tongue, and generally understood by many Nations and very
many Colonies? and if it was then the use of the Church to pray with the
understanding, why shall it not be so now? however, that it was so then, and is
not so now, demonstrates that the Church of Rome has in this material point
greatly innovated: Let but the Roman Pontifical be consulted, and there will be
yet found a form of ordination of Readers, Studete verba Dei, viz. Lectiones
sacras distinct and aperte ad intelligentiam and aedicationem fidelium absque
omni mendacio falsitatis proferre, etc.
in which it is said, that they must study to read distinctly and plainly, that
the people may understand: But now it seems that labor is saved. And when a
notorious change was made in this affair, we can tell by calling to mind the
following story. The Moravians did say Mass in the Slavonian tongue; for which
Pope John the eighth severely reproved them, and commanded them to do so no
more; but being better informed, he wrote a letter to their Prince
Sfentoputero, in which he affirms, that it is not contrary to faith and found
doctrine to say Mass and other prayers in the Slavonian tongue, and adds this
reason; because he that Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, has made the others also for
his glory; and this also he confirms with the authority of S. Paul's first
Epistle to the Corinthians, and some other Scriptures, only he commanded for
the decorum of the business, the Gospel should first be said in Latin and then
in the Slavonian tongue. But just two hundred years after this, the Tables were
turned, and though formerly these things were permitted, yet so were many
things in the Primitive Church; but upon better examination they have been
corrected. And therefore P. Gregory the seventh wrote to Vratislaus of Bohemia,
that he could not permit the celebration of the divine offices in the Slavonian
tongue, and he commanded the Prince to oppose the people herein with all his
forces. Here the world was strangely altered, and yet S. Paul's Epistle was not
condemned of heresy; and no Council had decreed that all vulgar languages were
profane; and no reason can yet be imagined why the change was made, unless it
were to separate the Priest from the people, by a wall of Latin, and to nurse
stupendous ignorance in them, by not permitting to them learning enough to
understand their public prayers, in which every man was greatly concerned.
Neither may this be called a slight matter; for besides that Gregory the
seventh thought it so considerable, that it was a just cause of a war or
persecution, (for he commanded the Prince of Bohemia to oppose the people in it
with all his forces;) besides this (I say) to pray to God with the
understanding, is much better, than praying with the tongue; that alone can be
a good prayer, this alone can never; and then the loss of all those advantages
which are in prayers truly understood, the excellency of devotion, the passion
of desires, the ascent of the mind to God, the adherence to and acts of
confidence in him, the intellectual conversation with God, most agreeable to a
rational being, the melting affections, the pulses of the heart to and from
God, to and from our selves, the promoting and exercising of our hopes, all
these and very many more (which can never be entire but in the prayers and
devotions of the hearts, and can never be in any degree but in the same, in
which the prayers are acts of love and wisdom, of the will and the
understanding) will be lost to the greatest part of the Catholic Church, if the
mouth be set open, and the soul be gagged; so that it shall be the word of the
mouth, but not the word of the mind.

All these things being added to what was said in this article by the
Dissuasive, will more than make it clear, that in this article (the consequents
of which are very great) the Church of Rome has causelessly troubled
Christendom, and innovated against the Primitive Church, and against her own
ancient doctrines and practices, and even against the Apostle: But they care
for none of these things. Some of their own Bigots profess the thing in the
very worst of all these expressions; for so Reynolds and Gifford in their
Calvino Turcismus complain that such horrid and stupendous evils have followed
the translation of Scriptures into vulgar languages, that they are of force
enough ad istas translationes penitus supprimendas, etiamsi Divina vel
Apostolica authoritate niterentur: Although they did rely upon the authority
Apostolical or Divine, yet they ought to be taken away. So that it is to no
purpose to urge Scripture, or any argument in the world against the Roman
Church in this article; for if God himself command it to be translated, yet it
is not sufficient: and therefore these men must be left to their own way of
understanding, for beyond the law of God, we have no argument. I will only
remind them, that it is a curse which God threatens to his rebellious people,
[I will speak to this people with men of another tongue, Isa. 25. 11.
and by strange lips, and they shall not understand. This is the curse which
the Church of Rome contends earnestly for, in behalf of their people.

SECTION VI.
Of the Worship of Images.
THat society of Christians will not easily be reformed, that think themselves
obliged to dispute for the worship of Images, the prohibition of which was so
great a part of the Mosaic Religion, and is so infinitely against the nature
and spirituality of the Christian; a thing which every understanding can see
condemned in the Decalogue, and no man can excuse, but witty persons that can
be bound by no words, which they can interpret to a sense contradictory to the
design of the common: a thing for the hating of, and abstaining from which the
Jews were so remarked by all the world, and by which as by a distinctive
cognizance they were separated from all other Nations, and which with perfect
resolution they keep to this very day, and for the not observing of which, they
are intolerably scandalized at those societies of Christians, who without any
necessity in the thing, without any pretense of any Law of God, for no good,
and for no wise end, and not without infinite danger, at least, of idolatry,
retain a worship and veneration to some stocks and stones. Such men as these
are too hard for all laws, and for all arguments; so certain it is, that faith
is an obedience of the will in a conviction of the understanding; that if in
the will and interests of men there be a perverseness and a noncompliance, and
that it is not bent by prudent and wise flexures and obedience to God, and the
plain words of God in Scripture, nothing can ever prevail, neither David, nor
his Sling, nor all the worthies of his army.

In this question I have said enough in the Dissuasive, and also in the Ductor
dubitantium; but to the arguments and fullness of the persuasion, they neither
have, nor can they say any thing that is material; but according to their usual
method, like flies they search up and down, and light upon any place which they
suppose to be sore, or would make their proselytes believe so. I shall
therefore first vindicate those few quotations which the Epistles of his
brethren except against; (for there are many, and those most pregnant which
they take no notice of) as bearing in them too clear a conviction. 2. I shall
answer such testimonies, which some of them steal out of Bellarmine, and which
they esteem as absolutely their best. And 3. I shall add something in
confirmation of that truth of God, which I here have undertaken to defend.

First, for the questioned quotations against the worship of images; S. Cyril
was named in the Dissuasive as denying that the Christians did give veneration
and worship to the image even of the cross it self, but no words of S. Cyril
were quoted; for the denial is not in express words, but in plain and direct
argument: for being by Julian charged with worshipping the cross, S. Cyril in
behalf of the Christians takes notice of their using the cross in a religious
memory of all good things, to which by the cross of Christ we are engaged, that
is, he owns all that they did, and therefore taking no notice of any thing of
worship, and making no answer to that part of the objection, it is certain that
the Christians did not do it, or that he could not justify them in so doing.
But because I quoted no words of S. Cyril, I now shall take notice of some
words of his, which do most abundantly clear this particular by a general rule;
N^mo autem ignorant nulli prorsus naturae, praeterquam Dei, adorationem a
scrip^uris contribui.
[Only the Divine Nature is capable of adoration, and the Scripture has given
adoration to no nature but to that of God alone;] that, and that alone ought to
be worshipped. But to give yet a little more light to this particular; it may
be noted that before S. Cyrils time this had been objected by the Pagans,
Thesaur. l. 2. c. 1. and alibi. Vna Natura est deitatis quam solummodo adorare
oportet.
particularly by Caecilius, to which Minutius answers by directly denying it,
and saying, that the Pagans did rather worship erosses, that is, the wooden
parts of their Gods. The Christians indeed were by Tertullian called Religiosi
crucis, because they had it in thankful use and memory, and used it frequently
in a symbolical confession of their not being ashamed, but of their glorying in
the real cross of Christ: But they never worshipped the material cross, or the
figure of it, as appears by S. Cyrils owning all the objections, excepting this
only, of which he neither confessed the fact, nor offered any justification of
it when it was objected, but professed a doctrine with which such practice was
inconsistent. And the like is to be said of some other of the Fathers who speak
with great affections and veneration of the cross, meaning, to exalt the
passion of Christ; and in the sense of S. Paul to glory in the cross of Christ,
not meaning the material cross, much less the image of it, which we blame in
the Church of Rome: And this very sense we have expressed in S. Ambrose, Orat.
de obitu Tbecdos.
Sapiens Helena egit, quae crucem in capite regum levavit, ut Christi Crux in
Regibus adoretur. The figure of the material cross was by Helena placed upon
the heads of Kings, that the cross of Christ in Kings might be adored:] How so?
He answers, Non insolentia ista sed pietas est cum defertur sacrae redemptioni.
It is to the holy redemption, not to the cross materially taken; this were
insolent, but the other is piety. In the same manner also S. Chrysostom is by
the Roman Doctors, and particularly by Gretser, E. W. page 57.
and E. W. urged for the worshipping Christ's cross. But the book de cruce and
latrone, whence the words are cited; Gretser and Possevine suspect it to be a
spurious issue of some unknown person: It wants a Father; and sometimes it goes
to S. Austin, and is crowded into his Sermons de Tempore: Sermon. 30.
But I shall not trouble my discourse any farther with such counterfeit ware.
What S. Chrysostoms doctrine was in the matter of images, is plain enough in
his indubitate works, as is, and shall be remarked in their several places.

The famous testimony of Epiphanius, against the very use of images in
Churches, being urged in the Dissuasive as an irrefragable argument that the
Roman doctrine is not Primitive or Catholic, the contra-scribers say nothing;
A. L.
but that when S. Hierome translated that Epistle of S. Epiphanius, it appears
not that this story was in that Epistle that S. Hierome translated; which is a
great argument that that story was foisted into that Epistle after S. Hieromes
time.] A likely matter! but spoken upon slight grounds. It appears not, says
the Objector, that this story was in it then: To whom does it not appear? To
Bellarmine indeed it did not, nor to this Objector who writes after him. Alan
Cope denied that Epiphanius ever wrote any such Epistle at all, or that S.
Hierome ever translated any such; but Bellarmine, being ashamed of such
unreasonable boldness, found out this more gentle answer, which here we have
from our Objector: well! but now the case is thus; that this story was put into
the Epistle by some Iconoclast is vehemently suspected by Bellarmine and
Baronius. But this Epistle vehemently burns their fingers, and the live coal
sticks close to them, and they can never shake it off. For 1. who should add
this story to this Epistle? Not any of the reformed Doctors; for before Luthers
time many ages, this Epistle with this story was known, and confessed, and
quoted, in the Manuscript copies of diverse Nations. 2. This Epistle was quoted,
and set down as now it is, with this story by Charles the great above DCCC.
years ago. 3. And a little after by the Fathers in the Council of Paris; only
they call the Author John Bishop of C. P. instead of Jerusalem. 4. Sirmondus
the Jesuit cites this Epistle as the genuine work of Epiphanius. Sirmond. Not.
in Council. Norbon. c. 13. l. ^. Council. Gal.
5. Marianus Victor, and Dionysius Petavius a Jesuit of great and deserved
fame for learning in their Editions of Epiphanius, have published this whole
Epistle; and have made no note, given no censure upon this story. 6. Before
them Tom. 3. lit. 19. c. 157. and apud Bellarm. lib. 2. de imag. c. 9.
Thomas Waldensis, and since him Alphonsus a Castro acknowledge this whole
Epistle as the proper issue of Epiphanius. 7. Who can be supposed to have put
in this story? The Iconoclasts? Not the Greeks, because if they had, they would
have made use of it for their advantage, which they never did in any of their
disputations against images; Lib. 2. de imag. cap 9. Sect. secundo quia
heretici.
insomuch that Bellarmine makes advantage of it, because they never objected
it. Not the Latins that wrote against images; for though they were against the
worship of images, yet they were not Iconoclasts: Indeed Claudius Taurinensis
was, but he could not put this story in, for before his time it was in, as
appears in the book of Charles the great before quoted. These things put
together are more than sufficient to prove that this story was written by
Epiphanius, and the whole Epistle was translated by S. Hierome, as himself
testifies. In Epist. 61. and 101. ad Pammach.
But after all this, if there was any foul play in this whole affair, the
cosenage lies on the other side; for some or other have destroyed the Greek
original of Epiphanius, and only the Latin copies remain; and in all of them of
Epiphanius's works, this story still remains. But how the Greek came to be
lost, though it be uncertain, yet we have great cause to suspect the Greeks to
be the Authors of the loss: And the cause of this suspicion is the command made
by the Bishops in the seventh Council, Syn. 7. Act. 8. Can. 9.
that all writings against images should be brought in to the Bishop of C. P.
there to be laid up with the books of other heretics. It is most likely here it
might go away: But however, the good providence of God has kept this record to
reprove the follies of the Roman Church in this particular.

The authority of S. Austin, reprehending the worship of images, De moribus
Eccles. lib. 1. c. 34.
was urged from several places of his writings cited in the Margent. In his
first book de moribus Ecclesiae, Jam videbitis quid inter ostentationem and
sinceritatem -- postremo quid inter superstitionis Sirenas and portum
religionis intersit. Nolite mihi colligere professores Nominis Christiani, nec
professionis suae vim aut scientes aut exhibentes. Nolite consectari turbas
imperitorum, qui vel in ipsa vera religione superstitiosi sunt, vel ita
libidinibus dediti, ut obliti sint quid promiserint Deo. Novi multos esse
sepulchrorum and picturarum adoratores, novi multos esse qui luxuriosissime
super mortuos vivant.
he has these words which I have now set down in the Margent; in which,
describing among other things the difference between superstition and true
religion, he presses it on to issue; [Tell not me of the professors of the
Christian name. Follow not the troops of the unskilful, who in true religion it
self either are superstitious, or so given to lusts, that they have forgotten
what they have promised to God. I know that there are many worshippers of
sepulchers and pictures, I know that there are many who live luxuriously over
[the graves of] the dead.] That S. Austin reckons these that are worshippers of
pictures among the superstitious and the vicious, is plain, and forbids us to
follow such superstitious persons. Sed and illa quam vana sint, quam noxia,
quam sacrilega, quemadmodum a magna part vestrum, atque adeo pene ab omnibus
v^bis non observentur, alio volumine oftendere instit^i. Nunc vos illud
admaneo, ut aliquando Ecclesiae Catholicae maledicere definatis, vituperando
mores hominum quos and ipsa condemnat, and quos quotidie tanquam malos filio^
corrigere stude^.
But see what follows, [But how vain, how hurtful, how sacrilegious they are, I
have purposed to show in another volume.] Then addressing himself to the
Manichees, who upon the occasion of these evil and superstitious practices of
some Catholics, did reproach the Catholic Church, he says, [Now I admonish you
that at length you will give over the reproaching the Catholic Church, by
reproaching the manners of these men, (viz. worshippers of pictures, and
sepulchers, and livers riotously over the dead,) whom she her self condemns,
and whom as evil sons she endeavors to correct.] By these words now cited, it
appears plainly, that S. Austin affirms that those few Christians, who in his
time did worship pictures, were not only superstitious, but condemned by the
Church. This the Letter writer denies S. Austin to have said; but that he did
say so, we have his own words for witness. Yea, but 2. S. Austin did not speak
of worshippers of pictures alone: what then? Neither did he of them alone say
they were superstitious, and their actions vain, hurtful and sacrilegious. But
does it follow that therefore he does not say so at all of these, because he
says it of the others too? But 3. neither does he formally call them
superstitions,] I know not what this offer of an answer means, certain it is,
when S. Austin had complained that many Christians were superstitious, his
first instance is of them that worship pictures and graves. But I perceive this
Gentleman found himself pinched beyond remedy, and like a man fastened by his
thumbs at the whipping-post, he wries his back and shrinks from the blow,
though he knows he cannot get loose.

In the Margent of the Dissuasive, De fide and. symb. c. 7. Contr. Adimant. c.
13.
there were two other testimonies of S. Austin pointed at; but the Page 27.
Letter says, that in these S. Austin has not a word to any such purpose: That
is now to be tried. The purpose for which they were brought, is to reprove the
doctrine and practice of the Church of Rome in the matter of images: It was not
intended that all these places should all speak or prove the same particular;
but that which was affirmed in the text being sufficiently verified by the
first quotation in the Margent, the other two are fully pertinent to the main
inquiry, and to condemnation of the Roman doctrine, as the first was of the
Roman practice. The words are these, [Neither is it to be thought that God is
circumscribed in a humane shape, that they who think of him should fancy a
right or a left side, or that because the Father is said to sit, it is to be
supposed, that he does it with bended knees, lest we fall into that sacrilege,
for which the Apostle Execrates them that change the glory of the incorruptible
God into the similitude of a corruptible man. For, for a Christian to place
such an image to God in the Church is wickedness, but much more wicked is it to
place it in our heart.] So S. Austin. Now this testimony had been more properly
made use of in the next Section, as more relating to the proper matter of it,
as being a direct condemnation of the picturing of God; but here it serves
without any sensible error, and where ever it is, it throws a stone at them,
and hits them. But of this more in the sequel.

But the third testimony (however it pleases A. L. to deny it) does speak home
to his part of the question, Contr. Adimant. c. 13.
and condemns the Roman hypothesis: the words are these, [See that ye forget
not the testimony of your God which he wrote, or that ye make shapes and
images:] But it adds also saying, Your God is a consuming fire, and a zealous
God. These words from the Scripture Adimantus propounded; [Yet remember not
only there, but also here concerning the zeal of God, he so blames the
Scriptures, that he adds that which is commanded by our Lord God in those
books, concerning the not worshipping of images; as if for nothing else he
reprehends that zeal of God, but only because by that very zeal we are
forbidden to worship images. Therefore he would seem to favor images, which
therefore they do that they might reconcile the good will of the Pagans to
their miserable and mad sect,] meaning the sect of the Manichees, who to comply
with the Pagans, did retain the worship of images. And now the three
testimonies are verified; and though this was an Unnecessary trouble to me, and
I fear it may be so to my Reader, yet the Church of Rome has got no advantage
but this, that in S. Austins sense, that which Romanists do now, the Manichees
did then; only these did it to comply with the Heathens, and those out of
direct and mere superstition. But to clear this point in S. Austins doctrine,
the Reader may please to read his 19. book against Faustus the Manichee, cap.
18. and the 119. Epistle against him, chap. 12. where he affirms that the
Christians observe that, which the Jews did in this, viz. that which was
written, Hear O Israel, the Lord thy God is one God, thou shall not make an
idol to thee, and such like things: and in the latter place, he affirms that
the second Commandment is moral, viz. that all of the Decalogue are so, but
only the fourth. I add a third as pregnant as any of the rest: for in his first
book de consensu Evangelistarum, speaking of some who had fallen into error
upon occasion of the pictures of S. Peter and S. Paul, he says, Sic nempe
errare meruerunt qui Christum and Apostolos ejus non in sanctis condicibus sed
in pictis parietibus quaesiverunt.

The Council of Eliberis is of great concern in this Question, and does great
effort to the Roman practices. E. W. page 57.
E. W. takes notice of it, and his best answer to it is, that it has often
been answered already. He says true; it has been answered both often and many
ways. The Council was in the year 305. of 19. Bishops, who in the 36. Canon,
decreed this [placuit picturas in Ecclesiis esse non debere.] It has pleased
us that pictures ought not to be in Churches; That Is the decree: The reason
they give is, ne quod colitur and adoratur in parietibus depingatur, lest that
which is worshipped be painted on the walls. So that there are two
propositions; 1. Pictures ought not to be in Churches. 2. That which is
worshipped ought not to be painted upon walls. Page 57.
E. W. has a very learned Note upon this Canon. Mark, first the Council
supposes worship and adoration due to pictures, ne quod colitur and adoratur.
By which mark, E. W. confesses that pictures are the object of his adoration,
and that the Council took no care and made no provision for the honor of God,
(who is and ought to be worshipped and adored in Churches, and illi soli
servies) but only were good husbands for the pictures for fear, 1. they should
be spoiled by the moisture of the walls, or 2. defaced by the Heathen; the
first of these is Bellarmines, the latter is Perrons answer: But too childish
to need a severer consideration. But how easy had it been for them to have
commanded that all their pictures should have been in frames, upon boards or
cloth, as it is in many Churches in Rome, and other places. 2. Why should the
Bishops forbid pictures to be in Churches; for fear of spoiling one kind of
them, they might have permitted others, though not these. 3. Why should any man
be so vain as to think, that in that age, in which the Christians were in
perpetual disputes against the Heathens for worshipping pictures and images,
they should be so curious to preserve their pictures, and reserve them for
adoration. 4. But then to make pictures to be the subject of that caution, ne
quod colitur, and adoratur, and not to suppose God and his Christ to be the
subject of it, is so unlike the religion of Christians, the piety of those
ages, the Economy of the Church, and the analogy of the Commandment, that it
betrays a refractory and heretical spirit in him, that shall so perversely
invent an Unreasonable Commentary, rather than yield to so pregnant and easy
testimony. But some are wiser, and consider, that the Council takes not care
that pictures be not spoiled, but that they be not in the Churches; and that
what is adorable be not there painted, and not, be not there spoiled. The not
painting them is the utmost of their design, not the preserving them; for we
see vast numbers of them every where painted on walls, and preserved well
enough, and easily repaired upon decay, therefore this is too childish; to blot
them out for fear they be spoiled, and not to bring them into Churches for fear
they be taken out. Agobardus Bishop of Lions, above 800. years since cited this
Canon in a book of his which he wrote de picturis and imaginibus, which was
published by Papirius Massonus; and thus illustrates it, Recte (says he)
nimirum ob hujusmodi evacuandam superstitionem ab Orthodoxis patribus definitum
est picturas in Ecclesia fieri non debere [Nec] quod eolitur and adoratur in
parietibus deping atur. Where first he expressly affirms these Fathers in this
Canon to have intended only rooting up this superstition, not the ridiculous
preserving the pictures. So it was Understood then. But then 2. Agobardus reads
it, Nec, not [Ne] quod colitur, which reading makes the latter part of the
Canon, to be part of the sanction, and no reason of the former decree; pictures
must not be made in Churches, neither ought that to be painted upon walls which
is worshipped and adored. This was the doctrine and sentiment of the wise and
good men above 800. years since. By which also the Unreasonable supposition of
Baronius, that the Canon is not genuine, is plainly confuted; this Canon not
being only in all copies of that Council, but owned for such by Agobardus so
many ages before Baronius, and so many ages after the Council. And he is yet
farther reproved by Cardinal Perron, who tells a story, that in Granada in
memory of this Council, they use frames for pictures, and paint none upon the
wall at this day. It seems they in Granada are taught to understand that Canon
according unto the sense of the Patrons of images, and to mistake the plain
meaning of the Council. For the Council did not forbid only to paint upon the
walls, for that according to the common reading is but accidental to the
decree; but the Council commanded that no picture should be in Churches.
Now-then let this Canon be confronted with the Council of Trent, Sess. 25.
decret. de S. S. invoc. [Imagines Christi, Deiparae virginis, and aliorum
sanctorum in Templis praesertim habendas and retinendas, that the images of
Christ, and of the Virgin Mother of God, and of other Saints be had and kept
especially in Churches:] and in the world there cannot be a greater
contradiction between two, than there is between Eliberis and Trent, the old
and the new Church: for the new Church not only commands pictures and images to
be kept in Churches, but paints them upon walls, and neither fears thieves nor
moisture. There are diverse other little answers amongst the Roman Doctors to
this uneasy objection; but they are only such as venture at the telling the
secret reasons why the Council so decreed; as Alan Cope says, it was so
decreed, lest the Christians should take them for Gods, or lest the Heathen
should think the Christians worshipped them; so Sanders. But it matters not for
what reason they decreed: Only if either of these say true, then Bellarmine and
Perron are false in their conjectures of the reason. But it matters not; for
suppose all these reasons were concentred in the decree, yet the decree it self
is not observed at this day in the Roman Church, but a doctrine and practice
quite contrary introduced. And therefore my opinion is, Ioc. Theol. lib. 5. c.
4.
that Melchior Canus answers best, [aut nimis duras aut parum rationi
consentaneas a Consiliis provincialibus interdum editas, non est negandum.
Qualis illa non impudenter modo verum etiam impie a Consilio Elibertino de
tollendis imaginibus. By this we may see not only how irreverently the Roman
Doctors use the Fathers when they are not for their turns; but we may also
perceive how the Canon condemns the Roman doctrine and practice in the matter
of images.

The next inquiry is concerning matter of History, relating to the second Synod
of Nice in the East, and that of Francfurt in the West. In the Dissuasive it
was said, that Eginardus, Hincmarus, Aventinus, etc. affirmed, 1. That the
Bishops assembled at Francfurt, and condemned the Synod of Nice. 2. That they
commanded it should not be called a General Council. 3. They published a book
under the name of the Emperor confuting that Unchristian Assembly. These things
were said out of these Authors, not supposing that every thing of this should
be proved from every one of them, but the whole of it by its several parts from
all these put together.

1. That the Bishops of Francfurt condemned the Synod of Nice or the seventh
General. Whether the Dissuasive has said this truly out of the Authors quoted
by him, we need no further proof, but the confession of Bellarmine. Lib. 2. de
imagine. c. 14. Sect. secundo quia.
Auctores antiqui omnes convenient in hoc, quod in concilio Francofordiensi sit
reprobata Synodus VII. quae decreverat imagines adorandas. Ita Hincmarus,
Aimoinus, Rhegino, Ado, and alii passim docent. So that if the objector blames
the Dissuasive for alleging these authorities, let him first blame Bellarmine,
who confesses that to be true, which the Dissuasive here affirms. Now that by
the VII. Synod Bellarmine means the II. Nicene, Sect. neque obstat.
appears by his own words in the same chapter. Videtur igitur mihi in Synodo
Francofordiensi vere reprobatam Nicaenam II. Synodum; sed per errorem, and
materialiter, etc. And Bellarmine was in the right; not only those which the
Dissuasive quoted, but all the Ancient writers says Bellarmine. So the Author
of the life of Charles the Great, speaking of the Council of Francfurt; [There
Queen Fastrada died. Pseudosynodus Graecorum quam falso septimam vocabant pro
imaginibus, rejecta est a pontificibus. The same is affirmed by the Annals of
the Francs Ad annum 794.
; by Adhelmus Benedictinus in his Annals, in the same year; by Hincmarus
Rhemensis Opusc. 55. N. cap. 20.
in an Epistle to Hincmarus his Nephew; by Strabus the Monk of Fulda, Rhegino
prumiensis, Urspergensis, and Hermanus Contractus in their Annals and
Chronicles of the year 794. By Ado viennensis Chron. aetat. 6 ad annum Christi
eundem and 792.
; sed pseudosynodus, quam septimam Graeci appellant, pro adorandis imaginibus,
abdicata penitus; the same is affirmed by the Annals of Eginhardus Ad eund.
annum.
; and by Aimoinus Lib. 4. c 85.
and Aventinus. I could reckon many more, if more were necessary, but these are
they whom the Dissuasive quoted, and some more; against this truth nothing
material can be said, only that Hincmarus and Aimoinus (which are two whom the
Dissuasive quotes) do not say that the Synod of Francfurt rejected the second
Nicene, but the Synod of C. P. But to this Bellarmine himself answers, that it
is true they do so, but it is by mistake; and that they meant the Council which
was kept at Nice: so that the Dissuasive is justified by his greatest
adversary. But David Blondel answers this objection, by saying that C. P. being
the head of the Eastern Empire, these Authors used the name of the Imperial
city for the provinces under it: which answer though it be ingenious, yet I
rather believe that the error came first from the Council of Francfurt, who
called it the Synod at C. P. and that after it, these Authors took it up: but
that error was not great, but always excusable, if not warrantable; because the
second Nicene Council was first appointed to be at C. P. but by reason of the
tumults of the people, was translated to Nice. But to proceed, That Blondus
(whom the Dissuasive also quotes) says, the Synod of Francfurt abrogated the
seventh Synod, the objector confesses, and adds, that it confuted the Felician
heresy for taking away of images: concerning which, lest the less wary Reader
should suppose the Synod of Francfurt to have determined for images, as Alan
Cope, Gregory de Valentia, Vasquez, Suarez, and Binius would fain have the
world believe; I shall note, that the Synod of Francfurt did at the same time
condemn the Heresy of Felix Urgetitanus, which was, that Christ was the
adopted son of God. Now because in this Synod were condemned the breakers of
Images, and the worshippers of images; some ignorantly (amongst which is this
Gentleman the objector) have supposed that the Felician Heresy was that of the
Iconoclasts.

2. Now for the second thing which the Dissuasive said from these Authors; that
the Fathers at Francfurt commanded that the second Nicene should not be called
a general Council, that matter is sufficiently cleared in the proof of the
first particular; for if they abrogated it, and called it pseudosynodum, and
decreed against it; hoc ipso, they caused it should not be, or be called a
General Synod. But I shall declare what the Synod did in the words of Adhelmus
Benedictinus; In annal.
Synodus etiam quae paucos ante annos C. P. sub Helena and Constantino filio
ejus congregata, and ab ipsis non tantum septima, verum etiam Universalis est
appellata, ut nec septima nec Universalis diceretur, habereturque quasi
supervacua, in totum ab omnibus abdicata est.

3. Now for the third thing, which the Dissuasive said, that they published a
book under the name of the Emperor; I am to answer that such a book about that
time, within three or four years of it, was published in the name of the
Emperor, is notoriously known, and there is great reason to believe it was
written three or four years before the Synod, and sent by the Emperor to the
Pope; but that diverse of the Church of Rome did endeavor to persuade the world
that the Emperor did not write it, but that it was written by the Synod, and
contains the acts of the Synod, but published under the Emperors name. Now this
the Dissuasive affirmed by the authority of Hincmarus, who does affirm it, Vide
supra. Sect. primo quia.
and of the same opinion is Bellarmine; Scripti videntur in Synodo
Francofordiensi and acta continere synodi Francofordiensis: and enim asserit
Hincmarus ejus temporis Author.] So that by all this the Reader may plainly see
how careful the Dissuasive was in what was affirmed, and how careless this
Gentleman is of what he objects: Only this I add, that though it be said that
this book contained the acts of the Synod of Francfurt, though it might be
partly true, yet not wholly. For this Synod did indeed do so much against that
of the Greeks, and was so decretory against the worship of images, (quod omnino
Ecclesia Dei execratur, A. D. 793.
said Hoveden, and Matthew of Westminster) that it is vehemently suspected,
that the Patrons of Images (the objector knows whom I mean) have taken a timely
course with it, so that the monuments of it are not to be seen, nor yet a
famous and excellent Epistle of Alcuinus written against the Greek Synod,
though his other works are in a large volume carefully enough preserved.

It was urged as an argument a minori ad majus, Of making of images.
that in the Primitive Church it was accounted unlawful to make images; and
therefore it was impossible that the worship of images should then be the
doctrine or practice of the Catholic Church. A. L. p. 27.
To this purpose Clemens Alexandrinus, Tertullian and Origin were alleged.
First for Tertullian, of whom the Letter says, that he said no such thing: sure
it is, this man did not care what he said; supposing it sufficient to pass the
common Reader, to say Tertullian did not say for what he is alleged: for more
will believe him, than examine him. But the words of Tertullian shall manifest
the strange confidence of this person. The Quotations out of Tertullian are
only noted in the Margent, but the words were not cited, but now they must, to
justify me and themselves. Cap. 3.
1. That reference to Tertullians book of idolatry, the objector takes no
notice of, as knowing it would reproach him too plainly: see the words, [the
artificers of statues and images, and all kind of representations, Diabolum
soeculo intulisse artifices statuarum and imaginum and omnis generis
simulachrorum.
the Devil brought into the world,] and when he had given the Etymology of an
Idol, saying (...) is formula, he adds, Igitur omnis forma vel formula idolum
se dici exposcit: Inde omnis Idoli artifex ejusdem and Unius est criminis. And
a little before. Exinde jam caput facta est Idololatriae ars omnis quae Idolum
quoquo modo edit. And in the beginning of the fourth chapter, Idolum tam fieri
quam coli Deus prohibet. Quanto praecedit ut fiat quod coli possit, tanto prius
est ne fiat si coli non licet. And again, toto mundo ejusmodi artibus
interdixit servis Dei. And a little after he brings in some or other objecting;
Sed ait quidam adversus similitudinis interdictae propositionem, cur ergo Moses
in eremo simulachrum serpentis ex aere fecit? To this at last he answers. Si
eundem Deum observas habes legem ejus, ne feceris similitudinem, si and
praeceptum factae postea similitudinis respicis and tu imitare Moysen. Ne
facias adversus legem simulachrum aliquod, nisi and tibi Deus jusserit. Now
here is no subterfuge for any one: For Tertullian first fays, the Devil brought
into the world all the artists and makers of statues, images and all sorts of
similitudes. 2. He makes all these to be the same with Idols. And 3. that God
as well forbad the making of these and the worship of them, and that the maker
is guilty of the same crime; and lastly I add, his definition of Idolatry,
Idololatria est omnis circa omne idolum famulatus and servitus. Every image is
an idol, and every service and obeisance about any or every idol is idolatry. I
hope all this put together will convince the Gentlemen that denied it, that
Tertullian has said some such thing as the Dissuasive quoted him for. Now for
the other place quoted, Lib. 2. advers. Marc. c. 22.
the words are these; proinde and similitudinem vetans fieri omnium quae in
coelo and in terra and in aquis, ostendit and causas, idololatriae scilicet
substantiam exhibentes. God forbidding all similitude to be made of things in
Heaven and Earth, and in the Waters, shows the causes that restrain idolatry:
the causes of idolatry he more fully described in the forecited place; Quando
enim and sine idolo idololatria fiat: for he supposes the making of the images
to be the cause of their worshipping, and he calls this making statues and
images Daemoniis corpora facere. Lib. 4. c. 22.
But there is yet another place in his books against Marcion, where Tertullian
affirming that S. Peter knew Moses and Elias on Mount Tabor by a spiritual
ecstasy, says it upon this reason, Nec enim imagines eorum aut statuas populus
habuisset aut similitudines lege prohibente. The same also is to be seen in his
book De spectaculis, c. 23. Jam vero ipsum opus personarum quaero an Deo
placeat qui omnem similitudinem vetat fieri, quanto magis imaginis suae. By
this time I hope the Gentleman thinks himself in some shame, for denying that
Tertullian said the making of images to be Unlawful.

Now let us see for the other two Authors quoted by the Dissuasive; Page 27.
The objector in the Letter says, they only spoke of making the Images of
Jupiter and the other heathen Gods: but E. W. says he cannot find those
quotations out of Clemens Alexandria, Page 54. 55.
because the books quoted are too big, and he could not espy them. The author
of the Letter never examined them, but took them for granted; but E. W. did
search a little, but not exactly. However he ought not to have looked in the
sixth book of the Stromata for the words there quoted, but in the protrepticon,
as I shall show by and by. That other quotation in the Stromata is the sixth
book, and is only referred to, as to the question in general against images,
for so, S. Clement calls it spiritual adultery to make idols or images. Now to
this E. W. says, although he did not find what he looked for, yet he knows
beforehand, that the word in the Latin translation is simulachrum, that is,
(...), an Idol. Strom. l. 6. p. 687. edit. Paris. 1629.
It is indeed well guessed of E. W. for the word is (...), and if he had seen
the place, he now tells us what answer we might have expected. But I am
beforehand with him in this particular, and out of Tertullian have proved,
idolum to be the same with formula, derived from (...), and consequently means
the same with an image. And he had a good warrant from the greatest Master of
the Latin tongue. Imagines quae idola nominant, Lib. 1. de fin. bon. and malor.
quorum incursione non solum videamus, sed etiam cogitemus, etc. said Cicero:
and the same notion of (...) is in a great Master of the Greek, S. Chrysostom,
who speaking of the statues and images with which they adorned their houses,
calls them idols. In cap. 3. Epist. ad Philip. hom. 10.
(...). But it matters not so much what Greek or Latin word is used in any
translation, for in the Hebrew in which the spirit of God spoke, when he forbad
the worship of images, he used two words, (...) Pesel and (...) Themunah, and
the latter of these signifies always an image or similitude, and that most
properly, and is always so translated; and the former of these is translated
indifferently by (...), or (...), and (...), image, carved image and idol, for
they are all one. And therefore proportionably Justin Martyr reciting this law
of God, says, that God forbad every image and similitude, (...) and the words.
But suppose that idolum and imago were not the same; yet because the
Commandment forbids not only idolum but imago, not only Pesel, but Themunah;
they do not observe the Commandment, who make to themselves, viz. for worship,
either one or the other. But to return to S. Clement, of whom our present
inquiry is. And to deal most clearly in this affair, as in all things else,
that out of the Stromata of S. Clement, that I rather remark, is not this of
the sixth book, but out of the fifth. Lib. Strom. 5. Page 559. Paris. 1629. Gr.
Lat.
S. Clement of Alexandria says; (...). Pythagoras commanded that his disciples
should not wear rings, or engrave them with the images of their Gods, as Moses
many ages before made an express law, that no man should make any graven, cast
or painted image; and of this he gives two reasons. 1. (...), that we may not
attend to sensible things, but pass on to the things discernible by the
Understanding. 2. (...) The custom of seeing so readily causes that the Majesty
of God becomes vile and contemptible, and by matter to worship that which is
perceived intellectually, is to disesteem him by sensation.] Now the Reader may
perceive that S. Clemens speaks against the making of any images, Vide etiam
eundem in Pretreptico. page 41. Nobis enim est aperte vetitum fallacem artem
exercere. Non facies enim (inquit Propheta) cujusvis rei similitudinem. Id.
Stromat. lib. 6. p. 687.
not only of Jupiter and the Heathen Gods, but of the true God, of whatsoever
intelligible being we ought to worship; and that upon such reasons which will
greatly condemn the Roman practices. But hence also it is plain, how careless
and trifling this objector is, minding no truth but the number of objections.
See yet further out of S. Clement. Nobis enim est aperte vetitum fallacem artem
exercere. Non facies enim (inquit Propheta) cujusvis rei similitudinem, we are
forbidden to exercise that cosening art, (viz. of making pictures or images)
for says the Prophet (meaning Moses) thou shall not make the likeness of any
thing. Page 55.
E. W. it seems could not find these words of S. Clement in his Paraenetic: He
should have said his Protreptic, for I know of no Paraenetic that he has
written. But E. W. followed the Printers error in the Margent of the
Dissuasive, and very carefully turned over a book that was not, and compared it
in bigness with a book that was. But I will not suppose this to be ignorance in
him, but only want of diligence: however the words are to be found in the 41.
page of this Protreptic, or his admonition to the Gentiles, and now they are
quoted, and the very page named; only I desire E. W. to observe, that in this
place S. Clement uses not the word (...), but (...), not simulachrum, but
cujusvis rei similitudinem.

In the place which was quoted out of Origin in his fourth book against Celsus,
Page 181. edit. G. L. Cantab. 1658.
speaking of the Jews, he has these words: (...). All makers of images were
turned from their commonwealth: for not a painter or statuary was admitted,
their laws wholly forbidding them, lest any occasion should be given to dull
men, or that their mind should be turned from the worship of God to earthly
things by these temptations.] Then he quotes the law of God against making
images, and adds, by which law this was intended, that being content with the
truth of things they should beware of lying figments.] There it is plain that
Origin affirms the law of God to have forbidden the making images, any
similitude of things in Heaven, Earth or Waters: which law also he in another
place Homil. 8 in Exodus apud Bellarm. imagine l. 2. c. 7. Sect. sed haec.
affirms to be of a moral and eternal obligation, that is, not to be spoken to
them only who came out of the terrestrial Egypt; and therefore is of Christian
duty. And of the same mind are S. Irenaeus L. 4 c. 31. and 32
, Tertullian L. de idololat. cap. 5.
, S. Cyprian L* 3. ad Quirinum c. 59. and de exhort. martyrii. c 1.
and S. Austin L. 15. contra Faustum c. 4. and 7.
affirming the whole decalogue, except the law of the Sabbath to be an
unalterable, or natural law. But for the further verification of the testimony
from Origin against the worship of images in the Primitive Church, I thought
fit to add the concurrent words of the prudent and learned Cassander Consult.
de imagine. and simulachris.
: Quantum autem veteres initio Ecclesiae ab omni veneratione imaginum
abhorruerunt declarat unus Origines adversus Celsum: but of this I shall have
occasion to speak yet once more. And so at last all the quotations are found to
be exact, and this Gentleman to be greatly mistaken.

From the premises I infer; if in the Primitive Church it was accounted
unlawful to make images, certainly it is unimaginable they should worship them,
and the argument is the stronger, if we understand their opinion rightly; for
neither the second Commandment, nor yet the Ancient Fathers in their
Commentaries on them, did absolutely prohibit all making of images; but all
that was made for religious worship, and in order to adoration, according as it
is expressed in him, who among the Jews collected the negative precepts, which
Arias Montanus translated into Latin: Lib. 4. de generat. and regeneratione
Adam.
the second of which is, signum cultus causa ne facito; the third, simulachrum
Divinum nullo pacto conflato; the fourth, signa religiosa nulla ex materia
facito.

The authorities of these Fathers being rescued from slander, and proved very
pungent and material. I am concerned in the next place to take notice of some
authorities which my adversaries urge from antiquity, E. W. page 49.
to prove that in the Primitive Church they did worship images. Concerning
their general Council, viz. the second Nicene, I have already made account in
the preceding periods; The great S. Basil is with great solemnity brought into
the Circus, and made to speak for images as apertly, plainly and confidently,
as Bellarmine or the Council of Trent it self. (...).
His words are these, [I admit the holy Apostles, and Prophets, and Martyrs,
and in my prayer made to God call upon them, that by their intercession God may
be propitious unto me. Whereupon I honor and adore the characters of their
images; and especially those things being delivered from the holy Apostles, and
not prohibited, but are manifested, or seen in all our Churches.] Now I confess
these words are home enough, and do their business at the first sight; and if
they prove right, S. Basil is on their side, and therefore E. W. with great
noise and preface insults, and calls them Unanswerable. The words he says are
found in S. Basils 205. Epistle ad Julianum. I presently consulted S. Basils
works, such as I had with me in the Country, of the Paris Edition by Guillard
1547. and there I found that S. Basil had not 205. Epistles in all; the number
of all written by him and to him being but 180. of which, that to Julianus is
one, viz. Epistle 166. and in that there is not one word to any such purpose as
is here pretended. I was then put to a melius inquirendum. Bellarmine (though
both he, and Lindan and Harding cry up this authority as irrefragable) quotes
this authority not upon his own credit, Appendix ad Tract. de cultu imaginum in
prooem. ante Cap. 1. and in Cap. 4.
but as taking it from the report of a book published 1596, called Synodus
Parisiensis, which Bellarmine calls, Unworthy to see the light. From hence
arises this great noise; and the fountain being confessedly corrupt, what
wholesome thing can be expected thence? But in all the first and voluminous
disputations of Bellarmine upon this Question, he made no use of this
authority, he never saw any such thing in S. Basils works, or it is not to be
imagined that he would have omitted it. But the words are in no ancient Edition
of S. Basil, nor in any Manuscript that is known in the world. 2. John
Damascen, and Germanus Bishop of C. P. who wrote for the worship of images, and
are the most learned of all the Greeks that were abused in this Question; yet
they never urged this authority of S. Basil, which would have been more to
their purpose than all that they said beside. 3. The first mention of this is
in an Epistle of Pope Adrian to the Emperors in the seventh Synod, and that
makes the business more suspicious; that when the Greek writers knew nothing of
it, a Latin Bishop, a stranger, not very well skilled in Antiquity, should find
this out, which no man ever saw before him, nor since in any Copy of S. Basils
works: But in the second Nicene Council such forgeries as these were many and
notorious. S. Gregory the Great is there quoted as Author of an Epistle de
veneratione imaginum; when it is notorious, it was writ by Gregory III. and
there were many Basils, and any one of that name would serve to give
countenance to the error of the second Nicene Synod; but in S. Basil the Great
there is not one word like it. And therefore they who set forth S. Basils works
at Paris 1618. who either could not, or ought not to have been ignorant of so
vile a cheat, were infinitely to blame to publish this as the issue of the
right S. Basil, without any mark of difference, or note of inquiry.

There is also another saying of S. Basil, of which the Roman writers make
much, and the words are by Damascen imputed to the Great S. Basil; Imaginis
honor exemplum transit, which indeed S. Basil speaks only of the statues of the
Emperors, and of that civil honor, which by consent and custom of the world
did pass to the Emperor, and he accepted it so; but this is no argument for
religious images put up to the honor of God, he says not, the honor of any
such images passes to God; for God has declared against it, (as will appear in
the following periods) and therefore from hence the Church of Rome can have no
argument, no fair pretense; and yet upon this very account, and the too much
complying with the Heathen rites and manners, and the secular customs of the
Empire, the veneration of images came into Churches. But suppose it be admitted
to be true; yet although this may do some countenance to Thomas Aquinas and
Bonaventures way of worshipping the image and the sampler with the same
worship; yet this can never be urged by all those more moderate Papists, who
make the worship to an image of a lower kind: For if it be not the same
worship, then they that worship images, worship God and his Saints by the image
not as they deserve, but give to them no more than the image it self deserves:
let them take which part they please, so that they will but publicly own it.
But let this be as it will, and let it be granted true, that the honor done to
the image can pass to the sampler, yet this is but an arbitrary thing, and a
King may esteem it so if he please, but if the King forbids any image to be
made of him, and counts it a dishonor to him, then I hope it is; and that is
the case now, for God has forbidden any such way of passing honor to him by
an image of him; and he has forbidden it in the second Commandment, and this
is confessed by Vasquez Tom. 3. Comment. in 3. part. Qu. 25. art. 3. disp. 94.
c. 3.
: So that upon this account, for all the pretense of the same motion to the
image and the sampler, to pass such a worship to God is no better than the
doing as the Heathen did, when they worshipped Mercury by throwing stones at
him.

An other authority brought by E. W. for veneration of images, Page 50.
is from Athanasius, but himself damns it in the Margent, with and without
ingenuity; for ingenuously saying, that he does not affirm it to be the Great
Athanasius, yet most disingenuously he adds, valeat quantum valere potest, that
is, they that will be cosened let them. And indeed these Questions and Answers
to Antiochus are notoriously spurious, for in them are quoted S. Epiphanius,
and Gregory Nyssen, Chrysostom, Scala Johannis, Maximus, and Nicephorus, who
were after Athanasius; and the book is rejected by Delrio, Martinus Delrio
Vindiciae Areopag. c. 14.
by Sixtus Senensis, and Possevine. But with such stuff as this the Roman
Doctors are forced to build their Babel; and E. W. in page 56. quotes the same
book against me for worshipping the Cross, together with another spurious piece
de Cruce and passione Domini, which Nannius, a very learned man of their own
and professor at Lovaine, rejects, as it is to be seen in his Nuncupatory
Epistle.

Yea, but S. Chrysostoms Liturgy is very clear, for it is said, that the Priest
turns himself to our Saviors picture, and bows his head before the picture,
and says this prayer; These words indeed are very plain, but it is not plain
that these are S. Chrysostoms words, for their are none such in S. Chrysostoms
Liturgy in the Editions of it by Claudius de Saints, or Morellus, and Claudius
Espencaeus acknowledges with great truth and ingenuity, that this Liturgy begun
and composed by S. Chrysostom was enlarged by many things put into it,
according to the variety of times. And it is evidently so, because diverse
persons are there commemorated, who lived after the death of Chrysostom, as
Cyrillus, Euthymius, Sabas, and Johannes Eleemosynarius, whereof the last but
one lived 126. years, the last 213. years after S. Chrysostom. Now how likely,
nay how certain it is that this very passage was not put in by S. Chrysostom,
but is of later interpolation, let all the world judge by that known saying of
S. Chrysostom; Comment^ in Isai. c. 2. T 3.
Quid enim est vilius atque humilius homine ante res inanimatas se incurvante
and saxa venerante? What in the world is baser and more abject than to see a
man worshipping stones, and bowing himself before inanimate things?] These are
his great authorities which are now come to nothing; what he has from them who
came after these, I shall leave to him to make his best of them: for about the
time of Gregory some began to worship images, and some to break them, the
latter of which he reproves, and the former he condemns; what it was afterward
all the world knows.

But now having cleared the Question from the trifling arguments of my
adversaries, I shall observe some things fit to be considered in this matter of
images. 1. It came at first from a very base and unworthy stock. I have already
pointed at this, but now I shall explain it more fully; it came from Simon
Magus and his crew; Theodoret says, that the followers of Simon brought in the
worship of images, viz. of Simons in the shape of Jupiter, De haeres ad qued
vult Deum paulo ab initio. haeres. 1. E. W. page 51.
and Helena in the figure of Minerva; but S. Austin says that Simon Magus
himself, imagines and suam and cujusdam meretricis quam sibi sociam scelerum
fecerat discipulis suis praebuisse adorandas. E. W. upon what confidence I know
not, says, that Theodoret has nothing like it, either under the title de
Simone or Carpocrate. And he says true, but with a shameful purpose to
calumniate me, and deceive his Reader; as if I had quoted a thing that
Theodoret said not, and therefore the Reader ought not to believe me. But since
in the Dissuasive Theodoret was only quoted lib. 5. haeret. Cum ejus statuam in
Jovis figuram construxissent, Helenae autem in Minervae speciem, eis thura
adolebant, and libabant, and tanquam Deos adorabant, Simonianos seipsos
nominantes. Theodoret. haeret. fab. lib. 1. tit. Simonis haeresis in fin.
fabul. and no title set down; if he had pleased to look to the next title,
Simonis haeresis, where in reason all Simons heresies were to be looked for, he
should have found that which I referred to. But why E. W. denies S. Austin to
have reported that for which he is quoted, viz. that Simon Magus brought in
some images to be worshipped, I cannot conjecture, neither do I think himself
can tell; but the words are plain in the place quoted, according to the
intention of the Dissuasive. But that he may yet seem to lay more load upon me,
he very learnedly says that Irenaeus, in the place quoted by me, says not a
word of Simon Magus being Author of images; and would have his Reader believe
that I mistook Simon Magus for Simon Irenaeus. Vide Irenae. lib. 1. adv.
haeres. c. 23. and 24.
But the good man I suppose wrote this after supper, and could not then read or
consider that the testimony of Irenaeus was brought in to no such purpose;
neither did it relate to any Simon at all, but to the Gnostics or
Carpocratians, who also were very early and very deep in this impiety; only
they did not worship the pictures of Simon and Selene, Vbi supra haeres. 7.
but of Jesus, and Paul, and Homer, and Pythagoras, as S. Austin testifies of
them; But that which he remarks in them is this, that Marcellina, one of their
sect, worshipped the pictures of Jesus, etc. adorando, incensumque ponendo,
they did adore them, and put incense before them: I wish the Church of Rome
would leave to do so, or acknowledge whose Disciples they are in this thing.
The same also is said by Epiphanius; and that the Carpocratians placed the
image of Jesus with the Philosophers of the world, collocatasque adorant, and
gentium mysteria perficiunt. But I doubt that both Epiphanius and S. Austin,
who took this story from Irenaeus, went farther in the Narrative than Irenaeus;
for he says only that they placed the images of Christ, etc. Et has coronant:
No more, and yet even for this, for crowning the image of Christ with flowers
Iren. reliquam observationem circa eas similiter ut gentes faciunt, i. e. sicut
coeterorum illustrium virorum imaginibus consueverunt facere.
, though they did not so much as is now adays done at Rome; S. Irenaeus made an
outcry and reckoned them in the black Catalogue of heretics, not for joining
Christ's image with that of Homer and Aristotle, Pythagoras and Plato, but even
for crowning Christ's image with flowers and coronets, as they also did those of
the Philosophers; for though this may be innocent, yet the other was a thing
not known in the religion of any, that were called Christians, till Simon and
Carpocrates began to teach the world.

2. We find the wisest and the most sober of the Heathens speaking against the
use of images in their religious rites. So Varro, when he had said that the old
Romans had for 170. years worshipped the Gods without picture or image, adds,
quod si adhuc mansissent, castius Dii observarentur, and gives this reason for
it, qui primi simulachra Deorum populis posuerunt, and civitatibus suis and
metum dempsisse, and errorem addidisse. The making images of the Gods took away
fear from men and brought in error: Prudenter existimavit Deos facile posse in
simulachrorum stoliditate contemni.
which place S. Austin quoting, commends and explicates it, saying, he wisely
thought that the Gods might easily be despised in the blockishness of images.
The same also was observed by Plutarch, Plut. in Numa.
and he gives this reason, nefas putantes augustiora exprimere humilioribus,
neque aliter aspirari ad Deum quam mente posse. They accounted it impiety to
express the Great Beings with low matter, and they believed there was no
aspiring up to God but by the mind.] This is a Philosophy which the Church of
Rome need not be ashamed to learn.

3. It was so known a thing, that Christians did abominate the use of images in
religion, and in their Churches; that Adrian the Emperor was supposed to build
Temples to Christ, Aelius Lamprid. in Alexandro Severo. edit. Salmat. p. 120.
and to account him as God, because he commanded that Churches without images
should be made in all Cities, as is related by Lampridius.

4. In all the disputations of the Jews against the Christians of the Primitive
Church, although they were impatient of having any image, and had detested all
use of them, especially ever since their return from Babylon, and still
retained the hatred of them, even after the dissolution of their Temple, even
unto superstition (says Bellarmine;) De imag. c. 7. Sect. Ad primum.
yet they never objected against Christians their having images in their
Churches, much less their worshipping them. And let it be considered, that in
all that long disputation between Justin Martyr and Tryphon the Jew, in which
the subtle Jew moves every stone, lays all the load he can at the Christians
door, makes all objections, raises all the envy, gives all the matter of
reproach he can against the Christians, yet he opens not his mouth against them
concerning images. The like is to be observed in Tertullians book against the
Jews; no mention of images, for there was no such thing amongst the Christians,
they hated them as the Jews did; but it is not imaginable they would have
omitted so great a cause of quarrel. On the other side, when in length of time
images were brought into Churches, the Jews forbore not to upbraid the
Christians with it. There was a dialogue written a little before the time of
the seventh Synod, in which a Jew is brought in saying to the Christians, [I
have believed all ye say, and I do believe in the crucified Jesus Christ, that
he is the son of the living God; Synod. 7. Act. 5.
Scandalizor autem in vos Christiani quia imagines adoratis, I am offended at
you Christians that ye worship images; for the Scripture forbids us every where
to make any similitude or graven image. And it is very observable that in the
first and best part of the Talmud of Babylon, called the Misna, published about
the end of the second Century, the Christians are not blamed about images;
which shows they gave no occasion: but in the third part of the Talmud about
the 10. and 11. age after Christ, the Christians are sufficiently upbraided and
reproached in this matter. In the Gemara, which was finished about the end of
the fifth Century, I find that learned men say the Jews called the Christian
Church the house of Idolatry; which though it may be expounded in relation to
images, which about that time began in some Churches to be placed and honored;
yet I rather incline to believe, that they meant it of our worshipping Jesus
for the true God and the true Messiah; for at this day they call all Christians
Idolaters, even those that have none, and can endure no images in their
Religion or their Churches. But now since these periods, it is plain that the
case is altered, and when the learned Christians of the Roman communion write
against the Jews, they are forced to make apologies for the scandal they give
to the Jews in their worshipping of images, as is to be seen (besides Leontius
Neopolitanus of Cyprus his apology which he published for the Christians
against the Jews;) in Ludovicus Carretus his Epistle, in Sepher Amana, and
Fabianus Fioghus his Catechetical Dialogues. But I suppose this case is very
plain, and is a great conviction of the innovation in this matter made by the
Church of Rome.

5. The matter of worshipping images looks so ill, so like Idolatry, so like
the forbidden practices of the Heathens, that it was infinitely reasonable,
that if it were the practice and doctrine of the Primitive Church, the
Primitive Priests and Bishops should at least have considered, and stated the
question how far, and in what sense it was lawful, and with what intention, and
in what degrees, and with what caution, and distinctions this might lawfully be
done; particularly when they preached, and wrote Commentaries and explications
upon the Decalogue; especially since there was at least so great a semblance of
opposition and contradiction between the commandment and any such practice; God
forbidding any image and similitude to be made of himself, or any thing else in
Heaven, or in Earth, or in the Sea, and that with such threatenings and
interminations of his severe judgments against them that did make them for
worship, and this thing being so constantly objected by all those many that
opposed their admission and veneration; it is certainly very strange that none
of the Fathers should take notice of any difficulty in this affair. They
objected the Commandment against the Heathens for doing it; and yet that they
should make no account, or take notice how their worshipping Saints and God
himself by images, should differ from the Heathen superstition that was the
same thing to look upon: This indeed is very Unlikely. But so it is; Justin
Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus speak plainly enough of this matter, and speak
plain downright words against making and worshipping images, and so careless
they were of any future chance, or the present concern of the Roman Church,
that they do not except the image of the true God, nor the image of Saints and
Angels, no not of Christ, Homil. 8. in Exodus
or the Blessed Virgin Mary her self. Nay Origin expounds the Commandments, and
S. Austin makes a professed commentary upon them, but touched none of these
things with the top of his finger, only told that they were all forbidden: we
are not so careless now adays in the Church of Rome; but carefully expound the
Commandments against the unsufferable objections of the Heretics of late, and
the Prophets and the Fathers of old. But yet for all this, a suspicious man
would conclude that in the first 400. years, there was no need of any such
explications, inasmuch as they had nothing to do with images, which only could
make any such need.

6. But then in the next place I consider, that the second Commandment is so
plain, so easy, so peremptory against all the making and worshipping any image
or likeness of any thing, that besides that every man naturally would
understand all such to be forbidden, it is so expressed, that upon supposition
that God did intend to forbid it wholly, it could not more plainly have been
expressed. For the prohibition is absolute and universal, and therefore of all
particulars; and there is no word or sign by the virtue of which it can with
any probability be pretended that any one of any kind is excepted. Now then to
this, when the Church of Rome pretends to answer they over-do it, and make the
matter the more suspicious. Some of them answer by saying, that this is no
moral Commandment not obligatory to Christians, but to the Jews only: Others
say, that by this Commandment it is only forbidden to account an image to be
very God; so Cajetan: Others say that an idol only is forbidden, and that an
image is no idol. Others yet distinguish the manner of worshipping, saying that
the image is worshipped for the Samplers sake, not for its own. And this
worship is by some called (...) or service; by others (...); saying that the
first is to images of Saints, the other to God only. And yet with this
difference; Some saying that the image of God is adored with the same kind of
adoration that God is; only it is to the image for Gods sake; so S. Thomas of
Aquine, and generally his scholars. Others say that it is a religious kind of
Worship due to Images, but not at all Divine; some say it is but a civil
worship. And then it is for the image sake, and so far is intransitive, but
whatever is paid more to the image is transitive, and passes further. And
whatsoever it be, it cannot be agreed how it ought to be paid: whether properly
or improperly, Univocally or aequivocally, for themselves or for something
else, whether analogically or simply, whether absolutely or by reduction. And
it is remarkable what Bellarmine answers to the Question, with what kind of
worship images may be adored? He answers with this proposition; Lib. 2. de
imagine. S. 8. Cap. 25.
[The worship which by it self and properly is due to images, is a certain
imperfect worship, which analogically and reductively pertains to a kind of
that worship, which is due to the Exemplar:] and a little after, to the images
a certain inferior worship is due, and that not all one, but various according
to the variety of images. To the images of Saints is due dulia secundum quid,
which if you do not understand, Bellarmine in the next words explains most
clearly; dulia secundum quid, is as a man may say, reductive and analogical.
But after all this we may be mistaken, and we cannot tell whom to follow nor
what to do in the case. Thomas and his Scholars warrant you to give the same
worship to Gods image as to God: And is the easiest way indeed to be
understood, and indeed may quickly be understood to be direct idolatry.
Bellarmine and others tell you, stay, not so altogether; but there is a way to
agree with S. Thomas, that it shall be the same worship, and not the same
worship; for it is the same by reduction, that is, it is of the same kind, and
therefore Divine, but it is imperfectly divine, as if there could be degrees in
Divine worship; that is, as if any worship could be divine, and yet not the
greatest. But if this seems difficult, Bellarmine illustrates it by
similitudes. This worship of images is the same with the worship of the
Example, viz. of God, or of Christ, as it happens, just as a painted man is the
same with a living man, and a painted horse with a living horse, for a painted
man and a painted horse differ specifically; as the true man and the true horse
do; and yet the painted man is no man, and the painted horse is no horse.] The
effect of which discourse is this, that the worship of images, is but the image
of worship; hypocrisy and dissimulation all the way; nothing real, but
imaginative and fantastical; and indeed though this gives but a very ill
account of the agreement of Bellarmine, with their Saints, Thomas and
Bonaventure, yet it is the best way to avoid idolatry, because they give no
real worship to images: But then on the other side, how do they mock God and
Christ, by offering to them that which is nothing; by pretending to honor them
by honoring their images; when the honor they do give to images, is it self
but imaginary, and no more of reality in it, than there is of humane Nature in
the picture of a man. However, if you will not commit downright idolatry, as
some of their Saints teach you, then you must be careful to observe these plain
distinctions, and first be sure to remember that when you worship an image, you
do it not materially, but formally; not as it is of such a substance, but as it
is a sign; next take care that you observe what sort of image it is, and then
proportion your right kind to it, that you do not give latria to that where
hyperdulia is only due; and be careful that if doulia only be due that your
worship be not hyperdulical. In the next place consider that the worship to
your image is intransitive but in few cases, and according but to a few
Doctors; and therefore when you have got all these cases together, be sure that
in all other cases it be transitive. But then when the worship is passed on to
the Exemplar, you must consider, that if it be of the same kind with that which
is due to the Example, yet it must be an imperfect piece of worship, though the
kind be perfect; and that it is but analogical, and it is reductive, and it is
not absolute, not simple, not by it self; not by an act to the image distinct
from that which is to the Example, but one and the same individual act, with
one intention, as to the supreme kind, though with some little variety, if the
kinds be differing. Now by these easy, ready, clear, and necessary
distinctions, and rules and cases, the people being fully and perfectly
instructed, there is no possibility that the worship of images should be
against the second Commandment, because the Commandment does not forbid any
worship that is transitive, reduct, accidental, consequential, analogical and
hyperdulical, and this is all that the Church of Rome does by her wisest
Doctors teach now adays. But now after all this, the easiest way of all
certainly is to worship no images, and no manner of way, and trouble the
peoples heads with no distinction; for by these no man can ever be at peace, or
Understand the Commandment, which without these laborious devices (by which
they confess the guilt of the Commandment, does lie a little too heavy upon
them) would most easily by every man and every woman be plainly and properly
understood. And therefore I know not whether there be more impiety, or more
fearful caution in the Church of Rome in being so curious, that the second
Commandment be not exposed to the eyes and ears of the people; leaving it out
of their manuals, breviaries and Catechisms, as if when they teach the people
to serve God, they had a mind they should not be tempted to keep all the
Commandments. And when at any time they do set it down, they only say thus, Non
facies tibi Idolum, which is a word not used in the second Commandment at all;
and if the word which is there used be sometimes translated Idolum, yet it
means no more than similitude; or if the words be of distinct signification,
yet because both are expressly forbidden in that Commandment, it is very ill to
represent the Commandment so, as if it were observed according to the intention
of that word, yet the Commandment might be broken, by the not observing it
according to the intention of the other word, which they conceal. But of this
more by and by.

7. I consider that there is very great scandal and offense given to Enemies
and strangers to Christianity; the very Turks and Jews, with whom the worship
of images is of very ill report, and that upon (at least) the most probable
grounds in the world. Now the Apostle having commanded all Christians to pursue
those things which are of good report, and to walk circumspectly and charitably
toward them that are without, and that we give no offense neither to the Jew
nor to the Gentile: Now if we consider, that if the Christian Church were
wholly without images, there would nothing perish to the faith or to the
charity of the Church, or to any grace which is in order to Heaven; and that
the spiritual state of the Christian Church may as well want such Baby
ceremonies as the Synagogue did; and yet on the other side, that the Jews and
Turks are the more, much more estranged from the religion of Christ Jesus, by
the image worship done by his pretended servants; 1 Cor. 8. 13.
the consequent will be, that to retain the worship of images is both against
the faith and the charity of Christians, and puts limits, and retrenches the
borders of the Christian pale.

8. It is also very scandalous to Christians, that is, it makes many, and
endangers more to fall into the direct sin of idolatry. De invent. rerum l. 6.
c. 13. E^ insaniae deventum est, ut haec pietatis pars parum differat ab
impietate. Sunt enim been multi rudiores stupidioresque qui saxeas vel ligneas,
seu in parietibus pictas imagines colant, non ut figuras, sed. perinde acsi
ipsae sensum aliquem habeant, and eis magis fidant quam Christ, Polyd. Virg.
lib. 6 c. 13. de invent. rerum. Lilius Giraldus in Syntag. de Diis Gentium
loquens de excessu Romanae Ecclesiae in negotio imaginum, praefatur, [Satius
esse ea Harpocrati and Angeronae consignare. Illud certe non praetermittam, nos
dico Christianos, ut aliquando Romanos fuisse sine imaginibus in primitiva quae
vocatur Ecclesia.] Erasmus in Catechesi ait, usque ad aetatem Hieronymi erant
probatae religionis viri, qui in Templis nullam ferebant imaginem, nec pictam,
nec sculptam, nec textam, ac ne Christi quidem.]
Polydore Virgil observes out of S. Jerome, that almost all the holy Fathers
damned the worship of Images, for this very reason, for fear of idolatry; and
Cassander says, that all the ancients did abhor all adoration of images; Et
ibid: Vt imagines sint in Templis nulla praecepit vel humana co^s^itutio, and
ut facilius est, ita lutius quoque omnes imagines e Templis submavere.]
Videatur etiam Cassandri consultatio; sub hoc titul^ and Masius in Jesuah cap.
8. Sic autem queritur Ludovicus Vives Comment. in lib. 8. c. ult. de civit.
Dei. Divos Divasque non aliter venerantur, quam Deum ipsum. Non video in multis
quid discrimen sit inter eorum opinionem de sa^ctis, and id quod Gentiles
putabant de Diis suis. Diodorus Siculus dixit de Mose, imaginem statuit nullam,
ideo quod non erederet Deum homini similem esse, and Dion. lib. 36 Nullam
effigi^m in Hieroso^ymis habuere, quod Deum crederent ut ineffabilem, ita
inaspicuum [(...).]
and he cites Consul. de imagine. ex Origene contr. Celsum. lib. 7. versus finem.
Origin as an instance great enough to verify the whole affirmative. Nos vero
ideo non honoramus simulachra, quia quantum possumus cavemus, ne quo modo
incidamus in eam credulitatem, ut his tribuantus divinitatis aliquid. This
authority E. W. page 55. is not ashamed to bring in behalf of himself in this
question, saying, that Origin has nothing against the use of images, and
declares our Christian doctrine thus, then he recites the words above quoted;
than which, Origin could not speak plainer against the practice of the Roman
Church; and E. W. might as well have disputed for the Manichees with this
argument: The Scripture does not say that God made the world, it only declares
the Christian doctrine thus, In the beginning God made Heaven and Earth, etc.
But this Gentleman thinks any thing will pass for argument amongst his own
people. And of this danger S. Austin Epist. 49. q. 3.
gives a rational account; [No man doubts but idols want all sense: But when
they are placed in their seats, in an honorable sublimity, that they may be
attended by them that pray and offer sacrifice, by the very likeness of living
members and senses, although they be senseless and without life, they affect
weak minds, that they seem to live and feel, especially when the veneration of
a multitude is added to it, by which so great a worship is bestowed upon them.]
Here is the danger, and how much is contributed to it in the Church of Rome, by
clothing their images in rich apparel, and by pretending to make them nod
their* head, to twinkle the eyes, and even to speak, the world is too much
satisfied. Some such things as these, and the superstitious talkings and
actings of their Priests made great impressions upon my Neighbors in Ireland;
and they had such a deep and religious veneration for the image of our Lady of
Kilbrony, that a worthy Gentleman, who is now with God, and knew the deep
superstition of the poor Irish, did not distrain upon his Tenants for his
rents, but carried away the image of the female Saint of Kilbrony; and
instantly the Priest took care that the Tenants should redeem the Lady, by a
punctual and speedy paying of their rents; for they thought themselves
Unblessed as long as the image was away; and therefore they speedily fetched
away their Ark from the house of Obededom, and were afraid that their Saint
could not help them, when her image was away. Now if S. Paul would have
Christians to abstain from meats sacrificed to idols, to avoid the giving
offense to weak brethren, much more ought the Church to avoid tempting all the
weak people of her Communion to idolatry, by countenancing, and justifying, and
imposing such acts, which all their heads can never learn to distinguish from
idolatry.

I end this with a memorial out of the Councils of Sens and Mentz, C. 14.
who command moneri populum ne imagines adorent: C. 41. apud Bellarmin. lib. 2.
de imag. S. S. c. 22. Sect. Secunda propositio.
The Preachers were commanded to admonish the people that they should not adore
images. And for the Novelty of the practice here in the British Churches, it is
evident in Ecclesiastical story, that it was introduced by a Synod of London,
about the year 714. under Bonifacius the Legate, and Bertualdus Archbishop of
Dover; and that without disputation or inquiry into the lawfulness or
unlawfulness of it, but wholly upon the account of a vision pretended to be
seen by Eguinus Bishop of Worcester; the Virgin Mary appearing to him, and
commanding that her image should be set in Churches and worshipped. That Austin
the Monk brought with him the banner of the Cross, and the image of Christ,
Beda tells; and from him Baronius, and Binius affirms, that before this vision
of Egwin the cross and image of Christ were in use; but that they were at all
worshipped or adored Beda says not; and there is no record, no monument of it
before this Hypochondrical dream of Egwin: and it further appears to be so, A.
D. circit^r 792.
because Albinus or Alcuinus an Englishman, Master of Charles the Great, when
the King had sent to Offa the book of C. P. for the worship of images, wrote an
Epistle against it, ex authoritate-Divina scripturarum mir abiliter affirmatum;
and brought it to the King of France in the name of our Bishops and Kings,
Annal. part. 1.
says Hovedon.

SECTION. VII.
Of Picturing God the Father, and the Holy Trinity.
AGainst all the authorities almost which are or might be brought to prove the
Unlawfulness of Picturing God the Father, or the Holy Trinity, the Roman
Doctors generally give this one answer; That the Fathers intended by their
sayings, to condemn the picturing of the Divine Essence; but condemn not the
picturing of those symbolical shapes or forms in which God the Father, or the
Holy Ghost, or the Blessed Trinity are supposed to have appeared. To this I
reply, 1. That no man ever intended to paint the essence of any thing in the
world. A man cannot well understand an Essence, and has no Idea of it in his
mind, much less can a Painters Pensil do it. And therefore it is a vain and
impertinent discourse to prove that they do ill who attempt to paint the Divine
Essence. Vide Plutarch. de Iside and Osir.
This is a subterfuge which none but men out of hope to defend their opinion
otherwise, can make use of. 2. To picture God the Father in such symbolical
forms in which he appeared, is to picture him in no form at all; for generally
both the Schools of the Jews and Christians consent in this, that God the
Father never appeared in his person; for as S. Paul affirms, he is the
invisible God whom no eye has seen or can see; He always appeared by Angels,
or by fire, or by storm and tempest, by a cloud or by a still voice; he spoke
by his Prophets, and at last by his Son; but still the adorable majesty was
reserved in the secrets of his glory. 3. The Church of Rome paints the Holy
Trinity in forms and symbolical shapes in which she never pretends the Blessed
Trinity did appear, as in a face with three Noses and four Eyes, one body with
three heads, and as an old man with a great beard, and a Popes Crown upon his
head, and holding the two ends of the transverse rafter of the Cross with
Christ leaning on his breast, and the Holy Spirit hovering over his head: And
therefore they worship the images of God the Father, and the Holy Trinity,
figures which (as is said of Remphan and the Heathen Gods and Goddesses)
themselves have made; which therefore must needs be idols by their own
definition of idolum; s^mulachrum rei non existentis; for never was there seen
any such of the Holy Trinity in Unity, as they most impiously represent. And if
when any thing is spoken of God in Scripture allegorically, they may of it make
an image to God, they would make many more Monsters than yet they have found
out: For as Durandus In 3. sent. did. 9. q. 2. n. 15.
well observes, If any one shall say, that because the Holy Ghost appeared in
the shape of a Dove, and the Father in the old Testament under the Corporal
forms, that therefore they may be represented by images, we must say to this,
that those corporal forms were not assumed by the Father and the Holy Spirit;
and therefore a representation of them by images is not a representation of the
Divine person, but a representation of that form or shape alone. Therefore
there is no reverence due to it, as there is none due to those forms by
themselves. Neither were these forms to represent the Divine persons, but to
represent those effects which those Divine persons did effect.] And therefore
there is one thing more to be said to them that do so; Romans 1. 23.
They have changed the glory of the incorruptible God into the similitude of a
mortal man. Now how will the Reader imagine that the Dissuasive is confuted,
and his testimonies from Antiquity answered? Page 60.
Why, most clearly E. W. says, that one principle of S. John Damascen does it,
it solves all that the Doctor has or can allege in this matter. Well! what is
this principle? The words are these; (and S. Austin points at the same) Quisnam
est qui invisibilis and corpore vacantis ac circumscriptionis and figurae
expertis Dei simulachrum effingere queat? De fide and symbol. c. 7.
Extremae itaque dementiae atque impietatis fuerit Divinum numen fingere and
figurare. Damasc. lib. 4.
] This is the principle to confute the Doctor: Orthod. fidei. cap. 17.
] why, but the Doctor thinks that in the world there cannot be clearer words
for the reproof of picturing God and the Holy Trinity. For to do so is madness
and extreme impiety, so says Damascen: But stay says E. W. E. W. page 60.
these words of Damascen are [as who should say, He that goes about to express
by any image the perfect similitude of Gods intrinsecal perfections or his
Nature, (which is immense without body or figure) would be both impious, and
act the part of a Madman.] But how shall any man know that these words of
Damascen are as much as to say this meaning of E. W. and where is this
principle (as he calls it) of Damascen, by which the Doctor is so every where
silenced? Certainly E. W. is a merry Gentleman, and thinks all mankind are
fools. This is the ridiculous Commentary of E. W. but Damascen was too learned
and grave a person to talk such wild stuff. And Cardinal Cajetan gives a better
account of the doctrine of Damascen. Authoritas Damasceni in litera damnat
illas (imagines Dei) ins^pientiae and impietatis. Et eadem est ratio nunc de
Deitate quae erat in veteri (...) quoad rem fig^rabilem vel non secundum se.
Constat autem in veteri lege imagines Dei esse prohibitas.
[The Authority of Damascen in the (very) letter of it condemns those images,
(viz. of God) of folly and impiety. And there is the same reason now concerning
the Deity which was in the old law. And it is certain, that in the old law the
images of God were forbidden.] Videat (si placet) lector Lucum Eudensem adv.
Albig. error. l. 2. c. 9.
To the like purpose is that of the famous Germanus, who though too favorable
to pictures in Churches for veneration, yet he is a great enemy to all pictures
of God. Neque enim invisibilis Deitatis imaginem, Tom. 4. Bibl. p. p. part 2.
and similitudinem, vel schema, vel figuram aliquam formamus, etc. as who
please may see in his Epistle to Thomas Bishop of Claudiopolis; Apud. Nicen.
But let us consider when God forbad the children of Israel to make any
likeness of him, Synod. 11. Act. 5.
did he only forbid them to express by any image the perfect similitude of his
intrinsecal perfections? Had the children of Israel leave to picture God in the
form of a man walking in Paradise? Or to paint the Holy Trinity like three men
talking to Abraham? Was it lawful for them to make an image or picture, or (to
use E. W. his expression) to exhibit to their eyes those visible or
circumscribed lineaments, which any man had seen? And when they had exhibited
these forms to the eyes, might they then have fallen down and worshipped those
forms, which themselves exhibited to their own and others eyes? I omit to
enquire how they can prove that God appeared in Paradise in the form of a man,
which they can never do, unless they will use the Friars argument; Faciamus
hominem ad similitudinem nostram, etc. and so make fair way for the Heresy of
the Anthropomorphites.

But I pass on a little further; Did the Israelites, when they made a molten
calf, and said, These are thy Gods O Israel, did they imagine that by that
image they represented the true form, essence or nature of God? Or did the
Heathens ever pretend to make any image of the intrinsecal perfections of any
of their Majores or Minores Dii, or any of their Demons and dead Heroes? And
because they neither did nor could do that, may it therefore be concluded, that
they made no images of their Gods? Certain it is, the Heathens have as much
reason to say they did not picture their Gods, meaning their nature and
essence, but by symbolical forms and shapes represented those good things which
they supposed them to have done. Thus the Egyptians pictured Joseph with a
Bushel upon his head, and called him their God Serapis; but they made no image
of his essence, but symbolically represented the benefit he did the nation by
preserving them in the seven years famine. Thus Ceres is painted with a Hook
and a Sheaf of corn, Pomona with a Basket of Apples, Hercules with a Club, and
Jupiter himself with a handful of symbolical Thunderbolts; This is that which
the Popish Doctors call picturing God, not in his Essence, but in history, or
in symbolical shapes: For of these three ways of picturing God, Bellarmine
says, the two last are lawful. And therefore the Heathens not doing the first,
but the second, and the third only, are just so to be excused as the Church of
Rome is. But then neither these nor those must pretend that they do not picture
God: For whatever the intention be, Observandum est tribus mo^i^ posse aliquid
pingi. Vno modo ad ^xpri^ mendam perfectam similitudinem formulae, and naturae
rei ipsius. Altero modo ad historiam aliquam oculis exhibendam. Tertio potest
aliquid pingi extra historiam ad explicandam naturam rei, non per immediatam
and propriam similitudinem, sed analogiam, sive metaphoric^, mysti^asque
significationes. Be^. de imag lib. 2. c. 8. Sect. pro solutione. Hoc modo
pingimus Deum ibid. Sect. Hoc modo.
still an image of God is made, or else why do they worship God by that, which
if it be no image of God, must by their own doctrine be an Idol? And therefore
Bellarmines distinction is very foolish, and is only crafty to deceive; for
besides the impertinency of it in answering the charge, only by declaring his
intention, as being charged with picturing God; he tells he did it indeed, but
he meant not to paint his nature, but his story or his symbolical
significations, which I say is impertinent, it not being inquired with what
purpose it is done, but whether or no; and an evil thing may be done with a
good intention: Besides this I say, that Bellarmines distinction comes just to
this issue: God may be painted or represented by an image, not to express a
perfect similitude of his form or nature, but to express it imperfectly, or
rather not to express it, but ad explicandam naturam, to explain it, not to
describe him truly, but historically; though that be a strange history, that
does not express truly and as it is: But here it is plainly acknowledged, that
besides the history, the very Nature of God may be explicated by pictures or
images, provided they be only metaphorical and mystical, as if the only reason
of the lawfulness of painting God is, because it is done imperfectly and unlike
him; or as if the metaphor made the image lawful; just as if to do Alexander
honor, you should picture him like a Bear, tearing and trampling every thing,
or to exalt Caesar, you should hang upon a table the pictures of a Fox and a
Cock and a Lion, and write under it, This is Cajus Julius Caesar. But I am
ashamed of these prodigious follies. But at last, why should it be esteemed
madness and impiety to picture the nature of God, which is invisible, and not
also be as great a madness to picture any shape of him, which no man ever saw?
But he that is invested with a thick cloud, and encircled with an inaccessible
glory, and never drew aside the Curtains to be seen under any representment,
will not suffer himself to be exposed to vulgar eyes, by fantastical shapes,
and ridiculous forms.

But it may be, the Church of Rome does not use any such impious practice, much
less own so mad a doctrine; for one of my adversaries says, that the picturing
the forms or appearances of God is all that some (in their Church) allow, that
is, some do, and some do not: So that it may be only a private opinion of some
Doctors, and then I am to blame to charge Popery with it. Lib 2. de reliq. and
imagine. S.
To this I answer, that Bellarmine indeed says, S. cap 8. Sect.
Non esse tam certum in Ecclesia an sint faciendae imagines Dei sive
Trinitatis, Ego dico tria.
quam Christi and Sanctorum; It is not so certain, viz. as to be an article of
faith. But yet besides that Bellarmine allows it, and cites Cajetan,
Catharinus, Payva, Sanders and Thomas Waldensis for it; this is a practice and
doctrine brought in by an unproved custom of the Church; Constat quod haec
consuetudo depingendi Angelos and Deum modo sub specie Columbae, modo sub
Figura Trinitatis, sit ubique inter Catholicos recepta: The picturing Angels,
and God sometimes under the shape of a Dove, and sometimes under the figure of
the Trinity* is every where received among the Catholics, Pujol. de adorat.
disp. 3.
said a great Man amongst them. Sect. 4.
And to what purpose they do this, we are told by Cajetan, speaking of images
of God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost saying, In 3. part. Tom. q. 25. a. 3.
Haec non solum pinguntur ut ostendantur sicut cherubim olim in Templo sed ut
adorentur. They are painted, that they may be worshipped, ut frequens usus
Ecclesiae testatur: This is witnessed by the frequent use of the Church. So
that this is received every where among the Catholics, and these images are
worshipped, and of this there is an Ecclesiastical custom; and I add, In their
Mass Book lately printed, these pictures are not infrequently seen. So that now
it is necessary to show that this, besides the impiety of it, is against the
doctrine and practice of the Primitive Church, and is an innovation in
religion, a propriety of the Roman doctrine, and of infinite danger and
unsufferable impiety.

To some of these purposes the Dissuasive alleged Tertullian, Page 28.
Eusebius and S. Hierom; but A. L. says, these Fathers have nothing to this
purpose. This is now to be tried. These men were only named in the Dissuasive.
Their words are these which follow.

1. For Tertullian, De corona milit.
A man would think it could not be necessary to prove that Tertullian thought
it unlawful to picture God the Father, when he thought the whole art of
painting and making images to be unlawful, as I have already proved. But
however let us see. He is very curious that nothing should be used by
Christians or in the service of God, which is used on, or by, or toward idols;
and because they did paint and picture their idols, cast, or carve them,
therefore nothing of that kind ought to be in rebus Dei, as Tertullian's phrase
is. But the sum of his discourse is this, [The Heathens use to picture their
false Gods that indeed befits them, De Cor. Milit. Johannes Filioli inquit,
Custodite vos ab idolis, non jam ab idololatria quasi ab officio, sed ab
idolis, id est, ab ipsa effigy eorum: Indignum enim est ut imago Divini,
imagoidoli and mortui fiat: Si enim verbo nudo conditio polluitur ut Apostolus
docet, si quis dixerit idolothytum est, non contigeris, multo magis cum habitu,
and ritu, and apparatu, etc. Quid enim tam dignum Deo quam quod indignum idolo?
but therefore is unfit for God; and therefore we are to flee, not only from
idolatry, but from idols: in which affair a word does change the case, and
that, which before it was said to appertain to idols, was lawful, by that very
word was made Unlawful, and therefore much more by a shape or figure; and
therefore flee from the shape of them; for it is an Unworthy thing, that the
image of the living God, should be made the image of an idol or a dead thing.
For the idols of the Heathens are silver and gold, and have eyes without sight,
and noses without smell, and hands without feeling.] So far Tertullian argues.
And what can more plainly give his sense and meaning in this Article? If the
very image of an idol be Unlawful, much more is it unlawful to make an image or
idol of the living God, or represent him by the image of a dead man.

But this argument is further and more plainly set down by Athanasius, whose
book against the Gentiles is spent in reproving the images of God real or
imaginary; insomuch that he affirms that the Gentiles dishonor even their
false Gods, by making images of them, and that they might better have passed
for Gods, if they had not represented them by visible images. And therefore,
that the religion of making images of their Gods, Nam si ut dicitis literarum
instar Dei praesentiam signant, atque adeo acsi Deum significantia Divinis
dignae censentur honoribus, cerre qui ea sculp^it, eisque effigiem dedit, multo
magis hos promerebatur honores. Et paulo post. Quocircae hujusmodi religio,
Deorumque fictio non pietatis esse, sed iniquitatis invectio -- Veritatis via
ad eum qui veru^ Deus est diriget. Ad eum vero ^ognoscendum and exactissime
intelligendum nullius extra nos positae rei opem necessariam haebemus -- Quod
si quis interrogat quanam ista sit? V^iuscujusque animam esse dixerim, atque
insitam illam intelligentiam, per ipsam enim solam Deus inspiciet, and
intelligi potest. Orat. contr, ^entiles.
is not piety, but impious. For to know God we need no outward thing; the way
of truth will direct us to him. And if any man ask which is that way, viz. to
know God, I shall say, it is the soul of a man, and that understanding which is
planted in us; for by that alone God can be seen and Understood.] The same
Father does discourse many excellent things to this purpose, as that a man is
the only image of God; Jesus Christ is the perfect image of his Glory, and he
only represents his essence; and man is made in the likeness of God, and
therefore he also in a less perfect manner represents God: Besides these, if
any man desires to see God, let him look in the book of the creature, and all
the world is the image and lively representment of Gods power, and his wisdom,
his goodness and his bounty. But to represent God in a carved stone, or a
painted Table, does depauperate our understanding of God, and dishonours him
below the Painters art; for it represents him lovely only by that art, and
therefore less than him that painted it. But that which Athanasius adds is very
material, and gives great reason of the Command, why God should severely forbid
any image of himself: Calamitati enim and tryannidi servientes homines Unicum
illud est nulli Communicabile Dei nomen lignis lapidibusque imposuerunt: Some
in sorrow for their dead children, made their images and fancied that presence;
some desiring to please their tyrannous Princes, put up their statues, and at
distance by a fantastical presence flattered them with honors. And in process
of time, these were made Gods; and the incommunicable name was given to wood
and stones.] Not that the Heathens thought that image to be very God, but that
they were imaginarily present in them, and so had their Name. Hujusmodi igitur
initiis idolorum inventio Scriptura test apud homines coepit. Thus idolatry
began says the Scripture, and thus it was promoted; and the event was, they
made pitiful conceptions of God, they confined his presence to a statue, they
worshipped him with the lowest way imaginable, they descended from all
spirituality and the noble ways of Understanding, and made wood and stone to be
as it were a body to the Father of Spirits, they gave the incommunicable name
not only to dead men, and Angels, and Demons, but to the images of them; and
though it is great folly to picture Angelical Spirits, and dead Heroes, whom
they never saw, yet by these steps when they had come to picture God himself,
this was the height of the Gentile impiety, and is but too plain a
representation of the impiety practiced by too many in the Roman Church.

But as we proceed further, the case will be yet clearer. Concerning the
testimony of Eusebius, I wonder that any writer of Roman controversies should
be ignorant, and being so, should confidently say, Eusebius has nothing to
this purpose, viz. to condemn the picturing of God, Synod. 7. act. 6.
when his words are so famous, that they are recorded in the seventh Synod; and
the words were occasioned by a solemn message sent to Eusebius by the sister of
Constantius and wife of Licinius, lately turned from being Pagan to be
Christian, desiring Eusebius to send her the picture of our Lord Jesus; to
which he answers: Quia vero de quadam imagine, quasi Christi, scripsisti, hanc
volens tibi a nobis mitti, quam dicis, and qualem, hanc quam perhibes Christi
imaginem? Utrum veram and incommutabilem, and natura characteres suos
portantem? An istam quam propter nos suscepit servi formae schemate
circumamictus? Sed de forma quidem Dei nec ipse arbitror te quaerere semel ab
ipso edoctam, quoniam neque patrem quis novit nisi filius, neque ipsum filium
novit quis aliquando digne, nisi solus pater qui eum genuit. And a little
after, Quis ergo hujusmodi dignitatis and gloriae vibrantes, and praefulgentes
splendores exarare potuisset mortuis and inanimatis Coloribus and scripturis
Umbraticis? And then speaking of the glory of Christ in Mount Thabor, he
proceeds; Ergo si tunc incarnata ejus forma tantam virtutem sortita est ab
inhabitante in se Divinitate mutata, quid oportet dicere cum mortalitate
exutus, and corruptione ablutus, speciem servilis formae in gloriam Domini and
Dei commutavit? Where besides that Eusebius thinks it unlawful to make a
picture of Christ, and therefore consequently, much more to make a picture of
God; he also tells Constantia, he supposes she did not offer at any desire of
that.] Well, for these three of the Fathers we are well enough, but for the
rest, the objector says, that they speak only against representing God as in
his own essence, shape or form. To this I answer, that God has no shape or
form, and therefore these Fathers could not speak against making images of a
thing that was not; and as for the images of his essence, no Christian, no
Heathen ever pretended to it; and no man or beast can be pictured so: No
Painter can paint an Essence. And therefore although this distinction was
lately made in the Roman Schools, yet the Fathers knew nothing of it, and the
Roman Doctors can make nothing of it, for the reasons now told. But the
Gentleman says, that some of their Church allow only and practice the
picturing those forms, wherein God has appeared. It is very well they do no
more; but I pray in what forms did God the Father ever appear, or the Holy and
Mysterious Trinity? Or suppose they had, does it follow they may be painted? We
saw but now out of Eusebius, that it was not esteemed lawful to picture Christ,
though he did appear in a humane body: And although it is supposed that the
Holy Ghost did appear in the shape of a Dove, Council. ^. P. Ca^ 82.
yet it is forbidden by the sixth General Council to paint Christ like a Lamb,
or the Holy Spirit like a Dove. Add to this, where did ever the Holy and
Blessed Trinity appear like three faces joined in one, or like an old man with
Christ crucified, leaning on his breast, and a Dove hovering over them; and yet
however the objector is pleased to mince the matter, yet the doing this is
ubique inter Catholicos recepta; and that not only to be seen, but to be
adored, as I proved a little above by testimonies of their own.

The next charge is concerning S. Hierom, that he says no such thing; which
matter will soon be at an end, if we see the Commentary he makes on these words
of Isaiah; Cui ergo similem fecisti Deum?] In Cap. 40. Isai.
To whom do you liken God?] A^t quam imaginem ponetis ei, qui spiritus est, and
in omnibus est, and ubique discurrit, and terram quasi pugillo continet?
Simulque irridet stultitiam nationum, quod artifex sive Faber aerarius, aut
auri^ex a^t argentarius Deum sibi faciant.
Or what image will ye make for him, who is a Spirit, and is in all things, and
runs every where, and holds the earth in his fist? And he laughs at the folly
of the nations, that an Artist, or a Brasier, or a Goldsmith, or a Silversmith
makes a God,] viz. by making the image of God. But the objector adds, that it
would be long to set down the words of the other Fathers quoted by the Doctor:
And truly so the Doctor thought so too at first; but because the objector says
they do not make against what some of his Church own and practice, I thought it
might be worth the Readers pains to see them.

The words of S. Austin in this question are very plain and decretory. De fide
and symb. c. 7. Tale enim simul^chrum Deo nefas est Christiano in Templo
collocare, multo magis in cord nefarium est, ubi vere Templum est.
For a Christian to place such an image to God, (viz. with right and left hand,
sitting with bended knees, that is, in the shape of a man) is wickedness; but
much more wicked is it to place it in our hearts. But of this I have given
account in the preceding Section.

Theodoret, Damascen, and Nicephorus do so expressly condemn the picturing God,
that it is acknowledged by my adversaries, only they fly for succor to the old
mumpsimus; they condemn the picturing the essence of God, but not his forms and
appearances; a distinction which those good old writers never thought of, but
directly they condemned all images of God and the Holy Trinity. And the Bishops
in the seventh Synod, though they were worshippers of images, yet they thinking
that Angels were Corporeal, believed they might be painted, but denied it of
God expressly. And indeed it were a strange thing that God in the old Testament
should so severely forbid any image to be made of him, upon this reason because
he is invisible; and he presses it passionately by calling it to their memory,
that they heard a voice, but saw no shape; and yet that both he had formerly
and did afterward show himself, in shapes and forms which might be painted,
and so the very reason of the Commandment be wholly void. To which add this
consideration, that although the Angels did frequently appear, and consequently
had forms possible to be represented in imagery, yet none of the Ancients did
suppose it lawful to paint Angels, but they that thought them to be corporeal.
(...), Lib. de legate.
said Philo. To which purpose is that of Seneca, Nature. q. 8. 30.
Effugit oculos, cogitatione visendus est: And Antiphanes said of God, (...):
God is not seen with eyes, he is like to no man; therefore no man can by an
image know him. By which it appears plainly to be the General opinion of the
Ancients, that whatever was incorporeal was not to be painted, no, though it
had appeared in symbolical forms, as confessedly the Angels did. And of this
the second Synod of Nice it self is a sufficient witness; Act. 5.
the Fathers of which did all approve the Epistle of John Bishop of
Thessalonica, in which he largely discourses against the picturing of any thing
that is incorporeal. He that pleases to see more of this affair, may find much
more, and to very great purpose in a little book de imaginibus, Page 734. etc.
in the first book of the Greek and Latin Bibliotheca Patrum; out of which I
shall only transcribe these words: Non esse faciendum imagines Dei: imo si quis
quid simile attentaverit, hunc extremis suppliciis, veluti Ethnicis
communicantem dogmatis, subjici. Let them translate it that please, only I
remember that Aventinus tells a story, Annal. Biorum. l. 7.
that Pope John XXII. caused to be burnt for Heretics, those persons who had
painted the Holy Trinity, which I urge for no other reason, but to show how
late an innovation of religion this is in the Church of Rome. The worship of
images came in by decrees, and it was long resisted, but until of late, it
never came to the height of impiety as to picture God, and to worship him by
images: But this was the state and last perfection of this sin, and has
spoiled a great part of Christianity, and turned it back to Ethnicism.

But that I may sum up all; I desire the Roman Doctors to weigh well the
words of one of their own Popes, In Epistola quam Baroni^ Grace edidit Tom. 9.
Annal. ad A. D. 726. in Margin.
Gregory II. to the Question, Cur tamen Patrem Domini nostri Jesu Christi non
oculis subjicimus? Why do we not subject the Father of our Lord Jesus to the
eyes? He answers, Quoniam Dei natura spectanda proponi non potest ac fingi: The
nature of God cannot be exposed to be beheld, nor yet feigned.] He did not
conclude that therefore we cannot make the image of his essence, but none at
all, nothing of him to be exposed to the sight. And that this is his direct and
full meaning, besides his own words, we may conclude from the note which
Baronius makes upon it. Postea in usu venisse ut pingatur in Ecclesia Pater and
Spiritus Sanctus. Afterward it became an use in the Church (viz. the Roman) to
paint the Father and the Holy Ghost. And therefore besides the impiety of it,
the Church of Rome is guilty of innovation in this particular also, which was
the thing I intended to prove.

FINIS.

