TOLERATION Tolerated: OR, A late Learned Bishops Opinion concerning Toleration
of Religion With some brief Observations thereon.

READER,
I Here present thee with the Opinion of a Dead Bishop Tailor in (...) Prop^,
p. 213 Sect. 16. (...) ^ue^ion ^, Whether it be (...) w^ a Prince to give
Toleration to several Religions.
Bishop, since the ^iving are Untoward, and will not Speak; and indeed, should
all M^n be silent, not only the Dead, but the very Stones would speak, in such
a just and Righteous Cause as is that of His Majesty's: But I will not (...)
detain thee, only desire thee to observe with me, the great Difference (...)
One who had no other I was to serve, but these of Truth and Christianity, and
these whom (...) justly suspected to have a great many little private and
particular ends of their Own.

First, IT IS a great Fault that Men do call the several Sects of Christians, by
the Names of several Religions. The Religion of JESUS CHRIST is the Form of
sound Doctrine and wholesome Words, which is set down in Scripture
indefinitely; actually conveyed to us by plain Places, and separated as for the
Question of Necessary or not Necessary, by the Symbol of the Apostles. Those
Impertinencies which the W^ and V^^^ty of some Men, the Pevishness and
M^r^seness of others, have Commenced, which their Interest have promoted; which
serve not Truth so much as their own Ends, are far from being distinct
Religions; for matters of Opinions are no part of the Worship of God, nor in
Order to it, but as they promote Obedience to his Commandments; and when they
contribute toward it, are in that Proportion, as they contribute Parts and
Actions, and minute particulars of that Religion they do or pretend to serve.
And such are all the Sects and Pretenses of Christians, but Pieces and Min^tes
of Christianity, if they do serve the Great End, as every Man for his own Sect
and Interest, believes for his share it does.

Secondly, TOLERATION has a double Sense or Purpose; for sometimes by it, Men
understand a public License and Exercise of a Sect; sometimes it is only an
Indemnity of the Persons, privately to Convene, and to Opine as they see
Cause, and as they mean to answer to God. Both these are very much to the same
Purpose, unless some Persons we are bound to Satisfy be scandalized, and then
the Prince is bound to do, as he is bound to Satisfy. To God it is all one;
for Abstracting from the Offense of Persons, which is to be considered, just as
our Obligation is to content the Persons; it is all one, whether we indulge to
them to meet publicly or privately to do Actions of Religion, concerning
which, we are not persuaded that they are truly Holy. To God it is just one to
be in the Dark and in the Light, the thing is the same; only the Circumstance
of public and private, which cannot be concerned in any thing; nor can it
concern any thing but Matter of Scandal, and Relation to the Minds and
Fantasies of certain Persons.

Thirdly, So that to Tolerate, is not to Persecute. And the Question, Whether
the Prince may Tolerate diverse Persuasions, is no more, than Whether he may
lawfully Persecute any Man for not being of his Opinion. Now in this Case, He
is just so to Tolerate Diversity of Persuasions, as he is to Tolerate public
Actions; for no Opinion is Ju^, nor no Person Punishable but for a Sin; and if
his Opinion by reason of its Managing, or its Effects be a Sin in it self, or
becomes a Sin to the Person, then as he is to do toward other Sins, so to that
Opinion, or Man so Opining. But to believe so or not so, when there is no more
but mere believing, is not in his Power to enjoin, therefore not to punish: And
it is not only lawful to Tolerate disagreeing Persuasions, but the Authority of
God only is competent to take Notice of it, and i^falli^le to Determinate it,
and fit to Judge; and therefore no H^n no Authority is sufficient to do all
those things, which can justify the Inflicting Temporal Punishments upon such
as do not Conform in their Persuasions, to a Rule or Authority, which is not
only fallible, but supposed by the disagreeing Persons to be actually deceived.

Fourthly, But I consider in the Toleration of a differing Opinion; Religion is
not properly and immediately concerned, so as in any Degree to be endangered:
For it may be safe in Diversity of Persuasions, and it is also a part of
Christian Religions that the Liberty of men's Consciences should be preserved in
all things, where God has not set a Limit, and made a Restraint; that the Soul
of Man should be free, and acknowledge no Master but Jesus Christ; that Matters
Spiritual, should not be restrained by Punishments Corporal; that the same
Meekness and Charity, should be preserved in the Promotion of Christianity,
that gave it Foundation, and Increment, and Firmness, in its first Publication;
that Conclusions should not be more Dogmatical, than the vertual Resolution and
Efficacy of the Premises; and that the Persons should not be more certainly
Condemned, than their Opinions Confuted; and lastly, that the Infirmities of
Men, and Difficulties of Things, should be both put in Balance, to make
Abatement in the Definitive Sentence against Men's Persons. But then, because
Toleration of Opinions is not properly a Question of Religion, it may be a
Question of Policy: And although a Man may be a good Christian, though he
believe an Error not Fundamental, and not directly or evidently Impious; yet
his Opinion may accidentally disturb the public Peace, through the
Over-activeness of the Person, and Confidence of their Belief, and the Opinion
of its Appendent Necessity; and therefore Toleration of differing Persuasions
in these Cases is to be considered upon Political Grounds; and is just so to be
permitted or denied, as the Opinions or Tolerations of them may conflit with
the public and necessary Ends of Government. Only this: As Christian Princes
must look to the Interest of their Government, so especially must they look to
the Interests of Christianity, and not call every Redargation or modest
Discovery of an Established Error, by the Name of the Disturbance of the Peace.
For it is very like, that the Peevishness and Impatience of Contradiction in
the Governors, may break the Peace: Let them remember the Gentleness of
Christianity, and the Liberty of Consciences which ought to be preserved; and
let them do Justice to the Persons, whoever they are, that are peevish,
provided no Man's Person be over-^orn by Prejudice: For if it be necessary for
all Men to subscribe to the present Established Religion, by the same Reason,
at another time a man may be bound to subscribe to the Contradictory, and so to
all the Religions in the World: And they only who by their too much Confidence,
entitle God to all their Fancies, and make them to be Questions of Religion,
and Evidences for Heaven, or Consignations to Hell, they only think this
Doctrine Unreasonable; and they are the Men that first disturb the Churches
Peace, and then think there is no appeasing the Tumult, but by getting the
Victory; but they that consider things wisely, understand, that since Salvation
and Damnation depends not upon Impertinencies, and yet that Peace and Public
Tranquillity may; the Prince in this case is to seek how to secure the
Government, and the Issues and Intentions of that, while there is in these
cases directly no Insecurity to Religion, unless by the accidental
Uncharitableness of them that Dispute. Which Uncharitableness is also much
prevented when the Public Peace is secured; and no Person is on either side
engaged upon Revenge, or troubled with Disgrace, or vexed with Punishments by
any Decretory Sentence against him.

It was a Wise saying of a Statesman ( Thuanus I mean) Here^iei qui p^^ce data
sa^tionibus S^^^duntur, Persecuti^^e uni^ centra Rempublicam. If you Persecute
Heretics or Discrepants, they Unite themselves as to a Common Defense: If you
permit them, they divide themselves upon Private I^tre^l, and the rather, if
this Interest was the Ingredient of the Opinion.

Fifthly, The sum is this, It concerns the Duty of a Prince, because it
concerns the Honor of God, that all Vices, and every part of ^^-life, be
Discountenanced and Restrained, and therefore in Relation to that, Opinions are
to be dealt with; for the Understanding being to direct the Will, and Opinions
to guide our Practices, they are Considerable only as they teach Impiety and
Vice, as they either Dishonor God, or Disobey Him. Now all such Doctrines are
to be condemned; but for the Persons Preaching such Doctrine, if they neither
justify nor approve the pretended Consequences, which are certainly Impious,
they are to be separated from th^e Consideration, but if they know such
Consequences, and allow them, or if they do not stay till the Doctrines produce
Impiety, but take Sin before hand, and manage them Impiously in any sense; or
if either themselves or their Doctrine do Really, and without Color or feigned
Pretense, dusturb the Public Peace and Just Intrests, they are not to be
suffered. In all other Cases it is not only Lawful to permit them, but it is
also necessary, that Princes, and all in Authority, should Persecute Discrepant
Opinions. And in such Cases, wherein Persons not otherwise incompetent, are
bound to reprove an Error (as they are in many.) In all these, if the Prince
make restraint, he hinders men from doing their Duty, and from Obeying the the
Laws of Jesus Christ. [so for that Learned Bishop]

HEre this Learned and great Man (whom I think I may safely pronounce one of
the greatest Ornaments which the English Church or N^t^on ever had) does not in
the least Scruple or Object against His Majesty's Dispensing Power, in
Tolerating differing Opinions in Religion; and s^ith that Religion is not
properly concerned in the question. so as in any degree to be ind^^gered; and
that it may be safe in diversity of Persuasions, and that it is rather a
question of Policy then Religion: Nay, he is so ^^r from saying the Prince may
Tolerate, that he ^^ith he (...), and leaves it not in his choice or power to
Choose, and very fairly and ^^ndidly seems rightly to state and determine the
present Controversies, in giving to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to
God, the things that are God's. He sets the Prince on his Throne, and makes it
his Province to look after Peace, and to take such Measures which may ^^cure
the Government, and puts it out of his Power to be concerned with Men's
Consciences. This he very justly leaves to the Managery and Conduct of the
Great God; And how far His Majesty's Judgment does quadrate with this Great
Man's, I shall here briefly set down. For,

Coming to the Crown of his Ancestors, he presently found himself to be the
Head of a divided Body; and that all his Subjects were a Disturbed and
Contending People, divided into many differing Sects and Factions; and that
having had several Educations, they had several Consciencess, he found also
every Sect and Party fiercely carrying on their own little particular Intrests;
and like Seamen, every one praying for a Wind to carry their own Vessel out of
the Heaven, though the same Wind kept their Neighbors Vessel in the Port or it
nay be sunk or overturned it: These things he wisely considered, and thought
th^^ he had as good be a Sovereign Shepherd, a^ Sovereign King over such a
People; therefore ^ade it his business to look into the Causes of such great
Disorder, and found that their Feuds and Animosities were about the things of
another World; about Truth and Falsehood, Heaven and Hell: And should a People
believing in such things be disturbed in their Methods, which they thought most
suitable, and proper to obtain the one, or avoid the other, He thought (and
that with great reason) His Kingdom here would be very Troublesome and Uneasy;
therefore seeing them all Fierce and E^ger, and that they would all be Judges
in their own Cause, He undertook to decide their Differences, and to judge for
them, not as to matter of Truth, but as to matter of Peace; and like a Wise
Chemist, seeing their Differences principally rose from the Mixture and
Confusion of things of a Heterogenial Nature, he separated the one from the
other, the Spiritual things from the Temporal; left the Spiritual to God and
themselves, to whom they most properly belong; and took the Temporal as his
just Right, and due to Himself

The Case stands thus, His Majesty having in a manner wronght a Miracle to
Appease his People, viz. To make the Winds blow from all Corners at once, that
all their Respective Vessels may Sail together, and none may ever wax^ a Wind
to Lanch out at his pleasure, One would think they should all be satisfied; but
we find they are not: And indeed, if we consider things more narrowly, we
cannot in Reason expect they should; for things being but in their Formation
and growing, if we pull the Fruit before it be ripe, we shall find it have but
a Crude and Unsavory Taste: The Truth is, there has been a Disease a a long
time in the Government, and now it comes to be Canvass'd into, and searched,
the pain in Curing makes some men love the Disease better than the Remedy; and
rather than to be troubled with Dust and Rubish, and to have a little Noise
about their Ears, they had rather have an old rotten House which daily
threatens to fall on their Heads) ^hen to have a New One founded on a Rock,
^t^ich the Rains and the Winds, the Wit of ^i^n, or Malice of the Devil, shall
be never ^e to pull down.

POSTSCRIPT
READER,
COnscience, which has been long last by some Gentlemen, being lately found in
a Paper of Reasons I have just now Read (which may be called Conscientia
Rediviva) I dare now let thee know, that the real cause of my Publishing this
Paper was my Conscience. I think really in my Conscience, that His Majesty is
hearty and sincere in what he proposes, and designs nothing but the Good of all
His Subjects in general; and that it is the Duty of every Man to Contribute
something toward making such a Settlement as he desires: And I think I have
very good Reason for this my Conscience; and so I think might all others, would
they but consider things impartially. And since I am got upon the business of
Conscience, I find there are several Consciences in the Nation: There is His
Majesty's Conscience, the Bishops Conscience, and the Consciences of all the
several Sects and Divisions of Christians amongst us. Now I shall not Examine
how Unconscionable some of these Consciences may be, nor how they came by such
their differing Consciences, but how (if possible) they may all be satisfied.
Then in the first place, It Is but a point of good Manners to let His Majesty's
Conscience be first satisfied; nay it is a point of Prudence too: And if men
would but be wise and consider things as they ought, and had really a mind that
their Consciences should be satisfied, they would begin here first, and so
reconcile their Duty and Intrest; for in letting His Majesty to have His
Conscience, they really secure their own; for it is His Majesty's Conscience,
that all Consciences should be satisfied, and that none shall be disturbed in
any Way or Method they shall choose to obtain Eternal Life, or secure a Mansion
in another Would: But then it is not His Conscience, that any should have the
power to Disturb or Ruin their Innocent Neighbors, or be Indulged in a
Liberty to choose what Irregular Methods they please in obtaining a Possession
in this; and this some Unconscionable Men know, and are very much afraid of;
and it is His Majesty's Justice they dread, more then his Persuasion; and they
could willingly Tolerate the one, so they might be Exempted from the other.

FINIS.
London: Printed by G. L. at the Two Swans without Bishopsgate. WITH ALLOWANCE.


