REFLECTIONS UPON THE MEMORIAL FROM HIS Most Christian Majesty, Presented by
The Count de Briord, His Ambassador Extraordinary to the States General of the
United Provinces at the Hague, December 4. 1700.

Containing His Reasons for Accepting the late King of Spain's Will, in Favor
of the Duke of Anjou.

In a LETTER from a Friend, to Mr. J. C. Merchant in LONDON.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1700.

Price 4 d.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE MEMORIAL Delivered to the States General, By the Count de
Briord, the French King's Ambassador, etc.

REFLECTIONS upon the Memorial delivered into the States General, by the Count
de Briord, the French King 's Ambassador, etc.
SIR,
I Have too often, in my own mind, censured others for Complementing themselves
(for as such I took it) in Essay's of this kind, when they pretended their
unfitness for the undertakeing, and that they purely did it at the Request of
their Friends, to be guilty of the same Preamble. But if I mistook their
designs, and they only were, that they might be able to Charge the Defects of
their Performances somewhere beyond themselves, if they should see occasion,
when they had exposed their Capacities at the request of their Friends. I have
the most reason of any to Preface so to you, especially considering that I am
about to Reflect upon the French King's Memorial to the States General,
Containing his Reasons for accepting the Late King of Spain 's Will in Favor
of the Duke d' Anjou. It is not to be doubted, but in a Case of this
Importance, he has taken care it should not be Jejunely done; and therefore
employed the best Heads he had in this Afffair; and if I mistake not, some who
I think Judicious, nor they fail in their Opinions, it is shrewdly worded; But
Truth and Justice are Weapons not easily Parry'd; yet easily used by the Hand
of the Unskilful, which is the only consideration that enboldens my attempt.

The design of this Memorial, I take to be, to sooth the Commonalty wherever it
comes, and is full of cunning Insinuations of the French King's Inclination^ to
the Peace of the Public. I doubt not but all the Princes and States of Europe
will very Heartily thank him for it, (as well as the States General) when they
can be persuaded he is endeavoring it, and really sollicitous about it, though
he should not go so far as to prefer it to the advantage of his own Crown. But
I think the only way to know, whether that is to be believed, or expected, is
to look back upon that Monarch's Practices in all preceding junctures of
Affairs of this (or such like) nature; and then we shall see, which he would
sooner Sacrifice his Honor or his Interest, and when they drew two ways, which
has always been the most prevalent; and upon this consideration, I cannot think
the States General should so much as seem to be surpised at the French King's
accepting the Will of the late King of Spain, since he thinks it most for his
Interest so to do.

It is something odd, that His most Christian Majesty should in the First Page
of his Memorial so Ironically Treat and Burlesque the States General as he
does: He tells them, If they take time to examine with their usual Prudence,
the infinite Troubles, which the Treaty of Partition would produce, That same
Prudence will oblige them to desist from the Demand, etc. What is this, but to
accuse them of a Precipitancy in the Treaty of Partition; and a want of
Prudence, in not well weighing before hand the Conveniences and Inconveniences
of it; and yet himself sheer clear enough of that Charge: For by the Treaty of
Partition, he added another Method to his Choice of disposing of the Spanish
Monarchy; and he knew the King of England, and the States General, both in
Honor and Conscience, thought themselves bound by, and would not recede from
the Obligations laid upon themselves by a Ratifyed Treaty, though he kept himself
above all bonds but those of his own advantage. It is certainly a great
Contradiction to abandon the design of a Treaty, for the sake of adhering to
the Terms of it; and I would be very willing (if I could) at this conjuncture
to distinguish betwixt them; but I cannot see that the Design, and the Terms
were any more United when the King of Spain lived, then they are now: For the
Design of that Treaty was not to take place in its effect till after the King
of Spain's Death; therefore that could make no difference betwixt them. On the
otherhand, how far it is in the Power of a King of Spain by his Will, to
dispose of his Kingdom, and the Succession of it; and cut off the Right of the
next Heir, is not my Province to Determine; but I think, if we look into the
10th page of the French King's Memorial, we shall find he lays no stress upon
it for the Duke d' Anjou's Right, for when he is pretending, There Is a
necessity, in order to preserve the Peace, to make use of Methods different
from those that were proposed at Signing the Treaty of Partition. He tells the
States in the next Paragraph; The most natural, that which is most agreeable
for maintaining the General Peace; and the only just Method, consists in the
Resolution, taken by the King to Accept the Will of the late Catholic King: So
that it plainly appears, that the Force of the Will lies only in his Resolution
to Accept of it; and therefore we have very good reason to suppose, the Will of
the King of Spain should have been (with him) no Will, if it had crossed his
inclinations, in settling the Crown upon the Archduke; and there is no doubt,
but then he would have delivered his Protest against it, strenuously insisted
upon the Treaty of Partition, and Challenged, upon their Guarranty, the
Assistance of the King of England, and the States General, to have forced the
performance of it. Then on the other hand, if the French King insists upon the
Duke d' Anjou's Natural Right, the King of Spain's Will, cannot (any more than
his Death) make any difference betwixt the Design and the Terms of the Treaty,
unless the French King means his own Private Design, which now, it plainly
appears must be absolutely destroyed, if the Terms stand.

He goes on then, and tells them, The former (that is the design of the Treaty)
maintains a General Peace, the latter (that is the Terms of it) causes an
Universal War; and therefore the Decision, what Measures to take, should be
made by the Explanation of the First Article of the Treaty, viz. To maintain
the General Peace of Europe. I am very much afraid he will prove a false Prophet,
and if he does, may the fate of a false Prophet pursue him. I cannot think the
Guarrantees of the Treaty of Partition will sit still, and see the Treaty
broke, was it only upon Punctilio of Honor; and I think 'twill plainly appear
to be too much their Interest to assist the Emperor, to expect they should be
Neutral: For should the French King, (which joined with Spain, etc.) I don't
see is so difficult to be done, to be too hard for the Emperor, and so Command
his Arms, or indeed otherwise engage them; they will make too Formidable an
Enemy, to be thought not worth minding; and the balance not so much kept in
Aequilibrio as might be wished. And therefore the French King must greatly
reflect upon the Conduct, and foresight of those concerned in the Treaty, in
endeavoring to impose that belief upon the public, That his accepting the
King of Spain 's Will, Maintains a General Peace. Then on the other hand had
the French King kept to the performance of the Treaty of Partition, I cannot for
my part see who could, or dared, attempt the disturbance of the Peace of Europe
upon that account; and therefore I shall consider the difficulties he mentions
as the Grounds of his specious pretenses.

But first I think it may not be amiss, to obviate the Objection made against
the Validity of the Treaty, and the French King's being any ways bound by it:
Because, says he, the Emperor had not Accepted of the Partition before the
Death of the King of Spain; it is therefore void, and ceases to be Obligatory,
the three Months being past which was allowed him for Acceptance. This is the
scope of the Objection, which will be easily Answered; if we consider, that by
the secret Article of the Treaty the Emperor was to have two Months more
granted him to consider of it, which were not determined; but suppose they
were, the 7th. Article of the Treaty has made Provision for the Emperor's
refusal. It runs thus, Immediately after the Exchange of this present Treaty,
it shall be Communicated to the Emperor, who shall be invited to enter
thereinto; but if, after three Month's time, from the Day of the said
Communication, and the said Invitation, or the day that his Catholic Majesty
shall dye, if it happen before the Expiration of the said three Months; his
Imperial Majesty, and the King of the Romans, should refuse to enter thereinto,
and to agree to the Share assigned to the most Serene Archduke Charles; The
two Kings (of France, and England) or their Successors, and the States General,
shall agree upon a Prince to whom that part shall be given: And in case,
notwithstanding the present Convention the most Serene Archduke shall take
possession either of the part which might fall to him, before he has Accepted
the present Treaty, or of that part which might be assigned to Mons. Dauphin,
or to him who shall have the Duchy of Millan in Exchange, as abovesaid; the
said two Kings, and the States General, by Virtue of this Convention, shall
hinder him with all their Forces. Now, I doubt not, but the French King would
take very haniously, any Reflection upon his Care, or Conduct, in this Affair,
in having agreed to he knew not what, (which, if he did, was his own fault) but
then he ought to forbear that Plea for his Breach of the Treaty; least it
necessary says a severer Charge, and proves, that his Agreeing to the Treaty
was purely a design to provoke the King of Spain, (or some, of the Grandees for
him) to give the Kingdom by Will, (as far as that Gift will go) to a Prince of
France, least it should be divided; and so the Treaty was broken (in his
Intention) before it was made. How well this agrees with what he says in the
11th. page of the Memorial: The high Dignities of Kings does not excuse them
frem considering whether the Wars they undertake be just. Then what Reasons
could his Majesty (who is known to be a just Prince) offer for resuming Arms to
divide a Monarchy, which is settled entirely upon the lawful Heir. And just
before in the 10th. page: If any Prince have a Right to oppose the Dispositions
of that Will, there needs no more but to read them, to be convinced that this
Right belongs only to the Dauphin. By the way, how the reading the Dispositions
of the Will should convince of a Right to oppose them, is, at present, to me a
Paradox: But put the Case the Right is in the Dauphin, was it not so when the
Treaty of Partition was ratified, and was not the Dauphin a Party thereunto? (
See the 4 th Article of the Treaty,) and could not the French King then, as
well as now, have obtained more considerable Advantages by his Arms, if he had
designed to make use of them (as now he does) than the Kingdoms of Naples and
Sicily, the Province of Guipuscoa, and the Duchy of Lorrain, etc. which he
says, he had no design to acquire by a Treaty: What then could he design by the
Treaty, but to give the World one Instance more (of which we have had singular,
in the Breach of the Pyrenean, and other Treaties) of his Infidelity (unless
the Partition should prove for his Advantage) and laugh in his sleeve at those
that gave any Credit to his Promises, and stumbled at his Painted Trap Door.

I come now to consider what he has Offered, for the Certainty of an universal
War if he had stood by the Treaty of Partition. First, the Milaneze, the
Kingdoms of Naples and Sicily, the Provinces, the Places comprehended in the
Partition, all of them put themselves in a Condition, (he should have said
Posture, though that is not true) to maintain their Union with the Body of the
Spanish Monarchy, and a little lower. Thus the Archduke becoming King of
Spain, etc. There must be a necessity in order to execute the Treaty, to
Conquer the Kingdoms reserved for the share of the Dauphin, etc. These are very
great Reasons, should it prove true, that the Places reserved for the share of
the Dauphin were really in a Condition to maintain their Union with the Spanish
Monarchy, against the united Power of the Guarantees. How comes the French King
all of a sudden to be so modest (though I believe we shall find him otherwise by
and by) or doubtful of his own strength, (that use to Hector all Europe,) to
suppose that France, England and Holland in Union, should speak twice for the
performance of the Treaty when there are none to withstand it, but what might
have been blown away by the Breath of their Guns; and they would have had more
Wit, than to have flung against Six high, when they might part Stakes; and the
King of Spain (I mean supposing the Arch Duke to have been so) would never have
been reduced to those great Extremities the Memorial speaks of, before he would
part with the Share of the Dauphin, since he must know 'twas impossible for him
to withstand the Arms of this Tripple League, though backed with the Emperor's
Assistance; and Savoy durst not (though if he did, to no great purpose) turn his
Arms against France, etc. on that Occasion; neither would it be so much worth,
for him to hazard his own ruin by being on the weaker side, considering the
Contingencies of his Title, which must not Commence, till after the extinction
of the Heirs of the Princes of France, and the Archduke.

There are several things more might be considered, as the grand Reflection
upon the States General in the 15th page, where he tells them, That, in truth,
he is persuaded, that they never had any design to obtain the effect of their
last Memorial, and so goes on to banter 'em, and makes them worse than Trifles.
Then again, That they should, in that their Memorial, have named the Princes
that were ready to join in it (the effecting the Partition)* The Troops for
being the Guarrantees of the Articles of it: They should have mentioned those
the Republic of Holland was to furnish by Sea or Land. Truly I cannot see what
occasion there was for the States General just in that Memorial (which was, as
I take it, only to put him in mind of the Treaty, when they found he was going
to break it) to Name the Princes ready to join, (which he knew as well as they)
since the 10th 11th and 13th Articles of the Treaty were so plain; and that all
engaged in that Treaty, (to him not unknown) were obliged to be ready so to do;
neither could he expect, that they should by that Memorial mention the Number
they were to furnish; because by the 14th Article, all the Guarrantees were to
agree what proportion each should Contribute; so that 'twould have been very
preposterous for them, then to have ascertained their Number, without any such
agreement. He has one very pretty Turn I cannot pass: After he had supposed
upon his rejecting the Will, the Archduke had entered upon the Regency: he
says in his 13th page, He must have been obliged to attack a Living Prince,
Prosessor of the Crown of Spain, and its certain that the Measures he had taken
with the Allies, related only to the Division of the Succession of a Prince,
whose Death appeared to be very near. Certainly the French King must think he
writes to very weak Heads, or he could never suppose thus to sham 'em, Would
not the Archduke then have come in as Successor to that King, whose Succession
the Division related to; and did not he stand obliged to the Division of that
Succession according to the Treaty? Ay, but the Emperor was all alo^^,
endeavoring to promote the Archduke, and therefore re^^s^d, or at least
delayed Signing the Treaty. That the French King knew, at the making of it; and
that can be no Plea for abandoning his Sacred Word, as that of a King ought to
be.

In the next Paragraph he does the Guarrantees the Justice to declare, that
their design was Peace, That they stipulated no particular Advantage to
themselves, etc. But acted the part of disinterested Mediators, betwixt the
King and the Emperor, etc. But this is brought as an Argument, That they having
received no prejudice, should not intermeddle. Surely there is the most Honor,
in standing to a Treaty where there is the least Interest to Sway; and in all
likelihood will be the most Justice too; but where does all this end? Why, in
the Old Story, with a a little addition: The Emperor had not Signed the Treaty,
and therefore, There was no Treaty, except with the Mediators; this needs no
farther Answer, than to referr you again to the 7th Article of the Treaty, and
what has been said before.

At length, Sir, we are got to consider of the Renunciation, by reason of the
following Expressions in the 12th page of the Memorial. The Disputes raised, as
to the Validity of the Renunciation of the late Queen, served for a Motive to
this Accommodation. In effect, it had been of no use, if the Nullity of that
Renunciation had been acknowledged as fully during the late Catholic King's
Life, as it is declared in his Will. Before I say any thing of it, I shall
recite the Title of the French King, as I found it in the Introduction of a
Relation of the French King's Expedition into the Spanish Netherlands, in the
Years, 1667 and 1668. page the 3d. of the Introduction. In the Year 1659 a
Treaty of Peace was concluded between the two Crowns, (of France and Spain,)
and together with a Marriage between Lewis the XIV. now King of France, and the
Lady Maria Theresa, (Eldest Daughter to Philip the IV. King of Spain, and
Elizabeth the Daughter to Henry the IV, and Sister to Lewis the XIII. King of
France, For whose Portion the King her Father, obliged himself to pay 500000
Crowns of Gold, and pretended Salick Law debars Females, from Succession to the
French Crown; as also to the end, that the two Crowns, being too Great and
Puissant to be United into one Kingdom, all occasions of such a Conjunction
might be avoided: It was Covenanted, (among other things) That neither the
Infanta, nor her Children and Descendents, in what degree soever, should ever
succeed in the Kingdoms, Seigniories or Dominions, which do or shall belong to
his Catholic Majesty, as well within, as without the Kingdom of Spain,
notwithstanding any Law or Custom, which by this agreement (which is to
continue in the full Force and Vigor of a Law for ever) Their Majesty's did
abolish. This Renunciation the Infanta Confirmed in these very Terms by an
Oath, in the presence of the Kings themselves, the Princes of the Blood, and
the Chief Nobility of both Kingdoms.

So that you see both Kings were engaged in it, as well as the Infanta; (whose
Oath I have not by me or else would insert it) but I think it will not be amiss
to Transcribe the very words of the Renunciation it self, by which it will be
more evinced.

Placuit utrique Regi pactione instar legis semper valitura sancire, ne unquam
serenissima Infans Teresa, aut posteri ejus ulli, ad feros usque Nepotes,
quocunque gradu sint, admittantur ad successionem ullam, sive Regnorum, sive
Principatuum, Provinciarum, Ditionum, Dominiorum quorumcunque Regis Catholici,
non obstante lege ulla, consuetudine, aut alio Jure in contrarium, cui
utriusque Regis authoritate plenissime derogatur, contemplatione dictae
aequalitatis, and publicae utilitatis quae inde emanatura speratur. It was to
Consented by both their Majesty's, and by them confirmed, that neither the most
Serene Infanta Teresa, nor any of her Issue or Posterity, in what degree
soever, be admitted to succeed in any of the Kingdoms, Dukedoms, Provinces, or
Dominions of his Catholic Majesty, any other Custom, Constitution, or Law to
the contrary notwithstanding: So that if any such Custom or Constitution were,
it was by authority of both Kings absolutely annulled and destroyed. And this
only to adjust the Dominion of both Crowns, so as each of them might receive an
equal benefit by it.

By this Sir to me it plainly appears that the King of Spain's Will cannot make
void a Renunciation so strongly confirmed. We find, as the Heirs receive a
Right from the Parent, it is in the Power of the Parent to restrain it; but I
will not pretend to be so much a Civilian, to argue, much less to determine, this
Point. I will only observe, the French King but renounced the ever having a
future Right, not a Right that he ever had; though I doubt not but his Civilians,
knowing his Mind, have given him their Absolution (which is not much to be
wondered at, since, in a more curious Frame of Government than his Judges have
been found, that would make the Will of their Prince Law) and should a Qualm
happen to overshadow his Conscience, the Sorbon too, must direct their
Decision, by the Regal Nod; and there I Will leave him, till the first have got
more Courage, than to submit the Law to his Will; and the latter more The Fear
of God, than to substitute the Sacred Oracles (which they pretend to unfold) to
his unbounded Ambition. And I Will only say he that will not be tied by an Oath,
will no more be secured by any other Bond, than Leviathan, when you bob for him
with a single Hair.

To conclude, Sir, in the last Page his Majesty is mightily transported with
the good Opinion he has of himself, and with what he would presuade the World,
the States General have, or ought to have, of him. When he had in the preceding
Paragraph suggested, that the delay of the two Months for the Emperor's
consideration, proposed by their Memorial, might settle the Archduke in the
Throne, he tells them, that He is willing to believe that this was not their
Design; they know too well that it is their Interest to merit by their Good
Conduct the Honor of his Affection and the Continuation of his Good Will. And
again he doubts not but they will change their Complaints into Thanks, and
Congratulate the King of Spain, as soon as possible, upon his Accession to the
Crown, and that they will endeavor to merit of the King the Good Will and
Protection that they and their Ancestors have received of his Majesty and his
Predecessors.

This should have been his Language at the Treaty at Reswick, and then he would
soon have had an Answer; and whoever considers how high he begun, and how low
he ended; and the Haughty Spirit of that Prince, can never suppose he would have
parted with so many Important Places, as he then did, had he been in such a
Protecting Capacity as he writes himself; or the Merit of the Honor of his
Affection; and the continuation of his Good Will, been so highly worth aspiring
to.

Neither are the Dutch in so poor, and forlorn a Condition now to want his Aid,
and Protection; and were they otherwise willing to condescend, to be of his
Party, this is enough to rouse their Indignation, and incline them to show him
they stand not in need of his Favor.

Indeed, when I think of the French King, he brings Belshazzar to my mind; He
is Glorying in his Achievements; His Heart (for ought I know) is Merry, He is
prideing himself in the Sacrilegious spoils of the Protestants, and TEKEL is
his Charge. He lives as if there was none above him, The Spirit of Persecution
is reigning in him; and the Cries of the Oppressed loud against him. I have
nothing more to do at present, but to crave leave to Subscribe my Self,

Sir, Your real Friend, and humble Servant, N. T.

FINIS.

