The Worthy Communicant.
Which things the Angels desire to (...) (...) 1 Pet 1.12.



The Worthy COMMUNICANT: OR, A Discourse of the Nature, Effects, and Blessings
consequent to the Worthy Receiving of the LORDS SUPPER; And of all the Duties
required in order to a Worthy Preparation.

TOGETHER With the Cases of Conscience occurring in the Duty of him that
Ministers, and of him that Communicates.

To which are added, Devotions fitted to every part of the Ministration.

BY JEREMY TAILOR, D. D. and Lord Bishop of Down and Connor.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for J. Martyn, J. Allestry, and T. Dicas, and are to
be sold by Thomas Basset at his Shop in St. Dunstans Churchyard in
Fleetstreet. 1667.

To the Most ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCESS Her Highness Royal MARY Princess of Great
Britain, Dowager of Orange, etc.
MADAM,
ALthough none of the Subjects of these Nations can, in propriety of speaking,
be a stranger to the Royal Family, from whom every single person receives the
daily emanations of many Blessings; yet besides this, there is much in your
Royal Highness by which your Princely Person is related to all amongst us that
are or would be excellent. For where Virtue is in her exaltation, to that
excellent Person all that are or would be thought virtuous do address
themselves, either to be directed or encouraged, for example or for patronage,
for the similitude of affection or likeness of design; and therefore, Madam,
although it is too great a confidence in me, something a stranger, to make this
Address to so highborn and great a Princess; yet when I considered that you
are the Sister of my King, and the Servant of my God, I know there was nothing
to be expected but serenity and sweetness, gentleness and goodness, Royal
favors and Princely graces; and therefore in such fruitful showers I have no
cause to fear that my fleece shall be dry, when all that is round about it
shall be made irriguous with your Princely influence. I shall therefore humbly
hope that your Royal Highness will first give me pardon, and then accept this
humble oblation from him who is equally your servant for your great Relations,
and for your great Excellencies: For I remember with what pleasure I have heard
it told, that your Highness's Court has been in all these late days of sorrow
a Sanctuary to the afflicted, a Chapel for the Religion, a Refectory to them
that were in need, and the great Defensative of all men and all things that are
excellent; and therefore it is but duty, that by all the acknowledgments of
Religion that honor should be paid to your Royal Highness, which so eminent
virtues perpetually have deserved. But because you have long dwelt in the more
secret recesses of Religion, and that for a long time your Devotion has been
eminent, your obedience to the strictest rules of Religion has been humble and
diligent, even up to a great example, and that the service of God has been
your great Care and greatest Employment, your Name has been dear and highly
honorable amongst the Sons and Daughters of the Church of England; and we no
more envy to Hungary the great Name of St. Elizabeth, to Scotland the glorious
memory of St. Margaret, to France the triumph of the piety of St. Genovese, nor
St. Katharine to Italy, since in your Royal Person we have so great an example
of our own, one of the Family of Saints, a Daughter to such a glorious Saint
and Martyr, a Sister to such a King, in the arms of whose Justice and Wisdom we
lie down in safety, having now nothing to employ us, but in holiness and
comfort to serve God, and in peace and mutual charity to enjoy the blessings of
the Government under so great, so good a King.

But Royal Madam, I have yet some more personal ground for the confidence of
this Address; and because I have received the great honor of your reading and
using of diverse of my Books, I was readily invited to hope that your Royal
Highness would not reject it, if one of them desired upon a special title to
kiss your Princely hand, and to pay thanks for the gracious reception of others
of the same Cognation. The style of it is fit for Closets, plain and useful;
the matter is of the greatest concernment, a rule for the usage of the greatest
solennity of Religion: For as the Eucharist is by the venerable Fathers of the
Church called the Queen of Mysteries; so the worthy Communicating in this, is
the most Princely Conjugation of Graces in the whole Rosary of Christian
Religion; and therefore the more proportioned and fitted for the handling of so
Princely a Person, whom the beauty of the Body, and the greatness of Birth, and
excellency of Religion, do equally contend to represent excellent and
illustrious in the eyes of all the world.

Madam, it is necessary that you be all that to which these excellent graces
and dispositions do design you: and to this glorious end, this Manual may if
you please add some moments; the effecting of which is all my design, except
only that it is intended, and I humbly pray that it may be looked upon as a
testimony of that greatest Honor which is paid you by the hearts and voices of
all the Religious of this Church, and particularly of

MADAM, Your Highness most humble and most devoted Servant, Jeremy Dunensis.

The Contents of this Book.
THe Introduction, Page 1
CHAP. I.
OF the nature, excellencies, uses, and intention of the holy Sacrament of the
Lords Supper. p. 10 Section 1. Of the several apprehensions of men concerning
it. Ibid. Sect. 2. What it is which we receive in the holy Sacrament. p. 17
Sect. 3. That in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper there are represented and
exhibited many great blessings upon the special account of that sacred
ministry, proved in General. p. 33. Sect. 4. The blessings and graces of the
holy Sacrament enumerated and proved particularly. p. 46 Sect. 5. Practical
conclusions from the preceding discourses. p. 64 Sect. 6. Devotions preparatory
to this mystery. p. 77
CHAP. II.
OF our general preparation to the worthy reception of the blessed Sacrament,
and the participation of the Mysteries. p. 82 Section 1. Of Examination of our
selves in order to the holy Communion. p. 83 Sect. 2. Of the Examination of our
desires. p. 89 Sect. 3. Of our examination concerning remanent affections to
sin. p. 100 Sect. 4. Of examination of our selves in the matter of our Prayers
in order to a holy Communion. p. 114 Sect. 5. Of preparatory examination of our
selves in some other instances. p. 122 Sect. 6. Devotions to be used upon the
days of our Examination; relative to that duty. p. 133
CHAP. III.
OF Faith, as it is a necessary disposition to the blessed Sacrament. p. 142
Sect. 1. Of Catechumens or unbaptized persons. p. 143 Sect. 2. Of Communicating
Infants. p. 147 Sect. 3. Whether Innocents, Fools, and Mad men may be admitted
to the holy Communion. p. 156 Sect. 4. Of actual faith as it is a necessary
disposition to the Sacrament. p. 159 Sect. 5. Of the proper and specific work
of Faith in the reception of the holy Communion. p. 172 Sect. 6. Meditations
and devotions relative to this preparatory grace: to be used in the days of
preparation; or at any time of spiritual Communion. p. 190
CHAP. IV.
OF Charity, preparatory to the blessed Sacrament. p. 197 Sect. 1. Ibid. Sect.
2. Of doing good to our neighbors. p. 201 Sect. 3. Of speaking good of our
neighbors. p. 204 Sect. 4. Forgiveness of injuries a necessary part of
preparation to the holy Sacrament. p. 208. Sect. 5. Devotions relative to this
grace of charity; to be used by way of exercise and preparation to the Divine
Mysteries; in any time or part of our life: but especially before and at the
Communion. p. 252
CHAP. V.
OF repentance preparatory to the blessed Sacrament. p. 258 Sect. 1. Ibid.
Sect. 2. The necessity of repentance in order to the holy Sacrament. p. 261
Sect. 3. What actions of repentance are specially required in our preparations
to the holy Sacrament. p. 267 Sect. 4. How far we must have proceeded in our
general repentance and emendation of our lives before we Communicate. p 289
Sect. 5. What significations of repentance are to be accepted by the Church in
admission of penitents to the Communion. p. 329 Sect. 6. Whether may every
Minister of the Church and Curate of Souls reject impenitent persons, or any
criminals from the holy Sacrament, until themselves be satisfied of their
repentance and amends. p. 334 Sect. 7. Penitential Soliloquies, Ejaculations,
Exercises, and preparatory Prayers to be used in all the days of preparation
to the holy Sacrament. p. 347
CHAP. VI.
OF our actual and ornamental preparation to the reception of the blessed
Sacrament. p. 355 Sect. 1. Ibid. Sect. 2. Rules for examination of our
Consciences against the day of our Communion. p. 359 Sect. 3. Of an actual
supply to be made of such actions and degrees of good as are wanting; against a
Communion-day. p. 366 Sect. 4 Devotions to be used upon the morning of the
Communion. p. 373
CHAP. VII.
OF our comportment in and after our Receiving the blessed Sacrament. p. 378
Sect. 1. Of the circumstances and manner of Reception of the Divine Mysteries.
Ibid. Sect. 2. Acts of virtues and graces relative to the mystery, to be used
before or at the celebration of the Divine Sacrament. p. 381 Sect. 3. An advice
concerning him who only Communicates spiritually. p. 390
THE INTRODUCTION.
WHen St. Joseph and the Blessed Virgin Mother had for a time lost their most
holy Son, they sought him in the villages and the highways, in the retinues of
their kindred, and the Caravans of the Galilean Pilgrims; but there they found
him not: At last, almost despairing, faint and sick with travel and fear, with
desires and tedious expectations, they came into the Temple to pray to God for
conduct and success; knowing and believing assuredly, that if they could find
God, they should not long miss to find the Holy Jesus; and their faith deceived
them not: For they sought God, and found him that was God and man in the midst
and circle of the Doctors. But being surprised with trouble and wonder, they
began a little to expostulate with the Divine Child, why he would be absent so
long, and leave them (as it must needs be when he is absent from us) in sorrow
and uncertain thoughts. This question brought forth an answer which will be for
ever useful to all that shall inquire after this Holy Child: For as they
complained of his absence, so he reproved their ignorance; How is it that you
have so fondly looked for me, as if I were used to wander in unknown paths
without skill, and without a guide? why did ye inquire after me in highways,
and village-fields? ye never knew me wander, or lose my way, or abide but where
I ought; why therefore did ye not come hither to look for me? Did ye not know
that I ought to be in So the Syriac Interpreter renders the Greek (...) in the
places of my Father; In iis quae patris mei sunt: So the Arabic Version. In
negotiis patris mei, in my Fathers business. So Castellio, Piscator, and our
English Bibles. But the second reddition is more agreeable with the words of
the Greek, and the first is more consonant to the use of that phrase in the N.
T. So Joh. 19.27. St. John received the Mother of our Lord (...), recepit eam
in domum suam: so Beza and our English Translation: he took her to his own
house. And thus St. Chrysostom uses the same phrase, Sermon. 52. in Genes. (...);
Whither do you drive the just man? do you not know that wherever he sets his
foot, he is within his fathers house, or territory?
my fathers house? that is, there where God is worshipped, where he loves to
dwell, where he communicates his blessing and holy influences, there and there
only we are sure to meet our dearest Lord.

For this reason, the place of our address to God and holy conversation with
him, he is pleased to call his house, that with confidence we may expect to
meet him there when we go to worship: and when the Solemnities of Religion were
confined to the Tabernacle, he therefore made it to be like a house of use and
dwelling, that in that figure he might tell us where his delight and his abode
would be; and therefore God furnished the Tabernacle with the Utensils of a
Prophets room at least, a Table and a Candlestick; and the Table must have
dishes and spoons, bowls and covers belonging to it; the Candlesticks must have
Lamps, and the Lamps must be continually burning. And besides this, the house
of God must have in it a continual fire, the fire must not go out by night nor
day; and to this the Prophet alludes; God] has his fire in Sion, Isa. 31.9.
and his hearth or furnace in Jerusalem: And after all, there must be meat in
his house too. And as this was done by the Sacrifices of old, so by the Lords
Supper in the New Testament; So that now it is easy to understand the place
and the reason of Christ's abode; even in his Fathers house, there where his
Father dwells, and loves to meet his servants, there we are sure to find the
Lord. For as God descended and came into the Tabernacle invested with a cloud;
so Christ comes to meet us clothed with a Mystery; O Tarpeie Pater, qui Templa
secundam Incolis a coelo sedem --
he has a house below as well as above; here is his dwelling, and here are his
Provisions; here is his fire, and here his meat; hither God sends his Son, and
here his Son manifests himself: the Church and the holy Table of the Lord, the
Assemblies of Saints, and the Devotions of his people, the Word and the
Sacrament, the Oblation of Bread and Wine, and the offering of our selves, the
Consecration and the Communion, are the things of God, and of Jesus Christ; and
he that is employed in these, is there where God loves to be, and where Christ
is to be found; in the Employments in which God delights, in the Ministries of
his own choice, in the work of the Gospel, and the methods of Grace, in the
economy of Heaven, and the dispensations of eternal happiness.

And now that we may know where to find him, we must be sure to look after him;
he has told us where he would be, behind what pillar, and under what cloud,
and covered with what vail, and conveyed by what ministry, and present in what
Sacrament; and we must not look for him in the highways of ambition and
pride, of wealth or sensual pleasures; these things are not found in the house
of his Father, neither may they come near his dwelling. But if we seek for
Christ, we shall find him in the methods of Virtue, and the paths of Gods
Commandments; in the houses of Prayer, and the offices of Religion; in the
persons of the poor, and the retirements of an afflicted soul: we shall find
him in holy reading and pious meditation, in our penitential sorrows, and in
the time of trouble, in Pulpits and upon Altars, in the Word and in the
Sacraments: If we come hither as we ought, we are sure to find our Beloved,
him whom our soul longs after.

Sure enough Christ is here; but he is not here in every manner, and therefore
is not to be found by every inquirer, nor touched by every hand, nor received
by all comers, nor entertained by every guest. He that means to take the air,
must not use his fingers, but his mouth; and he that receives Christ must have
a proper, that is, a spiritual instrument, a purified heart, consecrated lips,
and a hallowed mouth, a tongue that speaks no evil, and a hand that ministers
to no injustice, and to no uncleanness: For a disproportionate intrument is an
undecency, and makes the effect impossible both in nature and morality. Can a
man bind a thought with chains, or carry imaginations in the palm of his hand?
Can the beauty of the Peacocks train, or the Estrich plume, be delicious to the
palate and the throat? Does the hand intermeddle with the joys of the heart, or
darkness that hides the naked, make him warm? Does the Body live as does the
Spirit, or can the Body of Christ be like to common food? Indeed the Sun shines
upon the good and bad; and the Vines give Wine to the drunkard, as well as to
the sober man: Pirates have fair winds and a calm Sea, at the same time when
the just and peaceful Merchant man has them. But although the things of this
world are common to good and bad, yet Sacraments and spiritual joys, the food
of the soul and the blessing of Christ, are the peculiar right of Saints: and
the Rites of our Religion are to be handled by the measures of Religion, and
the things of God by the rules of the Spirit; and the Sacraments are Mysteries,
and to be handled by Mystic persons, and to be received by Saints; and
therefore whoever will partake of Gods secrets, must first look into his own;
he must pare off whatsoever is amiss, and not without holiness approach to the
Holiest of all Holies, nor eat of this Sacrifice with a defiled head, nor come
to this feast without a nuptial garment, nor take this remedy without a just
preparative. For though in the first motions of our spiritual life, Christ
comes alone and offers his Grace, and enlivens us by his Spirit, and makes us
begin to live, because he is good, not because we are; yet this great
mysterious Feast, and magazine of Grace and glorious mercies, is for those only
that are worthy; (...).
for such only who by their cooperation with the Grace of God, are
fellow-workers with God in the laboratories of salvation. The Wrastler that
Clemens of Alexandria tells us of, addressing himself to his contention, and
espying the Statue of Jupiter Pisaeus, prayed aloud; If all things, O Jupiter,
are rightly prepared on my part, if I have done all that I could do, then do me
justice, and give me the Victory: And this is a breviate of our case. He that
runs in races, says the Apostle, he that contends for mastery, is temperate
in all things, and this at least must he be that comes to find Christ in these
Mysteries; he must be prepared by the rules and method of the Sanctuary; there
is very much to be done on his part, there is an heap of duties, there is a
state of excellency, there are preparations solemn and less solemn, ordinary
and extraordinary, which must be premised before we can receive the mysterious
blessings, which are here not only consigned, but collated and promoted,
confirmed and perfected.

The holy Communion, or Supper of the Lord, is the most sacred, mysterious and
useful conjugation of secret and holy things and duties in the Religion. It is
not easy to be understood, it is not lightly to be received: It is not much
opened in the writings of the New Testament, but still left in its mysterious
Nature: It is too much untwisted and nicely handled by the writings of the
Doctors, and by them made more mysterious; and like a Doctrine of Philosophy,
made intricate by explications, and difficult by the aperture and dissolution
of distinctions. So we sometimes epsy a bright cloud formed into an irregular
figure; when it is observed by unskilful and fantastic travelers, looks like
a Centaure to some, and as a Castle to others: some tell that they saw an Army
with Banners, and it signifies War; but another wiser than his fellow says, it
looks for all the world like a flock of Sheep, and foretells Plenty; and all the
while it is nothing but a shining cloud, by its own mobility and the activity
of a wind cast into a contingent and inartificial shape: So it is in this great
Mystery of our Religion, in which some epsy strange things which God intended
not, and others see not what God has plainly told: some call that part of it a
Mystery which ^none, and others think all of it nothing but a mere ceremony and
a sign: some say it signifies, and some say it effects, some say it is a
Sacrifice, and others call it a Sacrament; some Schools of learning make it the
Instrument of Grace in the hand of God; others say that it is God himself in
that Instrument of Grace: some call it venerable, and others say as the vain
men in the Prophet, that the Table of the Lord is contemptible: some come to it
with their sins on their head, and others with their sins in their mouth: some
come to be cured, some to be quickened, some to be nourished, and others to be
made alive: some out of fear and reverence take it but seldom, others out of
devotion take it frequently; some receive it as a means to procure great graces
and blessings, others as an Eucharist, and an office of thanksgiving for what
they have received: some call it an act of obedience merely, others account it
an excellent devotion, and the exercising of the virtue of Religion; some take
it to strengthen their Faith, others to beget it, and yet many affirm that it
does neither, but supposes Faith beforehand as a disposition; Faith in all its
degrees, according to the degree of Grace whither the Communicant is arrived:
Some affirm the Elements are to be blessed by prayers of the Bishop or other
Minister; others say, it is only by the mystical words, the words of
institution; and when it is blessed, some believe it to be the natural body of
Christ; others, to be nothing of that, but the blessings of Christ, his Word
and his Spirit, his Passion in representment, and his Grace in real exhibition:
And all these men have something of reason for what they pretend; and yet the
words of Scripture from whence they pretend, are not so many as are the several
pretensions.

My purpose is not to dispute, but to persuade; not to confute any one, but to
instruct those that need; not to make a noise, but to excite devotion; not to
enter into curious, but material inquiries, and to gather together into an
union all those several portions of truth, and differing apprehensions of
mysteriousness, and various methods and rules of preparation, and seemingly
opposed Doctrines, by which even good men stand at distance, and are afraid of
each other: For since all societies of Christians pretend to the greatest
esteem of this, above all the Rites or external parts and ministries of
Religion, it cannot be otherwise, but that they will all speak honorable
things of it, and suppose holy things to be in it, and great blessings one way
or other to come by it; and it is contemptible only among the profane and the
Atheistical; all the innumerable differences which are in the discourses and
consequent practices relating to it, proceed from some common truths, and
universal notions, and mysterious or inexplicable words, and tend all to
reverential thoughts, and pious treatment of these Rites and holy Offices; and
therefore it will not be impossible to find honey or wholesome dews upon all
this variety of plants; and the differing opinions, and several understandings
of this mystery, which (it may be) no humane understanding can comprehend, will
serve to excellent purposes of the Spirit; if, like men of differing interest,
they can be reconciled in one Communion, at least the ends and designs of them
all can be conjoined in the design and ligatures of the same reverence, and
piety, and devotion.

My purpose therefore is to discourse of the nature, excellencies, uses, and
intention of the holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the blessings and fruits
of the Sacrament, all the advantages of a worthy Communion, the public and the
private, the personal and the Ecclesiastical, that we may understand what it
is, what we go about, and how it is to be treated. I shall account also
concerning all the duties of preparation, ordinary and extraordinary, more and
less solemn; of the rules and manners of deportment in the receiving; the
gesture and the offering, the measures and instances of our duty, our comport
and conversation in and after it; together with the cases of conscience that
shall occur under these titles respectively, relating to the particular matters.

It matters not where we begin; for if I describe the excellencies of this
Sacrament, I find it engages us upon matters of duty, and inquiries practical.
If I describe our duty, it plainly signifies the greatness and excellency of
the Mystery: the very notion is practical, and the practice is information; we
cannot discourse of the secret, but by describing our duty; and we cannot draw
all the lines of duty, but so much duty must needs open a Cabinet of Mysteries.
If we understand what we are about, we cannot choose but be invested with fear
and reverence; and if we look in with fear and reverence, it cannot be but we
shall understand many secrets. But because the natural order of Theology is by
Faith to build up good life, by a rectified Understanding to regulate the Will
and the Affections, I shall use no other method, but first discourse of the
excellent Mystery, and then of the duty of the Communicant, direct and
collateral.

CHAP. I. Of the Nature, Excellencies, Uses, and Intention of the Holy
Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
SECT. I. Of the several apprehensions of men concerning it.
WHen our Blessed Lord was to nail the hand writing of Ordinances to his Cross,
he was pleased to retain two Ceremonies, Baptism and the Holy Supper; that
Christians may first wash, add then eat; first be made clean, and then eat of
the Supper of the Lamb: and it cannot be imagined but that this so signal and
peculiar retention of two Ceremonies is of great purpose and remarkable
virtues. The matter is evident in the instance of Baptism; and as the Mystery
is of the foundation of Religion, so the virtue of it is inserted into our
Creed, and we all believe one Baptism for the remission of our sins; Heb. 6.1.2.
and yet the action is external, the very Mystery is by a Ceremony, the
allusion is bodily, the Element is water, the minister a sinful man, and the
effect is produced out of the Sacrament in many persons and in many instances,
as well as in it; and yet that it is effected also by it and with it, Act. 2.38.
in the conjunction with due dispositions of him that is to be baptized, we are
plainly taught by Christ's Apostles and the symbols of the Church.

But concerning the other Sacrament there are more divisions and thoughts of
heart; for it is never expressly joined with a word of promise, and where
mention is made of it in the Gospels, it is named only as a duty and a
Commandment, and not as a grace, or treasure of holy blessings; we are bidden
to do it, but promised nothing for a reward, it is commanded to us, but we are
not invited to obedience by consideration of any consequent blessing: and when
we do it, so many holy things are required of us, which as they are fit to be
done; even when we do not receive the Blessed Sacrament; so they effect
salvation to us by virtue of their proper and proportioned promises in the
virtue of Christ's death however apprehended and understood.

Upon this account some say that we receive nothing in the B. Eucharist; but we
commemorate many blessed things which we have received; that it is affirmed in
no Scripture that in this mystery we are to call to mind the death of Christ,
but because we already have it in our mind, we must also have it in our
hearts, and publish it in our confessions and Sacramental representment, and
therefore it is not the memory, but the commemoration of Christ's death; that as
the anniversary sacrifices in the law were Heb. 10.3.

(...).


a commemoration of sins every year; not a calling them to mind; but a
confession of their guilt and of our deserved punishment; so this Sacrament is
a representation of Christ's death by such symbolical actions as himself
graciously has appointed: but then, excepting that to do so is an act of
obedience, it exercises no other virtue, it is an act of no other grace, it is
the instrument of no other good; it is neither virtue nor gain, grace nor
profit. And whereas it is said to confirm our faith, this also is said to be
unreasonable; for this being our own work, cannot be the means of a Divine
grace; not naturally; because it is not of the same kind, and faith is no more
the natural effect of this obedience; than chastity can be the product of
Christian fortitude; not by Divine appointment; because we find no such order;
no promise, no intimation of any such event; and although the thing it self
indeed shall have what reward God please to apportion to it as it is obedience;
yet of it self it has no other worthiness; it is not so much as an argument of
persuasion; for the pouring forth of wine can no more prove or make faith that
Christ's blood was poured forth for us, than the drinking the wine can effect
this persuasion in us that we naturally, though under a vail, drink the natural
blood of Christ; which the Angels gathered as it ran into golden phials, and
Christ multiplied to a miracle like the loaves and fishes in the Gospel. But
because nothing that naturally remains the same in all things as it was before,
can do any thing that it could not do before; the Bread and wine which have no
natural change, can effect none; and therefore we are not to look for an egg
where there is nothing but order; and a blessing where there is nothing but an
action; and a real effect where there is nothing but an analogy, a Sacrament, a
mystical representment, and something fit to signify, and many things past, but
nothing that is to come. This is the sense and discourse of some persons that
call for an express word, or a manifest reason to the contrary, or else resolve
that their belief shall be as unactive as the Scriptures are silent in the
effects of this mystery. Only these men will allow the Sacraments to be, marks
of Christianity, symbols of mutual Charity, testimonies of a thankful mind to
God, allegorical admonitions of Christian mortification, and spiritual alimony,
symbols of grace conferred before the Sacrament, and rites instituted to stir
up faith by way of object and representation; that is, occasionally and
morally, but neither by any Divine or physical, by natural or supernatural
power, by the work done, or by the Divine institution. This indeed is something
but very much too little.

But others go as far on the other hand and affirm that in the Blessed
Sacrament we receive the body and blood of Christ; we chew his flesh, we drink
his blood; for his flesh is meat indeed and his blood is drink indeed, and this
is the Manna which came down from heaven; our bodies are nourished, our souls
united to Christ; and the Sacrament is the infallible instrument of pardon to
all persons that do not maliciously hinder it; and it produces all its effects
by virtue of the Sacrament it self so appointed; and that the dispositions of
the Communicants are only for removing obstacles and impediments, but effect
nothing; the sumption of the Mysteries does all in a capable subject; as in
infants who do nothing, in penitents who take away what can hinder; for it is
nothing but Christ himself; the body that dyed upon the cross is broken in the
hand of him that ministers, and by the teeth of him that communicates; and when
God gives us his Son in this Divine and glorious manner, with heaps of miracles
to verify heaps of blessings, how shall not he with him give us all things
else? They who teach this doctrine call the holy Sacrament; The host, the
unbloody sacrifice; the flesh of God, the body of Christ, God himself, the
Mass, the Sacrament of the Altar. I cannot say that this is too much; but that
these things are not true; and although all that is here said, that is of any
material benefit and real blessing is true; yet the blessing is not so
conferred, it is not so produced.

A third sort of Christians speak indefinitely and gloriously of this Divine
mystery; they speak enough, but they cannot tell what; they publish great and
glorious effects; but such which they gather by similitude and analogy, such
which they desire, but cannot prove; which indeed they feel, but know not
whence they do derive them: they are blessings which come in company of the
Sacraments, but are not always to be imputed to them; they confound spiritual
senses with mystical expressions, and expound mysteries to natural
significations: that is, they mean well but do not always understand that part
of Christian Philosophy which explicates the secret nature of this Divine
Sacrament, and the effect of it is this; that they sometimes put too great
confidence in the mystery; and look for impresses which they find not, and are
sometimes troubled that their experience does not answer to their Sermons; and
meet with scruples instead of comforts, and doubts instead of rest. and anxiety
of mind in the place of a serene and peaceful conscience. But these men both in
their right and in their wrong enumerate many glories of the holy Sacrament
which they usually signify in these excellent appellatives, calling it, the
Supper of the Lord; the bread of elect souls, and the wine of Angels, the Lords
body, the New Testament and the calice of benediction, spiritual food, the
great Supper, the Divinest and Archisymbolical feast; the banquet of the
Church, the celestial dinner, the spiritual, the sacred, the mystical, the
formidable, the rational Table, the supersubstantial bread, the bread of God,
the bread of life, the Lords mystery, the great mystery of salvation, the Lords
Sacrament, (...). Desiderata. (...), h^stia hostiarum, mysterium mysteriorum
(...), Dominicum.
the Sacrament of piety, the sign of unity, the contesseration of the Christian
communion, the Divine grace, the Divine making grace, the holy thing, the
desirable, the comunication of Good, the perf^ction and consummation of a
Christian, the holy particles, the gracious symbols, the holy gifts, the
Sacrifice of commemoration, the intellectual and mystical good, the hereditary
donative of the New Testament, the Sacrament of the Lords body, the Sacrament
of the Calice, the Paschal Oblation, the Christian pasport, the mystery of
perfection, the great Oblation, the Worship of God, the life of Souls, the
Sacrament of our price and our Redemption; and some few others much to the same
purposes, all which are of great and useful signification; and if the
explications and consequent propositions were as justifiable as the title^
themselves are sober and useful, they would be apt only for edification, and to
minister to the spirit of devotion. That therefore is to be the design of the
present Meditations, to represent the true and proper and mysterious nature of
this divine nutriment of our souls; to account what are the blessings God
reaches forth to us in the Mysteries, and what returns of duty he expects from
all to whom he gives his most holy Son.

I shall only here add the names and appellatives which the Scripture gives to
these Mysteries, and place it as a part of the foundation of the following
doctrines; (...) 2 Pet. 2.13.

1 Cor. 11.20.8.29. 1 Cor. 10.16.

Jude v. 12 Acts 16.2


It is by the Spirit of God called, The bread that is broken, and the cup of
blessing, the breaking of bread; the body and blood of the Lord; the
communication of his body, and the communication of his blood; the feast of
charity or love; the Lords Table, and the Supper of the Lord. Whatsoever is
consequent to these titles we can safely own, and our faith may dwell securely,
and our devotion like a pure flame, with these may feed, as with the spices and
gums upon the Altar of Incense.

SECT. II. What it is which we receive in the holy SACRAMENT.
IT is strange that Christians should pertinaciously insist upon carnal
significations and natural effects in Sacraments and Mysteries, when our
blessed Lord has given us a sufficient light to conduct and secure us from
such mis-apprehensions. [The flesh profits nothing: the words which I speak
unto you, they are spirit and they are life,] that is, the flesh is corruption,
and its senses are Ministers of death: and this one word alone was perpetually
sufficient for Christ's Disciples. For when upon occasion of the gross
understanding of their Masters words by the men of Capernaum, they had been
once clearly taught that the meaning of all these words was wholly spiritual;
they rested there and inquired no further: insomuch that when Christ at the
institution of the Supper affirmed of the bread and wine, that they were his
body and his blood, they were not at all offended, as being sufficiently before
instructed in the nature of that Mystery. And besides this, they saw enough to
tell them that what they eat was not the natural body of their Lord: This was
the body which himself did or might eat with his body: one body did eat, and
the other was eaten; both of them were his body, but after a diverse manner.
For the case is briefly this;

We have two lives, a natural and a spiritual, and both must have bread for
their support and maintenance in proportion to their needs, Duplex vita,
duplicem poscit panem. St, Aug. oportuit autem, non solum primitias nostrae
naturae in participationem venire melioris, sed omnes quotquot velint homines
and secunda nativitate nasci, and nutriti cibo novo, and huic nativitati
accommodato, atque ita praevenire mensuram perfectionis. Damasc. de fide
orthod. l. 4. c. 14. Et quoniam spiritualis est Adam, oportuit and nativitatem
spiritualem esse, similiter and cibum. Ib. ibid.
and to their capacities: and as it would be an intolerable charity to give
nothing but spiritual nutriment to a hungry body, and pour diagrams, and wise
propositions into an empty stomach; so it would be as useless and impertinent
to feed the Soul with wheat, or flesh, unless that were the conveyance of a
spiritual delicacy.

In the holy Sacrament of the Eucharist the body of Christ, according to the
proper signification of a humane body is not at all, but in a sense differing
from the proper and natural body, that is, in a sense more agreeing to
Sacraments; so St. Hierom expressly. [ Of this sacrifice which is wonderfully
done in the commemoration of Christ we may eat, in Levit: and habetur de
consecrat: did. 2. secundum se.
but of that sacrifice which Christ offered on the altar of the Cross by it
self, or in its own nature, no man may eat] For it is his flesh which is under
the form of bread, and his blood which is in the form and taste of wine: for the
flesh is the Sacrament of flesh, and blood is the Sacrament of blood: for by
flesh and blood that is invisible, habet. de consecrat, did. 2. Epist. ad.
Iren.
spiritual, intelligible, the visible and tangible body of our Lord Jesus
Christ is consigned, full of the grace of all virtues, and of Divine Majesty.]
So St Augustine. For therefore ye are not to eat that body which ye see, nor to
drink that blood which my crucifiers shall pour out: it is the same, and not
the same; the same invisibly, but not the same visibly.] For until the world be
finished, the Lord is above, but the truth of the Lord is with us. The body in
which he rose again must be in one place, but the truth of it is every where
diffused. Ibid.
] For there is one truth of the body in the Mystery, and another truth simply
and without Mystery. It is truly Christ's body both in the Sacrament, and out of
it; vide eund. in Joha^. tract. 50.
but in the Sacrament it is not the natural truth, but the spiritual and the
mystical.

And therefore it was that our Blessed Savior, to them who apprehended him to
promise his natural body and blood for our meat and drink, spoke of his
ascension into heaven, that we might learn to look from heaven to receive the
food of our souls, heavenly and spiritual nourishment, said St. Athanasius. In
tract. verb. Quicunque dixerit verbum in filium hominis.

In Levit. c. 10. hom. 7.


For this is the letter which in the New Testament kills him who understands
not spiritually what is spoken to him, under the signification of meat and
flesh, and blood and drink: So Origin For this bread does not go into the body
(for to how many might his body suffice for meat?) but the bread of eternal
life supports the substance of our spirit; and therefore it is not touched by
the body, nor seen with the eyes, but by faith it is seen and touched: So St.
De Sacram. l. 5. c. 4. and in Luc. l. 6. c. 8.
Ambrose. And all this whole mystery has in it neither carnal sense, nor
carnal consequence, says St. In Johan. 6. hom. 47. Tract. 26. in Johan. (...).
S. Basil in Ps. 33
Chrysostom.] But to believe in Christ is to eat the bread; and therefore why
do you prepare your teeth and stomach? believe him, and you have eaten him]
they are the words of S. Austin. For faith is that intellectual mouth, as S.
Brasil calls it) which is within the man, by which he takes in nourishment.

But what need we to draw this water from the lesser cisterns? we see this
truth reflected from the spring it self, the fountains of our blessed Savior,
I am the bread of life, Joh. 6.35.
he that comes unto me shall not hunger, and he that believes on me shall not
thirst; v. 54, 56.
and again, He that eats my flesh has life abiding in him, and I will raise
him up at the last day; The plain consequent of which words is this, that
therefore this eating and drinking of Christ's flesh and blood, can only be done
by the Ministeries of life and of the spirit, which is opposed to nature, and
flesh, and death. And when we consider, that he who is not a spiritual and a
holy person does not feed upon Christ, who brings life eternal to them that
feed on him, it is apparent that our manducation must be spiritual, and
therefore so must the food; and consequently, it cannot be natural flesh,
however altered in circumstance and visibilities, and impossible or incredible
changes. For it is not in this spiritual food as it was in Manna, of which our
Fathers did eat and died; but whosoever eats this divine nutriment shall never
die. Res ipsa cujus Sacramentum est, omni homini ad vitam, nulli ad exitium
quicunque ejus particeps suerit. S. Aug tract 16. in Joh. de resur. car. c. 37.
The Sacraments indeed and symbols, the exterior part and ministeries may be
taken unto condemnation; but the food it self never. For an unworthy person
cannot feed on this food, because here to eat Christ's flesh is to do our duty,
and to be established in our title to the possession of the eternal promises.
For so Christ disposed the way of salvation, not by flesh, but by the spirit,
says Tertullian; that is, according to his own exposition, Christ is to be
desired for life, and to be devoured by hearing, to be chewed by the
understanding, and to be digested by faith; and all this is the method and
economy of heaven, which whosoever uses and abides in it, has life abiding in
him. He that in this world does any other way look for Christ, shall never find
him; and therefore, if men say, Lo here is Christ, or lo there he is in the
desert, or he is (...), in the Cupboards or Pantries where bread or flesh is
laid, believe it not: Christ's body is in heaven, and it is not upon earth: the
heavens must contain him till the time of restitution of all things, Annon
(...) hoc mysterium pronunciat [Nestorius] and irreligiose fidelium mentes in
sensus adulterinos detrudit ac humanis cogitationibus aggreditur, quae sola
pura and inexquisita fide accipiuntur. S. Cyril lib. ad Euophium anathem. 11.
and so long as we are present in the body, we are absent from the Lord.

In the mean time we can taste and see that the Lord is gracious, that he is
sweet: but Christ is so to be tasted as he is to be seen, and no otherwise; but
here we walk by faith and not by sight, and here also we live by faith, and not
by mere or only bread, but by that Word which proceeds out from God; Quod
esca est carni, hoc anim^e fides.

S. Cypr. de coen^ Dom.


that as meat is to the body, so is Christ to the soul, the food of the soul,
by which the souls of the just do live. He is the bread which came down from
heaven, the bread which was born at Bethl^hem, the house of bread, was given to
us to be the food of our souls for ever.

The meaning of which mysterious and Sacramental expressions, when they are
reduced to easy and intelligible significations, is plainly this; By Christ we
live and move and have our spiritual being in the life of grace, and in the
hopes of glory. He took our life, that we might partake of his; he gave his
life for us, that he might give life to us: He is the Author and finisher of
our faith, the beginning and perfection of our spiritual life. Every good
thought we think, we have it from him; every good word we speak, we speak it by
his spirit [ for no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost:]
and all our prayers are by the aids and communications of the spirit of Christ,
who helps our infirmities, and by unutterable groans, and unexpressible
representment of most passionate desires, makes intercession for us. In fine,
all the principles and parts, all the actions and progressions of our spiritual
life, are derivations from the Son of God, by whom we are born and nourished up
to life Eternal.

(...) apud Arabas and Hebraeos significat panem and corpus. (...). S. Chrysostom
2. Christ being the food of our souls, he is pleased to signify this food to
us by such symbols and similitudes as his present state could furnish us
withal. He had nothing about him but flesh and blood, which are like to meat
and drink; and therefore what he calls himself, saying, I am the bread of life,
he afterward calls his flesh and his blood, saying, My flesh is meat indeed,
my blood is drink indeed; that is, that you may perceive me to be indeed the
food of your souls, see, here is meat and drink for you, my flesh and my blood;
so to represent himself in a way that was nearest to our capacity, and in a
more intelligible manner; not further from a Mystery, but nearer to our manner
of understanding; and yet so involved in figure, that it is never to be drawn
nearer than a Mystery, till it comes to experience, and spiritual relish and
perception. But because we are not in darkness, but within the fringes and
circles of a bright cloud, let us search as far into it as we are guided by the
light of God, and where we are forbidden by the thicker part of the cloud, step
back and worship.

3. For we have yet one further degree of charity and manifestation of this
Mystery. The flesh of Christ is his word; the blood of Christ is his spirit;
and by believing in his word, and being assisted and conducted by his spirit,
we are nourished up to life; and so Christ is our food, so he becomes life unto
our souls.

Thus St. Pedag. 1. lib. de resur. car. (...). Eusebius. l. 3. Eccles. Theol. M.S
Prove. 9.5. Moreh. Nevouch. l. 1. c. 30.
Clemens of Alexandria, and Pedag. 1. lib. de resur. car. (...). Eusebius. l. 3.
Eccles. Theol. M.S Prove. 9.5. Moreh. Nevouch. l. 1. c. 30.
Tertullian affirm the Church in their days to have understood this Mystery,
saying, The word of God is called flesh and blood: For so the eternal wisdom of
the Father calls to every simple soul that wants understanding, come eat of
the bread and drink of the wine which I have mingled: and that we may know what
is this bread and wine, he adds, forsake the foolish and live, and go in the
way of understanding. Our life is wisdom, our food is understanding. The
Rabbis have an observation, that when ever mention is made in the Book of the
Proverbs of eating and drinking, there is meant nothing but wisdom and the Law:
and when the Doctors using the words of Scripture, say, Come and eat flesh in
which there is much fatness, they would be understood to say, Come and hear
wisdom, and learn the fear of God, in which there is great nourishment and
advantage to your souls. Thus Wisdom is called Water, and Understanding Bread,
Ecclus. 15.3.
by the son of Sirach [with the bread of understanding shall she feed him, and
give him the water of wisdom to drink.] It is by the Prophet Isaiah called
water and wine; Isa. 55.1, 2.
and the desires of righteousness are called hunger and thirst by our blessed
Savior in his Sermon on the Mount: Mat. 5.6.
And in pursuance of this mysterious truth, we find that God in his anger
threatens a famine of hearing the words of the Lord: Amos. 8.11.
when we want Gods word, we die with hunger, we want that bread on which our
souls do feed. It was an excellent Commentary which the Jewish Doctors make
upon those words of the Prophet [ with joy shall ye draw waters from the wells
of salvation] that is, Isa. 12.3.
from the choicest or wisest of the just men, a selectis justorum; a capitibus
and primariis coetus.
says Rabbi Jonathan; from the chief Ministers of Religion, the Heads of the
people, and the Rulers of the Congregation; because they preach the Word of
God, they open the wells of salvation, from the fountains of our Savior giving
drink and refreshment to all the people. Thus the Prophet Jeremy expresses his
spiritual joy, and the sense of this Mystery; Jer. 15.16.
Thy words were found and I did eat them, and thy word was unto me the joy and
rejoicing of my heart; for I am called by thy Name, O Lord God of Hosts: the
same with that of our Blessed Savior; My words are spirit, and they are life,
they give life and comfort, they refresh our souls, and feed them up to
immortality.

As the body or flesh of Christ is his Word, so the blood of Christ is his
Spirit in real effect and signification. For as the body without blood is a
dead and liveless trunck, so is the Word of God without the Spirit a dead and
ineffective Letter: and this Mystery we are taught in that incomparable Epistle
to the Hebrews: For by the blood of Christ we are sanctified; and yet that
which sanctifies us is the spirit of grace, and both these are one: For so
says the Apostle, Heb. 9.14.
the blood of Christ was offered up for us, for the purification of our
consciences from dead works; but this offering was made through the eternal
spirit; and therefore he is equally guilty and does the same impiety, he who
does d^sp^te to the spirit of Grace, 10.29.
and he who accounts the blood of the Covenant an unholy thing; for by this
spirit and by this blood we are sanctified, 13.20.
by this spirit, and by the blood of the everlasting Cov^nant, Jesus Christ
does perfect us in every good work; so that these are the same Ministry of
salvation, and but one and the same Economy of God. Thus St. Peter affirms,
That by the precious blood of Christ we are redeemed from our vain
conversation; and it is every where affirmed, that we are purified and cleansed
by the blood of Christ, and yet these are the express effects of his Spirit:
for by the spirit we mortify the deeds of the body; and we are justified and
sanctified in the name of our Lord Jesus by the spirit of our God. By which
expressions we are taught to distinguish the natural blood of Christ from the
spiritual; the blood that he gave for us, from the blood which he gives to us;
that was indeed by the spirit, but was not the same thing; but this is the
spirit of grace, and the spirit of wisdom. And therefore, as our Fathers were
made to drink into one spirit, when they drank of the water of the rock; so we
also partake of the spirit when we drink of Christ's blood, which came from the
spiritual rock when it was smitten: for thus according to the Doctrine of St.
John, the water and the blood and the spirit are one and the same glorious
purposes.

As it was with our Fathers in the beginning, so it is now with us, and so it
ever shall be, world without end: for they fed upon Christ, that is, they
believed in Christ, they expected his day, they lived upon his promises, they
lived by faith in him: and the same meat and drink is set upon our Tables: and
more than all this, as Christ is the Lamb slain from the beginning of the
world, so he shall be the food of souls in heaven, where they who are accounted
worthy shall sit down and be feasted in the eternal Supper of the Lamb:
concerning which blessedness our B. Savior says, Luke 14.15.
Blessed is he that eats bread in the Kingdom of God; for he has appointed
to his chosen ones to eat and drink, at his table in his Kingdom; plainly
teaching us, that by eating and drinking Christ, (...),
(...)
(...),
(...).
Sibyl. Erithr. Orac. Luke 22.30.
is meant in this world to live the life of the spirit, and in the other world
it is to live the life of glory: here we feed upon duty, and there we feed upon
reward: our wine is here mingled with water and with myrrh, there it is mere
and unmixt; but still it is called meat and drink, and still is meant grace and
glory, the fruits of the spirit and the joy of the spirit; that is, by Christ
we here live a spiritual life, and hereafter shall live a life eternal.

Thus are sensible things the Sacrament and representation of the spiritual and
eternal; Ea forma qua semper carnalia in figuram spiritualium antecedunt.
Tertul. de baptis.
and spiritual things are the fulfillings (...).

(...). Philo. Allegor. In ratione sacrorum par est and animae and corporis
causa, nam plerunque quae non possunt circa animam fieri, fiunt circa corpus.
Servius in illud Virgil. [vittasque resolvit] and lib. 4. In sacris quae
exhiberi non poterunt, simulabantur and erant pro veris.


of the sensible. But the consequent of these things is this; that since Christ
always was, is, and shall be the food of the faithful, and is that bread which
came down from heaven; since we eat him here, and shall eat him there, our
eating both here and there is spiritual; only the word of teaching shall be
changed into the word of glorification, and our faith into Charity; and all the
way our souls live a new life by Christ, of which, eating and drinking is the
Symbol and the Sacrament. And this is not done to make this mystery obscure,
but intelligible and easy. For so the pains of hell are expressed by fire,
which to our flesh is most painful; and the joys of God by that which brings
us greatest pleasure, by meat and drink, and the growth in grace by the natural
instruments of nutrition; and the work of the Soul by the ministeries of the
body, and the graces of God by the blessings of nature, for these we know, and
we know nothing else, and but by phantasmes and ideas of what we see and feel
we understand nothing at all.

Now this is so far from being a diminution of the glorious mystery of our
Communion, that the changing all into spirituality is the greatest increase of
blessing in the world: And when he gives us his body and his blood, he does not
fill our stomachs with good things, for of whatsoever goes in thither, it is
affirmed by the Apostle, that God will destroy both it and them, but our hearts
are to be replenished, and by receiving his spirit we receive the best thing
that God gives; not his liveless body, but his flesh with life in it, that is,
his doctrine and his spirit to imprint it, so to beget a living faith and a
lively hope that we may live and live for ever.

4. St. John having thus explicated this mystery in general, Joh. Chap. 6.
of our eating the flesh and drinking the blood of Christ; added nothing in
particular concerning any Sacraments, these being in particular instances of
the general mystery and communion with Christ. But what is the advantage we
receive by the Sacraments, besides that which we get by the other and distinct
ministeries of faith, I thus account in general.

The word and the spirit are the flesh and the blood of Christ; that is the
ground of all. Now because there are two great Sermons of the Gospel which are
the sum total and abbreviature of the whole word of God, the great messages
of the word incarnate, Christ was pleased to invest these two words with two
Sacraments, and assist those two Sacraments, as he did the whole word of God,
with the presence of his Spirit, that in them we might do more signally and
solemnly what was in the ordinary ministrations done plainly and without
extraordinary regards.

Believe and repent; is the word in Baptism, and and there solemnly consigned;
and here it is that by faith we feed on Christ: for faith as it is opposed to
works, that is, the new Covenant of faith as it is opposed to the old Covenant
of works, is the covenant of repentance; repentance is expressly included in
the new covenant, but was not in the old; but by faith in Christ we are
admitted to pardon of our sins if we repent and forsake them utterly. Now this
is the word of faith; and this is that which is called the flesh or body of
Christ, for this is that which the soul feeds on, this is that by which the
just do live; and when by the operation of the holy spirit, the waters are
reformed to a Divine Nature or efficacy, the baptized are made clean, the^ are
sanctified and presented pure and spotless unto God. This mystery Ad infantes
apud Bedam.
St. Austin rightly understood when he affirmed, that we are made partakers of
the body and blood of Christ when we are in baptism incorporated into his
body; we are baptized in the passion of our Lord, so Tingimur in passione
Domini. Tertul. l. de bapt. (...). S. Cyril. vocatbaptismum Catech. 11
Tertullian, to the same sense with that of St. Paul, we are buried with him in
baptism into his death; that is, by baptism are conveyed to us all the
effects of Christ's death; the flesh and blood of Christ crucified are in
baptism reached to us by the hand of God, by his holy spirit, and received by
the hand of man, the Ministry of a holy faith. So that it can without
difficulty be understood that as in receiving the word and the spirit
illuminating us in our first conversion, we do truly feed on the flesh and
drink the blood of Christ who is the bread that came down from heaven; so we do
it also, and do it much more in baptism, because in this, besides all that was
before, there was superadded a rite of Gods appointment. The difference is only
this; That out of the Sacrament, the spirit operates with the word in the
ministry of man; in Baptism the spirit operates with the word in the
ministry of God. For here God is the preacher, the Sacrament is Gods sign, and
by it he ministers life to us by the flesh and blood of his Son, that is, by
the death of Christ into which we are baptized.

And in the same Divine method the word and the spirit are ministered to us in
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. For as in Baptism so here also there is a
word proper to the ministry. So often as ye eat this bread, and drink this
cup, ye declare the Lords death till he come. This indeed is a word of comfort.
Christ died for our sins; that is, our repentance which was consigned in
baptism shall be to purpose; we shall be washed white and clean in the blood
of the sacrificed Lamb. This is verbum visibile; the same word read to the eye
and to the ear. Hear the word of God is made our food in a manner so near to
our understanding, that our tongues and palats feel the Metaphor and the
Sacramental signification; here faith is in triumph and exaltation: but as in
all the other ministeries Evangelical, we eat Christ by faith, here we have
faith also by eating Christ: Thus eating and drinking is faith; it is faith in
mystery, and faith in ceremony; it is faith in act, and faith in habit; it is
exercised and it is advanced; and therefore it is certain that here we eat the
flesh and drink the blood of Christ with much eminency and advantage.

The sum is this. Christ's body, his flesh, and his blood are therefore called
our meat and our drink, because by his incarnation and manifestation in the
flesh he became life unto us: So that it is mysterious indeed in the
expression, but very proper and intelligible in the event, to say that we eat
his flesh and drink his blood, since by these it is that we have and preserve
life. But because what Christ begun in his incarnation, he finished in his body
on the cross, and all the whole progression of mysteries in his body, was
still an operatory of life and spiritual being to us; the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper being a commemoration and exhibition of this death which was the
consummation of our redemption by his body and blood, does contain in it a
visible word, the word in symbol and visibility, and special manifestation.
Consonant to which Docrtine, the Fathers by an elegant expression call the
blessed Sacrament, [the extension of the Incarnation.]

So that here are two things highly to be remarked.

1. That by whatsoever way Christ is taken, out of the Sacrament, by the same
he is taken in the Sacrament: and by some ways here, more than there.

2. That the eating and drinking the consecrated symbols is but the body and
lesser part of the Sacrament: the life and the spirit, is believing greatly,
and doing all the actions of that believing, direct and consequent. So that
there are in this, two manducations, and Sacramental, and the Spiritual. That
does but declare and exercise this: and of the sacramental manducation as it is
alone, as it is a ceremony, as it does only consigne or express the internal;
it is true to affirm that it is only an act of obedience: but all the blessings
and conjugations of joy which come to a worthy Communicant proceed from that
spiritual eating of Christ, which as it is done out of the Sacrament very well,
so in it and with it, much better. For here being (as in baptism) a double
significatory of the spirit, a word, and a sign of his own appointment, it is
certain he will join in this Ministration. Here we have bread and drink, flesh
and blood, the word and the spirit, Christ in all his effects, and most
gracious communications.

This is the general account of the nature and purpose of this great mystery.
Christians are spiritual men, faith is their mouth, and wisdom is their food,
and believing is manducation, and Christ is their life, and truth is the Air
they breath, and their bread is the word of God, and Gods spirit is their
drink, and righteousness is their robe, and Gods laws are their light, and the
Apostles are their salt; and Christ is to them all in all: for we must put on
Christ, and we must eat Christ, and we must drink Christ: we must have him
within us, and we must be in him: he is our vine, and we are his branches; he
is a door, and by him we must enter; he is our shepherd, and we his sheep: Deus
meus and omnia, he is our God, and he is all things to us: that is, plainly, he
is our Redeemer, and he is our Lord: He is our Savior and our Teacher: by his
Word and by his Spirit he brings us to God and to felicities eternal, and that
is the sum of all. For greater things than these we can neither receive nor
expect: But these things are not consequent to the reception of the natural
body of Christ, which is now in heaven; but of his Word and of his Spirit,
which are therefore indeed his body and his blood, because by these we feed on
him to life eternal. Now these are indeed conveyed to us by the several
ministries of the Gospel, but especially in the Sacraments, where the Word is
preached and consigned, and the Spirit is the teacher, and the feeder, and
makes the Table full, and the Cup to overflow with blessing.

SECT. III. That in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper there are represented and
exhibited many great blessings upon the special account of that sacred
ministry, proved in General.
IN explicating the Nature of this Divine mystery in general, as I have
manifested the nature and operations and the whole ministry to be spiritual,
and that not the natural body and blood of Christ is received by the mouth, but
the word and the spirit of Christ, by faith and a spiritual hand, and upon this
account have discovered their mistake, who think the secret lies in the
outside, and suppose that we tear the natural flesh of Christ with our mouths:
So I have by consequent explicated the secret which others indefinitely and by
conjecture and zeal do speak of, and know not what to say, but resolve to speak
things great enough; it remains now that I consider for the satisfaction of
those that speak things too contemptible of these holy mysteries; who say, it
is nothing but a commemoration of Christ's death, an act of obedience, a
ceremony of memorial, but of no spiritual effect, and of no proper advantage to
the soul of the receiver. Against this, besides the preceding discourse
convincing their fancy of weakness and derogation, the consideration of the
proper excellencies of this mystery in its own separate nature will be very
useful. For now we are to consider how his natural body enters into his
economy and dispensation.

For the understanding of which are to consider that Christ besides his
Spiritual body and blood did also give us his natural, and we receive that by
the means of this. For this he gave us but once, then, when upon the Cross he
was broken for our sins; this body could die but once and it could be but at
one place at once, and Heaven was the place appointed for it, and at once all
was sufficiently effected by it which was designed in the Counsel of God. ^or
by the virtue of that death Christ is become the Author of life unto us and of
salvation; he is our Lord and our Lawgiver; but it he received all power in
heaven and earth, and by it he reconciled his Father to the world, and in
virtue of that he intercedes for us in heaven, and sends his spirit upon earth,
and feeds our souls by his word, he instructs us to wisdom and admits us to
repentance, and gives us pardon, and by means of his own appointment nourishes
us up by holiness to life eternal.

This body being carried from us into heaven; cannot be touched or tasted by us
on earth; but yet Christ left to us symbols and Sacraments of this natural
body; not to be, or to convey that natural body to us, but to do more and
better for us; to convey all the blessings and graces procured for us by the
breaking of that body, and the effusion of the blood: which blessings being
spiritual are therefore called his body spiritually, because procured by that
body which died for us; and are therefore called our food, because by them we
live a new life in the spirit, and Christ is our bread and our life, because by
him after this manner we are nourished up to life eternal. That is plainly
thus: Therefore we eat Christ's spiritual body, because he has given us his
natural body to be broken, and his natural blood to be shed, for the remission
of our sins and for the obtaining the grace and acceptability of repentance.
For by this gift, and by this death, he has obtained this favor from God,
that by faith in him and repentance from dead works, by repentance toward God
and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, we may be saved.

To this sense of the Mystery are those excellent words of the Apostle: Romans
5.10.

Col. 1.20, 21, 22.

Tit. 2.14. Heb. 2.9, 14.

Heb. 9.15 1 Pet. 1.18.

1 Pet. 2.24.

Tertul. l. 3. c. 8. contr. Marcion.


He bare our sins upon his own body on the Tree, that he might deliver us from
the present evil world, and sanctify and purge us from all pollution of flesh
and spirit, that he might destroy the works of the devil, that he might redeem
us from all iniquity, that he might purchase to himself a peculiar people,
zealous of good works, and that we being dead unto sin* might live unto
righteousness. Totum Christiani nominis and pondus and fructus, mors Christi.
All that we are, or do, or have, is produced and effected by the death of
Christ.

Now because our life depends upon his death, the ministry of this life must
relate ^o the ministry of this death; and we have nothing to glory in but the
Cross of Christ: the Word preached is nothing, but Jesus Christ crucified: and
the Sacraments are the most eminent way of declaring this word: for by Baptism
we are buried into his death, Figura est ergo praecipiens, passioni Domini esse
communicandum, and suaviter atque utiliter recondendum in memoria, quo pro
nobis caro ejus crucifixa and vulnerata sit. S. August. de doctr. Christ. l. 3.
and by the Lords Supper we are partakers of his death: we communicate with the
Lord Jesus as he is crucified; but now, since all belong to this, that Word and
that Mystery that is highest and nearest in this relation, is the principal and
chief of all the rest; and that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is so, is
evident beyond all necessity of inquiry, it being instituted in the vespers of
the Passion, it being the Sacrament of the passion, a sensible representation
of the breaking Christ's body, of the effusion of Christ's blood; it being by
Christ himself entitled to the passion, and the symbols invested with the
names of his broken body, and his blood poured forth, and the whole ministry
being a great declaration of this death of Christ, and commanded to be
continued until his second coming. Certainly by all these it appears, that this
Sacrament is the great ministry of life and salvation: here is the publication
of the great word of salvation: here is set forth most illustriously the body
and blood of Christ, the food of our souls; much more clearly than in Baptism,
much more effectually than in simple enunciation, or preaching and declaration
by words; for this preaching is to strangers and infants in Christ to produce
faith, but this Sacramental enunciation is the declaration and confession of it
by men in Christ; a glorying in it, giving praise for it, a declaring it to be
done, and owned, and accepted, and prevailing.

The consequent of these things is this, That if any Mystery, Rite or Sacrament
be effective of any spiritual blessings, then this is much more, Et tu qui
accipis panem divinae ejus substantiae in illo participas alimento. S. Ambros.
lib. 66. de sacram. Hic umbra, hic imago, illic veritas: umbra in lege, imago
in evangelio, veritas in coelestibus. Idem de offic. lib. 4. cap. 48. [si quis
vero transire potuerit ab hac umbra, veniat ad imaginem rerum, and videat
adventum Christi in carne factum, videat eum pontificem, offerentem quidem and
nunc patri hostias, and postmodum oblaturum, and intelligat haec omnia imagines
esse spiritualium rerum, and corporalibus officiis coelestia designari. Origin
in Psalm. 38. Vide eund. hom. 7. in Levit. and Epiphanium in Anchorato.
as having the prerogative and illustrious principality above every thing else
in its own kind, or of any other-kind in exterior or interior Religion: I
name them both, because as in Baptism the water alone does nothing, but the
inward cooperation with the outward oblation does save us, yet to Baptism the
Scriptures attribute the effect: so it is in this sacred solemnity, the
external act is indeed nothing but obedience, and of it self only declares
Christ's death in rite and ceremony, yet the worthy communicating of it does
indeed make us feed upon Christ, and unites him to the soul, and makes us to
become one spirit, according to the words of S. Ambrose, De sacram. l. 6.
Ideo in similitudinem quidem accipis sacramentum, sed verae naturae gratiam
virtutemque consequeris, [thou rec^iv^st the Sacrament as the similitude of
Christ's body, but thou shall receive the grace and the virtue of the true
nature.]

I shall not enter into so useless a discourse, as to inquire whether the
Sacraments confer grace by their own excellency and power with which they are
endued from above, because they who affirm they do, require so much duty on our
parts as they also do who attribute the effect to our moral disposition: but
neither one nor the other say true: for neither the external act, nor the
internal grace and morality, does effect our pardon and salvation; but the
spirit of God, who blesses the symbols, and assists the duty, makes them holy,
and this acceptable. Only they that attribute the efficacy to the Ministration
of the Sacrament, chose to magnify the immediate work of man, rather than the
immediate work of God, and prefer the external, at least in glorious
appellations, before the internal: and they that deny efficacy to the external
work, and wholly attribute the blessing and grace to the moral cooperation,
make too open a way for despisers to neglect the divine Institution, and to lay
aside or lightly esteem the Sacraments of the Church. It is in the Sacraments
as it is in the Word preached, in which not the sound, or the letters and
syllables, that is, not the material part, but the formal, the sense and the
signification, prepare the mind of the hearer to receive the impresses of the
holy spirit of God, without which all preaching and all Sacraments are
ineffectual: so does the internal and formal part, the signification and sense
of the Sacrament, dispose the spirit of the receiver the rather to admit and
entertain the grace of the spirit of God there consigned, and there exhibited,
and there collated: but neither the outward nor the inward part does effect it,
neither the Sacrament nor the moral disposition; only the spirit operates by
the Sacrament, and the Communicant receives it by his moral dispositions, by
the hand of faith. And what have we to do to inquire into the philosophy of
Sacraments? these things do not work by the methods of nature: But here the
effect is imputed to this cause, and yet can be produced without this cause,
because this cause is but a s^gn in the hand of God, by which he tells the soul
when he is willing to work.

Thus Baptism was the instrument and sign in the hands of God to confer the
holy Spirit upon believers: but the holy Ghost sometimes comes like lightning,
and will not stay the period of usual expectation; for when Cornelius had heard
St. Peter preach, he received the holy Ghost: and as sometimes the holy Ghost
was given because they had been baptized, now he and his company were to be
baptized because they had received the holy Ghost: and it is no good argument
to say, The graces of God are given to believers out of the Sacrament, ergo,
not by or in the Sacrament; but rather thus, If Gods grace overflows sometimes,
and goes without his own instruments, much more shall he give it in the use of
them: If God gives pardon without the Sacrament, then rather also with the
Sacrament: For supposing the Sacraments in their design and institution to be
nothing but signs and ceremonies, yet they cannot hinder the work of God: and
therefore holiness in the reception of them, will do more than holiness
alone: for God does nothing in vain; the Sacraments do something in the hand of
God, at least they are Gods proper and accustomed times of grace; they are his
seasons and our opportunity: when the Angel stirs the pool, when the Spirit
moves upon the waters, then there is a ministry of healing.

For consider we the nature of a Sacrament in general, and then pass on to a
particular enumeration of the blessings of this, the most excellent. When God
appointed the bow in the clouds to be a Sacrament, and the memorial of a
promise, he made it our comfort, but his own sign: Genesis 9.15.
I will remember my Covenant between me and the earth, and the waters shall be
no more a flood to d^stroy all flesh. This is but a token of the Covenant; and
yet at the appearing of it God had thoughts of truth and mercy to mankind; The
bow shall be in the cloud, and I will look upon it, that I may remember the
everlasting Covenant between me and every creature. Thus when Elisha threw the
wood into the waters of Jordan; 2 Kings 6.6. advers. Judaeos.
Sacramentum ligni, the Sacrament of the wood, Tertullian calls it; that chip
made the iron swim, not by any natural or any infused power, but that was the
Sacrament or sign at which the Divine power then passed on to effect and
emanation. When Elisha talked with the King of Israel about the war with Syria,
he commanded him to smite upon the ground, 2 Kings 13.18, 19.
and he smote thrice and stayed. This was Sacramentum victoriae, the Sacrament
of his future victory: For the man of God was wroth with him, and said, Thou
should have smitten five or six times, then thou had smitten Syria until
thou had consumed it; whereas now thou shall smite Syria but thrice. In which
it is remarkable, that though it was not that smiting that beat the Syrians,
but the ground; yet God would effect the beating of the Syrians by the
proportion of that Sacramental smiting. The Sacraments are Gods signs, Acts
22.16.

Romans 6.5. and 8.11.


the opportunities of grace and act^on Be baptized and wash away thy sins, said
Ananias to Saul: and therefore it is cal^'d the laver of regeneration and of
the ren^wing of the holy Gh^st; that is, in that Sacrament, and at that
corporal ablution, the work of the spirit is done: for although it is not that
washing of it self, yet God does so do it at that ablution, which is but the
similitude of Christ's death, that is, the Sacrament and symbolical
representation of it; that to that very similitude a very glorious effect is
imputed, for if we have been planted together in the LIKENESS of his death,
Romans 6.5.
we shall be also in the LIKENESS of his Resurrection. For the mystery is this:
by immersion in Baptism, and emersion, we are configured to Christ's Burial, and
to his Resurrection: that is the outward part; to which if we add the inward,
which is there intended, and is expressed by the Apostle in the following
words; v. 6.
knowing that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be
destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin; that is our spiritual death,
which answers to our configuration with the death of Christ in Baptism; v. 4.
that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father,
even so we also should walk in n^wness of life; there is the correspondent of
our configuration to the resurrection of Christ: that is if we do that duty of
Baptism, we shall receive that grace: God offers us the mercy at that time,
when we promise the duty, and do our present portion. 1 Pet. 3.16.
This St. Peter calls the stipulation of a good conscience, the postulate and
bargain which man then makes with God, who promises us pardon and immortality,
resurrection from the dead, and life eternal, if we repent toward God, and have
faith in the Lord Jesus, and if we promise we have and will so abide.

The same is the case in the other most glorious Sacrament: it is the same
thing in nearer representation: only what is begun in Baptism, proceeds on to
perfection in the holy Communion. Et institutio paria, and significatio
similia, and finis facit aequalia, S. August. apud Bedam in 1 Cor. 10.

So Cyril, Hierom. catech. 2.


Baptism is the antitype of the passion of Christ; and the Lords Supper (...),
that also represents Christ's passion: Baptism is the union of the members of
Christ and the admission of them under one head into one body: as the Apostle
affirms we are all baptized into one body; 1 Cor. 12.13.

1 Cor. 10.16.17.


and so it is in the Communion, the bread which we break, it is the communion
of the body of Christ; for we being many, are one body and one bread: in
baptism we partake of the death of Christ: and in the Lords Supper we do the
same, in that as Babes, in this as men in Christ; so that what effects are
affirmed of one, the same are in greater measure true of the other; they are
but several rounds of Jacobs ladder reaching up to heaven upon which the Angels
ascend and descend; and the Lord sits upon the top.

And because the Sacraments Evangelical be of the like kind of mystery with the
Sacraments of old; from them we can understand, that even signs of secret
graces, do exhibit as well as signify: for besides that there is a natural
analogy between the ablution of the body and the purification of the soul,
between eating the holy bread and drinking the sacred calice, and a
participation of the body and blood of Christ, it is also in the method of the
divine economy; to dispense the grace which himself signifies in a ceremony of
his own institution; thus at the Unction of Kings, Priests and of Prophets, the
sacred power was bestowed, and as a Canon is invested in his dignity by the
tradition of a book, Sermon. de coena Dui.
and an Abbat by his staff, a Bishop by a ring (they are the words of St.
Bernard:) so are divisions of graces imparted to the diverse Sacraments. And
therefore although it ought not to be denied, that when in Scripture and the
writings of the holy Doctors of the Church, the collation of grace is
attributed to the s^gn, it is by a metonymy and a Sacramental manner of
speaking, yet it is also a synecdoche of the part for the whole; because both
the Sacrament and the grace are joined in the lawful and holy use of them, by
Sacramental union, or rather by a confederation of the parts of the holy
Covenant. Our hearts are purified by faith, and so our consciences are also
made clean in the cestern of water. By faith we are saved; Acts 15.9.
and yet he has sav^d us by the laver of regeneration, Ephesians. 5.26.

Romans 3.28.

Luke 7.50. Tit. 3.5. Ephesians. 5.26.


and they are both joined together by St. Paul, Christ gave himself for his
Church, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the
word: that is, plainly by the Sacrament, according to the famous Commentary of
St. Austin, accedat verbum ad elementum and tum fit sacramentum, when the word
and the element are joined, then it is a perfect Sacrament, and then it does
effect all its purposes and intentions. Thus we find that the grace of God is
given by the imposition of hands; 2 Timothy 1.6 lib. 15. de Trinit. cap. 26.
and yet as Austin rightly affirms, God alone can give his holy spirit, and
the Apostles did not give the holy Ghost to them upon whom they laid their
hands, but prayed that God would give it, and he did so at the imposition of
their hands. Act. 8.18.
Thus God sanctified Aaron, and yet he said to Moses, thou shall sanctify
Aaron: that is, not that Moses did it instead of God, but Moses did it by his
ministry, St. Aug. lib. 3. in Levit. pu. 84.
and by visible Sacraments and rites of Gods appointment, and though we are
born of an immortal seed, by the word of the living God, yet St. Paul said to
the Corinthians, I have begotten you through the Gos^el, and thus it is in the
greatest as well as in the least, he that drinks Christ's blood, and eats his
body has life abiding in him, it is true of the ^acrament and true of the
spiritual manducation and may be indifferently affirmed of either, when the
other is not excluded, for as the Sacrament operates only by the virtue of the
spirit of God; so the spirit ordinarily works by the instrumentality of the
Sacraments. And we may as well say, that faith is not by hearing, as that grace
is not by the Sacraments, for as without the spirit, the word is but a dead
letter, so with the spirit, the Sacrament is the means of life and grace: And
the meditation of St. Chrysostom is very pious and reasonable, If we were
wholly incorporeal, God would have given us graces unclothed with signs and
Sacraments, but because our spirits are in earthen vessels, God conveyes his
graces to us by sensible ministrations.] The word of God operates as secretly
as the Sacraments, and the Sacraments as powerfully as the word, nay the word
is always joined in the worthy administration of the Sacrament, which
therefore operates both as word and sign by the ear and by the eyes and by both
in the hand of God, and the conduct of the spirit, effect all that God intends,
and that a faithful receiver can require and pray for.

For justification and sanctification are continued acts: they are like the
issues of a Fountain into its receptacles, God is always giving, and we are
always receiving, and the signal effects of Gods holy spirit, sometimes give
great indications, but most commonly come without observation, and therefore in
these things we must not discourse as in the conduct of other causes and
operations natural: for although in natural effects, we can argue from the
cause to the event, yet in spiritual things we are to reckon only from the sign
to the event. And the signs of grace we are to place in stead of natural
causes, because a Sacrament in the hand of God, is a proclamation of his
graces, he then gives us notice that the springs of heaven are opened: and then
is the time to draw living waters from the fountains of salvation. When
Jonathan shot his arrows beyond the boy, he then by a Sacrament sent salvation
unto David; he bad him be gone and fly from his Fathers wrath; and although
Jonathan did do his business for him by a continual care and observation, yet
that symbol brought it unto David; for so are we conducted to the joys of God
by the methods and possibilities of men.

In conclusion; the sum is this, The Sacraments and symbols if they be
considered in their own nature, are just such as they seem, water, and bread,
and wine; they retain the names proper to their own natures; but because they
are made to be signs of a secret mystery; and water is the symbol of
purification of the soul from sin, and bread and wine, of Christ's body and
blood; therefore the symbols and Sacraments receive the names of what
themselves do sign; S. Austin. in Levit. q. 57. solet autem res quae
significat, ejus rei nomine quam significat, nuncupari.

Theodoret. dial. 1. c. 8. (...).


they are the body and they are the blood of Christ; they are Metonymically
such. But because yet further, they are instruments of grace in the hand of
God, and by these his holy spirit changes our hearts and translates us into a
Divine nature; therefore the whole work is attributed to them; by a Synecdoche;
that is, they do in their manner the work for which God ordained them, and they
are placed there for our sakes, and speak Gods language in our accent, and they
appear in the outside; we receive the benefit of their ministry, and God
receives the glory.

SECT. IV. The blessings and Graces of the Holy Sacrament enumerated and proved
particularly.
IN the reception of the blessed Sacrament; there are many blessings which
proceed from our own actions, the conjugations of moral duties, the offices of
preparation and reception, the reverence and the devotion; of which I shall
give account in the following Chapters; here I am to enumerate those graces
which are intended to descend upon us from the spirit of God in the use of the
Sacrament it self precisely.

But first I consider that it must be infinitely certain that great spiritual
blessings are consequent to the worthy receiving this Divine Sacrament; because
it is not at all received but by a spiritual hand: for it is either to be
understood in a carnal sense that Christ's body is there eaten, or in a
spiritual sense. If in a carnal, it profits nothing. If in a spiritual he be
eaten, let the meaning of that be considered, and it will convince us that
innumerable blessings are in the very reception and Communion. Now what the
meaning of this spiritual eating is; I have already declared in this chapter,
and shall yet more fully explicate in the sequel. Chap. 3. Sect. 5.
In the Sacrament we do not receive Christ carnally; but we receive him
spiritually; and that of it self is a conjugation of blessings and spiritual
graces. The very understanding what we do, tells us also what we receive. But I
descend to particulars.

1. And first I reckon that the Sacrament is intended to increase our faith:
for although it is with us in this Holy Sacrament, as it was with Abraham in
the Sacrament of circumcision; he had the grace of faith before he was
circumcised; and received the Sacrament after he had the purpose and the grace;
and we are to believe, before we receive these symbols of Christ death; yet as
by loving we love more, and by the acts of patience we increase in the spirit
of mortification; so by believing we believe more; and by publication Ante
communicationem corporis Christi and sanguinis, juxta Orientalium partium
morem, unanimiter clara voce sacratissimum fidei recenseant Symbolum, ut primum
populi quam credulitatem teneant, fateantur. Council. Tolet. 3. c. 2. and St.
Ambros. quibus [symbolis] vescentes confessionem fidei suae addebant:
respondebant. Amen. Idem etiam sancitum in Council. Agath.
of our confession we are made confident, and by seeing the signs of what we
believe, our very senses are incorporated into the article; and he that has
shall have more, and when we concorporate the sign with the signification, we
conjoyn the word and the spirit, and faith passes on from believing to an
imaginary seeing; and from thence to a greater earnestness of believing, and we
shall believe more abundantly; this increase of faith not being only a natural
and proper production of the exercise of its own acts; but a blessing and an
effect of the grace of God in that Sacrament; it being certain, that since the
Sacrament being of Divine institution it could not be to no purpose ( for in
spiritualibus Sacramentis ubi praecipit virtus, Eusebius. Emiss. habetur de
consecrat did. 2.
servit effectus, where the commandment comes from him that has all power, the
action cannot be destitute of an excellent event) and therefore that the
representing of the death of Christ being an act of faith, and commanded by God
must needs in the hands of God be more effectual than it is in its own nature;
that faith shall then increase not only by the way of nature, but by Gods
blessing his own instruments, can never be denied but by them that neither have
faith nor experience. For this is the proper scene and the very exaltation of
faith: the Latin Church for a long time into the very words of consecration of
the calice, has put words relating to this purpose, [ For this is the cup of
my blood of the New and Eternal Testament, the mystery of faith, which for you
and for many shall be shed for the remission of sins.] And if by faith we eat
the flesh of Christ; as it is confessed by all the Schools of Christians, then
it is certain, that when so manifestly and solemnly according to the divine
appointment we publish this great confession of the death of Christ, we do in
all senses of spiritual blessing eat the flesh and drink the blood of Christ;
and let that be expounded how we list, we are not in this world capable, and we
do not need a greater blessing and God may s^y in the words of Isaac to his son
Esau, with corn and wine have I sustained [thee] and what is there left that I
can do unto thee my son? To eat the flesh and to drink the blood of Christ
Sacramentally is an act of faith, and every act of faith joined with the
Sacrament does grow by the nature of grace, and the measures of a blessing, and
therefore is eating of Christ spiritually, and this reflection of acts like
circles of a glorious and eternal fire, passes on in the univocal production of
its own parts till it pass from grace to glory.

2. Of the same consideration it is, that all the graces which we do exercise
by the nature of the Sacrament requiring them, or by the necessity of the
commandment of preparation, do here receive increase upon the account of the
same reason; but I instance only in that of Charity, of which this is signally
and by an especial remark the Sacrament: and therefore these holy conventions
are called by St. Jude, feasts of charity, Jude 12.
which were Christian Festivals, in which also they had the Sacrament adjoined;
but whether that do effect this persuasion or no, yet the thing it self is
dogmatically affirmed in St. Paul's explication of that mystery, (...).

Corpus sumus de conscientia Religionis, and disciplinae unitate, and spei
foedere. Coimus ad Deum quasi manu facta pre^ptionibus ambiamus. Haec vis Deo
grata est Tertul. apol. cap. 39. Idem ad verse. haeret. cap. 20. ait Sacramentum
esse contesserationem mutuae dilectionis in membris Ecclesiae inter se.


we are one body because we partake of one bread; that is, plainly, Christ is
our head, and we the members of his body, and are united in this mystical union
by the holy Sacrament; not only because it symbolically does teach our duty,
and promotes the grace of charity by a real signature, and a sensible Sermon;
nor yet only because it calls upon Christians by the public Sermons of the
Gospel, and the duties of preparation, and the usual expectations of conscience
and Religion; but even by the blessing of God, and the operation of the holy
Spirit in the Sacrament, which (as appears plainly by the words of the Apostle)
is designed to this very end, to be a reconciler and an atonement in the hand
of God, a band of charity, and the instrument of Christian Communion; that we
may be one body, because we partake of one bread; that is, we may be mystically
united by the Sacramental participation: and therefore it was not without
mystery, that the Congregation of all Christ servants, his Church, and this
Sacramental bread, are both in Scripture called by the same name: This bread is
the body of Christ, and the Church is Christ's body too; for by the communion of
this bread all faithful people are confederated into one body, the body of our
Lord. Now it is to be observed, that although the expression is tropical (...).
Isid. Pelusiot.
and figurative, that we are made one body, because it is meant in a spiritual
sense; yet that spiritual sense means the most real event in the world; we are
really joined to one common Divine principle, Jesus Christ our Lord, and from
him we do communicate in all the blessings of his grace, and the fruits of his
passion, and we shall, if we abide in this union, be all one body of a
spiritual Church in heaven, there to reign with Christ for ever. Now unless we
think nothing Good but what goes in at our eyes or mouth; if we think there is
any thing good beyond what our senses perceive, we must confess this to be a
real and eminent benefit; and yet whatever it be, it is therefore effected upon
us by this Sacrament, because we eat of one bread. The very repeating the words
of St. Paul is a satisfaction in this inquiry; they are plain and easy, and
whatever interpretation can be put upon them, it can only vary the manner of
effecting the blessing, and the way of the Sacramental efficacy; but it cannot
evacuate the blessing, or confute the thing: Only it is to be observed in this,
as in all other instances of the like nature, that the grace of God in the
Sacrament usually is a blessing upon our endeavors, for spiritual graces and
the blessings of sanctification do not grow like grass, but like corn; not
whether we do any husbandry or no, but if we cultivate the ground, then by Gods
blessing the fruits will spring and make the Farmer rich, if we be disposed to
receive the Sacrament worthily, we shall receive this fruit also. Which fruit
is thus expressed, saying, Sermon. 8. ad fratres in erem. Hoc Sacramentum ideo
nobis datum est ut corpus Ecclesiae Christi in terris cum capite quod est in
coelis coadunetur] Itaque petendo panem nostrum quotidianum perpetuitatem
postulamus in Christo, and individuitatem a corpore ejus. Tertul. de orat. Et
ideo panem nostrum, i.e. Christum dari nobis quotidie petimus, ut qui in
Christo manemus, a sanctificatione ejus and corpore non ^ecedamus St. Cyprian
de orat. Domin.
[this Sacrament is therefore given unto us that the body of the Church of
Christ in the earth may be joined, or united with our head which is in the
heavens.]

3. The blessed Sacrament is of great efficacy for the remission of sins; not
that it has any formal efficacy, or any inherent virtue to procure pardon, but
that it is the ministry of the death of Christ and the application of his
blood, which blood was shed for the remission of sins, and is the great means
of impetration, and as the Schools use to speak, is the meritorious cause of
it. For there are but two ways of applying the death of Christ: an internal
grace and an external ministry. Faith is the inward applicatory, and if there
be any outward at all, it must be the Sacraments; and both of them are of
remarkable virtue in this particular; for by baptism we are baptized into the
death of Christ, and the Lords supper is an appointed enunciation and
declaration of Christ's death, and it is a Sacramental participation of it. Now
to partake of it Sacramentally, is by Sacrament to receive it, that is, so to
apply it to us, as that can be applied: it brings it to our spirit, it
propounds it to our faith, it represents it as the matter of Eucharist, it
gives it as meat and drink to our souls, and rejoices in it in that very
formality in which it does receive it, viz, as broken for, as shed for the
remission of our sins. Now then what can any man suppose a Sacrament to be, and
what can be meant by sacramental participation? for unless the Sacraments do
communicate what they relate to; they are no communion or communication at all;
for it is true that our mouth eats the material signs; but at the same time,
faith eats too, and therefore must eat, that is, must partake of the thing
signified; faith is not maintained by ceremonies: the body receives the body of
the mystery; we eat and drink the symbols with our mouths, but faith is not
corporeal, but feeds upon the mystery it self; it entertains the grace, and
enters into that secret which the spirit of God conveyes under the signature.
Now since the mystery is perfectly and openly expressed to be the remission of
sins; if the soul does the work of the soul, as the body the work of the body,
the soul receives remission of sins, as the body does the symbols of it and the
Sacrament.

But we must be infinitely careful to remember that even the death of Christ
brings no pardon to the impenitent persevering sinner; but to him that repents
truly, and so does the Sacrament Qui scel erate vivunt in Ecclesia, and
communicare non desinunt putantes setali communione mundari, discant nihil ad
emundationem proficere dicente propheta, quid est quod dilectus meus facit in
domo mea scelera multa? nunquid carnes sanctae auferent a te malitias tuas?
Jer. 11.15. Isidor. Hispal. de summo bono lib. 1. cap. 24.
of Christ's death; this can do no more than that: and therefore let no man come
with his guilt about him, and in the heat and in the affections of his sin, and
hope to find his pardon by this ministry. He that thinks so will but deceive,
will but ruin himself. They are excellent but very severe words, which God
spoke to the Jews, and which are a prophetical reproof of all unworthy
Communicants in these divine mysteries, What has my beloved to do in my house
seeing she has wrought l^wdness with many? The holy flesh has passed from
thee when thou do evil, that is, this holy sacrifice, the flesh and blood of
thy Lord shall slip from thee without doing thee any good, if thou have not
ceased from doing evil. But the vulgar Latin reads these words much more
emphatically to our purpose, Shall the holy flesh take from thee thy wickedness
in which thou rejoycest? Deceive not thy self; thou have no part nor portion in
this matter. For the holy Sacrament operates indeed and consigns our pardon,
but not alone; but in conjunction with all that Christ requires as conditions
of pardon; but when the conditions are present, the Sacrament ministers pardon,
as pardon is ministered in this world; that is, by parts, and in order to
several purposes, and with power of revocation, by suspending the Divine wrath,
by procuring more graces, by obtaining time of repentance; and powers and
possibilities of working out our salvation; and by setting forward the method
and Economy of our salvation. For in the usual methods of God, pardon of sins
is proportionable to our repentance; which because it is all that state of
Piety we have in this whole life after our first sin; pardon of sins is all
that effect of grace which is consequent to that repentance; and the worthy
receiving of the holy Communion, is but one conjugation of holy actions and
parts of repentance, but indeed it is the best and the noblest, and such in
which man does best cooperate toward pardon, and the grace of God does the
most illustriously consign it. But of these particulars I shall give full
account when I shall discourse of the preparations of repentance.

4. It is the greatest solemnity of prayer, the most powerful Liturgy and means
of impetration in this world. For when Christ was consecrated on the cross and
became our High Priest, (...), etc.
having reconciled us to God by the death of the cross, he became infinitely
gracious in the eyes of God, and was admitted to the celestial and eternal
Priesthood in heaven; where in the virtue of the cross he intercedes for us,
and represents an eternal sacrifice in the heavens on our behalf. That he is a
Priest in heaven appears in the large discourses and direct affirmatives of St.
Paul; that there is no other sacrifice to be offered, Heb. 7.24.
but that on the cross; it is evident, because he has but once appeared in
the end of the world to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself; and therefore
since it is necessa^y that he has something to offer so long as he is a
Priest, and there is no other sacrifice but that of himself offered upon the
cross; Heb. 8.3.
it follows that Christ in heaven perpetually offers and represents that
sacrifice to his heavenly Father, and in virtue of that obtains all good things
for his Church.

Now what Christ does in heaven he has commanded us to do on earth, that is,
to represent his death, Nonne semel immolatus est Christus in seipso? and tamen
in Sacramento non solum per omnes paschae solennitates, sed omni die populis
immolatur. Nec utique mentitur qui interrogatus, eum responderit immolari: si
enim Sacramenta quandam similitudinem earum rerum quarum Sacramenta sunt non
haberent, omnino Sacramenta non essent St. Aug. Epist. ad Bonifac. 23. Quia
corpus assumptum ablaturus erat ab oculis, and illaturus syderibus, necessarium
erat ut die coenae Sacramentum nobis corporis and sanguinis consecraretur, ut
coleretur jugiter per mysterium quod semel offerebatur in precium, ut quia
quotidiana and indefessa currebat pro omnium salute redemptio, perpetua esset
redemptionis oblatio, and perennis victima illa viveret in memoria, and semper
praesens esset in gratia, vera unica, and perfecta hostia, fide aestimanda non
specie, neque exteriori censenda visu sed interiore affectu. Unde coelestis
confirmat authoritas, quia caro mea vere est cibus, and sanguis meus vere est
potus. Recedat ergo omne infidelitatis ambiguum quoniam qui author est muneris,
idem testis est veritatis. Eusebius. Emiss. and habetur de consecrat. did. 2.
to commemorate this sacrifice, by humble prayer and thankful record; and by
faithful manifestation and joyful Eucharist to lay it before the eyes of our
heavenly Father, so ministering in his Priesthood, and doing according to his
commandment and his example; the Church being the image of heaven, the Priest
the Minister of Christ, the holy Table being a Copy of the celestial altar; and
the eternal sacrifice of the Lamb slain from the beginning of the World, being
always the same; it bleeds no more after the finishing of it on the Cross;
but it is wonderfully represented in heaven, and graciously represented here;
by Christ's action there, by his commandment here; and the event of it is
plainly this, that as Christ in virtue of his sacrifice on the cross
intercedes for us with his Father; so does the Minister of Christ's Priesthood
here, that the virtue of the eternal sacrifice may be salutary and effectual to
all the needs of the Church both for things temporal, and eternal: and
therefore it was not without great mystery and clear signification that our
blessed Lord was pleased to command the representation of his death and
sacrifice on the cross should be made by breaking bread and effusion of wine;
to signify to us the nature and sacredness of the Liturgy we are about, and
that we minister in the Priesthood of Christ; who is a Priest for ever after
the order of Melchisedeck; that is, we are Ministers in that unchangable
Priesthood imitating in the external Ministry, the prototype Melchisedeck: Of
whom it is said, Non sine mysterio, sine re, vel panis ad aram,
Vel vinum fertur cui superaddis aquam.
Utraque sub typico ritu, formaque futuri,
Melchisedec Domino sacrificasse serunt.
Hildebert. Cenoman. Melchisedec Domino panem vinumque litavit,
Christus idem faciens, pactum vetus evacuavit.
Hugo Card. -- Rex ille Salem, qui munere tali,
Mystica praemisit summi libamina Christi.
Claud. Marian victor. lib. 3. in Genes.
he brought forth bread and wine and was the Priest of the most high God; and
in the internal imitating the antitype or the substance, Christ himself; who
offered up his body and blood for atonement for us, and by the Sacraments of
bread and wine, and the prayers of oblation and intercession commands us to
officiate in his Priesthood, in the external ministering like Melchisedeck; in
the internal after the manner of Christ himself.

This is a great and a mysterious truth, which as it is plainly manifested in
the Epistle to the Hebrews, so it is understood by the ancient and holy Doctors
of the Church. So St. Ambrose. [Now Christ is offered, but he is offered as a
man, as if he received his passion; but he offers himself as a Priest, that he
may pardon our sins; here in image or representation, there in truth, as an
Advocate interceding with his Father for us.] So St. Chrysostom; In Christ once
the Sacrifice was offered, which is powerful to our eternal salvation; but what
then do we? do not we offer every day? what we daily offer is at the memorial
of his death, and the Sacrifice is one, not many; because Christ was once
offered: but this Sacrifice is the example or representation of that. And
another: Christ is not impiously slain by us, but piously sacrificed; and by
this means we declare the Lords death till he come: for here through him we
humbly do in earth, which he as a son who is heard according to his reverence,
does powerfully for us in heaven, where as an advocate he intercedes with his
Father, whose office or work it is; for us to exhibit and interpose his flesh
which he took of us and for us, and as it were to press it upon his Father. To
the same sense is the meditation of St. Austin: By this he is the Priest and
the Oblation, the Sacrament of which he would have the daily Sacrifice of the
Church to be; which because it is the body of that head, she learns from him to
offer her self to God by him, who offered himself to God for her. And therefore
this whole Office is called by St. Basil, (...), the prayer of oblation, the
great Christian Sacrifice and Oblation in which we present our prayers and the
needs of our selves and of our brethren unto God in virtue of the great
Sacrifice, Christ upon the Cross, whose memorial we then celebrate in a divine
manner, by divine appointment.

The effect of this I represent in the words of Lyra: [That which does purge
and cleanse our sins must be celestial and spiritual, and that which is such
has a perpetual efficacy, and needs not to be done again; but that which is
daily offered in the Church, is a daily commemoration of that one Sacrifice
which was offered on the Cross, according to the command of Christ, Do this in
commemoration of me.]

Now this holy Ministry and Sacrament of this death, being according to Christ's
commandment and in our manner a representation of the eternal Sacrifice, an
imitation of Christ's intercession in heaven in virtue of that Sacrifice, must
be after the pattern in the Mount, it must be as that is, pur a prece, as
Tertullians phrase, is by pure prayer; it is an intercession for the whole
Church present and absent in the virtue of that Sacrifice. I need add no more,
but leave it to the meditation, to the joy and admiration of all Christian
people to think, and to enumerate the blessings of this Sacrament, which is so
excellent a representation of Christ's death, by Christ's commandment; and so
glorious an imitation of that intercession which Christ makes in heaven for us
all; it is all but the representment of his death, in the way of prayer and
interpellation; Christ as head, and we as members; he as High Priest, and we
servants as his Ministers: and therefore I shall stop here, and leave the rest
for wonder and Eucharist: we may pray here with all the solemnity and
advantages imaginable; we may with hope and comfort use the words of David, I
will take the cup of salvation, Psalm. 116.
and call upon the name of the Lord: we are here very likely to prevail for all
blessings, Hinc ergo pensemus quale sit hoc sacramentum, quod pro absolutione
nostra passionem unigeniti filii imitetur. Quis n. fidelium habere dubium
posset in ipsa immolationis hora ad Sacerdotis vo^^m coelos aperiri, in illo
Jesu Christi mysterio angelorum choros ^^lesse: S. Gregor. in homil. Paschali.
for this is by way of eminency, glory, and singularity, Calix benedictionis,
the cup of blessing which we bless, and by which God will bless us, and for
which he is to be blessed for evermore.

5. By the means of this Sacrament our bodies are made capable of the
resurrection to life and eternal glory. For when we are externally and
symbolically in the Sacrament, and by faith and the spirit of God internally
united to Christ, and made partakers of his body and his blood, we are joined
and made one with him who did rise again; and when the head is risen, the
members shall not see corruption for ever, but rise again after the pattern of
our Lord. If by the Sacrament we are really united and made one with Christ,
then it shall be to us in our proportion as it was to him; we shall rise again,
and we shall enter into glory. But it is certain we are united to Christ by it;
we eat his body and drink his blood Sacramentally by our mouths, and therefore
really and spiritually by our spirits and by spiritual actions cooperating.
Humana enim caro quae erat peccato mortua, carni^ mundae unita, incorporata,
unum cum illa effecta, vivit de spiritu ejus, sicut unum corpus de suo spiritu,
St. Aug. Epist. ad Iren.

Condescendens Deus nostris fragilitatibus, influit oblatis vim vitae
convertens ea in veritatem propriae carnis, ut corpus vitae quasi quoddam semen
vivificativum inveniatur in nobis. 8. Cyril. ad Calosyrium.

St. Cyril. l. 11. in Johan. c. 26. Christus suo corpore per communionem
mysticam benedicens credentibus and secum and inter nos unum corpus efficit. de
Trinit. lib. 8.


For what good will it do us to partake of his body, if we do not also partake
of his spirit? but certain it is, if we do one, we do both; cum naturalis per
sacramentum proprietas perfectae sacramentum sit unitatis, as St. Hilaries
expression is; the natural propriety, viz the outward elements by the
Sacrament, that is, by the institution and blessing of God, become the
Sacrament of a perfect unity, which beside all the premises is distinctly
affirmed in the words of the Apostle; we which are sanctified, and he which
sanctifies are all of one; and again, the bread which we break, is it not the
communication of the body of Christ; and the cup which we drink is it not the
communication of the blood of Christ? plainly saying, that by this holy
ministry we are joined and partake of Christ's body and blood, and then we
become spiritually one body, and therefore shall receive in our bodies all the
effects of that spiritual union; the chief of which in relation to our bodies,
is resurrection from the grave. And this is expressly taught by the Ancient
Church. So St. Irenaeus teaches us. As the bread which grows from the earth,
Lib. 4. c. 34. St. Clem. Alex. lib. 2. paedag. c. 2. Bibere Jesu sanguinem est
participem esse incorruptionis Domini. lib. 5.
receiving the calling of God, (that is, blessed by prayer and the word of God)
is not now common bread, but the Eucharist, consisting of two things, an
earthly, and an heavenly: so also our bodies receiving the Eucharist, are not
now corruptible, but have the hope of resurrection. And again, when the mingled
calice and the made bread receives the word of God viz. is consecrated and
blessed, it is made the Eucharist of the body and blood of Christ out of those
things by which our body is nourished, and our substance does consist: and how
shall any one deny that the flesh is capable of the gift of God, which is
eternal life, which is nourished by the body and blood of Christ? (...), Epist.
ad Ephesians. (...).
And St. Ignatius calls the blessed Eucharist (...); the medicine of
immortallity, for the drink is his blood who is (...), incorruptible love and
eternal life (...), so the Fathers of the Nicene Council; the symbols of our
resurrection, the meat nourishing to immortallity and eternal life, so Cyril of
Alexandria; for this is to drink the blood of Jesus, to be partakers of the
Lords incorruptibility, said St. Clement. For bread is food, and blood is life;
but we drink the blood of Christ, himself commanding us that together with him,
we may by him be partakers of eternal life; So St. Cyprian, aut quicunque sit
author Sermon. de coena Domini.

6. Because this is a ministry of grace by bodily ceremonies, and conveys
spiritual blessings by temporal ministrations; there is something also of
temporal regard directly provided for our bodies by the holy Sacrament. It
sometimes is a means in the hand of God for the restoring and preserving
respectively of our bodily health, and secular advantages: I will not insist
upon that of St. Gorgonia* who being oppressed with a violent headache, threw
her self down before the holy Table where the Sacrament was placed, and prayed
with passion and pertinacy till she obtained relief and ease in that very
place: Nor that of St. Ambrose, who having trod upon a Gentleman's foot
afflicted with the gout, in the time of ministration, gave him the holy smbols,
and told him it was good for his sickness also, and that he presently found
his cure. I my self knew a person of great sanctity, who was afflicted to
deaths door with a vomiting, and preparing her self to death by her viaticum
the holy Sacrament, to which she always bore a great reverence, she was
infinitely desirous and yet equally fearful to receive it, lest she should
reject that by her infirmity which in her spirit she passionately longed for;
but her desire was the greater passion, and prevailed; she received it, and
swallowed it, and after great and earnest reluctance being forced to cast it
up, in zeal and with a new passion took it in again, and then retained it, and
from that instant speedily recovered, against the hope of her Physician, and
the expectation of all her friends. God does miracles every day; and he who
with spittle and clay cured the blind man's eyes, may well be supposed to
glorify himself by the extraordinary contingences and Sacramental contacts of
his own body. But that which is most famous and remarked is, that the Austrian
Family do attribute the rise of their House to the present Grandeur, to W^lliam
Earl of Hasburgh, and do acknowledge it to be a reward of his piety in the
venerable treatment and usage of these Divine mysteries. It were easier to heap
together many rare contingences and miraculous effects of the holy Sacrament,
than to find faith to believe them now-adayes; and therefore for this whole
affair I rely upon the words of Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 11.26.
affirming that God sent sicknesses and sundry kinds of death to punish the
Corinthian irreverent treatment of the Blessed Sacrament; and therefore it is
not to be deemed, but that life and health will be the consequent of our holy
usages of it: for if by our fault it is a savor of death; it is certain, by
the blessing and intention of God it is a favor of life. But of these things
in particular we have no promise, and therefore such events as these cannot
upon this account of faith and certain expectations be designed by us in our
communions. If God please to send any of them, as sometimes he has done, it is
to promote his own glory and our value of the Blessed Sacrament the great
ministry of salvation. Haec sumpta and hausta faciunt ut nos in Christo and
Christus in nobis sit. lib. 8. de Trinit. habetur de consecrat. did.


7. The sum of all I represent in these few words of St. Hilary. These holy
mysteries being taken, cause that Christ shall be in us, and we in Christ; and
if this be more than words; we need no further inquiry into the particulars of
blessing consequent to a worthy communion, for if God has given his Son unto
us, how shall not he with him give us all things else? nay all things that we
need are effected by this, said St. Clement of Alexandria, one of the most
ancient Fathers of the Church of Christ: Eucharistia qui per fidem sunt
participes, lib. 2. paed. c. 2.
sanctifi^antur and corpore and anima: They who by faith are partakers of the
Eucharist are sanctified both in body and in soul.

Font renascentes membris and sanguine Christi
Vescimur, atque ideo templum Deitatis habemur.
Sedul. How great therefore and how illustrious benefits (it is the meditation
of St. Eusebius Emissenus) does the power of the Divine blessing produce? you
ought not to esteem it strange and impossible; for how earthly and mortal
things are converted into the substance of Christ, ask thy self, who art
regenerated in Christ: Not long since, thou wast a stranger from life, a
pilgrim and wanderer from mercy, and being inwardly dead thou were banished
from the way of life. On a sudden being initiated in the laws of Christ, and
renewed by the Mysteries of Salvation, thou did pass suddenly into the body
of the Church not by seeing, but by believing, and from a son of perdition,
thou have obtained to be adopted a son of God by a secret purity: remaining in
a visible measure, thou art invisibly made greater than thy self, without any
increase of quantity, thou art the same thou were, and yet very much another
person in the progression of Faith, to the outward nothing is added, but the
inward is wholly changed, and so a man is made the son of Christ, and Christ is
formed in the mind of a man. As therefore suddenly without any bodily
perception, the former vileness being laid down, on the sudden thou have put on
a new dignity, and this that God has done, that he has cured thy wounds,
washed off thy stains, wiped away thy spots, is trusted to thy discerning, not
thy eyes: so when thou ascendest the reverend altar to be satisfied with
spiritual food, by faith regard, honor, admire the holy body of God, touch it
with thy mind, take it with the hand of thy heart even with the draught of the
whole inward man:

SECT. V. Practical conclusions from the preceding Discourses.
THe first I represent in the words of St. Augustine, Tract. 17. in Johan.
Contenti sint ad venera^ionem figuris defendentibus a vilitate secretam.
Macrob. in somn. Scip. l. 1. c. 2.
who reduces this whole doctrine to practice in these excellent words [let this
whole affair thus far prevail with us that we may eat the flesh, [and drink]
the blood of Christ, not only in the Sacrament, which many evil persons do;
but let us eat and drink unto the participation of the spirit; that as members
we may abide in the Lords body, that we may be quickened by his spirit; and let
us not be scandalized because many do temporally eat and drink with us, who yet
in the end shall find eternal torments] that is; let us remember that the
exterior ministry is the least part of it; and externally and alone it has
in it nothing excellent, as being destitute of the sanctity that God requires,
and the grace that he does promise, and it is common to wicked men and good:
but when the signs and the thing signified, when the prayers of the Church and
the spirit of God, the word and the meaning, the sacrament and the grace do
concur; then it is (...), it is a venerable cup, and full of power, St.
Chrysostom.

(...) Origin. (...).


and more honorable than all our possessions, it is a holy thing says Origin
and appointed for our sanctification. For Christ in the Sacrament is Christ
under a vail: as without the hand of faith we cannot take Christ, so we must be
sure to look here with an eye of faith, and whatsoever glorious thing is said
of the holy Sacrament; it must be understood of the whole Sacrament, body and
spirit, that is, the Sacramental and the spiritual Communion.

2. Let no man be less confident in his holy faith and persuasion concerning
the great blessings and glorious effects which God designs to every faithful
and obedient soul in the communication of these Divine mysteries, by reason of
any difference of judgment which is in the several Schools of Christians
concerning the effects and consequent blessings of this Sacrament. For all men
speak honorable things of it, except wicked persons, and the scorners of
Religion, and though of several persons like the beholders of a dove walking in
the sun, as they stand in several aspects and distances, some see red and
others purple, and yet some perceive nothing but green, but all allow and love
the beauties: so do the several forms of Christians, according as they are
instructed by their first teachers, or their own experience conducted by their
fancy and proper principles, look upon these glorious mysteries some as
vertually containing the reward of obedience, some as solemnities of
thanksgiving and records of blessings, some as the objective increasers of
faith, others as the Sacramental participations of Christ, others as the acts
and instruments of natural union, yet all affirm some great things or other of
it, and by their differences confess the immensity and the glory. For thus
Manna represented to every man the taste that himself did like, but it had in
its own potentiality all those tastes and dispositions eminently, and
altogether, those feasters could speak of great and many excellencies, and all
confessed it to be enough, and to be the food of Angels: so it is here, it is
that to every man's faith, which his faith wisely apprehends; and though there
are some who are of little faith, and such receive but a less proportion of
nourishment, yet by the very use of this Sacrament the appetite will increase,
and the apprehensions grow greater, and the faith will be more confident and
instructed; and then we shall see more, and feel more. For this holy nutriment
is not only food, but physic too, and although to him who believes great
things of his Physician, and of his medicine, it is apt to do the more
advantage; yet it will do its main work, even when we understand it not, and
nothing can hinder it; but direct infidelity, or some of its foul and deformed
ministers.

3. They who receive the blessed Sacrament must not suppose that the blessings
of it, are effected as health is by physic, or warmth by the contact and
neighborhood of fire; but as music one way affects the soul, and witty
discourses another, and joyful tidings a way differing from both the former, so
the operations of the Sacrament are produced by an energy of a nature entirely
differing from all things else; But however it is done, the thing that is done
is this, no grace is there improved, but what we bring along with us: no
increases but what we exercise; we must bring faith along with us, and God will
increase our faith, we must come with charity, and we shall go away with more,
we must come with truly penitential hearts, and to him that has shall be
given, and he shall have more abundantly: he shall be a better penitent: when
he has eaten the sacrifice that was slain for our sins, and died in the body,
that we might live in the spirit and die no more. For he is the bread from
heaven, he is the grain of wheat which falling into the earth, unless it dies
it remains alone, but if it dies, it brings forth fruit and brings it forth
abundantly.

4. Although the words, the names, and sayings concerning the Blessed Sacrament
are mysterious and inexplicable, yet they do, nay, therefore wear sure they
signify some great thing, they are in the very expression beyond our
understanding, and therefore much more are the things themselves too high for
us: but therefore we are taught three things. 1. To walk humbly with our God,
that is, in all entercourses with him to acknowledge the infinite distance
between his immensitie and our nothing; his wisdom and our ignorance; his
secrets and our apprehensions; he does more for us than we can understand. It
was an excellent saying of Aristotle which Seneca reports of him, Nunquam nos
verecundiores esse debere, quam cum de Diis agitur, we ought never to be more
bashful and recollect, than when we are to speak any thing of God. Timide de
pot^state Deorum, and pauca dicenda sunt, said Cicero, Denat. Deor.
we must speak of his power and glory, timorously and sparingly, with
joyfulness and singleness or simplicity of heart, so the first Christians eat
their Bread, their Eucharist, so we understand the words of St. Luke. 2. To
walk charitably with our disagreeing brother, that this may be indeed a
Sacrament of charity, and not to wonder if he be mistaken in his discourses of
that which neither he nor you can understand. 3. Though it be hard to be
understood: yet we must be careful that with simplicity we admire the secret,
and accept the mystery; but at no hand by pride or ignorance, by interest or
vanity to wrest this myste^y, to ignoble senses, or to evil events, or to
dangerous propositions, or to our own damnation.

5. Whatever propositons any man shall entertain in his manner of discoursing
of these mysteries; let him be sure to take into his notice and memory, those
great appellatives with which the purest ages of the Church, the most ancient
Liturgies, and the most eminent Saints of God use to adorn and invest this
great mysteriousness. In the Greek Liturgy attributed to St. James; the
Sacramental Symbols are called, (...).
sanctified, honorable, precious, celestial, unspeakable, incorruptible,
glorious, fearful, formidable, divine; in the use of which Epithets, as we have
the warranty and consent of all the Greek Churches since they ever had a
Liturgy; so we are taught only to have reverend usages and religious
apprehensions of the Divine mysteries, (...). Lib. 8. contr. Celsum.
but if by any appellative we can learn a duty, it is one of the best ways of
entering into the secret. To which purpose the ages Primitive and Apostolical
did use the word Eucharist: the name and the use we learn from Origin; the
Bread which is called the Eucharist, is the Symbol of our thanksgiving toward
God. But it is the great and most usual appellative for the holy Supper; (...),
and (...), we find in Epist. ad Smyr.
Ignatius, St. Clemens. Justin Martyr, the Syrian Paraphrast, Origin, and ever
after amongst the Greeks, and afterward amongst the Latins. By him we
understand that then we receive great blessings, since ^he very mystery it self
obliges us to great thank^ulness. I have instanced in this as an example to the
use of the other Epithets and appellatives which from Antiquity I have
enumerated. Sect. 1. of this Chap.


6. He that desires to enter furthest into the secrets of this mystery, Ecclus.
21.11.
and to understand more than others, can better learn by love Nam animalis
homo, ho^ est, qui sequitur cogitationes humanas and animales sive naturales,
non est capax eoru^, quae sunt supra naturam, and spiritualiu^, atque ita and
spiritualem esum carnis Dominicae non intelligit, cujus qui non sunt
participes, non erunt participes aeternae vi^ae. Theophylact in cap. 6. Joh.
than by inquiry. He that keeps the law of the Lord gets the understanding
thereof, says the wise Bensirach; if he will prepare himself diligently, and
carefully observe the dispensations of the Spirit, and receive it humbly, and
treat it with great reverence, and dwell in the communion of Saints, and pass
through the mystery with great devotion and purest simplicity, and converse
wi^h the purities of the Sacrament frequ^ntly, and with holy intention, this
man shall unde^stand more by his experience, than the greatest Cle^ks can by
all their subtilties, the commentaries of the Doctors, and the glosses of
inquisitive men: Obey and ye shall understand, said the Prophet: and our
blessed Savior assured us, Joh. 8.31, 32.
that if we continue in his word, then we shall know the truth; and if any man
will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine whether it be of God or no. For
we have not turned from our iniquities, that we might understand the truth,
said Daniel: Ecclus. 25 11.
for the love of the Lord (says the wise man) passes all things for
illumination.

7. Let no man advance the preaching of the word of God, to the disparagement.
or to occasion the neglect of the Sacraments. For though it be true, that faith
comes by hearing; yet it is not intended that by hearing alone faith is
engendered; for the faith of the Apostles came by seeing; and St. Paul's faith
did not come by hearing; but by intuition and revelation; and hearing in those
words of St. Paul does not signify the manner of ministration; 1 John 1.1.
but the whole Oeconomie of the word of God, the whole office of preaching;
which is done most usefully to babes and strangers by sermon and homily, but
more gloriously and illustriously to men, by Sacraments. But however, be it so
or otherwise; yet one ordinance ought not to exclude the other, much less to
disparage the other, and least of all to undervalue that which is the most
eminent: but rather let every Christian man and woman think; that if the word
ministered by the spirit is so mighty, it must be more, when the word and the
spirit join with the Sacrament, which is their proper significatorie. He that
is zealous for the word of God does well; but let him remember, that the word
of God is a goodly ring and leads us into the circles of a blessed eternity;
but because the Sacrament is not without the word, they are a jewel encha'sd in
gold when they are together. The Ministeries of the Gospel are all of a piece;
they, though in several manners, work the same salvation by the conduct of the
some spirit.

8. Let no man in the reception of the Sacrament, and in his expectation of
blessings and events from it, limit his hopes and belief to any one particular,
for that will occasion a littleness of faith, and may make it curious,
scrupulous and fantastical; rather let us adore the secret of God, and with
simple expectations receive it; disposing our selves to all the effects that
may come rather with fear and indefinite apprehensions, than with dogmatical
and confident limitations; for this may beget scruples and diminution of value;
but that hinders nothing, but advances the reverential treatments and opinion.

9. He that guesses at the excellency and power of the Sacrament, by the events
that himself feels; must be sure to look for no other than what are eminently
or virtually contained in it; that is, he must not expect that the Sacrament
will make him rich; or discover to him stolen goods, or cure the Toothache, or
Countercharm Witches, or appease a Tempest if it be thrown into the Sea. These
are such events which God has not made the effects of religion; but are the
hopes and expectations of vain and superstitious people. and I remember that
Pope Alexander the third in the Council of Lateran wrote to the Bishop of S.
Agatha advice how to treat a woman who took the Holy Sacrament into her mouth,
and ran with it to kiss her husband, Council. Later. part 50. cap. 30
hoping by that means to procure her husbands more intense affection. But the
story tells that she was chastis'd by a miracle, and was not cured but by a
long and severe repentance.

10. He that watches for the effects and blessings of the Sacrament, must look
for them in no other manner, than what is agreeable to the usual dispensation;
we must not look for them by measures of nature and usual expectations: not
that as soon as we have received the Symbols, we shall have our doubts
answered; or be comforted in our spirit as soon as we have given thanks for the
holy blood; or be satisfied in the inquiries of faith, as soon as the prayers
of consecration and the whole ministry is ended; or prevail in our most
passionate desires as soon as we rise from our knees; for we enter into the
blessings of the Sacrament by prayer, and the exercise of proper graces; both
which being spiritual instruments of virtues, work after the manner of
spiritual things; that is, not by any measure we have, but as God please; only
that in the last event of things, and when they are necessary, we shall find
them there: Gods time is best, but we must not judge his manner by our
measures, nor measure eternity by time, or the issues of the spirit, by a
measuring line. The effects of the Sacrament are to be expected as the effect
of prayers: not one prayer or one solemn meeting, but persevering and
pas^ionate, fervent and lasting prayers; a continual desire and a daily address
is the way of prevailing In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening
withold not thy hand, Eccles. 11.6.
for thou know not whether shall prosper* either this or that, or whether
they shall be both alike good.

11. He that looks for the effects and blessings told of to be appendant to the
Sacrament, must expect them upon no other terms, but such as are the conditions
of a worthy Communion. If thou do find thy faith as dead after the reception
as it was before; it may be it is because thy faith was not only little, but
reprovable: or thou did not pray vehemently, or thou art indisposed by some
secret disadvantage: or thou have not done thy duty: and he shall imprudently
accuse that physic for useless and unfit, that is not suffered to work by the
incapacity, the ill-diet, the weak stomach, or some evil accident of the
patient.

12. Let no man judge of himself or of the blessings and efficacy of the
Sacrament it self, or of the prosperity and acceptance of his service in this
ministry by any sensible relish, by the gust and deliciousness which he
sometimes perceives, and other times does not perceive For these are fine
accidents and given to some persons often, to others very seldom, to all
irregularly, as God please: and sometimes are the effects of natural and
accidental dispositions, and sometimes are illusions. But that no man may fall
into inconvenience for want of them: we are to consider that the want of them
proceeds from diverse causes. 1. It may be the palate of the Soul is indisposed
by listlesness or sorrow, anxiety or weariness. 2. It may be we are too much
immerg'd in secular affairs and earthly affections. 3. Or we have been
unthankful to God when we have received some of these spiritual pleasures, and
he therefore withdraws those pleasant entertainments. 4. Or it may be, we are
therefore without relish and gust, because the Sacrament is too great for our
weakness, like the bright Sun to a mortal eye; the object is too big for our
perceptions, and our little faculties. 5. Sometimes God takes them away least
we be lifted up and made vain. 6. Sometimes for the confirmation and exercise
of our faith; that we may live by faith and not by sense. 7. Or it may be that
by this dryness of spirit God intends to make us the more fervent and resigned
in our direct and solemn devotions, by the perceiving of our wants and
weakness, and in the infinite inability, and insufficiency of our selves. 8. Or
else it happens to us irremediably and inevitably, that we may perceive these
accidents are not the fruits of our labor, but gifts of God, dispensed wholly
by the measures of his own choice. 9. The want of just and severe dispositions
to the Holy Sacrament may possibly occasion this uncomfortableness. 10. Or we
do not relish the Divine Nutriment now, so as at other times, for want of
spiritual mastication, that is, because we have not considered deeply, and
meditated wisely and holily. 11. Or there is in us too much self-love and
delight in, and adherence to the comforts we find in other objects. 12. Or we
are careless of little sins, and give too much way to the daily incursions of
the smaller irregularities of our lives. If upon the occasion of the want of
these sensible comforts and delightful relishes, we examine the causes of the
want, and suspect our selves in these things, where our own faults may be the
causes, and there make amends; or if we submit our selves in those particulars
where the causes may relate to God, we shall do well, and receive profit. But
unless our own sin be the cause of it, we are not to make any evil judgment of
our selves by reason of any such defect; much less diminish our great value of
the blessings consequent to a worthy communion.

13. But because the pardon of sins is intended to be the great effect of a
worthy Communion, and of this men are most solicitous, and for this they pray
passionately, and labor earnestly, and almost all their lives, and it may be
in the day of their death have uncertain souls; and therefore of this men are
most desirous to be satisfied, if they apprehend themselves in danger, that is,
if they be convinced of their sin, and be truly penitent; although this effect
seems to be least discernable, and to be a secret reserved for the publication
and trumpet of the Archangel at the day of Doom; yet in this we can best be
satisfied. For because when our sins are unpardoned, we are under the wrath of
God to be expressed as he pleases, and in the method of eternal death; now if
God intends not to pardon us, he will not bless the means of pardon; if we
shall not return to his final pardon, we shall not pass through the
intermedial; if he will never give us glory, he will never give us the increase
of grace. If therefore we repent of our sins, and pray for pardon: if we
confess them and forsake them: if we fear God and love him: if we find that our
desires to please him do increase, that we are more watchful against sin, and
hate it more: that we are thirsty after righteousness: if we find that we
increase in duty, then we may look upon the tradition of the holy Sacramental
Symbols as a direct consignation of pardon: not that it is them completed; for
it is a work of time, it is as long in doing as repentance is in perfecting, it
is the effect of that, depending on its cause in a perpetual operation; but it
is then working, and if we go on in duty, God will proceed to finish the
methods of his grace, and snatch us from eternal death which we have deserved,
and bring us unto glory. And this he is pleased by the Sacramental all the way
to consigne: God speaks not more articulately in any voice from Heaven than in
such real indications of his love and favor.

14. Lastly, since the Sacrament is the great solemnity of prayer, and
imitation of Christ's intercession in Heaven; let us here be both charitable and
religious in our prayers; interceding for all states of men and women in the
Christan Church; and representing to God all the needs of our selves and of our
Relatives. For then we pray with all the advantages of the spirit, when we pray
in the faith of Christ crucified, in the love of God and of our neighbor, in
the advantages of solemn piety, in the communion of Saints, in the imitation of
Christ's intercession, and in the union with Christ himself Spiritual and
Sacramental; and to such prayers as these nothing can be added, but that which
will certainly come, that is, a blessed hearing and a gracious answer.

SECT. III. Devotions preparatory to this Mystery.
Ejaculations. I.
1. I Will praise thee with my whole heart; before the Angels will I sing
praise unto thee.

2. I will worship toward thy holy Temple, and praise thy Name for thy loving
kindness and for thy truth; for thou have magnified above all thy name, the
word of thy praise.

3. In the day when I call upon thee, thou shall answer: and shall multiply
strength in my soul.

4. How precious are thy thoughts unto me O God: how great is the sum of them!
The Lord will perfect that which concerns me: Thy mercy O Lord endures for
ever.

5. I wait for the Lord: my soul does wait, and in his word do I hope.

6. My soul does wait for the Lord more than they that keep the morning
watches: that they may observe the time of offering the morning sacrifices.

7. O let my soul hope in the Lord; for with the Lord there is mercy, and with
him is plenteous redemption: he shall redeem his people from all iniquity.

II.
1. Our Lord is gentle and just: our God is merciful.

2. The Lord keeps the simple: I was humbled, but the Lord looked after my
redemption.

3. O my soul, return thou unto thy rest: because the Lord has restored his
good things unto thee.

4. He has snatched my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from
falling: I will therefore walk before the Lord in the land of the living.

5. I have believed, therefore will I speak: in the assemblies of just men I
will greatly praise the Lord.

6. What shall I return unto the Lord: all his retributions are repayed upon me.

7. I will bear the chalice of redemptions in the Kingdom of God: and in the
name of the Lord I will call upon my God.

III.
1. I will pay my vows unto the Lord: I will then show forth his Sacraments
unto all the people.

2. Honorable before the Lord is the death of his holy one: and thereby thou
have broken all my chains.

3. I have sworn, and I will perform it: that I will keep thy righteous
judgments.

4. I will greatly praise the Lord with my mouth: yea I will praise him among
the multitude.

5. For he shall stand at the right hand of the poor: to save him from them
that condemn his soul.

6. His work is honorable and glorious, and his righteousness remains for
ever: He has made his wonderful works to be remembered.

7. The Lord is gracious and full of compassion: he has given meat unto them
that fear him: he will ever be mindful of his covenant: he has showed his
people the power of his works, blessed be God.

The Prayers to be used in any day or time of preparation to the Holy Sacrament.
I.
O Thou shepherd of Israel, thou that feedest us like sheep; thou make us to
lie down in pleasant pastures, and leadest us by the still waters running from
the clefts of the rock, from the wounds of our Lord, from the fountains of
salvation; thou preparest a table for us, and anointest our heads with the
unction from above, and our cup runs over: let the blood of thy wounds, and
the water of thy side, wash me clean, that I may with a pure clean soul come to
eat of the purest sacrifice, the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world.

II.
THou give thy self to be the food of our souls in the wonders of the
Sacrament, in the faith of thy Word, in the blessings and graces of thy Spirit:
Perform that in thy Servant, which thou have prepared and effected in thy Son;
strengthen my infirmities, heal my sicknesses; give me strength to subdue my
passions, to mortify my inordinations, to kill all my sin: increase thy Graces
in my soul; enkindle a bright devotion; extinguish all the fires of hell, my
lust and my pride, my envy, and all my spiritual wickednesses; pardon all my
sins, and fill me with thy Spirit, that by thy Spirit thou may dwell in me,
and by obedience and love I may dwell in thee, and live in the life of grace
till it pas^ on to glory and immensity, by the power and the blessings, by the
passion and intercession of the Word incarnate; whom I adore, and whom I love,
and whom I will serve for ever and ever.

III.
O Mysterious God, ineffable and glorious Majesty; what is this that thou have
done to the sons of men? thou have from thy bosom sent thy Son to take upon him
our nature; in him thou have opened the fountains of thy mercy, and have
invited all penitent sinners to come to be pardoned, all the oppressed to be
eased, all the sorrowful to be comforted, all the sick to be cured, all the
hungry to be filled, and the thirsty to be refreshed with the waters of life,
and sustained with the wine of elect souls; admit me, O God, to this great
effusion of loving kindness, that I may partake of the Lord Jesus, that by him
I may be comforted in all my griefs, satisfied in all my doubts; healed of all
the wounds of my soul, and the bruises of my spirit; and being filled with the
bread of heaven, and armed with the strength of the Spirit; I may begin,
continue, and finish my journey through this valley of tears, unto my portion of
thy heavenly kingdom, whither our Lord is gone before to prepare a place for
every loving and obedient soul. Grant this, O Eternal God, for his sake who
died for us, and intercedes for us, and gives himself daily to us, our Blessed
Lord and Savior Jesus. Amen.

CHAP. II. Of our General Preparation to the worthy Reception of the Blessed
Sacrament, and the participation of the Mysteries.
IN all the Scriptures of the New Testament there are no words of particular
duty relating to the Blessed Sacrament, and expressing the manner of our
address to the Mysteries, but those few words of St. Paul, Let a man examine
himself, 1 Cor. 11.20.
and so let him eat. The Apostle expresses one duty, and intimates another. The
duty of preparation is expressed: but because this is a relative duty, and is
not for it self, but for something beyond, he implies the other to be the great
duty to which this preparation does but minister. 1. A man must examine
himself. 2. And a man must eat. A man must not eat of these Mysteries till he
be examined; for that were dangerous, and may prove fatal: but when a man is
examined, he must eat; for else that examinations were to no purpose.

SECT. I. Of Examination of our selves in order to the Holy Communion.
THere is no duty in Christianity that is partly solemn and partly moral, that
has in it more solemnity and more morality than this one duty; and in the
greatest declension of Religion, still men have fear when they come to receive
this holy Sacrament. They that have no Religion will fear when they come to
die; and they who have but a little, will fear when they come to communicate.
But although men who believe this to be the greatest secret and sacredness of
our Religion, do more in their addresses to this than to any thing else, yet
many of them that do come, consider that they are only commanded to examine
themselves; and that according to the ordinary methods is easily done. It is
nothing but asking our selves a few questions: Do I believe? Do I repent? and
am I in charity? To these the answers are ready enough; I do believe that
Christ gave his body and blood for me, as for all mankind; and that Christ is
mystically present in the Sacrament: I have been taught so all my life, and I
have no reason to doubt it. 2. I do also repent according to the measures I am
taught: I am sorry I have sinned, I wish I had not done it; and I promise to do
so no more: and this I do constantly before every Communion; and before the
next comes I have reason enough to renew my vows; I was never so good as my
word yet, but now I will. 3. I am also in charity with all the World; and
against this good time, I pray to God to forgive them; for I do. This is the
usual examination of Consciences; to which we add a fasting day, and on that we
may say more prayers than usual; and read some good discourses of the
Sacrament; and then we are dressed like the friends of the Bridegroom, and with
confidence come to the Marriage Supper of the Lamb. But this examination, has
it self need to be examined. Noah labored a hundred years together in making
the Ark that he and a few more might be saved: and can we think in an hour to
prepare our souls for the entertainment of him that made all the World? This
will very hardly be done. For although our duty of preparation is contained in
this one word, of [ Try, or Examine] it being after the manner of mysteries,
mysteriously and secretly described, yet there is great reason to believe that
there is in it very much duty, and therefore we search into the secret of the
word, and to what purposes it is used in the New Testament.

(...).
1. It signifies to try and search, to enter into the depths and secrets, the
varieties and separations and divisibilities of things. The word is taken from
the tryers of Gold: which is tried by the touchstone; and in great cases, is
tried by the fire. And in this sense St. Paul might relate to the present
condition of the Christians, who were often under a fiery t^yal For the holy
Communion being used by the Primitive Christians according to its intention,
was indeed a great consolation to the Martyrs and Confessors, as appears often
in St. Cyprian: Non edit Israel sine amaris caulibus agnum,
Toll tuam, Christum qui cupis esse, crucem,
Quos amat, aerumnis etenim Deus angit, at illis
Foetior exhausto palma labor venit.

and this blessing and design was mystically represented to the Church in the
circumstance of the institution, in being done immediately before the passion:
they who were to pass through this fiery trial, Lib. de lapsis. and Epist. 54.
Nunc non infirmis sed fortibus pax necessaria est; nec morientibus, sed
viventibus communicatio a nobis danda est: ut quos excitamus and hortamur ad
praelium, non inermes and nudos relinquamus: sed protectione sanguinis and
corporis Christi muniamus: and cum ad hoc fiat Eucharistia, ut possit
accipientibus esse tutela, quos tutos esse contra adversarium volumus,
munimento Dominicae saturiritatis armemus.
ought to examine themselves against this solemnity in order to that last
trial, and see whether or no they were vessels of sanctification and honor;
for none else were fit to communicate but they also that were fit to die;
Christ would give himself to none but to them who are ready to give themselves
for him; according to that saying of Christ, Revel. 3.20, 21.
If any man hear my voice and open the door, I will come into him and sup with
him and he with me. To him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me etc.
That is, those who are tried by the experiments of a great love, and a great
patience, that out of love are willing to suffer, and with patience do suffer
unto the end; -- sit laurea justis
Ex pretio quod terror agit, mansuraque virtus
Crescit in ad versis, quae testibus usa periclis
Ad meritum discrimen habet
Arat. Diacon. lib. 2. in acta.
these are the guests at my heavenly Table: for labor and affrightment put a
price upon the Martyrs Crown, while his virtue grows in danger, and like the
water-plants ever grow higher than the Floods. Now the use that we can make of
this sense of the word is that we also are to examine what we are likely to be,
or what we have been in the day of persecution; how we have passed through the
fire? Did we contract the smell of fire, or the pollution of smoke? or are we
improved by the purification of the discerning flames? Did we do our duties
then, and then learn to do them better? or did we then only like glass, bend
in all the flexures and mobilities of the flame, and then mingle with the
ashes, incorporating with the interests and foulest pollutions of the world? or
were we like Gold, patient of the hammer, and approved by the stone of trial?
like Gold in the fire, did we untwist our selves from all complications and
mixtures with impurer dross? certain it is, that by persecution and by money
Ecclus. 81.9.
men are in all capacities and relations best examined how they are in their
Religion and their Justice.

(...).
Sometimes God tries his friends as we try one another, by the infelicities of
our lives; when we are unhappy in our affliction, if we be not unhappy in our
friend too, he is a right good one; and God will esteem of us so, if we can say
with David, though thou have smitten us into the place of Dragons, yet have we
not forgotten thee; and my soul is always in my hand, that is, I am always in
danger and trouble, and I bear death about me, yet do I not forsake thy
Commandments. This indeed is Gods way of Examination of us; but that is all one;
for we must examine our selves here in order to our duty, and state of being,
as God will examine us hereafter in order to what we have been and done. And
there is no greater testimony of our being fit to receive Christ, than when we
are ready to die for him. But this is a final trial: we must have some steps of
progression before we come thus far.

2. There is a way something less than this; (...) Suidas.

(...).


Lycurgus instituted among the Spartans, that the Princes, the Magistrates, the
Soldiers and every Citizen that was capable of dignity should be tried; They
examined their lives whether they had lived according to the rate of their
employment or pretensions; and those who were so examined were called (...)
tried and examined men; and if they were persons quitting themselves like men,
they were ascribed into the number of the good Citizens. That is our way, to
try whether we be instructed and rightly prepared to this good work, and that
is to be examined by a course and order of good works, that was the old and
true way of examining.

For examination is but a relative duty; and nothing of it self, for no man is
the better for being examined if being examined there follows nothing after it.
He that is examined, either must be approved, or else in St. Paul's phrase he is
(...) a reprobate; and to what purpose is it that every man should examine
himself, but in case that he find himself unfit, to abstain and forbear to
come: for if he comes unworthy he dies for it; and therefore to Examine must
signify; let every man examine himself so that he be approved; Romans 14, 22.

(...). Phil. 1.4, 10.

Gal. 6.4. Ephesians. 5.10.


and so the word is used by St. Paul, Happy is he that does not condemn himself
in that which be approves: The word signifies both to examine and to approve
that is indeed to examine as wise men should; [(...), says Suidas] it is all
one as to judge righteous Judgment after due examination; and that is expressly
added by the Apostle, in the same Chapter, after the precept of examination,
judge your selves that you be not judged of the Lord; that is, your examination
of your selves will prevent the horrors of the eternal scrutiny; your
condemnation of your sins will prevent Gods condemnation of you for them; and
then when you examine so as to judge, and so condemn your sins that you approve
your selves to God and your own Consciences, then you have examined rightly.

The sense then is this: Let a man examine and prove himself, whether he be fit
to come to the holy Communion, and so let him eat: not so if upon examination
he be found unfit: but because it is intended he should come, and yet must not
come without due and just preparations, let him who comes to the holy
Communion, be sure that he worthily prepare himself.

These then are the great inquiries: 1. How a man shall so examine himself, as
to know whether he be fit or no. 2. What are those necessary dispositions
without which a man cannot be worthily prepared. The first will represent the
general rules of preparation. The second inquiry will consider the more
particular.

SECT. II. Of the Examination of our desires.
EVery one that comes to the holy Sacrament must have earnest affections and
desires toward God and Religion, and particularly toward these Divine
mysteries, and therefore he must examine accordingly whether or no he be
willing and passionately desirous to do all his duty? His saying that he is so,
I do not suppose to be a sufficient satisfaction to a serious inquiry, unless
he really feels himself to be so. For we find that all men pretend that they
have earnest desires to be saved; and very many espying the beauties of wisdom,
the brightness of chastity, the health of temperance, the peace of meek
persons, and the reputation an^ joy of the charitable; wish that they were such
excellent persons. But they consider not, that it is the splendour, not the
virtue; the reputation, not the usefulness; the reward, and not the duty that
they are in love withal: our desires of holiness are too often like our desires
of being cut of the stone, or suffering causticks or cupping-glasses, an
unwilling willingness, a hard and a fatal necessity, and therefore something of
a consequent choice; since it can be no better, it must be no worse: but this
can never make our duty pleasant, we can never be heartily reconciled to the
things of God as long as we feel smart and pain in the ministeries of Religion:
we suffer Religion, and endure the laws of God, but we love them not. He that
comes to God whether he will or no, confesses the greatness of God and the
demonstrations of Religion, but sees no amability and comeliness in it; and
shall find as little of the reward.

It is true that force and fear may bring us in to God; and the fear of the
Lord is the beginning of wisdom; and Christ said, compel them to enter, and our
natural needs, or our superinduced calamities may force us to run to God, and
affright us into Religion as into a Sanctuary: but then if we enter at this
door we must examine whether we be taken with the beauties of the interior
house: does fear make us look, and does looking make us like? if holy desires,
and love be not in the beginning or the progression, we shall do the work of
grace pitifully, and our preparations coldly, and our attentions distractedly,
and receive the Sacraments without effect.

Now concerning our desires, we shall best judge of them by the proper effects
and significations of desire.

Signs and Indications of the sincerity and heartinesse of our desires.
Are his affections warm and earnest, inqu^sitive and longing, interrested and
concerned in the things of God? I do not say it is necessary that he find those
passions and degrees of fierceness, which passionate persons find in sensual
objects. But yet it is very fit that we inquire concerning those degrees and
excesses of desire; not that he is unfit who finds them not; but that they who
have them, can also receive comfort in their inquiry, and become examples to
others and invite them forwards by the arguments of amability which they feel.

But our passions and desires are so to be inquired of; that we find no rest in
our souls concerning this question unless we do indeed set a high value upon
these mysteries; and love to partake of them Ut perdunt propriam mortalia
corpora vitam,
Si nequeunt escas sumere corporeas:
Sic animae nisi deliciis rationis alantur
Dum Verbi aeterni pane carent, pereunt.
Namquid erit quod dira procul fastidia pellat
Cum se ipso refugit men's saturare Deo*
Prosper Epigr.
and desire them reasonably, and without very great cause not to omit the
opportunities which the Church gives and requires us to use, and to exceed the
lowest measure of the law, for he that only communicates when he is commanded;
communicates in obedience but not in love, for though obedience to God is love;
yet our Obedience to man is most commonly fear; at least we cannot so well be
sure that we are passionate enough, and have love enough to these mysteries,
when the law of men, that is, when something without is our measure. For
Ecclesiastical laws have necessity most commonly for their limit; and that is
the least of all holy measures: less than their determination we cannot go and
be innocent: but if we will make judgment concerning our love and our desires,
we must frequent these holy mysteries by the measures and suggestion of
something that is within, if it be love; it will have no measures but it self,
and nothing can give it limits but the circumstances of things themselves and
the possibilities of our persons and affairs.

2. Besides this coming upon necessity, our desires are very much to be
suspected, if compliance and custom or reputation be the ingredients, and
prevail above any better motive that can be observed. As force makes
hypocrites, so favor and secular advantages make flatterers in Religion, and
when a Prince or a Ruler, a Master of a Family or any one that has power to
oblige, is heartily religious, Religion will quickly be in fashion. Those
persons which come upon such inducements are by our blessed Savior signified
by the parable of the corn that fell by the high way, they presently receive it
with joy, and it springs quickly if the sun shines, but when persecution comes
they hang the head, and slack their pace, and appear seldom, and show that
they had no depth of root. These men serve God when Religion is rich and
prosperous; they come to Christ for the loaves; but care but little for the
mystery. As long as the Religion stays at this port, it is good for nothing,
and the very entry it self is suspicious, fear is better than this, but if it
pass on to create an effective and material love, it will be well at last.

3. They that are easily diverted from communicating and apt to be excused from
the solemnity, these men have just cause to suspect their desires to be too
cold to kindle the fires upon this altar, and to consume this sacrifice, they
have not love, and come against their will, some men are hindered by every
thing; if a stranger come to the house, if they be indisposed with a littlehead
ach, if they have affairs of the world, if a neighbor be angry with them, if a
merry meeting be appointed the day before; this is a suspicious indifferency
and lukewarmness. They that are not desirous to use all opportunities and to
take all advantages, and long for all the benefits, want very much of that
hunger and thirst after the righteousness of God which is fulfilled in those
mysteries, and to which Christ has promised such ample satisfaction. I do not
say that every man is bound to communicate every time that he can have it, and
that it is lukewarmness not to desire it so often as it is in our power, but he
that refuses it, when it is in his opportunity, when his circumstances are
fitted, when by the measures of piety and Religion it is decent and useful to
him to do it, (of which I shall afterward give account) that man is guilty of
a criminal indifference, and when he does come, may fear that he has not
spiritual hunger enough for so divine a banquet.

4. They that in their preparation take the least measures that are practiced
or allowed, and rest there and increase not, have neither value for the
Sacrament, nor desires of the blessing, nor expectations of any fruit; and
therefore cannot have this holy appetite in due proportion, because they see no
sufficient moving cause; and they look for little, and find less, and
therefore can never be true desirers: For he that thinks there is no great
matter in it, will have no great stomach for it; and he that will do no great
matter for it, certainly expects no great excellency in it: and such are all
they that take the least measures of preparation, who therefore shall find the
least measures of blessing; and in spiritual things that which is called
positively the least, is just none at all; he that shall be called least in the
kingdom, shall be quite shut out. This is an indifferency both in the cause and
in the effect: They feel no great blessings consequent to their reception, and
therefore their affections are cold; and because they are so, they shall for
ever be without the blessing.

5. They only can be confident that their desires are right, who feel
sharpnesses and zeal in their acts of love. For in spiritual things every
abatement is by the mixture of the contrary; and therefore when things are
ind^fferent, we cannot tell which shall be accepted or accounted of; and when
there is as much evil as good, the evil is only abated, but the good is
destroyed, and is not accepted: and therefore till the victory be clear and
evident, we cannot have much comfort; but the strong desire is only certain and
comfortable to the spirit. Great desires are a great pain; and the Spouse in
the Canticles complains that she is sick of love, and then calls upon Christ to
comfort her with flaggons of wine. Less desires than the greatest, if they be
real and effective of the work, are fit for such persons as are not the
greatest in Religion: but in all spiritual progressions we are sure that our
desires shall never cease growing, till they be full of God, and are swelled up
to immensity; and till they come to some greatness, that they are like hunger
and thirst, or like the breasts of a fruitful Nurse, full and in pain till they
be eased, we cannot be so confident that things are well with us in this
particular. Are we in trouble till we converse with our Lord in all the ways of
spiritual intercourse? Do we rejoice when a Communion day comes? And is our joy
fixed upon consideration of that holy necessity of doing good works at that
time especially, and receiving the aids of Grace, and the helps of the
Sacrament liberally? When it is thus, it is well; tha^ we can be sure of: All
measures of desire which are so little, that we can compare them to no natural
similitude of earnestness and appetite, we can only say that they are yet very
uncomfortable; and if we come often and pray that we may have lively relish and
appetite to the Mysteries, it may be well in time; but as yet we cannot be sure
that it is so.

There is only in this case one help to our examination and our confidence: He
that comes because God commands him, in a direct and certain obedience to the
words of Christ, or in a deep sorrow for his sins, coming hither in hopes of
remedy; or in a great apprehension of his infirmity, addressing himself hither
for support and strength; this man, although he feels no sensual punctures and
natural sharpnesses of desire, yet he comes well, and upon a right principle:
For St. Austin reckoning what predisposition is necessary by way of preparation
to the holy Sacrament, reckons hunger, and the sense of our sins and our
infirmities; but if he wants the pleasure of these passionate indications, he
must be careful that he be sure in the intellectual and religious choice; for
that is the thing which is intended to be signified by all the exterior
passions: but when he has no sign, he must be the more careful he have the
thing signified, and then all is right again.

But happy is that soul which comes to these springs of salvation as the Heart
to the water brooks, panting and thirsty, longing and passionate, weary of sin,
and hating vanity, and reaching out the heart and hands to Christ; and this we
are taught by the same Mystery represented under other Sacraments; the waters
of the spiritual Rock of which our fathers drank in the wilderness; the Rock
was Christ, and those waters were his blood in Sacrament: and with the same
appetite they drank those Sacramental waters withal, we are to receive these
divine Mysteries Evangelical.

Now let us by the aids of memory and fancy consider the children of Israel in
the wilderness, in a barren and dry land where no water was, marching in dust
and fire, not wet with the dew of heaven, wholly without moisture save only
what dropped from their own brows: the air was fire, and the vermin was fire; the
flying serpents were of the same cognation with the firmament, their sting was
a flame, their venom was a fever, and the fever a calenture, and their whole
state of abode and travel was a little image of the day of judgment, when the
elements shall melt with fervent heat: These men like Salamanders walking in
fire, dry with heat, and scorched with thirst, and made yet more thirsty by
calling upon God for water; suppose, I say, these thirsty souls hearing Moses
to promise that he will smite the Rock, and that a River should break forth
from thence; observe how presently they ran to the foot of the springing stone,
thrusting forth their heads and tongues to meet the water, impatient of delay,
crying out that the water did not move like light, all at once: and then
suppose the pleasure of their drink, the unsatiableness of their desire, the
immensity of their appetite; they took in as much as they could, and they
desired much more. This was their Sacrament of the same Mystery, and this was
their manner of receiving it; and this teaches us to come to the same Christ
with the same desires: For if that water was a type of our Sacrament, or a
Sacrament of the same secret blessing, then that thirst is a signification of
our duty, that we come to receive Christ in all the ways of reception with
longing appetites, preferring him before all the interests in the world, as
birds do corn above jewels, or hungry men meat before long orations.

For it is worth observing, that there being in the Old Testament thirteen
Types and Umbrages of this holy Sacrament, eleven of them are of meat and
drink: such are * the tree of life in the midst of Paradise, * the bread and
wine of Melchisedeck, * the fine meal that Sarah kneaded for the Angels
entertainment, * the Manna, * and the roasted paschal Lamb Sint desiderii post
eseas pocula magni
Praesertim, quia carnes assas sumpsimus agni
Assa caro nobis facit ora magis sitibunda,
Quam tenerae carnes, qua^ mollis decoquit unda.
Petrus Blesens.
, * the springing Rock, * and the bread of proposition to be eaten by the
Priests, * the barley cake in the host of Midian, * Sampsons Fathers oblation
upon the rock, * the honeycomb that opened the eyes of Jonathan, * and the
bread which the Angel brought to Elijah, in the strength of which he was to
live forty days: all this to show, that the Sacrament is the life of the
spiritual man, and the food of his soul, the light of his eyes, and the
streng^h of his heart; and not only all this, and very much more of this
nature, but to represent our duty also, and the great principle of preparation:
Meat is the object and hunger is the address. The wine is the wine of Angels;
but if you desire it not, what should you do with it? for the wine that is not
to satisfy your need, can do nothing but first minister to vanity, and then to
vice; first to wantonness, and then to drunkenness.

St. Austin expressing the affections of his Mother Monica to the Blessed
Sacrament, says, that her soul was by the ligatures of faith united so firmly
to the Sacrifice which is dispensed in the Lords Supper, that a Lion or a
Dragon could not drag her away from thence, and it was said of St. Katherine,
In actis Lovaniensibus dicitur de B. Ida: ex ore and naribus fluere sanguinem
solere, qui non sistebatur donec ad Sacram mensam se sisteret ad sedandum
vehemens ejus communicandi cum eo quem ardenter amaverat desiderium. cap. 9.

In Matthew. cap. 26. hom. 83. (...) S. Chrysostom. hom. 24. in 1. ad Corinth.


that she went to the Sacraments as a sucking infant to his mothers breasts:
and this similitude St. Chrisostom presses elegantly, [ See you not with what
pretty earnestness and alacrity infants match their nurses breast? how they
thrust their lips into the flesh (like the sting of a Be.) Let us approach to
this Table with no less desire, and with no less suck the nipple of the holy
Calice; yet with greater desire let us suck the grace of the holy Spirit.] And
it is reported that our Blessed Lord taught St. Mechtildis, When you are to
receive the holy Communion, desire and wish to the praise of my Name to have
all desire and all love that ever was kindled in any heart toward me, and so
come to me; for so will I inflame, and so will I accept thy love, not as it is,
but as thou desire it should be in thee.

Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden says Christ: that is, they
that groan under the burden of their sins, and feel the load of their
infirmities, and desire pardon and remedy; they that love the instruments of
grace as they are channels of Salvation: they that come to the Sacrament out of
earnest desires to receive the blessings of Christ's death and of his
intercession, these are the welcome guests: for so says God, Luke 1.53
Open thy mouth wide and I will fill it, for he has filled the hungry with
good things: said the holy Virgin Mother, for Christ is food and refreshment to
none else: for the full he has sent empty away.

If therefore you understand your danger, and deeply resent the evil of your
infirmities and sinful state; if you confess your selves miserable and have
all corresponding apprehensions; if ye long for remedy and would have it upon
any terms; if you be hungry at your very heart, and would fain have food and
Phys^ck, health and spiritual advantages: if you understand what you need, and
desire what you understand; if these desires be as great as they are
reasonable, and as lasting as they are great; if they be as inquisitive as they
are lasting, and as operative as they are inquisitive; that is, if they be just
and reasonable pursuances of the means of grace; if they carry you by fresh and
active appetites to the communion; and that this may be to purpose; if they fix
you upon such methods as will make the Communion effect that which God designed
and which we need, then we shall perceive the blessings and fruits of our holy
desires: according to those words of David (as it is rendered in the vulgar
Latin) the Lord has heard the desire of the poor; Psa. 10.1^
and his ear has hearkened to the preparation of their heart. An earnest desire
is a good preparation, and God will attend unto it. Concerning this therefore
we are first to examine our selves. Upon the account of our earnest desires, it
is seasonable to inquire, whether to communicate frequently be an instance of
that holy desire which we ought to have to these sacred Mysteries? and whether
all men be bound to communicate frequently, and what measure is the safest and
best in this inquiry? But because the answer to this depends upon some other
propositions of differing matter; I reserve it to its proper place, Chap. 5.
Sect. 4.
where it will be a consequent of those propositions.

SECT. III. Of our Examination concerning Remanent Affections to Sin.
HE that desires communicate worthily, must examine himself whether there be
not in him any affection to sin remaining. This examination is not any part of
repentance, but a trial of it; for of preparatory repentance I shall give
larger accounts in its own place: but now we are to try whether that duty be
done, that if it be we may come; if not, we may be remanded, and go away till
we have performed it: For he that comes must have repented first; but now he is
to be examined whether he have or no done that work so materially, that it is
also prosperously; that is, whether he have done it not only solemnly and
ritually, but effectively; whether he have so washed, that he is indeed clean
from any soul and polluting principle.

When the Heathens offered a Sacrifice to their false gods, they would make a
severe search to see if there were any crookedness or spot, any uncleanness
or deformity in their Sacrifice. The Priest was wont to handle the liver, Et
fibras pecorum and spirantia consulit exta. Virg.
and search the throbbing he^rt; he inquires if the blood springs right, and if
the lungs be sound; he thrusts his hand into the region of the lower belly, and
looks i^ ^here be an ulcer, or a schirrus, a stone, or a bed of gravel: Now the
observation which Tertullian makes upon these Sacrifical Rites is pertinent to
this rule. Miror com hostiae probantur penes vos a vitiosissimis Sacerdotibus,
cur praecordia potius victimarum, quam ipsorum sacrificantium examinantur:
Apolog. c. 30.
When your impure Pri^sts look after a pure Sacrifice, why do they not rather
inquire into their own heart, than into the lambs appurtenance? why do they not
ask after the lust of the Sacrifice^s, more than the little spot upon the bulls
liver? The rites of Sacrifices were but the monitions of duty; Submonentur in
his Symbolis ut quoties accedunt ad altaria, vel nuncupaturi vota, vel
reddituri nullum vitium, nullumque morbum asserant in anima. Ph^lo.
and the Priests inquiry into the puri^y of the beast was but a precept
represented in ceremony and hieroglyphick, commanding us to take care that the
man be not less pure and perfect than the beast. For if an unclean man brings
a clean Sacrifice, the sacrifice shall not cleanse the man, but the man will
pollute the Sacrifice; let them bring to God a soul pure and spotless, Conentur
omnino nitidam and immaculatam [animam] in conspectu Dei producere ne visam
aversetur. Philo.

Si mortale corpus, multo magis immortalem animam. Idem.


lest when God espying a soul humbly lying before the Altar, and finding it to
be polluted with a remaining filthiness, or the reproaches of a sin, he turns
away his head and hates the Sacrifice. And God who taught the Sons of Israel in
figures and shadows, and required of the Levitical Priests to come to God clean
and whole, straight, and with perfect bodies, meant to tell us, that this
bodily precept in a carnal Law, does in a spiritual Religion signify a
spiritual purity. For God is never called a lover of bodies, but the great
lover of souls; and he that comes to redeem our souls from sin and death, from
shame and reproach, would have our souls brought to him as he loves them; An
unclean soul is a deformity in the eyes of God; it is indeed spiritually
discerned, but God has no other eyes but what are spirits and flames of fire.

Here therefore it concerns us to examine our selves strictly and severely,
always remembering, that to examine our selves (as it is here intended) is not a
duty completed by examining; Salvatorem nostrum (fratres charissimi)
suscepturi, totis viribus debemus nos cum ipsius adjutorio praeparare, and
omnes latebras animae nostrae diligenter aspicere, ne forte sit in nobis
aliquod peccatum absconditum, quod and conscientiam nostram confundat and
mordeat, and oculos Divinae Majestatis offendat. S. Ambros. de Sacram.
for this carries us on to the Sacrament, or returns us to the mortifications
of repentance.

But sometimes our sins are so notorious, that they go before unto judgment and
condemnation, and they need no examining: and whatsoever is not done against
our wills, cannot be besides our knowledge, and so cannot need examination, but
remembering only; and therefore I do not call upon the drunkard to examine
himself concerning temperance, or the wanton concerning his uncleanness, or the
oppressor concerning his cruel covetousness, or the customary swearer
concerning his profaneness. No man needs much inquiry to know whether a man be
alive or dead when he has lost a vital part.

But this caution is given to the returning sinner, to the repenting man, to
him that weeps for his sins, and leaves what was the shame of his face and the
reproach of his heart. For we are quickly apt to think we are washed enough;
and having remembered our shameful falls, we groan in method, and weep at
certain times; we bid our selves be sorrowful, and tune our heart strings to
the accent and key of the present solemnity; and as sorrow enters in dress and
imagery when we bid her, so she goes away when the scene is done. Here, here it
is that we are to examine whether shows do make a real change; whether shadows
can be substances, and whether to begin a good work splendidly can effect all
the purposes of its designation. Have you wept for your sin so that you were
indeed sorrowful and afflicted in your spirit? Are you so sorrowful that you
hate it? Do you so hate it that you have left it? And have you so left it that
you have left it all, and will you do so for ever? These are particulars worth
the inquiring after. How then shall we know?

Signs by which we may examine and tell whether our affections to sin remain.
1. Because in examining our selves concerning this, we can never be sure but
by the event of things, and the heart being deceitful above all things, we
secretly love what we profess to hate, we deny our lovers, and desire they
should still press us, we command away the sin from our presence, for which we
die if it stays away; therefore while we are in this prepartaory duty of
examination, the best sign whereby we can reasonably suppose all affection to
sin to be gone away, is if we really believe that we shall never any more
commit that sin to which we are most tempted, and most inclined, and by which
we most frequently fall. Here is a copious matter for examination.

2. When thou do examine thy self, thou can not but remember how often
thou have sinned by wantonness, perhaps, or by intemperance; but now thou
say thou will do so no more. If thou had never said so and failed, it
might have been likely enough; but the Sun does not rise and set so often as
thou have sinned and broken all thy holy vows: and thy resolution to put away
thy sin is but like Amnon thrusting out his sister after he had enjoyed her and
was weary: Sin looks ugly after it has been handled; and thou having lost thy
innocence and thy peace for nothing but the exchange of shame and indignation,
thou art vexed, peevish, and unsatisfied, and then thou resolvest thou will sin
no more. But thou will find this to be no great matter, but a great deception;
for thou only desire it not, because for the present the appetite is gone;
thou have no fondness for it, because the pleasure is gone; and like him who
having scratched the skin till the blood comes, to satisfy a disease of
pleasure and uncleanness, feeling the smart thou resolvest to scratch no more.

3. But consider I pray and examine better; is the disease cured because the
skin is broken? will the appetite return no more? and can not thou again be
tempted? is it not likely that the sin will look prettily, and talk flattering
words, and entice thee with softnesses and easy fallacies? and wilt not thou
then lay thy foolish head upon the lap of the Philistian damsel, and sleep till
thy locks be cut, and all thy strength is gone? wilt not thou forget thy shame
and thy repentance, thy sick stomach and thy aking-head, thy troubled
conscience and thy holy vows, when thy friend calls thee to go and sin with
him, to walk aside with him into the regions of foolish mirth and an
unperceived death? Place thy self by consideration and imaginative
representment in the circumstances of thy former temptation; and consider when
thou can be made to desire, and art invited to desire, and naturally do
desire, can thy resolution hold out against such a battery:

4. In order to this; examine whether there be in thee any good principle
stronger than all the Arguments and flatteries of thy sin? but above all
things, examine whether there be not in thee this principle, that if thou do
sin again in great temptation, that thou will and may repent again? Take
heed of that: for it is certain, no man lives in the regions of temptation, to
whom sin can seem pleasant, but he will fall when the temptation comes
strongly, if he have this principle within him, that though he do commit that
sin, he may and will repent: for then sin has got a Paranymph and a
solicitor, a warrant and an advocate; if you think that you can so order it,
that you shall be as sure of heaven, though you do this sin as though you do it
not, you can have no security; your resolutions are but glass; they may look
like diamonds to an undescerning eye, but they will last no longer then till
the next rude temptation falls upon them.

5. Examine yet further: is your case so, that you have no reserves of cases in
which your sin shall prevail? you resolve to leave the partner of your follies,
and you go from her lest you be tempted? It is well; it is very well: but is
not your heart false as water; and if you should see her again, do you not
perceive that your resolution has brought you to a little shame, because it
will upbraid thy falsehood and inconstancy? you resolve against all intemperate
anger, and you deny the importunity of many trifling occurrencies: but
consider; if you be provoked, and if you be despised, can your flesh and blood
endure it then? It may be Calpurnius or Tocca shall not persuade thee to go to
the baths of Lucrinus; but if Mecoenas calls thee, or the Consul desires thy
company, thou can resist no longer. Thou did play the fool with poor
Calenia, and thou art troubled at thy folly; and art ashamed when thou do
remember how often thou wentest into the Summoenium and peeped into the titles
of those unhappy women whose bodies were the price of a Roman penny: but art
thou so severe and chaste that thou will die rather than serve the imperious
lust of Julia? or will thou never be scorched with the flames of Corinna's
beauty? It is nothing to despise a cheap sin and a common temptation; but art
thou strong enough to overcome the strongest argument that thy sin has?
Examine thy self here wisely and severely. It is not thy part saying, I will
sin no more. He that has new dined can easily resolve to fast at night: but
when thou art hungry, and invited, and there is rare meat on the table, and thy
company stays for thee and importunes thee, can thou then go on with thy
fasting day? if thou can, it is as it should be: but let not thy resolution
be judged by short sayings: but first by great considerations, and then by
proportionable events. If neither the biggest temptation, nor thy trifling
hopes, nor thy foolish principles, nor weak propositions can betray thee, then
thou may with reason say that you have no affection so strong as the love of
God, no passion so great as thy repentance, no pleasure equal to that of an
holy conscience, and then thou may reasonably believe that there is in thee
no affection to sin remaining. But something more is to be added.

6. In the examination of this particular; take no accounts of your self by the
present circumstances, and by your thoughts and resolutions in the days of
Religion and solemnity: but examine how it is with you in the days of ordinary
conversation, and in the circumstances of secular employments. For it is with
us in our preparations to the holy Communion, as it is with women that sit to
have their pictures drawn: they make themselves brave and adorned and put on
circumstances of beauty to represent themselves to their friends and to their
posterity with all the advantages of art and dressing. But he that loves his
friends picture because it is like her, and desires to see in image what he had
in daily conversation, would willingly see her in picture as he sees her every
day; and that is most like her, not which resembles her in extraordinary, and
by the sophistry of dressing, but as she looked when she went about in the
government of her family. So must we look upon our selves in the dresses of
every day in the week; and not take accounts of our selves as we trick up our
souls against a communion day. For he that puts on fine clothes for one day or
two, must not suppose himself to be that Prince which he only personates. We
dress our selves upon a day of Religion; and then we cannot endure to think of
sin; and if we do we sigh, and when we sigh, we pray, and suppose that if we
might die upon that day, it would be a good days work; for we could not die in
a better time. But let us not deceive our selves. That is our picture that is
like us every day in the week: and if you are as just in your buying and
selling, as you are when you are saying your prayers; if you are as chaste in
your conversation, as you are in your religious retirement; if your temperance
be the same every day, as it is in your thoughts upon a fasting day; if you
wear the same habits of virtue every day in the week, as you put on upon a
Communion day, you have more reason to think your selves prepared, than by all
the extempore piety and solemn Religion that rises at the sound of a Bell, and
keeps her time by the Calendar of the Church, more than by the laws of God.

This is not so to be understood as if it were not fit that against a solemn
time and against a communion day, our souls should be more adorned, and our
lamps better dressed, and our lights snuffed, and our Religion more active, and
the habits of grace should exercise more acts: But this is meant only; that
though the acts of virtue are not so frequent on ordinary days, yet there must
be no act of vice upon them at all; and the habits of grace must be the same,
and the inclinations regular, and the disposition ready, and the desires pressed:
and you shall better know the estate of your soul by examining how you converse
with your Merchant, than by considering how cautiously you converse with your
Priest. He that talks to a Prince will talk as wisely as he can, but if you
will know what the man is, inquire after him in his house, and how he is with
all his relations. For no man stands upon his Guard always, as he does
sometimes. If therefore, upon examining you would understand what you are,
examine your self; not by your clothes, but by your body; not by the
extraordinaries of a solemn religion, but by the ordinaries of a daily
conversation.

These are the best Signs I can tell of; but they are to be made use of, with
the following cautions.
1. Although in trying whether your resolutions are likely to hold, and your
affections to sin are gone, you must not rely upon words, but place your self
in the scene and circumstances of your temptation, and try whether you be
likely to hold out when sin comes with all the offers of advantage; yet be
careful that this examination of your own strength against temptation become
not a temptation to you, and this is especially to be attended to in the matter
of lust and fear.

For the very imaginations of a lustful object are of themselves a direct
temptation; and he that dresses his fancy with remembrances of this vanity,
opens a door to let the sin in. Murenia's little boy being afraid of the wolf
at the door, opened the door to see if he were gone, and let the beast in: and
since the fancy is the proper scene of lust, he that brings the temptation
there, brings it where it can best prevail. Therefore in our examination
concerning this evil, and whether we be likely to stand in this war, we are to
examine our selves only, whether we are perfectly resolved to fly and not to
fight, that is, whether we will secure our selves by the proper arts of the
spirit of prudence: for if any thing can make us come near this Devil, we are
lost without remedy.

The temptations in the matter of fear are something like it, if you will
examine whether you love God so well that you would dye for him, inquire as
well and wisely as you can, but be not too particular. Satisfy your self with
a general answer, and rest in this, if you find that the apprehension of death
is not so great as the apprehension of sin; if you pray against fear, and heap
up arguments to confirm your courage and your hope, if you find that you
despise those instances of persecution that you meet with; for the rest,
believe in God, who it may be will not give strengths before you need them; and
therefore be satisfied with thus much, that your present strength is sufficient
for any present trial; and when a greater comes, God has promised to give you
more strength when you shall have need of more. But examine your self by what
is likely to fall upon you actually. It may be you have cause to fear that you
shall be made poor for a good conscience, or imprisoned for your duty, or
banished for religion, consider if you love God so well that you are likely to
suffer that, which is likely to happen to you; but do not dress your
examination with rare contingencies and unlikely accidents, and impossible
cases. Do not ask your self whether you would endure the rack for God, or the
application of burning Basins to your eyes, or the torment of a slow fire, or
whether you had rather go to hell than commit a sin; this is too fantastic a
trial; and when God (it may be) knowing your weakness, will never put you to it
really, do not you tempt your self by fancy, and an afflictive representment.

Domitian was a cruel man, false and bloody; and to be near him was a perpetual
danger: enough to try the constancy of the bravest Roman. But once that he
might be wanton in his cruelty; he invited the chiefest of the Patricii to
Supper; who coming in obedience and fear enough, entered into a Court all hanged
with blacks, and from thence were conducted into dining rooms by the
Pollinctors, who used to dress the bodies unto Funerals: the lights of heaven
(we may suppose) were quite shut out by the approaching night and arts of
obscurity; when they were in those charnel houses (for so they seemed) every
one was placed in order, a black Pillar or Coffin set by him, and in it a dim
taper besmeared with brimstone that it might burn faint, and blew, and solemn;
where when they had stood a while like designed sacrifices, or as if the Prince
were sending them on solemn Embassy to his brother the Prince of Darkness; on
a sudden entered so many naked Black-Moors, or Children besmeared with the
horrid juice of the sepia, who having danced a little in fantastic and Devils
postures, retired a while, and then returned serving up a banquet as at solemn
funerals; and Wine brought to them in Urnes instead of Goblets; with deepest
silence, now and then interrupted with fearful groans and shriekings. Here the
Senators, who possibly could have strugled with the abstracted thoughts of
death, seeing it dressed in all the fearful imagerie and Ceremonies of the
grave; had no powers of Philosophy or Roman courage; but falling into a
lipothymie or deep swooning, made up this pageantry of death with a
representing of it unto the life. This scene of sorrows was over-acted, and it
was a witty cruelty to kill a wise man, by making him too imaginative and
fantastical. It is not good to break a staff by too much trying the strength
of it, or to undo a man's soul by a useless and so fantastic a temptation. For
he that tries himself further than he has need of, is like Palaemons shepherd,
who fearing the foot-bridge was not strong enough to try it, loaded it so long,
till by his unequal trial he broke that which would have born a bigger burden
than he had to carry over it. Some things will better suffer a long usage, than
an unequal trial.

2. When any man has by the former measures examined himself, how his
affections do stand to sin and folly, by whatsoever signs he is usually made
confident; let him be sure to make abatements of his confidence, if he have
found that he has failed already in despite of all his Arts, and all his
purposes. If we have often fallen back from our resolutions, there is then no
sign left for us but the thing signified: nothing can tell us how our
affections are, but by observing what they do. For he that has broken his word
with me, when it was in his power to keep it; has destroyed my confidence in
him: but if he has deceived me twice or thrice in the same thing; for shame
and prudence sake I will venture no more, if I can be disobliged. If we
therefore have failed of our promises to God so many times, that we can speak
nothing reasonably of our proceedings, nor imagine what thoughts God has
concerning us, but the hardest and the worst; though we have great reason to
rejoice in Gods long suffering and infinite patience, yet by any signs which
can be given we have no reason to trust our selves.

^or if we shall now examine; we can tell no more than we could do before, we
were always deceived in our conjectures and pretenses; and it is more likely
now; because sin has so long prevailed; and by our frequent relapses we must
at least learn this truth, that our hearts are false, and our promises are not
to be trusted. In this case, no testimony is credible but an eye witness.
Therefore let us leave all artificial examinations and betake our selves to the
solid and material practices of a religious life. We must do something really,
before we can by inquiring tell how it is with us. When we have resolved, and
in some measure performed our resolution; when we have stood the shock of a
temptation and found our heart firm as in a day of religion; when we perceive
sin to be weaker, and the kingdom of grace to grow in power; when we feel that
all our holy vows are more than words, and that we are not the same easy
fools, always giving God good words but never performing them; but that now we
have set our foot upon the enemy, and are not infallibly carried away when our
temptation comes; then we may inquire further, and look after the former signs
and indications of spiritual life, and the just measures of preparation. Till
then let us not trouble our selves with the particulars of spiritual arts and
the artificial methods of religion; for things are not so well with us as we
suppose.

SECT. IV. Of Examination of our selves in the matter of our Prayers in order
to a Holy Communion.
THe Holy Sacrament is in its nature and design a solemn prayer, and the
imitation of the intercession which our glorious High Priest continually makes
for us in heaven; and as it is our ministry, See Chap. 1. Sect. 4. N. 4.
and contains our duty, it is nothing else but the solemnity and great economy
of prayer, for the whole, and for every member, and for all and every
particular necessity of the Church; and all the whole conjugation of Offices,
and union of hearts, and conjunction of Ministers, is nothing but the
advantages, and solemnity, and sanctification of Prayer; and therefore in order
to do this work in solemnity as we ought, it were fit that we examine our
selves how we do it in ordinary and daily offices.

For since there are so many excellent promises made to Prayer, and that
nothing more disposes us to receive the grace of the Sacraments, and the
blessings of Communion, than holy Prayer; since Prayer can obtain every thing,
it can open the windows of heaven, and shut the gates of hell; it can put a
holy constraint upon God, and detain an Angel till he leave a blessing; it can
open the treasures of rain, and soften the iron ribs of rocks, till they melt
into tears and a flowing river: Prayer can unclasp the girdles of the North,
saying to a Mountain of Ice, Be thou removed hence, and cast into the bottom of
the Sea; it can arrest the Sun in the midst of his course, and send the swift
winged winds upon our errand; and all those strange things, and secret decrees,
and unrevealed transactions which are above the clouds, and far beyond the
regions of the stars, shall combine in ministry and advantages for the praying
man: It cannot be but we should feel less evil, and much more good than we do,
if our Prayers were right. But the state of things is thus: It is an easy
duty, and there are many promises, and we do it often, and yet we prevail but
little. Is it not a strange thing, that our friends die round about us, and in
every family some great evil often happens, and a Church shall suffer
persecution for many years together without remedy, and a poor man groans under
his oppressor, who is still prosperous, and we cannot rescue the life of a
servant from his fatal grave; and still we pray, and do not change the course
of providence in a single instance many times, whether the instance be of
little or of great concernment: what is the matter? we patiently suffer our
prayers to be rejected, and comfort our selves by saying, that it may be the
thing is not fit for us, it is against the decree of God, or against our good,
or to be denied is better; and there is a secret order of things and events, to
which a denial does better minister than a concession. This is very true, but
not always when we are denied; for it is not always in mercy, but in anger very
often we are denied, because our duty is ill performed: For if our Prayers were
right, the Providence of God would often find out ways to reconcile his great
ends with our great desires; and we might be saved hereafter, and yet delivered
here besides; and sometimes we should have heaven and prosperity too, and the
cross should be sweetened, and the days of affliction should for our sakes be
shortened, and death would not come so hastily, and yet we should be preserved
innocent in the midst of an evil generation, though it waited for the periods
and usual determinations of nature: Let us rectify our Prayers, and try what
the event will be; it is worth so much at least; but however, as to the present
case, if we perform this duty pitifully and culpably, it is not to be expected
we should communicate holily. The gradation and correspondencies of this holy
ministry will demonstrate this truth.

For what Christ did once upon the Cross in real Sacrifice, that he always
does in heaven by perpetual representment and intercession; what Christ does by
his supreme Priesthood, that the Church does by her ministerial; what he does
in heaven, we do upon earth; what is performed at the right hand of God, is
also represented and in one manner exhibited upon the holy Table of the Lord:
and what is done on Altars upon solemn days, is done in our Closets in our
daily offices; that is, God is invocated, and God is appeased, and God is
reconciled, and God gives us blessings and the fruits of Christ's passion in the
virtue of the sacrificed Lamb; that is, we believing and praying, are blessed
and sanctified and saved through Jesus Christ. So that as we pray so we
communicate: if we pray well, we may communicate well, else at no hand. Now in
this, besides that we are to take account of our Prayers by all those measures
of the Spirit which we have learned in the holy Scriptures, there are two great
lines of duty by which we can well examine our selves in this particular.

1. That our Prayers must be the work of our hearts, not of our lips; that is,
that we heartily desire what we so carefully pray for: and God knows this is
not very ordinary. For besides that we are not in love with the things of God,
and have no worthy value for Religion, there are many things in our Prayer
which we ask for, and do not know what to do with if we had them, and we do not
feel any want of them, and we care not whether we have them or no. We ask for
the Spirit of God, for Wisdom, and for a right Judgment in all things; and yet
there are not many in our Christian Assemblies who use to trouble themselves at
all with judging concerning the Mysteries of Godliness. Men pray for humility,
and yet at the same time think that all that which is indeed humility, is a
pitiful poorness of spirit, pusilanimity, and want of good breeding. We pray
for contrition and a broken heart; and yet if we chance to be melancholy we
long to be comforted, and think that the Lectures of the Cross bring Death,
and therefore are not the way of Eternal Life. We pray sometimes that God may
be first and last in all our thoughts; and yet we conceive it no great matter
whether he be or no; but we are sure that he is not, but the things of the
world do take up the place of God; and yet we hope to be saved for all that,
and consequently are very indifferent concerning the return of that Prayer. We
frequently call upon God for his grace, that we may never fall into sin; now in
this, besides that we have no hopes to be heard, and think it impossible to
arrive to a state of life in which we shall not commit sins, yet if we do sin,
we know there is a remedy so ready, that we believe we are not much the worse
if we do. Here are prayers enough, but where are the desires all this while? We
pray against covetousness, and pride, and gluttony; but nothing that we do but
is either covetousness or pride; so that our Prayers are terminated upon a
word, not upon a thing. We do covetous actions, and speak proud words, and have
high thoughts, and do not passionately desire to have affections contrary to
them, but only to such notions of the sin as we have entertained, which are
such as will do no real prejudice or mortification to the sin: and whatever our
Prayers are, yet it is certain our desires are so little, and so content with
any thing of this nature, that for very many spiritual petitions we are
indifferent whether they be granted or not.

But if we are poor or persecuted, if we be in fear or danger, if we be
heart-sick or afflicted with an uncertain soul, then we are true desirers of
relief and mercy; we long for health, and desire earnestly to be safe; our
hearts are pinched with the desire, and the sharpness of the appetite is a
pain; then we pray, and mind what we do. * He that is in fear of death, does
not when he prays for life think upon his money and his sheep; the entering of a
fair woman into the room does not bend his neck, and make him look off from the
Princes face of whom he sues for pardon. And if we had desires as strong as our
needs, and apprehensions answerable to our duty, it were not possible that a
man should say his prayers and never think of what he speaks: but as our
attention is, so is our desire, trifling and impertinent; it is frighted away
like a bird, which fears as much when you come to give it meat, as if you came
with a design of death.

When therefore you are to give sentence concerning your Prayers, your
^rayer-book is the least thing that is to be examined; your Desires are the
principal, for they are fountains both of action and passion. Desire what you
pray for; for certain it is, you will pray passionately if you desire
ferven^ly. Prayers are but the body of the bird; Desires are its Angels wings.

2. If you will know how it is with you in the matter of your Prayers, examine
whether or no the form of your Prayer be the rule of your life. Every Petition
to God is a Precept to man; and when in your Litanies you pray to be delivered
from malice and hypocrisy, from pride and envy, from fornication and every
deadly sin; all this is but a line of duty, and tells us that we must never
consent to an act of pride, or a thought of envy, to a temptation of
uncleanness, or the besmearings and evil paintings of hypocrisy. * But we
when we pray against a sin think we have done enough; and if we ask for a
grace, suppose there is no more required. Now Prayer is an instrument of help,
a procuring auxilliaries of God, that we may do our duty; and why should we ask
for help, if we be not our selves bound to do the thing? Look not therefore
upon your prayers as a short method of ease and salvation, but as a perpetual
monition of duty; and by what we require of God, we see what he requires of us;
and if you want a system or collective body of holy precepts, you need no more
but your prayer book; and if you look upon them first as duties, then as
prayers, that is things fit to be desired, and fit to be labored for, your
prayers will be much more useful; not so often vain, nor so subject to
illusion, not so destitute of effect, or so failing of the promises. The
prayers of a Christian must be like the devotions of the husbandman. God speed
the plough, that is, labor and prayer together; a prayer to bless our labor.
Thus then we must examine.

Is desire the measure of our prayer? and is labor the fruit of our desire? if
so; then what we ask we shall receive as the gift of God and the reward of our
labor; but unless this be the state of o^r prayer, we shall find that the
receiving of the Sacrament will be as ineffective because it will be as
imperfect as our prayer. For prayer and Communion differ but as great and
little in the same kind of duty. Communion is but a great, public and solemn
address and prayer to God through Jesus Christ: and if we be not faithful in a
little we shall not be entrusted in a greater; he that does not pray holily and
prosperously, can never communicate acceptably. This therefore must be severely
and prudently examined.

But let us remember this; that there is nothing fit to be presented to God but
what is great and ^xcellent; for nothing comes from him but what is great and
best; and nothing should be returned to him that is little and contemptible in
its kind. It is a mysterious elegancie that is in the Hebrew of the Old
Testament; Genesis 35.15.
when the Spirit of God would call any thing very great, or very excellent, he
calls it [of the Lord]; so the affrightment of the Lord; that is, a great
affrightment fell upon them; and the fearful fire that fell upon the shepherds
and sheep of Job is called the fire of God: Job 1.16.
and when David took the spear and water-pot from the head of Saul while he
and his guards were sleeping, it is said, that the sleep of the Lord, that is,
a very great sleep was fallen upon them. Thus we read of the flames of God, and
a land of the darkness of God, that is, vehement flames, Cant. 8.6. Jerem.
and a land of exceeding darkness: and the reason is, because when God
strikes, he strikes vehemently, so that it is a fearful thing to fall into the
hands of the living God: And on the other side, when he blesses he blesses
excellently; and therefore when Naomie blessed Boaz, she said, Let him be
blessed of the Lord, that is, according to the Hebrew manner of speaking, Let
him be exceedingly blessed. In proportion to all this, whatsoever is offered to
God should be of the best; it should be a devout Prayer, a fervent, humble,
passionate supplication. He that prays otherwise, must expect the curses and
contempt of his lukewarmness, and will be infinitely unworthy to come to the
holy Communion, whether they that come intend to present their Prayers to God
in the union of Christ's intercession, which is then solemnly imitated and
represented. An indevout Prayer can never be joined with Christ's Prayers. Fire
will easily combine with fire, and flame marries flame; but a cold devotion and
the fire of this Altar can never be friendly and unite in one pyramid to ascend
together to the regions of God and the Element of love. If it be a prayer of
God, that is, fit to be entitled, fit to be presented unto him, it must be most
vehement and holy. The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man, only can be
confident to prevail; nothing else can ever be sanctified by a conjunction with
this sacrifice of prayer, which must be consumed by a heavenly fire. There is
not indeed any greater indication of our worthiness or unworthiness to receive
the holy Communion than to examine and understand the state of our daily prayer.

SECT. V. Of preparatory examination of our selves in some other instances.
HE that comes to the holy Communion must examine himself concerning his
passions; whether that which usually transports him to undecency and shame, to
sin and folly, be brought under the dominion of grace, under the command of
reason, under the Empire of the spirit. For the passions of the soul are the
violences and storms of reason, neither reason nor grace can be heard to speak
when they are loud; and in vain it is that you tell a passionate person of the
interests of wisdom and Religion. We see it in fools who have no allay of
reason; their anger is rage, their jealousy is madness, their desires are
ravenous, their loves are troublesome and unseasonable, their hopes are
groundless but ever confident, their fears are by chance, but always without
measure: and a fool when his belly is full may as soon be persuaded into
temperate discourses, as he that is passionate, to be obedient to God and to
the rules of his own felicity.

A great fear and a constant virtue are seldom found in one man; and a coward
is virtuous by chance, and so song as he is let alone; but unless the fear of
God be greater than the fear of man, it is in the power of his enemy whether
that man shall be happy or wise. And so it is in a great or easy anger; every
man and every thing can put a peevish person out of his Religion. It cannot in
these and all the like cases be well, unless by examining we find that our
spirit is more meek, our passion easier overcome, and the paroxysms or fits
return less frequently, and the symptoms be less malignant. In this instance
we must be quick and severe; and begin betimes to take a course with these
vermin and vipers of the soul. Suetonius tells, that when the witty flatterers
of Caesar had observed that no frogs did breed in his Grandfathers Villa which
was in the suburbs of Rome, they set themselves to invent a reason which should
flatter the Prince, and boldly told abroad that when young Octavius was a
child he once in sport forbad them to make a noise, and for ever after they
were silent and left those pools; ever since Octavius began to speak, they left
off to make their noises and their dwellings there. If we suppress our
passions that make inarticulate noises in the soul, if betimes and in their
infancy we make them silent, we shall find peace in all our days. But an old
passion, an inveterate peevishness, an habitual impotency of lust and vile
desires are like an old Lion; he will by no means be made tame and taught to
eat the meat of peace and gentleness.

If thy passion be lasting and violent, thou art in a state of evil: if it be
sudden and frequent, transient and volatile, thou will often fall into sin; and
though every passion be not a sin, yet every excess of passion is a diminution
of reason and Religion; and when the acts are so frequent that none can number
them, what effects they leave behind, and how much they disorder the state of
grace, none can tell. Either therefore suffer no passion to transport and
govern you, or no examination can signify any thing. For no man can say that a
very passionate man is a very good man; or how much he is beloved of God who
plays the fool so frequently; nor how long God will love him who is at the
mercy of his imperious passion, Dolori si fraena remiseris nulla meteria non
est maxima.
which gives him laws and can every day change his state from good to bad. It
was well said of one; If you give the reins to grief, every thing that crosses
thee can produce the biggest grief; and the causes of passions are as they are
made within. He that checks at every word, and is jealous of every look, and
disturbed at every accident, and takes all things by the wrong handle, and
reflects upon all disturbances, switches and spurs his passion, and strives to
overtake sin and to be tied to infelicity: but nothing can secure our Religion,
but binding our passions in chains, and doubling our guards upon them, least
like mad-folk^ they break their locks and bolts and do all the mischief for
which they can have instruments and opportunity.

Concerning some sorts of passionate persons, it may be truly said, that they
are very unfit to communicate, but that they are fit, it can be confidently
said of none.

Here therefore let us thus examine our selves.
Are your desires unreasonable, passionate, impotent and transporting? If God
refuses to give you what you desire, can you lay your head softly down upon the
lap of providence and rest content without it? Do you thankfully receive what
he gives, and when he gives you not what you covet, can you still confess his
goodness and glorify his will and wisdom, without any amazement,
dissatisfaction, or secret murmurs? Can you be at peace within when your
purposes are defeated; and at peace abroad with him that stands in the way
between you and your desires? And how is it with you in your angers? Does it
last so long, or return so frequently as before? Have you the same malice, or
have you the same peevishness? Haec brevis est illa perennis aqua.
For one long anger and twenty short ones have no very great difference, save
only that in short and sudden angers we are surprised; and not so in the other:
but it is an intolerable thing always to be surprised, and a thousand times to
say, I was not aware, or I was mistaken. But let us without excuses examine our
selves in this matter, for this is the great Magazine of virtue or vice; here
dwells obedience or licentiousness, a close knot, -- hic habitat constricta
licentia nodo
Et flecti faciles irae vinoque madentes
Excubiae
Jocundique metus, and non secura voluptas
Et lasciva volant levibus perjuria pennis.
Claudian. de nuptiis Honorii.
or an open liberty, little pleasures, and great disturbances, loss of time,
and breach of vows. But if that we may come to Christ we have stopped so many
avenues of sin and fountains of temptation, it may be very well; but without
it, it can never.

2. He that comes to the Holy Communion must examine himself whether his lusts
be mortified, or whether they be only changed. For many times we have a seeming
peace when our open enemies are changed into false friends; and we think our
selves holy persons because we are quit of carnal crimes, and yet in exchange
for them, we are dying with spiritual. It is an easy thing to reprove a
murderer, and to chide a foolish drunkard, to make a liar blush, and a thief to
run away. But you may be secretly proud when no man shall dare to tell you so;
and to have a secret envy and yet to keep company with the best and most
religious persons. A little examination will serve your turn to know whether
you have committed adultery, or be a swearer; but to know whether your
intentions be holy, whether you love the praise of men more than the praise of
God, whether religious or secular interest be the dearer, whether there be any
hypocrisy or secret malice in your heart, has something of more secret
consideration. Do not you sometimes secretly rejoice in the diminution or
disparagement of your brother? Do not you tell his sad and shameful story with
some pleasure? Are you not quick in telling it, and willing enough it should be
believed? Would you not fain have him less than your self; not so eminent, not
so well esteemed, and therefore do not you love to tell a true story of him
that is not so very much for his commendation?

These things must be examined, not that it can be thought that a man must be
without fault when he comes, but that he must cherish none, he must leave none
unexamined; he must discover as much as he can and crucify all that he can
discover. He that has mortified his carnal appetite, and is proud of his
conquest; or prays often and reproaches him that does not; and gives alms,
and secretly undervalues him that cannot; or is of a right opinion, but curses
him that is in the wrong; or leaves his ambitious pursuits and vain glorious
purposes, but sits at home and is idle, is like a man who stands by a fire in a
wide and a cold room; he scorches on one side and freezes on the other: whereas
the habits of virtue are like a great mantle, and the man is warm and well all
over. But it is an ill cure for the ague to fall into a feavour, or to be eased
of sore eyes by a diversion of the rheum upon the lungs: and that soul that
turns her back upon one sin and her face to another is (it may be) weary of the
instance, but not of the iniquity: and rolling upon an uneasy bed of thorns,
chooses only to be tormented in another part: but finding the same sense there
because the part is informed by the same spirit, and no difference between the
thorn in the side and the thorn in the hand, perceives her self miserable and
incirled with calamity. But when from carnal crimes which bring shame, a man
falls into spiritual crimes which most men let alone; from those sins which
every thing can reprove to a secret venom and an undiscerned ulcer; a man may
come to the Communion, and the holy man that Ministers cannot reject him; but
he causes no joy before the Angels; and because he does not examine wisely and
judge severely, he is discerned by God, and shall be judged, when to be judged,
means all one with being condemned.

3. When we examine our selves in order to receiving of the blessed Sacrament,
we must be careful that we do not limit our examination; and confine it to the
time since our last receiving. For some persons who think themselves spiritual,
usually examine how they have comported themselves since the last communion
only, and accordingly make judgment upon themselves; and these men possibly
may do well enough; if they be of the number of them of whom our blessed
Savior affirms, that they need no repentance, that is, no change of life, no
inquiry but into the measures of progression. But there are but few who live at
that rate, and they that do, it may be have not that confidence. But to them
and all men else, it were safe advice, that the inquiry how they have lived
since the last communion should be but one part of their examination.

1. Because they who so limit their inquiries must needs suppose that till then
all was well, and that they communicated worthily; and consequently that all
the whole work and Economy of salvation was then performed; every one of which
supposals has an uncertain truth, but a very certain danger.

2. They who so limit their examination suppose that at every Communion they
begin the world anew; whereas our future life is to be a progression upon the
old stock, and judgment is to be made of this that comes after by that which
went before; and therefore these limited examinations must needs be of less
use and purpose. True it is, that at every Communion we are to begin a new
life; and so we ought every day; that is, we ought to be as zealous, and as
penitent, and resolute and affectionate, as if we never had begun before; we
ought so to suspect the imperfection of what is past, that we are to look upon
our selves but as new beginners; that by apprehending the same necessity we may
have the same passion, the same fervor and holy fires. But in the matter of
examining we must consider how much has been pardoned, that we may examine how
thankful we have been, and what returns we have made: we must observe all our
usual failings, that we may now set our guards accordingly: we must remember in
what weak part we were smitten, that we may still pray against it; and we must
renew our sad remembrances that we may continue our sad repentances, and we
must look upon our whole life that we may be truly humbled. He that only
examines how it is with him since the last Communion, will think too well of
himself if he spies his bills of accusation to be small, but every man will
find cause enough to hide his face in the dust, and to come with fear and
trembling when he views the sum total of his life, which certainly will appear
to be full of shame and of dishonor.

3. We are not to limit our examinations to the interval since the last
Communion, because much of our present duty is relative to the first parts of
our life. For all the former vows of obedience though we have broken them a
thousand times, yet have still an obliging power; and there are many
contingencies of our life which require peculiar usages and treatments of our
selves, and there are many follies which we leave by degrees, and many
obligations which are of continual duty; and it may be that our passion did
once carry us to so extreme to intolerable a violence; perhaps twenty years
ago, that we are still to keep our fears and tremblings about us, lest the same
principle produce the same evil event. When Horatius Cocles had won that
glorious victory over the three Sabine Brothers, and entering gloriously into
Rome espied his sister wetting his Laurel with her unseasonable tears for the
death of one of them whom she love with the honor of a wife and the passion of
a lover; and being mad with rage and pride, because her sorrow allayd his joys
and glory, killed her with that sword by which her servant died: Sometimes
passion makes a prodigious excursion and passes on to the greatest violence,
and the most prodigious follies; and though it be usually so restrained by
reason and Religion that such transvolations are not frequent; yet one such act
is an eternal testimony how weak we are, and how mischievous a passion can be.
It is a miracle of providence that in the midst of all the rudenesses and
accidents of the world, a man preserves his eyes, which every thing can
extinguish and put out: and it is no less a miracle of grace, that in the
midst so many dishonorable loves there are no more horrid tragoedies: and so
many brutish angers do not produce more cruel sudden murders; and that so much
envy does not oftener break out into open hostilities; it is indeed a mighty
grace that pares the nails of these wild beasts, and makes them more innocent
in their effects, than they are in their nature; but still the principle
remains: there is in us the same evil nature, and the same unruly passion, and
therefore as there ought to be continual guards upon them, so there must be
continual inquiries made concerning them; and every thing is to be examined,
lest all be lost upon a sudden.

4. We must not limit our examination to the interval of the last Communion,
because our first repentances must still proceed and must never be at an end.
For no man was so pardoned at the last Communion but that he is still obliged
to beg pardon for those sins he then repented of. He must always repent, and
always pray and never be at peace with the first sins of his youth; and the
sorrows of the first day must be the duty of every day; and that examination
must come into this account; and when we inquire after our own state we must
not view the little finger, but the whole man. For in all the forest the ape
is the handsomest beast so long as he shows nothing but his hand; but when the
inquiring and envious beasts looked round about him, they quickly espied a foul
deformity.

There are in the state of a man's soul some good proportions, and some well
days, and some fortunate periods, but he that is contented with beholding them
alone, cares more to please himself than to please God, and thinks him to be
happy whom man, not whom God approves. By this way twenty deceptions and
impostures may abuse a man. See therefore what you are from head to foot, from
the beginning to the end, from the first entry to your last progression; and
although it be not necessary that we always actually consider all; yet it will
be necessary that we always truly know it all, that our relative duties, and
our imperfect actions, and our collateral obligations, and the direct measures
of the increase of grace may be justly discerned and understood.

4. He that examines himself and would make right judgment of his state and of
his duty must not do it by single actions, but by states of life and habits of
Religion. If we can say truly that neither prosperity nor adversity, neither
cross nor crown, employment nor retirement, public offices nor houshold-cares
do disorder us in our duty to God and our relations; that is, if we safely and
wisely passed through, or converse in any one of these states of life, it is
very likely that things are well with us. But the consideration of single
actions will do but little. Some acts of charity, and many prayers, and the
doing one noble action, or being once or twice very bountiful, or the struggling
with one danger, and the speaking for God in one contestation; these are
excellent things, and good significations of life, but not always of health
and strength, not of a state of grace. Now because in the holy Communion we are
growing up to the measures of the fullness of Christ, we can no otherwise be
fitted to it, but by the progressions and increase of a man, that is, by habits
of grace and states and permanencies of Religion; and therefore our
examinations must be accordingly.

SECT. VI. Devotions to be used upon the days of our Examination, relative to
that duty.
The Hymn.
THe Lord is in his holy temple, the Lords throne is in heaven: his eyes
behold, his eye lids try the children of men.

The Lord tries the righteous: but the wicked and him that loves violence his
soul hates.

For the righteous Lord loves righteousness: his countenance does behold the
upright.

The words of the Lord are pure words: as silver tried in a furnace of earth,
purified seven times.

Thou have proved mine heart, thou have visited me in the night, thou have
tried me and shall find nothing: I am purposed that my mouth shall not
transgress.

Hold up my goings in thy paths: that my footsteps slip not.

As for God, his way is perfect: the word of the Lord is tried; he is a buckler
to all those that trust in him.

For who is God save the Lord? and who is our rock save our God?

Judge me O Lord; for I have walked in mine integrity: but I trust in the Lord,
therefore I shall not slide.

Examine me, O Lord, and prove me; try my reins and my heart: for thy
loving-kindnesse is before mine ey^s, and I will walk in thy truth

I will not sit with vain persons: neither will I go in with dissemblers.

I hate the Congregation of evil doers: and will not sit with the wicked.

I will wash mine hands in innocence: so will I compass thine Altar O lord.

That I may publish with the voice of thanksgiving: and tell of all thy
wondrous works

But as for me, I will walk in my integrity: redeem me and be merciful unto me.

So shall my foot stand in an even place: and in the congregations will I
bless the Lord.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
The Prayers.
O Eternal and most Glorious God, who sit in heaven ruling over all things
from the beginning; thou dwell on high, and yet humblest thy self to behold
the things that are in heaven and earth; thou have searched me, O Lord, and
known me; thou understandest my thoughts afar off, and art acquainted with all
my ways; for there is not a word in my tongue but thou O Lord know it
altogether: Be pleased to impart unto thy servant a ray of thy heavenly light,
a beam of the Sun of righteousness; open mine eyes that I may see the wondrous
things of thy Law, that I may walk in them all my days: Set all my sins before
my face, that I may speedily and earnestly and perfectly repent and forsake
them all: Give me a sight of my infirmities, that I may watch against them;
discover to me all my evil and weak principles, that I may reform them; and
whatsoever is wanting in me toward the understanding of any thing whereby I
may please thee and perfect my duty, I beg of thee to reveal that also unto me,
that my duty may not be undiscerned, and my faith may not be reproved, and my
affections may not be perverse, and hardened in their foolish pursuance, and a
secret sin may not lie undiscovered and corrupting my soul.

II.
GIve me an ingenuous and a severe spirit, that whatever judgment of charity I
make concerning others, I may give a right judgment concerning my own state and
actions, condemning the criminal, censuring the suspicious, suspecting what
seems allowable, and watchful even over the best, that I may in the spirit of
repentance and mortification correct all my irregularities, and reform my
errors, and improve the good things which thou have given me; that
endeavoring to approve my actions to my conscience, and my conscience to thy
law, I may not be a reprobate, but approved by thee in the great day of
examination of all the world, and be reckoned amongst thy Elect, thy secret
ones, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A short form of Humiliation, after our Examination.
I.
THY Judgments O Lord God are declared in thunder, and with fear and dread thou
shakest all my bones, and my soul trembles when I consider that great day in
which thou shall judge all the world, and that infinite justice which will not
spare the mighty for his greatness, nor the poor for his poverty; and thy
unlimited power, which can mightily destroy all them that will not have thee to
reign over them.

II.
O most dreadful Judge. I stand in amazement when I consider that the heavens
are not pure in thine eyes: and if thou foundest perverseness in thy Angels,
and did not spare them, what shall become of me? The stars fell from heaven;
and what can I presume, who am but dust and ashes? They whose life that seemed
holy are fallen into an evil portion; and after they have eaten the bread of
Angels, they have been delighted with Carobe-nuts, with husks and draffe of
Swine.

III.
There is no holiness, O God, if thou withdrawest thy hand; no wisdom profits
if thy government does cease. No courage can abide, no chastity can remain
pure; no watchfulness keep us safe, unless thou do continue to strengthen
us, to purify us, to make us stand. When thou leavest us, we drown and perish;
when thy grace and mercy visits us, we are lifted up and stand upright. We are
unstable, and unsecure, unless we be confirmed by thee; but we seek to thee
for thy help; and yet depart from the ways of thy commandments.

IV.
O how meanly and contemptibly do I deserve to be thought of! how little and
inconsiderable is the good which I do? and how vast, how innumerable, how
intolerable are the evils which I have done? I submit O God, I submit to the
abysses of thy righteous and unsearchable judgments; for I have been searching
for a little some little good in me; but I find nothing. Much indeed of good I
have received; but I have abused it; thou have given me thy grace; but I have
turned it into wantonness: thou have enabled me to serve thee; but I have
served my self; but never but when I was thy enemy: so that in me, that is, in
my flesh dwells no good thing.

V.
I am a deep abyss, O God, of folly and calamity; I have been searching my
heart, and can find no good thing; I have been searching, and I cannot find out
all the evil. Thou did create in me a hope of glory, but I have lost my
confidence; and men have sometimes spoken good things of me, but I know not
where they are; and who shall raise me up when I fall down before thy face in
thy eternal judgment?

VI.
I will no more desire, I will no more suffer, I will no more seek, I will no
more be moved by the praises of men; for behold they speak, but they know
nothing: Thou art silent, but thou know all things, and I increase the
number of my sins. What shall I do, O thou preserver of men! I will lay my face
in the dust, and confess my self to be nothing.

VII.
Pity my shame O God: bind up my wounds; lift me from the dust; raise me up
from this nothing, and make me something; what thou will, what thou will
delight in. Take away the partition wall, the hindrance, the sin that so easily
besets me; and bring me unto Jesus, to my sweetest Savior Jesus; unite me unto
him; and then although in my self I am nothing, yet in him I shall be what I
ought to be, and what thou can not choose but love. Amen, Amen.

A Prayer for holy and fervent desires of Religion, and particularly of the
Blessed Sacrament.
O Most Blessed, most glorious Lord and Savior Jesus; thou that waterest the
furrows of the earth, and refreshest her weariness, and make it very
plenteous, behold O God my desert and unfruitful soul; I have already a parched
ground, give me a land of Rivers of Waters; my Soul is dry but not thirsty; it
has no water, nor it desires none; I have been like a dead man to all the
desires of heaven. I am earnest and concerned in the things of the world; but
very indifferent, or rather not well enduring the severities and excellencies
of Religion. I have not been greedy of thy Word, or longed for thy Sacraments.
The worst of thy followers came running after thee for loaves, though they cared
not for the miracle; but thou offerest me loaves and miracles together, and I
have cared for neither: Thou offerest me thy self, and all thy infinite
sweetnesses; I have needed even the compulsion of laws to drive me to thee; and
then indeed I lost the sweetness of thy presence, and reaped no fruit. These
things O God are not well, they are infinitely amiss. But thou that providest
meat, thou also give appetite; for the desire and the meat, the necessity and
the relief are all from thee.

II.
Be pleased therefore, O my dearest Lord, to create in thy servant a great
hunger and thirst after the things of thy kingdom and the righteousness of it,
all thy holy graces, and all the holy ministeries of grace; that I may long for
the bread of heaven, thirst after the fountains of salvation, and as the Heart
pants after the brooks of water, so my soul may desire thee O Lord. O kindle
such a holy flame in my soul, that it may consume all that is set before me;
that it may be meat and drink to me to do thy will.

III.
Grant O blessed Jesus that I may omit no opportunity of serving thee, of
conversing with thee, of receiving thee; let me not rest in the least and
lowest measures of necessity, but pass on to the excellencies of love, and the
transportations of an excellent Religion, that there may remain in me no
appetite for any thing but what thou love; that I may have no satisfaction
but in a holy Conscience, no pleasure but in Religion, no joy but in God, and
with sincerity and zeal heartinesse and ingenuity, I may follow after
righteousness, and the things that belong unto my peace, until I shall arrive
in the land of eternal peace and praises, where thou live and reignest for
ever world without end. Amen.

CHAP. III. Of Faith, as it is a necessary disposition to the Blessed Sacrament.
EXamination of our selves is an inquiry whether we have those dispostions
which are necessary to a worthy Communion. Our next inquiry is after the
dispositions themselves, what they ought to be, and what they ought to effect;
that we may really be that which we desire to be found when we are examined. I
have yet only described the ways of examining; now I am to set down those
things whereby we can approved, and without which we can never approach to
these divine Mysteries with worthiness, or depart with joy. These are three;
1. Faith, 2. Charity, 3. Repentance.

SECT. I. Of Catechumens, or unbaptised persons.
THE Blessed Sacrament before him that has no faith is like messes of meat set
upon the graves of the dead The sine dulce nihil, Domine,
Nec juvat ore quid appetere,
Pocula ni prius atque cibos
Christ tuus favor imbuerit,
Omnia sanctificante fide.
Prudentius hymno 3. ante cibum.
, they smell not that nidour which quickens the hungry belly; they feel not the
warmth, and taste not the juice; for these are provided for them that are
alive, and the dead have no portion in them. This is the first great line of
introduction, and necessarily to be examined: we have the rule from the
Apostle; 2 Cor. 13.5.
Examine your selves whether ye be in the faith, prove your own selves Know ye
not your own selves how that Jesus Christ is in you except ye be reprobates? As
if he had said, ye are reprobates, and Jesus Christ shall never dwell in you,
except by faith; without this you can never receive him; and therefore examine
strictly your selves concerning your faith.

But the necessity of this preparation by faith has a double sense, and a
proportionable necessity. 1. It means that no unbaptised person can come to the
holy Communion. 2. It means that those that are baptized have an actual and an
operative faith, properly relative to these divine Mysteries, and really
effective of all the works of faith. Of this we have the most ancient and
indubitable records of the Primitive Church: For in the Apology which Justin
Martyr made for the Christians, (...).
he gives this account of the manner of dispensing the holy Eucharist. It is
lawful for none to participate of this Eucharistical bread and wine, but to him
who believes those things to be true which are taught by us, and to him that is
washed in the laver of regeneration, which is to the remission of sins, and who
live as Christ has commanded Shut the pro^hane and the unhallowed people out
of doors. (...).
So. Orpheus sang. None comes to this holy feast but they whose sins are
cleansed in Baptism, who are sanctified in those holy waters of regeneration,
who have obedient Souls, ea^s attentive to the Sermons of the Gospel, and
hearts open to the words of Christ. These are they who see by a brighter light,
and walk in the warm^h of a more refreshing Sun; they live in a better air, and
are irradiated with a purer beam, -- purior illos Solis fervor alit,
pretiosaque pabula libant.
the glories of the Sun of righteousness; and they only are to eat the
precious food of the sacrificed lamb: For by Baptism we are admitted to the
spiritual life, and by the holy Communion we nourish and preserve it.

But although Baptism be always necessary, yet alone it is not a sufficient
qualification to the holy Communion; but there must be an actual faith also in
every Communicant. Neither faith alone, nor baptism alone can suffice; but it
must be the actual faith of baptized persons which disposes us to this sacred
Feast: For the Church gives the Communion neither to Catechumens, nor to
Infants, nor to mad men, nor to natural fools.

Catechumens not admitted to the holy Communion.
Of this, besides the testimony of Justin Martyr, St. Cyril of Alexandria gives
this full acoount. [ We refuse to give the Sacraments to Catechumens, although
they already know the truth, and with a loud voice confess the faith of
Christ, because they are not yet enriched with the holy Ghost, who dwells in
them who are consummated and perfected by Baptism: But when they have been
baptized, because it is believed that the holy Ghost does dwell within them,
they are not prohibited from the contact and communion of the body of Christ.
And therefore to them who come to the mystical benediction, the Ministers of
the Mystery cry with a loud voice, Sancta sanctis, Let holy things be given to
sanctified persons: signifying, that the contact and sanctification of Christ's
body does agree with them only who in their spirits are sanctified by the holy
Ghost.] And this was the certain and perpetual Doctrine and Custom of the
Church; insomuch that in the primitive Churches they would not suffer
unbaptized persons so much as to see the Consecration of the holy Mysteries, as
is to be seen in many Ecclesiastical Records. Dionys. Eccles. hierarch.
Microlog. observe. Eccles. cap. 51. in biblioth. PP. Cabas. exposit. liturg.
cap. 15.16. Germanus Patr. C. P. in rerum Ecclesiast. theoria. Durandus.
ration. Divin. offic. l. 4. and l. 6. Albe^tus Magnus de officio Missae tract.
3. c. 23. Alcuinus de divin. offic. Aquinas Sum. 3. q. 80. art. 4.
The reason of this is nothing but the nature and analogy of the thing it self.
For we first come to Christ by faith, and we first come to Christ by Baptism;
they are the two doors of the Tabernacle, which our Lord has pi^ched and not
man. By faith we desire to go in, and by baptism we are admitted. Faith knocks
at the door, and baptism sets it open: but until we are in the house, we cannot
be entertained at the Masters Table: they that are in the high ways and hedges
must be called in, and come in at the doors, and then they shall be feasted.
The one is the moral entrance, and the other is the ritual. Faith is the door
of the soul, and baptism is the door of the man. Faith is the spiritual
address to God, and baptism is the Sacramental. Baptism is like the pool of
Siloam appointed for healing; it is salutary and medicinal: but the Spirit of
God is that great Angel that descends thither and makes them virtual; and faith
is the hand that puts us in. So that faith alone does not do it; and therefore
the unbaptized must not Communica^e: So neither will baptism alone admit us;
and therefore Infants and Innocents are yet incapable. But that is the next
inquiry.

SECT. II. Of Communicating Infants.
Question. Whether Infants are to be admitted to the Holy Communion?
WHether the holy Communion may be given to Infants, has been a great question
in the Church of God; which in this instance has not been as in others,
divided by parties and single persons, but by whole ages: for from some of the
earliest ages of the Church, St. Cyprianus lib. de lapsis.
down to the time of Charles the Great, that is, for above six hundred years,
the Church of God did give the holy Communion to newly baptized Infants. St.
Cyprian recounts a miracle of an Infant, into whose mouth (when the parents had
ignorantly and carelessly left the babe) the Gentile Priests had forced some of
their Idol Sacrifice: But when the Minister of the Church came to pour into the
mouth the Calice of our Lord, it resisted, and being over-powred grew sick, and
fell into convulsions. By which narrative the practice of the Church of that
age is sufficiently declared. Of the matter of fact there is no question; but
they went further.

The Primitive Church did believe it necessary to the salvation of Infants: St.
Austin believed that this Doctrine and practice descended from the Apostles;
that without both the Sacraments no person could come to life, or partake of
the Kingdom of heaven; which when he had endeavored to prove largely, he
infers this conclusion: It is in vain to promise salvation and life eternal to
little children, Si ergo, ut tot and tanta Divina testimonia concinunt, nec
salus nec vita aeterna sine baptismo and corpore and sanguine Domini cuiquam
expectanda sunt, frustra sine his promittitur parvulis. lib. 1. de peccat.
merit. and remiss. cap. 20. etc. 24. vide eundem de verbis Apostoli ad Bonifac.
Epist. 23. ad vitalem epist. 106. cont. duas epistol. Pelagian. l. 1. c. 22.
and lib. 4. c. 4. lib. contr. Julian c. 2. and S. Cyprian. lib. 3. Test. ad
Quirin. c. 25. Author Hypognost. in operibus S. August. idem ait express S.
Paulinus Epist. Nolanus epist. 12. ad Severum. S. Cyril. Hieros. Catech. 3. c.
1. Idem dixit P. Innocentius. Capit. Caroli Mag. lib. 1. cap. 161. Alcuin. lib.
de divinis offic. Idem videre est in Ordine Romano quem edidit Michael
Hittorpius.
unless they be baptized, and receive the body and blood of Christ since the
necessity of them both is attested by so many, so great, and so divine
Testimonies. And that this practice continued to the time of Charlemaine,
appears by a Constitution in his Capitular, saying [That the Priest should
always have the Eucharist ready, that when any one is sick, or when a child is
weak, he may presently give him the Communion, lest he die without it.] And
Alcuinus recites a Canon expressly charging, that as soon as ever the Infants
are baptized, they should receive the holy Communion before they suck, or
receive any other nourishment. The same also is used by the Greeks, by the
Aethiopians, by the Bohemians and Moravians: and it is confessed by Maldonate
Maldonatus in Johan. 6. number. 116.
, that the opinion of St. Austin and Innocentius, that the Eucharist is
necessary even to Infants, prevailed in the Church for six hundred years
together.

But since the time of Charles the Great, that is, for above eight hundred
years, Vide Hierem. Patr. C. P. doctr. exhor. ad Germanos Alvarez in it in.
Aethiop. Joachimum Vadianum in notat. lib. 1. fol. 14. de Sacram. Eucharistae
council. Trid. Sess. 21. can. 4.
this practice has been omitted in the Western Churches generally; and in the
Council of Trent it was condemned as unfit, and all men commanded to believe,
that though the ancient Churches did do it upon some probable reasons, yet they
did not believe it necessary. Concerning which I shall not interrupt the
usefulness which I intend in this discourse, by confuting the Canon; though it
be intolerable to command men to believe in a matter of fact contrary to their
evidence, (...), dixit Agatho apud Aristot.
and to say that the Fathers did not believe it to be necessary, when they say
it is, and used it accordingly: yet because it relates to the use of this
divine Sacrament, I shall give this short account of it.

The Church of Rome, and some few others, are the only refusers and condemners
of this ancient and Catholic practice: But upon their grounds they cannot
reasonably deny it. 1. Because Infants are by them affirmed to be capable of
the grace and benefits of the Eucharist: for to them who put no bar (as Infants
put none) the Sacraments by their inherent virtue confer grace, and therefore
particularly it is affirmed, Franc. a victor. de Euchar. n. 75.
that if Infants did now receive the Eucharist, they should also receive grace
with it: and therefore it is not unreasonable to give it to them, who therefore
are capable of it, because it will do them benefit; and it is consequently
(upon these grounds) uncharitable to deny it. For,

2. They allow the ground upon the supposition of which the Fathers did most
reasonably proceed; and they only deny the conclusion. For by the words of
Christ, it is, absolutely necessary to eat his flesh and drink his blood: John
6.53.

John 3.5.


and if those words be understood of Sacramental manducation (in which
interpretation both the ancients and the Church of Rome do consent) then it is
absolutely necessary to communicate. For although there are other ways of
eating his flesh and drinking of his blood, besides the Sacramental
manducation, yet Christ in this place meant no other; and if of this he spoke
when he said [ Without doing this we have no life in us,] then it will not be
sufficient to baptize them, though it baptism they should receive the same
grace as in the Eucharist; because abstracting from the benefit and grace of
it, it is made necessary by the Commandment, and by the will of God it is
become a means indispensibly necessary to salvation. It is necessary by a
necessity of the means, and a necessity of precept. True it is, that in each of
the Sacraments there is a proportion of the same effect, as I have already
discoursed Chap. 1. Sect. 3.
; yet this cannot lessen the necessity that is upon them both; for so Pharaohs
dream was doubled, not to signify diverse events, but a double certainty; and
therefore although children even in baptism are partakers of the death of
Christ, and are incorporated into and made partakers of his body; yet because
Christ has made one as necessary as the other, and both for several
proportions of the same reason, the Church of Rome must either quit the
Principle, or retain the consequent; for they have dug a ditch on both
sides, and on either hand they are fallen into inconvenience. But it will be
more material to consider the question as it is in it self, and without
relation to any Schools of learning. Therefore,

3. It is certain that in Scripture there is nothing which directly forbids the
giving the Holy Communion to Infants. For though we are commanded to examine,
and so to eat; yet this precept is not of it self necessary, but by reason of
an introduced cause; just as they are commanded to believe and repent who are
to be baptized; that is, persons that need it, and that can do it, they must:
and Infants without examination can as well receive the effect of the
Eucharist, as without repentance they can have the effect of Baptism. For if
they be communicated, they and the whole Assembly do declare the Lords death;
for that is done by virtue of the whole solemnity, and it is done by the
conj^nct devotion of the whole Community; it is done by the Prayers and Offices
of the Priest, and it is done by the action of every one that communicates: it
is done in Baptism; and yet they are baptized who cannot with their voices
publish the Confession. Infants indeed cannot discern the Lords body, so
neither can they discern truth from falsehood, an Article of Faith from an
heretical Doctrine; and yet to discern the one, is as much required as to
discern the other: but in both the case is equal; for they must discern when
they can confound or dishonor; but till they can do evil, they cannot be tied
to do good. And it were hard to suppose the whole Church of God in her best and
earliest times to have continued for above six hundred years in a practical
error; it will not well become our modesty to judge them without further
inquiry and greater evidence.

4. But as there is no prohibition of it, so no command for it. For as for the
words of our blessed Lord recited by St. John, John 6.53.
upon which the holy Fathers did principally rely, they were spoken before the
Institution of both the Sacraments, and indifferently relate to either; that
is, indeed to them both, as they are the ministries of faith; but to neither in
themselves directly, or in any other proportion, or for any other cause; for
faith is the principal that is there intended; for the whole analogy of the
discourse drawn forth of its cloud and allegory, infers only the necessity of
being Christ's Disciples, of living the life of grace, of feeding in our hearts
on Christ, of living in him, and by him, and for him, and to him; which is the
work of faith, See Chap. 1. Sect. 2. and 3.
and believing in Christ, as faith signifies the being of Christ's Disciple.

5. The thing it self then being left in the midst, and undetermined, it is in
the power of the Church to give it or to deny it: ^or in all things where
Christ has made no Law, the Church has liberty to do that which is most for
the glory of God, and the edification of all Christian people. And therefore
although the Primitive Church did confirm newly baptized persons, and
communicate them; yet as with great reason she did change the time of
Confirmation from their first Baptism, till they could give an account of their
faith; so with equal authority, when she has an equal reason, she may change
and limit the time of ministering the Communion. The Church is tied to nothing
but to the Laws of the Sacrament, and the Laws of Reason, and the Laws of
Charity. But that either of them is reasonable enough, may appear in the
following considerations.

For the Primitive Church had all this to justify their practice: That the
Sacraments of the Gospel are the great channels of the grace of God: * That
this grace always descends upon them that do not hinder it, and therefore
certainly to Infants; And some do expressly affirm it, and none can with
certainty deny, but that Infants if they did receive Communion, should also in
so doing receive the fruits of it: * That to Baptism there are many acts of
predisposition required, as well as to the Communion; and yet the Church, who
very well understands the obligation of these precepts, supposes to children to
be obliged to those predispositions to either Sacrament, but fits every
Commandment to a capable subject: * That there is something done on Gods part,
and something on ours; that what belongs to us, obliges us then when we can
hear and understand, but not before; but that what is on Gods part is always
ready to them that can receive it: * That Infants although they cannot alone
come to Christ, yet the Church their Mother can bring them in her arms: * That
they who are capable of the grace of the Sacrament, may also receive the sign;
and therefore the same grace being conveyed to them in one Sacrament, may also
be imparted to them in the other: * That as they can be born again without
their own consent, so they can be sed by the hands of others; and what begins
without their own actual choice, may be renewed without their own actual
desire: * and that therefore it may be feared lest, if upon the pretense of
figurative speeches, allegories and allusions, and the injunction of certain
dispositions, the holy Communion be denied them, a gap be opened upon equal
pretenses to deny them Baptism. * That since the Jewish Infants being
circumcised, is used as an argument that they might be baptized their eating of
the Paschal Lamb may also be a competent warrant to eat of that Sacrament, in
which also, as in the other, the sacrificed Lamb is represented as offered and
slain for them. Now The Church having such fair probabilities and prudential
motives, and no prohibition, is she shall use her power to the purposes of
kindnesses and charity, she is not easily to be reproved, lest without
necessity we condemn all the Primitive Catholic Church, and all the Modern
Churches of the East and South to this day; especially since without all
dispositions Infants are baptized; there is less reason why they may not be
communicated, having already received some real dispositions toward this, even
all the grace of the Sacrament of Baptism, which is certainly something toward
the other: And after all, the refusing to communicate Infants entered into the
Church, upon an unwarrantable ground. For though it was confessed that the
Communion would do them benefit, yet it was denied to them then when the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation entered, Victoria. Relect. de Eucharist. ubi
supr^.
upon pretense lest by puking up the holy Symbols the Sacrament should be
dishonored; which indeed, though that Doctrine were true, were infinitely
unreasonable; as supposing that Christ, who suffered his body to be broken upon
the Cross that he might convey grace to them and us, would refuse to expose the
symbols to the accidents of a child's stomach, and rather deny them that grace
than endure that sight; who yet does daily suffer mice and mouldiness to do
worse unto it.

But on the other side, they that without interest and partiality deny to
communicate Infants, can consider that Infants being in Baptism admitted to the
Promises of the Gospel, and their portion in the Kingdom of Christ, can have
upon them no necessity to be communicated. For by their first Sacrament they
are drawn from their mere natural state, and lifted up to the adoption of Sons;
and by the second Sacrament alone they can go no further: * That although the
first grace which is given in Baptism be given them as their first being, yet
the second graces are given to us upon other accounts, even for well using the
first free grace: * That in Baptism there were promises made, which are to be
personally accepted and verified before any new grace can be Sacramentally
imparted: * That it was necessity which gave them Baptism before their Reason;
and that necessity heing served, there can be no profit in proceeding upon the
same method without the same reason: * That Baptism is the Sacrament of the new
born, the beginning, the gate of the Church, the entry of the Kingdom, the
birth of a Christian; but the holy Eucharist is the Sacrament of them that grow
in grace, of them that are perfect in Christ Jesus: * And lastly, to him that
lists to be contentious, we are to say as St. Paul did, We have no such custom,
nor the Churches of God.

Now these probabilities on both sides may both of them be heard, and both of
them prevail in the sense of the former determination: For by the first it may
appear that to communicate Infants is lawful; but the second proves that it is
not necessary: for having in baptism received sufficient title to the Kingdom
of Heaven, they who before the use of reason cannot sin and cannot fall from
the grace they have received, cannot be obliged to the use of that Sacrament
which is for their reparation and security: and therefore in this case the
present practice of the Church is to be our rule and measure of peace, and
determination of the Article.

SECT. III. Whether Innocents, Fools, and Madmen may be admitted to the Holy
Communion?
TO this I answer, That if fools can desire it, and can be kept innocent, the
Church did never deny it to them; but unless they be capable of love and
obedience in some degree, they must in no case be admitted. A vicious fool is
intolerable; and he that knows nothing of it, nor can be taught any thing, must
be permitted to the mercies of God and the prayers of the Church; but he that
is not capable of Laws, can be no part of a Society, and therefore has nothing
to do with Communion. If he can but learn so much that it is good for his soul,
if he can desire to go to God, and if he can in any degree believe in Christ,
he will be judged according to what he has, and not according to what he has
not; but if he cannot discern between good and evil, but ^ndifferently likes
and does one and the other, though mercy is to be hoped for him in the last
account, yet because he does that which is materially evil, and cannot discern
what is spiritually good, he must not be admitted so much as to the Symbols of
the divine Mysteries.

But concerning Mad men the case is otherwise; and therefore I am to answer
with a distinction. If from a state of sin and debauchery they entered into
their madness, their case is sad and infinitely to be deplored; but their
debt-books are sealed up, they are like dead men, until they be restored to
reason they cannot be restored to grace, and therefore not admitted to the
Sacrament. But if they were men of a good life, they may in their intervals,
that is, when they can desire it, and when they will not use the Sacrament
irreverently, be communicated. For the seed of God abides within them, and no
accident of nature can destroy the work of God, and the impresses of the
spirit; nothing but their own wills can do that.

For in these cases it is a good rule, and of great use in the practice of the
Sacrament: Whoever can communicate spiritually, may be admitted to communicate
Sacramenttally; that is, they who are in a state of grace, and can desire it,
must not be rejected: And therefore good men falling into this calamity, when
they have any ease from their sadness, and that they can return to words of
order, and composed thoughts, though but for a while, though but in order to
that ministry, are not to be rejected.

But on the other side, whoever can hinder the effect of the Sacrament, they
are not to be admitted to it, unless they do not only not hinder it, but
actually dispose themselves to it: For if they can do evil, they can and ought
to do good; and therefore vicious madmen having been and still remaining in a
state of evil, cannot be admitted till they do good; and therefore never while
their madness remains. The godly man that is so afflicted may; but yet not
till the fire that was hidden makes some actual and bright emissions.

But then lastly, For others who are of a probable life, concerning whom no man
can tell whether they be in the state of grace or no; because no man can tell
whether he that comes with that sadness be capable or no, no man can tell
whether he does well or ill; and therefore he must determine himself by
accidents and circumstances, and prudential considerations, having one eye upon
the designs and compliances of charity, and the other upon the reverence of the
Sacrament. And the case is in all things alike with dying persons, past the use
of speech and reason.

SECT. IV. Of actual faith as it is a necessary disposition to the Sacrament.
BEsides the faith that is previous to Baptism, or is wrapped up in the
offices of that Sacrament, the Church of God admitted only such persons to the
Sacrament whom she called Fideles or Faithful, by a propriety or singularity
and eminency of appellation. They accounted it not enough barely to believe or
to be professors; for the penitents, and the lapsed and the Catechumens were
so; but they meant, such persons whose faith was operative and alive and
justifying; such men whose faith had overcome the world, and overcome their
lusts, and conquered their spiritual enemy; such who by faith were real
servants of Christ, disciples of his doctrine, subjects of his Kingdom and
obedient to his institution. Such a faith as this is indeed necessary to every
worthy communicant; because without such a faith a Christian is no more but a
name; but the man is dead; and dead men eat not. Of this therefore we are to
take strict and severe accounts: which we shall best do by the following
measures.

1. Every true Christian believer must consent to the Articles of his belief by
an assent firmer than can be naturally produced from the ordinary arguments of
his persuasion. Men believe the resurrection; but it is because they are taught
it in their childhood, and they inquire no further in their age: their Parents
and their Priests, the laws of the Church and the Religion of the Country make
up the demonstration; but because their faith is no stronger than to be the
daughter of such arguments, we find they commonly live at such a rate, as if
they did neither believe nor care whether it were so or no. The confidence of
the article makes them not to leave off violently to pursue the interests of
this world, and to love and labor for the other. Before this faith can enable
them to resist a temptation they must derive their assent from principles of
another nature; and therefore because few men can dispute it with arguments
invincible and demonstrative and such as are naturally apt to produce the most
perfect assent, it is necessary that these men of all other should believe it
because it is said to come from God, and rely upon it because it brings to God,
trust it because it is good, acknowledge it certain because it is excellent;
that there may be an act of the will in it, as well as of the understanding,
and as much love in it as discourse.

For he that only consents to an article because it is evident, is indeed
convinced, but has no excellency in his faith but what is natural, nothing
that is gracious and moral: true Christian faith must have in it something of
obscurity, something that must be made up by duty and by obedience: but it is
nothing but this; we must trust the evidence of God in the obscurity of the
thing. Gods testimony must be clear to him, and the thing in all other senses
not clear; and then to trust the article because God has said it, must have in
it an excellency which God loves and that he will reward. In order to this, it
is highly considerable that the greatest argument to prove our Religion, is the
goodness and the holiness of it: it is that which makes peace and friendships,
content and comfort, which unites all relations and endears the relatives, it
relieves the needy and defends the widow, it ends strife and makes love
endless; all other arguments can be opposed and tempted by wit and malice, but
against the goodness of the Religion no man can speak, by which it appears that
the greatest argument is that which moves love intending by love to convince
the understanding.

But then for others who can enquire better; their inquiries also must be
modest and humble, according to the nature of the things, and to the designs
of God: they must not disbelieve an article in Christianity which is not proved
like a conclusion in Geometry; they must not be witty to object, and curious to
enquire beyond their limit: for some are so ingeniously miserable, that they
will never believe a proposition in Divinity if any thing can be said against
it; they will be credulous enough in all the affairs of their life, but
impenetrable by a Sermon of the Gospel; they will believe the word of a man and
the promise of their neighbor; but a promise of Scripture signifies nothing
unless it can be proved like a proposition in the Metaphysics. If Sempronius
tell them a story, it is sufficient if he be a just man, and the narrative be
probable: but though Religion be taught by many excellent men who gave their
lives for a testimony, this shall not pass for truth till there is no
objection left to stand against it. The reason of these things is plain: they
do not love the thing; their interest is against it: they have no joy in
Religion; they are not willing and desirous that the things shall appear true.
When love is the principle, the thing is easy to the understanding, the
objections are nothing, the arguments are good, and the Preachers are in the
right. Faith assents to the revelations of the Gospel, not only because they
are well proved, but because they are excellent things; not only because my
reason is convinced; but my reason yields upon the fairer terms because my
affections are gained. For if faith were an assent to an article but just so
far as it is demonstrated, then faith were no virtue, and infidelity were no
sin; because in this there is no choice, and no refusal: but where that which
is probable is also naturally indemonstrable, and yet the conclusion is that in
which we must rejoice, and that for which we must earnestly contend, and that
in the belief of which we serve God, and that for which we must be ready to
die. It is certain that the understanding observing the credibility, and the
will being pleased with the excellency, they produce a zeal of belief, because
they together make up the demonstration. For a reason can be opposed by a
reason, and an argument by an argument; but if I love my Religion, nothing can
take me from it, unless it can pretend to be more useful and more amiable, more
perfective and more excellent than heaven and immortality, and a kingdom and a
crown of peace, and all the things and all glories of the Eternal God.

2. That faith which disposes to the holy Communion must have in it a fullness
of confidence and relying upon God, a trusting in, and a real expectation of
the event of all the promises of the Gospel. God has promised sufficien^ for
the things of this life to them that serve him. They who have great revenues
and full bags can easily trust this promise: but if thou have neither money nor
friends, if the labor of thy hands, and the success of thy labor fails thee,
how is it then? Can you then rely upon the promise? What means your melancholy
and your fear, your frequent sighs and the calling of your self miserable and
undone? Can God only help with means? or cannot he also make the means, or help
without them; or see them when you see them not? or is it that you fear whether
he will or no? He that has promised, if he be just, is always willing,
whether he be able or no; and therefore, if you do not doubt of his power, why
should you at all doubt of his willingness? For if he were not able, he were
not Almighty; if he were not willing to perform his promise, then he were not
just: and he that suspects that, has neither faith nor love for God, of all
things in the world, faith never distrusts the good will of God, in which he
most glories to communicate him self to mankind. If yet your fear objects and
says that all is well on Gods part; but you have provoked him by your sins,
and have lost all title to the promise; I can say nothing against that, but
that you must speedily repent and amend your fault, and then all will be
quickly well on your part also, and your faith will have no objection, and your
fears will have no excuse. When the glutton Apicius had spent a vast revenue in
his prodigious feastings, he killed himself for fear of starving: but if Caesar
had promised to give him all Sicily or the revenues of Egypt, the beast would
have lived and eaten. But the promises of God give to many of us no security,
not so much as the promise of our rich friend, who yet may be disabled, or may
break his word, or die. * But let us try again. *

God has promised that all things shall work together for good to them that
fear him. Do we believe that our present affliction will do so? Will the loss
of our goods, the diminution of our revenue, the amission of our honor, the
death of our eldest son, the unkindness of a husband, the frown of our Prince,
the defeating of our secular hopes, the unprosperous event of our employment?
Do we find that our faith is right enough really to be satisfied in these
things so much as to be pleased with Gods order and method of doing good to us
by these unpleasing instruments? Can we rejoice under the mercy by the joys of
believing at the same time when we groan under the affliction by the passions
of sense? Do we observe the design of cure, when we feel the pain and the
smart? Are we patient under the evil, Quaeque latent meliora puta.
being supported by the expectation of the good which is promised to follow?
This is the proper work of faith, and its best indication.

Plutarch tells that when the cowards of Lacedaemon depicted upon their shields
the most terrible beasts they could imagine, their design was to affright their
enemies that they might not come to a close fight; they would fain have made
their enemies afraid; because themselves were so. Which when Lacon espied, he
painted upon a great shield nothing but a little fly for his device; and to
them who said he did it that he might not be noted in the battle, he answered;
yea but I mean to come so near the enemy, that he shall see the little fly.
This is our case, our afflictions seem to us like Gorgons heads, Lions and
Tigres, things terrible in picture, but intolerable in their fury; but if we
come near and consider them in all the circumstances; they are nothing but a
fly upon a shield, they cannot hurt us, and they ought not to affright us, if
we remember that they are conducted by God, that they are the effect of his
care and the impresse of his love, that they are the method and order of a
blessing, that they are sanctified and eased by a promise; poenam Phaethon pro
munere poscis.
and that a present ease it may be would prove a future infelicity. If our
faith did rely upon the promise, all this were nothing; but our want of faith
does cause all the excess of trouble. For the question is not whether or no we
be afflicted, whether we be sick, or crossed in our designs, or deprived of our
children, this we feel and mourn for: but the question is, whether all this may
not, or be not intended to bring good to us? Not whether God smiles or no, but
to what purposes he smiles? Not whether this be not evil, but whether this evil
will not bring good to us? If we do believe, why are we without comfort and
without patience? If we do not believe it, where is our faith?

And why does any of us come to the holy Communion if we do not believe it will
be for our good? but if we do think it will, why do we not think so of our
cross? for the promise is that every thing shall. Cannot the rod of God do
good as well as the bread of God? and is not he as good in his discipline as in
his provision? Is not he the same in his School as at his Table? Is not his
physic as wholesome as his food? It is not reason, but plainly our want of
faith that makes us think otherwise. Faith is the great magazine of all the
graces and all the comforts of a Christian: and therefore the Devil endeavors
to corrupt the truth of it by intermingling errors, the sincerity of it by
hypocrisy, the ingenuity of it by interest, the comforts of it by doubting,
the confidences of it by objections and secular experiences and present
considerations; by adherence to humane confidences, and little sanctuaries, and
the pleasures of the world and the fallibilities of men. * When Xerxes had a
great army to conduct, and great successes to desire, and various contingencies
to expect, he left off to sacrifice to his Country gods, forsook Jupiter and
the Sun, and in Lydia espying a goodly Platan tree, tall and strait and spread,
he encamped all his army in the fields about it, hung up bracelets and coronets
upon the branches, and with costly offerings made his petitions to the
beauteous tree; and when he marched away he left a guard upon his God, lest any
thing should do injury to the plant of which he begged to be defended from all
injury. By such follies as these does the Devil endeavor to deflour our holy
faith and confidences in God: we trust in man who cannot trust himself; we
rely upon riches, that rely upon nothing; for they have no stabiliment, and
they have no foundation; but are like atoms in the air; the things themselves
can bear no weight, and the foundation cannot bear them. In our afflictions we
look for comfort from wine or company, from a friend that talks well, or from
any thing that brings us present ease, but in the mean time we look not into
the promises of God which are the store houses of comfort; and like the dogs at
Hippocrene, we lick the water drops that fall upon the ground and take no
notice of the fountain and the full vessels. These things are so necessary to
be considered in order to our preparation to the Communion, as they are
necessary to be reduced to practice in order to a Christian Conversation: for
the holy Communion is the summary and compendium of the Religion and duty of a
whole life; and as faith cannot be holy, material and acceptable without it
contain in it a real trust in the promises of God; so neither can it be a
sufficient disposition to the receiving the divine mysteries unless upon this
ground it be holy, acceptable and material.

3. That faith which is a worthy preparatory to the holy Communion must be the
actual principle and effective of a good life: a faith in the threatenings and
in the Commandments of God. Who can pretend to be a Christian and yet not
believe those words of St. Paul [Follow after peace with all men and holiness,
without which no man shall see God? Heb. 12.14.
] and yet if we do believe it, what do we think will become of us, who neither
follow peace nor holiness, but follow our anger and pursue our lust? If we do
believe this, we had need look about us and live at another rate than men
commonly do. But we still remain peevish and angry, malicious and unplacable,
apt to quarrel and hard to be reconciled, lovers of money and lovers of
pleasures, but careless of holiness and Religion; as if they were things fit
only to be talked on, and to be the subject of Theological discourses, but not
the rule of our lives and the matter of our care. 1 Cor. 11.28.
It is expressly said by St. Paul; He that eats and drinks unworthily,
eats and drinks damnation to himself. Now if we observe what crowds of
people in great Cities come to the holy Communion, good and bad, penitent and
impenitent, the covetous and the proud, the crafty Merch^nt from yesterdays
fraud, and the wanton fool from his last nights lust, we may easily perceive
that not many men believe these words. He that says to me, drink not this for
it is poison, has given me a law and an affrightment, and I dare not disobey
him, if I believe him; and if we did believe St. Paul, I suppose we should as
little dare to be damned as to be poisoned. Mat. 7.2.
Our Blessed Savior told us, that with what measure we mete to others, it
shall be measured to us again; but who almost believes this, and considers what
it means? Will you be content that God should despise you as you despise your
brother? that he should be as soon angry with you, as you are with him? that he
should strike you as hastily, and as seldom pardon you, and never bare with
your infirmities, and as seldom interpret fairly what you say or do, and be
revenged as frequently as you would be? And what think we of these sayings [
Into the heavenly Jerusalem there shall in no wise enter any thing that
defiles, Revel. 21.27.
or prophaneth, neither whatsoever works abomination, or makes a lie?] Do
men believe God, and yet doing these things hope to be saved for all these
terrible sayings? [ Now the works of the flesh are manifest, Galat. 5.21.
adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, etc. of which I tell you
before, that they which do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.]
Certainly if we did believe that these things are spoken in earnest, we should
not account fornication such a decent crime, so fashionable and harmless; or
make such a maygame of the fearful lectures of damnation. For if these words be
true; will men leave their sins, or are they resolved to suffer damnation, as
being less troublesome than to quit their vain Mistresses? surely that is not
it; but they have some little subterfuges and illusions to trust to. They say
they will rely upon Gods mercy. Well they may; if in well doing they commit
their souls to him as to a faithful Creator: but will they make God their
enemy, and then trust in him while he remains so? That will prove an
intolerable experiment; for so said God, when he caused his name to be
proclaimed to the host of Israel; The Lord God merciful and gracious: he caused
to be added; and that will by no means quit the guilty. By no means? No, by no
means, let us believe that as well as the other. For the passion of our
Redeemer, the intercession of our high Priest, the Sacraments of the Church,
the body and blood of Christ, the mercies of God, the saying Lord, Lord, the
privileges of Christians, and the absolution of the Priest, none of all this,
and all this together shall do him no good that remains guilty, that is, who is
impenitent, and does not forsake his sin. If we had faith we should believe
this, and should not dare to come to the holy Communion with an actual
guiltiness of many crimes, and in confidence of pardon, against all the truth
of Divine relations, and therefore without faith.

But then here we may consider, that no man in this case can hope to be excused
from the necessities of a holy life upon pretense of being saved by his faith.
For if the case be thus; these men have it not. For he that believes in God,
believes his words; and they are very terrible to all evil persons: For in
Christ Jesus nothing can avail, but a new creature, nothing but keeping the
Commandments of God, nothing but faith working by charity: they are the words
of God. Wicked men therefore can never hope to be saved by their faith, or by
their faith to be worthy Communicants, for they have it not. Who then can?

He only by his faith is worthily disposed to the Communion, and by his faith
can be saved, who by his faith lives a life of grace; whose faith is to him a
magazine of holy principles, whose faith endears obedience, and is the nurse of
a holy hope, and the mother of a never failing charity. He shall be saved by
his faith who by his faith is more than conqueror; who resists the Devil and
makes him fly, and gives laws to his passions, and makes them obedient; who by
his faith overcomes the world and removes mountains, the mountains of pride and
vanity, ambition and secular designs; and whose faith casts out Devils, the
Devil of lust and the Devil of intempe^ance, the spirit that appears like a
goat, and the spirit that comes in the shape of a swine: he whose faith opens
the blind man's eyes and makes him to see the things of God, and cures the lame
hypocrite and makes him to walk uprightly. For these signs shall follow them
that believe (said our blessed Savior; Mark 16.17.18.
) and by these as by the wedding garment we are fitted to this heavenly Supper
of the King. In short, for what ever end faith is designed, whatever
propositions it intends to persuade, to what duties soever it does engage, to
what state of things soever it ought to efform us, and whithersoever the nature
and intention of the grace does drive us, thither we must go, that we must do,
all those things we must believe, and to that end we must direct all our
actions and designs. For ^he nature of faith discovers it self in the affairs
of our Religion as in all things; if we believe any thing to be good we shall
labor for it; if we think so, we shall do so; (...). Just. Mart.
and if we run after the vanities of the world and neglect our interest of
heaven, there is no other account to be given of it, but because we do not
believe the threatenings and the Laws of God, or that heaven is not so
considerable as those sottish pleasures and t^ifling regards for which all
pains is too much, though we think all labor and all passion is too little.
Isid. and Osir.
Plutar^h tells that when poverty desired to have a child she lay with the God
Porus their God of plen^y, and she proved with child and brought forth Love,
by which they intended to represent the nature of the Divine love; (...)
it is born of a rich Father and a poor mother; that is, it proceeds from a
contempt of the world and a value of God; an emptiness of secular affections
and a great estimate of wisdom and Religion.

But therefore it is that God and the fruits of his garden, and the wealth of
his treasure, and the meat of his Table, and the graces of his spirit are not
gustful and delicious, because we dote upon mushromes and colliquintida. But as
Manna was given in the desert and it became pleasant when they had nothing else
to eat: So it is in ^he sweetnesses of Religion; we cannot live by faith, and
rejoice in the banquets of our Savior, unless our souls dwell in the
wilderness; that is, where the pleasures and appetites of ^he world may not
prepossesse our palates and debauch our reasonings. Delicata est Divina
consolatio quae non datur admit tentibus alienam. S. Bernard.
And this was mysterio^sly spoken by the Psalmist, The broad places of the
wilderness shall wax fat, and the hills shall be en^ircled with joy; that is,
whatsoever ^s barren and desolate, not full of the things and affections of the
world shall be inebriated with the pleasures of Religion and rejoice in
Sacraments, in faith and holy expectations. But the love of money and the love
of pleasures are the intrigues and fetters to the understanding; but he only is
a faithful man who Fraenetur ergo corporum cupidines
Detersa ut intus emicet prudentia,
Sic excitato perspicax acumine
Liberque flatu laxiore Spiritus
Reum parentem rectius precabitur.
Prudent. in Cathemerin.
restrains his passions and despises the world and rectifies his love, that he
may believe a right, and put that value upon Religion as that it become the
satisfaction of our spirit and the great object of all our passionate desires;
pride and prejudice are the Parents of misbelief, but humility and contempt of
the world first bear faith upon their knees, and then upon their hands.

SECT. V. Of the proper and Specific work of Faith in the reception of the
holy Communion.
HEre I am to enquire into two practical questions. 1. What stresse is to be
put upon faith in this Mystery: that is, how much is every one bound to believe
in the article of this Sacrament before he can be accounted competently
prepared in his understanding, and by his faith?

2. What is the use of faith in the reception of the Blessed Sacrament? and in
what sense, and to what purposes, and with what truth it is said that in the
holy Sacrament we receive Christ by faith?

How much every man is bound to believe of this mystery.
If I should follow the usual opinions, I should say that to this preparatory
faith it is necessary to believe all the niceties and mysteriousnesse of the
blessed Sacrament. Men have introduced new opinions and turned the key in this
lock so often till it cannot be either opened or shut, and they have unravel'd
the clue so long till they have entangled it; and not only reason is made blind
by staring at what she never can perceive, but the whole article of the
Sacrament is made an objection and temptation even to faith it self; and such
things are taught by some Churches and some Schools of learning, which no
Philosophy did ever teach, no Religion ever did reveal, no prophet ever preach,
and which no faith ever can receive: I mean it in the prodigious article of
Transubstantiation; vide Real presence per totum.
which I am not here to confute, but to reprove upon practical considerations;
and to consider those things that may make us better, and not strive to prevail
in disputation. That therefore we may know the proper offices of faith in the
believing what relates to the holy Sacrament, I shall describe it in several
propositions.

1. It cannot be the duty of faith to believe any thing against our sense; what
we see and taste to be bread, what we see and taste and smell to be wine, no
faith can engage us to believe the contrary. For by our senses Christianity it
self, and some of the greatest Articles of our belief were known by them who
from that evidence conveyed them to us by their testimony; and if the
perception of sense were not finally to be relied upon, 1 John 1.1, 2, 3.
Miracles could never be a demonstration, nor any strange event prove an
unknown proposition: for the Miracle can never prove the Article, unless our
eyes or hands approve the miracle; and the Divinity of Christ's person, and his
mission and his power could never have been proved by the Resurrection, but
that the resurrection was certain and evident to the eyes and hands of so many
witnesses. Thus Christ to his Apostles proved himself to be no spirit, by
exposing his flesh and bones to be felt; and he wrought faith in St. Thomas by
his fingers ends; the wounds that he saw and felt were the demonstrations of
his faith: and in the Primitive Church the Valentinians and Marcionites, who
said Christ's body was fantastical, were confused by no other argument but of
sense: For sense is the evidence of the simple, and the confirmation of the
wise; it can confute all pretenses, and reprove all deceitful subtilties; it
turns opinion into knowledge, and doubts into certainty; it is the first
endearment of love, and the supply of all understanding: from what we see
without, we know what to believe within; and no demonstration in the world can
be greater than the evidence of sense. Our senses are the great arguments of
virtue and vice; and if it be not safe to rely upon that evidence, we cannot
tell what pleasure and pain is; and a man that is born blind may as well have
the true idea of colors, as we could have of pain, if our senses could not
tell us certainly: and all those arguments from heaven by which God prevails
upon all the world, as Oracles, and Vrim and Thummim, and still voices, and
loud thunders, and the daughter of a voice, and messages from above, and
Prophets on earth, and lights and Angels, all were nothing; for faith could not
come by hearing, if our hearing might be illusion. That therefore which all the
world relies upon for their whole Religion, that which to all the world is the
great means and instrument of the glorification of God, even our seeing of the
works of God, and eating his provisions, and beholding his light; that which is
the great ministry of life, and the conduit of good and evil to us, we may
rely upon for this article of the Sacrament: what our faith relies upon in the
whole, she may not contradict in this. Tertullian said, that [It is (not only
unreasonable, but) unlawful to contradict the testimony of our sense, lest the
same question be made of Christ himself, lest it be suspected that he also
might be deceived when he heard his Fathers voice from heaven] That therefore
which we see upon our Altars and Tables, that which the Priest handles, that
which the Communicant does taste, is bread and wine; our senses tell us that it
is so, See Real Presence, Sect. 10.
and therefore faith cannot be enjoined to believe it not to be so. Faith gives
a new light to the soul, but it does not put our eyes out; and what God has
given us in our nature, could never be intended as a snare to Religion, or to
engage us to believe a lie. Faith sees more in the Sacrament than the eye does,
and tastes more than the tongue does, but nothing against it: and as God has
not two wills contradictory to each other, so neither has he given us two
notices and perceptions of objects, whereof the one is affirmative and the
other negative of the same thing.

2. Whatsoever is against right reason, that no faith can oblige us to believe.
For although reason is not the positive and affirmative measures of our faith,
and God can do more than we can understand, and our faith ought to be larger
than our reason, and take something into her heart that reason can never take
into her eye; yet in all our Creed there can be nothing against reason. If true
reason justly contradicts an article, it is not of the household of faith. See
this largely discoursed of in the Rule of Consci^nce, lib. 1. chap. 2. Rule 3.
In this there is no difficulty, but that in practice we take care that we do
not call that reason which is not so: for although a man's reason is a right
Judge, yet it ought not to pass sentence in an inquiry of faith, until all the
information be brought in; all that is within, and all that is without; all
that is above, and all that is below; all that concerns it in experience, and
all that concerns it in act; whatsoever is of pertinent observation, and
whatsoever is revealed: for else reason may argue very well, and yet conclude
falsely; it may conclude well in Logic, and yet infer a false Proposition in
Theology: but when our Judge is fully and truly informed in all that where she
is to make her judgment, we may safely follow it, whithersoever she invites us.

If therefore any society of men calls upon us to believe in our Religion what
is false in our experience; to affirm that to be done, which we know is
impossible it ever can be done; to wink hard that we may see the better; to be
unreasonable men, that we may off^r to God a reasonable sacrifice; they make
Religion so to be seated in the will, that our understanding will be useless,
and can never minister to it. But as he that shuts the ^ye hard, and with
violence curles the eye lid, forces a fantastic fire from the crystalline
humor, and espies a light that never shines, and sees thousands of little fires
that never burn: So is he that blinds the eye of his reason, and pretends to
see by an eye of faith; he makes little images of notion, and some atoms dance
before him; but he is not guided by the light, nor instructed by the
proposition, but sees like a man in his sleep, and grows as much the wiser as
the man that dreamt of a Lycanthropy, and was for ever after wisely wary not to
come near a River. He that speaks against his own reason, speaks against his
own conscience; and therefore it is certain, no man serves God with a good
conscience that serves him against his reason. For though in many cases reason
must submit to faith, that is, natural reason must submit to supernatural, and
the imperfect informations of art to the perfect revelations of God; yet in no
case can a true reason and a right faith oppose each other: and therefore in
the article of the Sacrament, the impossible affirmatives concerning
Transubstantiation, because they are against all the reason of the world, can
never be any part of the faith of God.

3. Whatsoever is m^tter of curiosity that our faith is not obliged to believe
or confess. Ubi ad profunditatem Sacramentorum perventum est, om^i^
Platonicorum caligavit subtilitas. S. Cyprian. de Spir. S.
For the faith of a Christian is pure as light, plain as a Commandment, easy
as childrens Lessons: it is not given to puzzle the understanding, but to
instruct it; it brings clarity to it, not darkness and obscurity. Our faith in
this Sacrament is not obliged to inquire or to tell how the ho^y bread can feed
the soul, or the calice purify our spirits; how Christ is united to us and yet
we remain imperfect even then when we are all one with him that is perfect:
there is no want of faith though we do not understand the secret manner how
Christ is really present, and yet this reality be no other but a reality of
event and positive effect; though we know not that Sacramental is more than
figurative, and yet not so much as natural, but greater in another kind. It is
not a duty of our faith to discern how Christ's body is broken into ten thousand
pieces and yet remains whole at the same time; or how a body is present by
faith only, when it is naturally absent, and yet faith ought to believe things
to be as they are, and not to make them what of themselves they are not. We
need not to be amazed concerning our faith, when our overbusie reason is amazed
in the article; and our faith is not defective though we confess we do not
understand how Christ's body is there incorporeally, that is, a body after the
manner of a Spirit; or though we cannot apprehend how the Symbols should make
the grace presential, and yet that the grace of God in the receiver can make
the Symbols operative and energetical.

The faith that is required of those who come to the holy Communion is of what
is revealed plainly, and taught usually; what sets devotion forward, not what
ministers to curiosity; that which the Good and the plain, the easy and the
simple man can understand. For if thou can not understand the reciprocations
and pulses of thy own arteries, the motion of thy blood, the feat of thy
memory, the rule of thy dreams, the manner of digestion, the disease of thy
bowels, and the distempers of thy spleen, things that thou bear about thee,
that cause to thee pain and sorrow; it is not to be expected that thou
should understand the secrets of God, the causes of his will, the impulses
of his grace, the manner of his Sacraments, and the Economy of his spirit.
Gods works are secret, and his words are deep, and his dispensations
mysterious, -- exigua est vis
Humani ingenii, tantoque angusta labori.
Quippe minor natura aciem si intendere tentet
Acrius ac penetrare Dei secreta supremi,
Quis dubitet victo fragilem lacessere visu.
Vimque fatigatae mentis sub pectore parvo
Turbari, invalidisque hebetem succumbere curis?
Prudent. in Symmach. l. 2.
and therefore too high for thy understanding. St. Gregory Nazianzen (...).
Orat. 1.
says of God; the more you think you comprehend of him in your understanding,
the less he is comprehended; like the sand of the glass which the harder you
grasp the less you can retain; or like the sand of the sea which you can never
number; but by going about it, you are confounded, and by doing something of
it, you make it impossible to do the rest. Curious inquiries are like the
contentions of Protogenes and Apelles who should draw the smallest line; and
after two or three essays they left this monument of their art, that they drew
three lines so curiously that they were scarcely to be discerned. And therefore
since faith is not concerned in intrigues and hard questions, it were very well
if the Sacrament it self were not disguised, and charity disordered by that
which is not a help but a temptation to Faith it self. In the holy Communion we
must retain an undoubted Oportet igitur nos in sumptionibus Divinorum
mysteriorum indubitatam retinere fidem and non quaerere quo pacto. S.
Bernardus. An sit, fidei est inquirere: quid sit, Philosophi: quomodo sit,
Curiosi.
faith, but not enquire after what manner the secrets of God are appointed.
Whether it be or no; that is the object of faith to enquire, and to accept
accordingly. What it is, he that is to teach others and speak mysteries may
modestly dispute: but how it is, nothing but curiosity will look after. The
Egyptians used to say, that unknown darkness is the first principle of the
world; not meaning that darkness was before light; but by Darkness they mean
God, as Damascius the Platonist rightly observes; saying, This darkness or
obscurity is the beginning of every intellectual being, and every Sacramental
action: (...).
and therefore in their ceremonies they usually made three acclamations to the
unknown Darkness; that is, to God, whose secrets are pervious to no eye, whose
dwelling is in a light that is not to be discerned, whose mysteries are not to
be understood by us, and whose Sacraments are objects of faith and wonder, but
not to be disordered by the mistaking, undiscerning eye of people that are
curious to ask after what they shall never understand.

Faith is oftentimes safer in her ignorance than in busy questions; and to
enquire after the manner of what God has plainly and simply told, Multa etenim
been tecta latent, nescitaque prosunt
Dum mansueta fides quaedam dilata modeste
Sustinet, and nullo ignorant non edita damno.
Prosper advers. ingrat, c. 35.
may be an effect of infidelity, but never an act of faith. If concerning the
things of God we once ask Why or How, we argue our doubt and want of
confidence: and therefore it was an excellent Counsel of S. Cyril: (...). Just.
Mart.

Firmam fidem mysteriis adhibentes, nunquam in t^m sublimibus rebus illud
Quomodo aut cogitemus aut proferamus. lib. 4. in Johan. c. 13.


Believe firmly in the mysteries, and consent to the words of Christ: but never
so much as speak or think, How is this done? In your faith be as particular and
minute, as Christ was in his expressions of it, Non patiar me quicquam nescire
de eo quemamem. Plin.
but no more. He has told us, This is his body This is his blood: believe it
and so receive it: but he has not told us how it is so; it is behind a cloud,
and tied up with a knot of secrecy; therefore let us lay our finger on our
mouth, and worship humbly. But he that looks into the eye of the Sun shall be
blind; and he that searches into the secrets of Majesty shall be confounded
with the glory.

The next enquiry is,
What is the use of faith in this Sacrament? It is tied but to little duty, and
a few plain articles; what then is the use and advantages of it? To what graces
does it minister, and what effect does it produce? To this the answer is easy,
but yet such as introduces a further enquiry. Faith indeed is not curious but
material: and therefore in the contemplation of this mysterious Sacrament and
its Symbols, we are more to regard their signification than their matter; their
holy employment than their natural usuage, what they are by grace than what
they are by nature; what they signify rather than what they are defined. Faith
considers not how they nourish the body, but how they support and exalt the
soul: that they are Sacramental not that they are also nutritive; that they are
made holy to purposes of Religion, (...). Chrysostom. homil. 2. in 2 Timothy (...).
Idem and S. Cyril. in defens. anathem. idem asserit.

In Johan. hom. 46. vide etiam August. in Psalm. 98.


not that they are salutary to offices of nature; that is, what they are to the
spirit, not what they are to sense and disputation. For to faith Christ is
present; by faith we eat his flesh, and by faith we drink his blood; that is,
we communicate not as men, but as faithful and believers; the meaning, and the
duty, and the effect of which are now to be inquired.

1. It signifies that Christ is not present in the Sacrament corporally; or
naturally, but spiritually; for thus the carnal and spiritual sense are
opposed. So St. Chrysostom upon those words of Christ; the flesh profits
nothing: what is it to understand carnally? To understand them simply and
plainly as they are spoken. For they are not to be judged as they seem, but all
mysteries are to be considered with internal eyes, that is, spiritually. For
the carnal sense does not penetrate to the understanding of so great a secret,
says St. Cyprian. For therefore we are not devourers of flesh, because we
understand these things spiritually. So Theophilaect.

2. Since the spiritual sense excludes the natural and proper, it remains that
the expression which is natural be in the sense figurative and improper; and if
the holy Sacrament were not a figure, it could neither be a sign nor a
Sacrament. But therefore it is called the body and blood of Christ because it
is the figure of them; as St. Austin largely discourses; Epist. 23. ad Bonifac.
vide eundem contr. Adimantum cap. 12. Non dubitavit dicere Dominus hoc est
corpus meum, cum signum daret corporis sui. Dicitur item ab Origene and
Chrysostomo; in cap. 26. Mat. homil. 83. Typus and Symbolum: ab eodem Origene,
S. Basilio, and S. Ambrosio, and aliis; exemplum exemplar, and imago.
[ ^or so when good Friday draws near, we say to morrow or the next day is the
passion of our Lord; although that passion was but once, and that many ages
since: and upon the Lords day, we say, to day our blessed Lord arose from the
dead although so many years be passed since; and why is no man so foolish as to
reprove us of falsehood, but because on these days is the similitude of those
things which were done so long since. Was not Christ once sacrificed? and yet
he is sacrificed still on the solemnities of Easter, and every day in the
Communions of the people; neither does he say false, who being asked, shall say
that he is sacrificed; for if the Sacraments had not a similitude of those
things whereof they are Sacraments, they would be no Sacraments at all. But
most commonly, by their similitudes things receive their names. Contr. Marcion.
lib. 4.
] Thus Tertullian expresses this mystery. This is, my body, that is, the figure
of my body; and St. Gregory Nazianzen calls the Passover, because it antedated
the Lords Supper, a figure of a figure.

3. But St. Austin added well; The body of Christ is truth and figure too. The
holy Sacrament is not only called the Lords body and blood, for the figure,
similitude and Sacramentality; but for the real exhibition and ministration of
it. For it is truly called the body of Christ, because there is joined with it
the vital power, virtue and efficacy of the body; and therefore it is called by
St. Austin, Laus fidei est crederequod non vides. Aug.
the intelligible, the invisible, the spiritual body; by St. Hierom* the Divine
and spiritual flesh; the celestial thing, by St. Irenaeus; the spiritual food:
and the body of the divine Spirit, Immortalitatis alimonia datur, a communibus
cibis differens, corporalis substantiae retinens speciem, sed virtutis Divinae
invisibili efficientiaa probans adesse praesentiam. S. Cyprian de coena Dom.
by St. Ambrose: for by this means it can very properly be called the body and
blood of Christ; since it has not only the figure of his death externally, but
internally it has hidden and secret the proper and divine effect, the
life-giving power of his body; so that though it be a figure, yet it is not
merely so; not only the sign and memorial of him that is absent, but it bears
along with it the very body of the Lord, that is, the efficacy and divine
virtue of it. Thus our blessed Savior said of John the Baptist, that Elias is
already come, because he came in the power and spirit of Elias. As John was
Elias, so is the holy Sacrament the body and blood of Christ, because it has
the power and spirit of the body of Christ. And therefore the ancient Doctors
of the Church in their Sermons of these divine Mysteries, use the word Nature
and Substance, not understanding these words in the natural or Philosophical,
but a Theological, in a sense proper to the Schools of Christians; by Substance
meaning the power of the substance; by Nature, the gracious effect of his
natural body: the nature and use and mysteriousnesse of Sacraments so allowing
them to speak, and so requiring us to understand.

4. And now to this spiritual food must be sitted a spiritual manner of
reception; and this is the work of faith; that spiritual blessings may invest
the spirit, and be conveyed by proportioned instruments, lest the Sacrament be
like a treasure in a dead hand, or music in the grave. But this I choose rather
to represent in the words of the Fathers of the Church than mine own. [ We see
(says St. Epiphanius) what our Savior took into his hands, as the Gospel
says, In Anchorato.
he arose at supper and took this, an^ when he had given thanks, he said, This
is my body; and we see it is not equal, nor like to it, neither to the
invisible Deity, nor to the flesh: for this is of a round form, without sense:
but by grace he would say, This is mine; and every one has faith in this
saying: For he that does not believe this to be true as he has said, he is
fallen from grace and salvation. But that which we have heard, that we believe;
that it is his.] And again, [The bread indeed is our food; but the virtue which
is in it, is that which gives us life: by faith and efficacy, by hope and the
perfection of the Mysteries, and by the title of sanctification, it should be
made to us the perfection of salvation. Author lib. de coena Dom. Fides non
habet meritum, cui humana ratio praebet experimentum. St. Gregor.
] For these words are spirit and life; and the flesh pierces not into the
understanding of this depth, unless faith come.] Arcanum coeli Dominus pro
tempore celat
Ut sic nostra fides ad justitiam doceatur,
Et fidei major merces exinde sequatur.
Petr. Blesens.
But then, [The bread is food, the blood is life, the flesh is substance, the
body is the Church] For the body is indeed shown, it is slain, and given for
the nourishment of the world, that it may be spiritually distributed to every
one, and be made to every one the conservatory of them to the resurrection of
eternal life, de peccat. in Spir. S.
] says St. Athanasius. Therefore because Christ said, This is my body, let us
not at all doubt, but believe, and receive it with the eye of the soul; for
nothing sensible is delivered us; but by sensible things he gives us insensible
or spiritual,] so St. Chrysostom: S. Chrysostom. ubi supra in Mat. 26.
[For Christ would not that they who partake of the divine Mysteries should
attend to the nature of the things which are seen, but let them (by faith)
believe the change that is made by grace. Theodoret. dial. 1.
[For according to the substance of the creatures, it remains after
consecration the same it did before: But it is changed inwardly by the powerful
virtue of the holy Spirit; and faith sees it, Bertram de corp. and sang. Domini.
it feeds the soul, and ministers the substance of eternal life: for now faith
sees it all whatsoever it is.

From these excellent words we are confirmed in these two things. 1. That the
divine Mysteries are of very great efficacy and benefit to our souls. 2. That
Faith is the great instrument in conveying these blessings to us. ubi supra.
For as St. Cyprian affirms, the Sacraments of themselves cannot be without
their own virtue; and the divine Majesty does at no hand absent it self from
the Mysteries.] But then unless by faith we believe all this that Christ said,
there is nothing remaining but the outward Symbols, and the sense of flesh and
blood, which profits nothing. But to believe in Christ, is to eat the flesh of
Christ. John 6.35.
I am the bread of life, he that comes to me shall not hunger; that is, he
shall be filled with Christ: and he that believes in me shall not thirst:
coming to Christ, and believing in him, is the same thing: that is, he that
believes Christ's Words and obeys his Commandments; he that owns Christ for his
Lawgiver and his Master, for his Lord and his Redeemer; he who lays down his
sins in the grave of Jesus, and lays down himself at the foot of the Cross,
and his cares at the door of the Temple, and his sorrows at the Throne of
Grace; he who comes to Christ to be instructed, to be commanded, to be
relieved, and to be comforted; to this person Christ gives his body and blood,
that is food from heaven. And then the bread of life, and the body of Christ,
and eating his flesh, and drinking his blood, are nothing else but mysterious
and Sacramental expressions of this great excellency; that whoever does this,
shall partake of all the benefits of the Cross of Christ, where his body was
broken, and his blood was poured forth for the remission of our sins, and the
salvation of the world. But still that I may use the expression of St. Ambrose,
in Lucam lib. 6. c. 8.
Christ is handled by faith, he is seen by faith, he is not touched by the
body, he is not comprehended by the eyes.

5. But all the inquiry is not yet past: For thus we rightly understand the
mysterious Propositions; but thus we do not fully understand the mysterious
Sacrament. For since coming to Christ in all the addresses of Christian
Religion, that is, in all the ministeries of faith, is eating of the body and
drinking the blood of Christ, what does faith in the reception of the blessed
Sacrament that it does not do without it? Of this I have already given an
account Chap. 1. Sect. 2.
: But here I am to add, That in the holy Communion all the graces of a
Christian, all the mysteries of the Religion are summed up as in a divine
compendium; and whatsoever moral or mysterious is done without, is by a worthy
Communicant done more excellently in this divine Sacrament: for here we
continue the confession of our faith which we made in Baptism; here we perform
in our own persons what then was undertaken for us by another; here that is
made explicit which was but implicit before; what then was in the root, is now
come to a full year; what was at first done in mystery alone, is now done in
mystery and moral actions and virtuous excellencies together: here we do not
only here the words of Christ, but we obey them; we believe with the heart, and
here we confess with the mouth, and we act with the hand, and incline the
head, and bow the knee, and give our heart in sacrifice: here we come to
Christ, and Christ comes to us; here we represent the death of Christ as he
would have us represent it, and remember him as he commanded us to remember
him; here we give him thanks, and here we give him our selves; here we defy
all the works of darkness, and hither we come to be invested with a robe of
light, by being joined to the Son of Righteousness, to live in his eyes; and
to walk by his brightness, and to be refreshed with his warmth, and directed
by his spirit, and united to his glories. So that if we can receive Christ's
body and drink his blood out of the Sacrament, much more can we do it in the
Sacrament: For this is the chief of all the Christian Mysteries, and the union
of all Christian Blessings, and the investiture of all Christian Rights, and
the exhibition of the Charter of all Christian Promises, and the exercise of
all Christian Duties. Here is the exercise of our faith, and acts of obedience,
and the confirmation of our hope, and the increase of our charity. So that
although God be gracious in every dispensation, yet he is bountiful in this:
although we serve God in every virtue, yet in the worthy reception of this
divine Sacrament there must be a conjugation of virtues, and therefore we serve
him more: we drink deep of his loving kindness in every effusion of it; but in
this we are inebriated: he always fills our cup, but here it runs over.

The effects of these Considerations are these.
1. That by [ Faith] in our dispositions and preparations to the holy
Communion, is not understood only the act of faith, but the body of faith; not
only believing the articles, but the dedication of our persons; not only a
yielding up of our understanding, but the engaging of our services; not the
hallowing of one faculty, but the sanctification of the whole man. That faith
which is necessary to the worthy receiving this divine Sacrament, is all that
which is necessary to the susception of Baptism, and all that which is produced
by hearing the word of God, and all that which is exercised in every single
grace; all that by which we live the life of grace, and all that which works by
charity, and makes a new creature, and justifies a sinner, and is a keeping the
Commandments of God.

2. If the manducation of Christ's flesh and drinking his blood be spiritual,
and done by faith, and is effected by the spirit, and that this faith signifies
an entire dedition of our selves to Christ, and sanctification of the whole man
to the service of Christ, then it follows, Panis qui de coelo descend it non
nisi ab eo accipitur qui Dominum habet and Christi membrum est. S. Hilar. de.
Trinit. l. 8.
that the wicked do not Communicate with Christ, they eat not his flesh, and
they drink not his blood: They eat and drink indeed; but it is gravel in their
teeth, and death in their belly; they eat and drink damnation to themselves.
For unless a man be a member of Christ, unless Christ dwells in him by a
living faith, he does not eat the bread that came down from heaven. They lick
the rock, says St. Cyprian, but drink not the waters of its emanation: They
receive the skin of the Sacrament, and the bran of the flesh, says St.
Bernard. But it is in this divine nutriment as it is in some fruits; the skin
is bitterness, and the inward juice is salutary and pleasant: the outward
Symbols never bring life, but they can bring death; Non manducant
spiritualiter, sed premunt dentibus signum corporis and sanguinis.
and they of whom it can be said (according to the expression of St. Austin)
they eat no spiritual meat, but they eat the sign of Christ, must also remember
what old Simeon said in his prophecy of Christ, He is a sign set for the fall
of many; but his flesh and blood spiritually eaten, is resurrection from the
dead.

SECT. VI. Meditations and Devotions relative to this Preparatory Grace; to be
used in the days of Preparation, or at any time of spiritual Communion.
St. Bernard's Meditation and Prayer.
THE Calice which thou (O sweetest Savior Jesus) did drink, has made thee
infinitely amiable; it was the work of my redemption. Certainly nothing does
more pleasingly invite, or more profitably require, or more vehemently affect
me than this love: for by how much lower thou did for me descend in the
declinations of humility, by so much art thou dearer to me in the exaltations
of thy charity and thy glory. * Learn, O my soul, how thou ought to love
Christ, who has given us his flesh for meat, his blood for drink, the water of
his side for our lavatory, and his own life for the price of our redemption. He
is stark and dead cold who is not set on fire by the burning and shining flames
of such a charity.

I.
Blessed Savior Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith, the fountain of
life and salvation; by thee let us have access to thy Heavenly Father, that by
thee he may accept us, who by thee is revealed to us. Let thy innocence and
purity procure pardon for our uncleanness and disobedience; let thy humility
extinguish our pride and vanity; thy meekness extinguish our anger, and thy
charity cover the multitude of our sins.

II.
O blessed Advocate and Mediator, intercede for us with thy Father and ours,
with thy God and ours; and grant that by the grace which thou have found, by
the prerogative which thou have deserved, by the mercy which thou have
purchased for us, that as thou were partaker of our sufferings and infirmities,
so we by thy death and resurrection, and by thy infinite gracious intercession,
may be made partakers of thy holiness and thy glory.

III.
Let the brightness of the divine grace for ever shine upon thy servants, that
we being purified from all error and infidelity, from weak fancies and curious
inquiries, may perceive and adore the wisdom and the love of God in the truth
and mysteriousnesse of this Divine Sacrament: And be pleased to lighten in our
spirits such a burning love, and such a shining devotion, that we may truly
receive thee, and be united unto thee; that we may feed on thee the celestial
Manna, and may with an eye of faith see thee under the cloud and in the vail;
and at last may see thee in the brightest effusions of thy glory. Amen.

A Confession of Faith in order to the Mysteries of the Holy Sacrament; taken
out of the Liturgy of St. Clement; to be used in the days of Preparation or
Communion.
HOly, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabbath; Heaven and Earth are full of thy
glory. Blessed art thou, O God, and blessed is thy Name for ever and ever,
Amen.

For thou art holy, and in all things thou art sanctified and most exalted, and
sit on high above all for ever and ever.

Holy is thy only begotten Son our Lord Jesus Christ, who in all things did
minister to thee his God and Father, both in the creation of the world, and in
the excellent providence and conservation of it. He suffered not mankind to
perish; but gave to him the Law of nature, and a Law written in Tables of
stone, and reproved them by his Prophets, and sent his Angel to be their
guards: And when men had violated the natural Law, and broken that which was
written; when they had forgotten the Divine Judgment manifested in the deluge
upon the old world, in fire from heaven upon Sodom and Gomorrah, in many
plagues upon the Egyptians, in the slaughters of the Philistines, and when the
wrath of God did hang over all the world for for their iniquity, according to
thy will he who made man resolved to become a man; he who is the Lawgiver
would be subject to Laws; he that is the High Priest would be made a Sacrifice,
and the great Shepherd of our souls would be a Lamb and be slain for us. Thee
his God and Father he appeased, and reconciled unto the world, and freed all
men from the instant anger: He was born of a Virgin, born in flesh; He is God,
and the Word, the beloved Son, the first born of every creature; according to
the Prophecies which went before him, of the seed of of Abraham and David, and
of the Tribe of Judah.

He who is the maker of all that are born, was conceived in the womb of a
Virgin; and he that is void of all flesh, was incarnate and made flesh: He was
born in time who was begotten from eternity: He conversed piously with men and
instructed them with his holy Laws and doctrine: He cured every disease and
every infirmity: He did signs and wonders among the people: He slept and eat
and drank, who feeds all the living with food, and fills them with his
blessing: He declared thy Name to them who knew it not: He enlightened our
ignorances: He enkindled Godliness, and fulfilled thy will, and finished all
that which thou gave him to do.

All this when he had done, he was taken by the hands of wicked men, by the
treachery of false Priests and an ungodly people, he suffered many things of
them, and by thy permission suffered all shame and reproach. He was delivered
to Pilate the President, who judged him that is the Judge of the quick and
dead, and condemned him who is the Savior of all others. He who is impassible
was crucified; and He died who is of an immortal nature; and they buried him by
whom others are made alive; that by his death and passion he might free them
for whom he came, and might dissolve the bands of the Devil, and deliver men
from all his crafty malices.

But then he rose again from the dead, he conversed with his Disciples forty
days together, and then was received up into heaven, and there sits at the
right hand of God his Father.

We therefore being mindful of these things which he did and suffered for us,
give thanks to thee Almighty God, not as much as we should, but as much as we
can: and here fulfill his Ordinance [ and believe all that he said, and know and
confess that he has given us his body to be the food, and his blood to be the
drink of our souls; that in him we live and move and have our being; that by
him we are taught, by his strength enabled, by his graces prevented, by his
spirit conducted, by his death pardoned, by his resurrection justified, and by
his intercession defended from all our enemies, and set forward in the way of
holiness and life eternal.]

O grant that we and all thy servants, who by faith and Sacramental
participation communicate with the Lord Jesus, may obtain remission of our
sins, and be confirmed in piety, and may be delivered from the power and
illusions of the Devil; and being filled with thy Spirit, may become worthy
members of Christ, and at last may inherit eternal Life; through the same our
Lord Jesus Christ, Amen.

CHAP. IV. Of Charity, preparatory to the Blessed Sacrament.
SECT. I.
THE second great Instrument of preparation to the blessed Sacrament, is
Charity: for though this be involved in faith, as in its cause and moral
principle, yet we are to consider it in the proper effects also of it, in its
exercise and operations relative to the Mysteries. For they that speak
distinctly, and give proprieties of employment to the two Sacraments, by that
which is most signal and eminent in them both respectively, call Baptism the
Sacrament of Faith, and the Eucharist the Sacrament of Charity; that is, Faith
in Baptism enters upon the work of a good life; and in the holy Eucharist it is
actually productive of that Charity, which at first was designed and undertaken.

For Charity is that fire from heaven, which unless it does enkindle the
Sacrifice, God will never accept it for an atonement. This God declared to us
by his Laws given to the sons of Israel and Aaron. The Sacrifice that was Gods
portion was to be eaten and consumed by himself, and therefore to be devoured
by the holy fire that came down from heaven: And this was imitated by the
Persians, who worshipped the fire, and thought what the fire devoured, their
god had plainly eaten. (...).
So Maximus Tyrius tells of them, that bringing their Sacrifices, they were
wont to say, O Fire our Lord, eat this meat. And Pindar (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...).
Od. 7.
in his Olympiaes tells of the Rhodians, that when they brought a Sacrifice to
Jupiter, and had by chance forgotten to bring their fire, he accepting of their
good intentions, and pitying their forgetfulness, rained down upon them a
golden shower from a yellow cloud; that is, a shower of fire came and consumed
their sacrifice. Now this is the great emblem of Charity: Epulantes adludit
flamma.
the flame consumes the feasters Sacrifice, and makes it a divine nutriment;
our Charity it purifies the Oblation, and makes their Prayers accepted,

(...) Diaconi solebant enunciare in Synaxi.
The Tables of the Lord, like the Delian Altars, must not be defiled with blood
and death, with anger and revenge, with wrath and indignation: and this is to
be in all senses of duty and ministration an unbloody Sacrifi^e. The blood of
the Cross was ^he last that was to have been shed. The Laws can shed more, but
nothing else. For by remembering and representing the effusion of blood, not by
shedding it, our expiation is now perfected and complete: but nothing hinders
it more than the spirit of war and death; not only by the emissions of the
hand, or the apertures of a wound, but by the murder of the tongue, and the
cruelties of the heart, or by an unpeaceable disposition.

It was love that first made Societies, and love that must continue our
Communions: and God who made all things by his power, does preserve them by his
love; and by union and society of parts every creature is preserved. When a
little w^ter is spilt from a full Vessel, and falls into its enemy dust, it
curles it self into a drop, and so stands equally armed in every point of the
circle, dividing the Forces of the enemy, that by that little union it may
stand as long as it can; but if it be dissolved into flatnesse, it is changed
into the nature and possession of the dust. Scelera dissident. Seneca.
War is one of Gods greatest plagues; and therefore when God in this holy
Sacrament pours forth the greatest effusion of his love, peace in all
capacities, and in all dimensions, and to all purposes, he will not endure that
they should come to these love feasts Facinus saevum and atrox inter pocula
atque epulas, ubi libare Diis dapes, ubi been precari mos esset, ad spectaculum
scorti procacis in sinu Consulis rec^bantis, mactatam humanam victimam esse,
and cruore mensam respersam. Sic Valerius Antiates apud Livium, lib. 39.
who are unkind to their brethren, quarrelsom with their neighbors, implacable
to their enemies, apt to contentions, hard to be reconciled, soon angry,
scarcely appeased. These are dogs, and must not come within the holy place,
where God who is the Congregating Father, and Christ the great minister of
peace, (...), Dionys. Areop.
and the holy spirit of love are present in mysterious Symbols and most
gracious Communications.

For although it be true that God loves us first, yet he will not continue to
love us, or proceed in the methods of his kindness, unless we become like
unto him and love. For by our love and charity he will pardon us, and he will
comfort us, and he will judge us, and he will save us; and it can never be well
with us till love that governs heaven it self be the Prince of all our actions
and our passions. Cum nostros animos amor quo coelum regitur, regit. Boeth.
consol. Philos.
By this we know we are translated from death to life, by our love unto our
brethren: That Is the testimonial of our comfort. I was hungry and ye fed me: I
was hungry and ye fed me not: These are the Tables of our fi^al judgment. If ye
love me, keep my Commandments: That Is the measure of our obedience. In that ye
have done kindness to one of these little ones, ye have done it unto me: That
is the installing of the Saints in their Thrones of Glory. If thou bring a
gift to the altar, leave it there; go and be reconciled to thy brother: That Is
the great instrument of our being accepted. No man can love God and hate his
brother: That Is the rule of our examination in this particular. This is a new
Commandment, that ye love one another: There Is the great precept of the Gospel.
This is an old Commandment, that ye love one another: There is the very Law of
Nature. And to sum up all; Love is the fulfilling of the Law; that is the
excellency and perfection of a man; and there is the expectation of all reward,
and the doing all our du^y, and the sanctification of every action, and the
spirit of life: It is the heart and the fire and the salt of every Sacrifice;
it is the crown of every Communion. And all this mysterious excellency is
perfectly represented by that divine exhortation made by Saint Paul; Purge out
therefore the old leaven, 1 Cor. 5.7, 8.
that ye may be a new lump, as ye are unleavened. For even Christ our Passover
is sacrificed for us. Therefore let us keep the feast, not with old leaven,
neither with the leaven of MALICE and wickedness, but with the unleavened
bread of sincerity and truth.

Now concerning this grace, if we will inquire after it in order to a worthy
receiving the holy Communion, we must inquire after the effects and offices of
Charity; and by the good we do, or are ready to do, take an account of our
selves in this particular. The offices and general duties are three. 1. Doing
good. 2. Speaking good, and, 3. ^orgiving evil.

SECT. II. Of doing good to our Neighbors.
HE that loves me does me good; for until love be beneficial, it is not my
good, but his fancy and pleasure that delights in me. I do not examine this
duty by our alms alone; for although they are an excellent instrument of life (
for alms deliver from death, Tobit 12.9.
said the Angel to old Tobit) yet there are some who are bountiful to the poor,
and yet not charitable to their neighbor. You can best tell whether you have
charity to your brother, by your willingness to oblige him, and do him real
benefit, and keeping him from all harm we can. Do you do good to all you can?
Will you willingly give friendly counsel? Do you readily excuse your neighbors
faults? Do you rejoice when he is made glad? Do you delight in his honor and
prosperity? Do you stop his entry into folly and shame? Do not you laugh at his
miscarriages? Do you stand ready in mind to do all good offices to all you can
converse with? For nothing makes Societies so fair and lasting, as the mutual
endearment of each other by good offices; and never any man did a good turn to
his brother, but one time or other himself did eat the fruit of it. The good
man in the Greek Epigram that found a dead man's scul unburied, in kindness
digging a grave for it, opened the enclosures of a Treasure: And we read in the
Annals of France, that when Goutran King of Burgundy was sleeping by the
murmurs of a little brook, his Servant espied a Lizard coming from his Masters
head, and essayed to pass the water; but seeming troubled because it could
not, he laid his sword over the brook, and made an iron bridge for the little
beast, who passing entered into the earth, and speedily returned back to the
King, and disturbed him (as it is supposed) into a dream, in which he saw an
iron bridge which landed him at the foot of the mountain, where if he did dig
he should find a great heap of gold. The servant expounded his Masters dream,
and showed him the iron bridge; and they dug where the Lizard had entered,
where they found indeed a Treasure; and that the Servants piety was rewarded
upon his Lords head, and procured wealth to one and honor to the other. There
is in humane nature a strange kind of nobleness and love to return and
exchange good offices: but because there are some dogs who bite your hand when
you reach them bread, God by the ministry of his little creatures tells, that
if we will not, yet he will certainly recompense every act of piety and charity
we do one to another. * This the ^gyptians did well signify in one of the new
names of their Constellations: For when the wife of Ptolomaeus Euergetes had
vowed her hair to the Temple upon condition her husband might return in safety,
and she did consecrate the beauty of her head to the ornaments of Religion,
Comonus the Astronomer told her that the Gods had p^aced her hair among the
Stars; and to this day they call one knot of Stars by the name of Berenices
hair. For every such worthiness like this will have an immortal name in some
Record, -- Ille capillos coelo infert, inopes qui miseratus alit. Billii
antholog.
and it shall be written above the Stars, and set by the names of the Sons of
God, who by doing worthy things have endeared Communions and Societies of
mankind.

In all the Sacrifices of the Ancients they were hugely kind to one another;
they invited their friends to partake the Sacrifice, and called them to a
portion of the pardon, that they might eat of that mercy and that forgiveness
which they expected from their God. Then they sent portions to the absent; then
they renewed Leagues, and re-established Peace, and made marriages, and joined
Families, and united hearts, and knitted Interests by a thread and chain of
mutual acts of kindness and endearment: And so should we, when we come to this
holy Sacrifice; we must keep our hearts entire to God, and divide them amongst
our Brethren, and heartily love all them who feed upon the same Christ, who
live by the same faith, who are entertained by the same hope, and are
confederate by the laws, and the events and the causes, by the acts and
emanation of the same Charity. * But this thing is plain; no discourse here is
useful, but an exhortation; all that can be said is this; that it is decent and
it is useful, and it is necessary that we be very kind and very charitable to
all the members of Christ; with whom we are joined by the ligatures of the same
body, and supported by the strength of the same nourishment, and blessed by
influences from the same Divine head, the Lord Jesus Christ.

SECT. III. Of speaking good of our neighbors.
IF it be not in our hands to do well, it must be in our hearts; and the
contrary must never be upon our tongues; we are sure we can speak well, or we
can abstain from speaking ill. If it be otherwise with us, we can not be
welcome here; we shall not worthily communicate. God opens his mouth and his
heart and his bowels, his bosom and his treasures to us in this holy
Sacrament, and calls to us to draw water as from a river; and can we come to
drink of the pleasant streams that we may (...).
have only moisture enough to talk much and long against the honor of our
brother or our sister? Inter epulas, ubi been precari mos erat. Livius. lib. 39.
Can it be imagined that Christ who never spoke an ill word, should take thee
into his arms, -- gravior terras infestat Echidna
Cum sua vipereae jaculantur toxica linguae
Atque homini fit homo serpens, O prodiga culpae
Germina, natur^eque utero fatalia monstra!
Queis nimis innocuo volupe est in sanguine rictus.
Tingere, fraternasque sibras, cognataque pasci
Viscera, and arrosae deglubere funera famae
Quae morum ista lues?

and feast thee at his table, and dwell in thy heart, and lodge thee in his
bosom, who make thy self all one with the Devil; whose office and work it is
to be an accuser of the Brethren? No, Christ never will feast serpents at his
Table *, persons who have stings instead of tongues, and venom in all the
moisture of their mouth, and reproach is their language.

We should easily consent that he that ki^^^d a man yesterday and is likely to
kill another to morrow were not this day worthy to Communicate: now some
persons had rather lose their lives than lose their honor; what then think we
of their preparation to the holy communion, that make nothing of murdering
their brothers or their sisters same? that either invent evil stories falsely
and maliciously, or believing them easily, report them quickly, and aggravate
them spitefully, and scatter them diligently? He that delights to report evil
things of me, that will not endure so much as to have me well spoken of, has
certainly but little kindness to me: he would very hardly die for me, or lay
out great sums of money for me, that will not afford me the cheapest charity of
a good word. The Jews have a saying; that it were better that a man were put
into a flame of fire, than he should publicly disgrace his Neighbor. But in
this there are two great considerations that declare the unworthiness of it.

1. They who readily speak reproachfully of others, destroy all the love and
combinations of charity in the world; they ruin the excellency and peculiar
privilege of mankind, whose nature it is to delight in society, and whose
needs and nature make it necessary. Now slander and reproach and speaking evil
one of another poisons love, and brings in hatred, and corrupts friendship, and
tempts the biggest virtue by anger to pass unto revenge. For an evil tongue is
a perpetual storm; it is a daily temptation and no virtue can without a miracle
withstand its temptation. If you strike a lamprey but once with a rod (says
the Greek proverb) you make him gentle; (...).
but if often you provoke him. A single injury is entertained by Christian
patience like a stone into a pocket of wool; it rests soft in the embraces of
a meek spirit, which delights to see it self overcome a wrong by a worthy
sufferance; but he that loves to do injury by talk, does it in all companies,
and takes all occasions, and brings it in by violence, and urges it rudely,
till patience being weary goes away, and is waited upon by Charity, which never
forsakes or goes away from patience. A wound with the tongue is like a bruise,
it cannot be cured in four and twenty hours.

Sed miserere tui rabido nec perditus ore
Fumantem nasum vivi tentaveris ursi.
Sit placidus licet and lambat digitosque manusque
Si dolor et bilis, si justa coegerit ira,
Ursus erit. Martial.
2. No man sins singly in such instances as these. Some men commit one murder
and never do another; some men are surprised and fall into uncleanness or
drunkenness; but repent of it speedily and never again return to folly: but an
evil and an uncharitable tongue is an accursed principle; it is in its very
nature and original equal to an evil habit, and it enters without temptation,
and dwells in every part of our conversation, and injures every man, and every
woman: and is like the evil spirit that was in love with Tobias his wife; if
you drive him from Nineve, he will run to the utmost parts of Egypt, there also
unless an Angel bind him, he will do all the mischief in the world, for there
is not in the world a worse Devil than a devilish tongue Cede Hircana Tigris,
Fremanthi Bellua, cede
Tuque genas obnube tuas natura pudori,
Laeviu^ ingenium est homini; gravioraque fata
Lingua cruenta serens, non uno in funere ludit.



But I am not now to speak of it as it is injurious to our neighbor, Nefas
enim est per os quo profertur Nomen illud sanctissimum, quicquam turpe progredi.
but as it is an hinderance to our worthy communicating, The mouth that
speaks lies, or stings his neighbor, or boasts proud things, is not fit to
drink the blood of the sacrificed Lamb. Christ enters not into those lips from
whence slander and evil talkings do proceed, and the tongue that loves to
dispraise his brother, can not worthily celebrate the praises and talk of the
glorious things of God; and let no man deceive himself, an injurious talker is
an habitual sinner; and he that does not learn the discipline of the tongue,
can never have the charity of Christ, or the blessings of the peaceful
Sacrament. De Catone dixit Plutarchus, Mensam inprimis putabat esse amicitiae
conciliandae aptam; ac frequens illic laudatio egregiorum virorum
introducebatur; frequens etiam malorum and improborum oblivio, nec
vituperationi eorum, vel commendationi permittebat in convivium suum Cato
accessum.
Persons that slander or disgrace their brother are bound to make restitution;
It is as if they had stolen a jewel, they must give it back again, or not come
hither. But they that will neither do nor speakwell of others De Catone dixit
Plutarchus, Mensam inprimis putabat esse amicitiae conciliandae aptam; ac
frequens illic laudatio egregiorum virorum introducebatur; frequens etiam
malorum and improborum oblivio, nec vituperationi eorum, vel commendationi
permittebat in convivium suum Cato accessum.
are very far from charity, and they that are so, ought to be as far from the
Sacrament, or they will not be very far from condemnation. But a good man will
be as careful of the reputation, as of the life of his brother; and to be apt
to speak well of all men is a sign of a charitable and a good man; and that
goes a great way in our preparation to a worthy Communion.

SECT. IV. Forgiveness of injuries a necessary part of preparation to the holy
Sacrament.
THis duty is expressed not only as obligatory to us, but as relative to the
Holy Sacrament, in the words of our blessed Savior, When thou bring thy
gift to the Altar, Mat. 5.23, 24.
and there remembrest that thy Brother has ought against thee, leave there thy
g^ft and go, be first reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer. This
Precept was indeed instanced in the Levitical Sacrifices and Jewish Altars; but
because, as St. Irenaeus observes, the Precepts of Christ, however expressed,
relate to Moses Law but less principally, and chiefly design an Evangeli al
duty See this discoursed and proved. Rule of Conscience, Book 2. Chap. 3. Rule
15. Irenae. lib. 4. c. 34.
; therefore he referrs these words to the celebration of the Christian
Eucharistical Sacrifice and Oblation; concerning which he has these excellent
words: From the beginning God respected Abels offering because he offered in
righteousness and singleness of heart. But God regarded not the Sacrifice of
Cain, because he had a heart divided from his Brother, full of zeal and malice,
and therefore God who knows all secrets thus reproves him. If thou do
rightly offer, but not rightly divide, be quiet, God will not be appeased with
thy sacrifice. For if any one in outward appearance offers a clean, a right,
and a pure sacrifice, but in his soul does not truly apportion his communion to
his neighbor, he has sin within, and by his external sacrifice does not bring
God unto him, neither will the oblation profit him at all, unless the malice
that he has conceived within does cease, but that sin will make him every day
more and more a murderer.] In pursuance of this; St. Cyril tells, St. Cyril.
Hier. mystag. Cat. 5.
that the Ancient Christians were wont before the Communion to kiss each other
as a Symbol of reconciled minds, and forgotten injuries; and in confirmation of
this practice brings the preceptive words of our Lord now cited.

And our blessed Savior himself adds a parallel to the first precept, which
gives light and explication to it: [ When you stand praying, if you have any
thing against any man forgive him, Mar. 11.25.
that your Father which is in heaven may forgive you your trespasses] and so
Christ taught us to pray [ Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that
trespass against us.] Let us consider what we do, and consider what we say. Do
we desire to be forgiven no otherwise? Do not we exact every little ignorance,
and grow warm at every mistake? And are not we angry at an unavoidable chance?
Would we have God do so to us, and forgive us in no other manner than as we do,
that is, turn his anger into every shape, and smite us in every part? Or would
we have God pardon us only for little things, for a rash word, or an idle hour
spent less severely? If we do so to our Brother, it is a great matter, but if
he reviles us to our head, if he blasphemes, and dishonours us, if he rob us,
if he smite us on the face, what then? We rob God of his honor, his Priests of
their reverence, his houses of their beauty, his Churches of their maintenance:
we talk vile things of his holy Name, we despise Religion, we oppose his
Honor, and care not for his Service. It is certain we do not usually forgive
things of this nature to our brother; what then will become of our prayer? And
what will be the effect of our Communion? And yet it is certain, there is
nothing in the world easier than to forgive an injury. It costs us nothing,
after it is once suffered; and if our passions and foolish principles would
give us leave to understand it; the precise duty of forgiveness is a perfect
negative; it is a letting things alone as they are, and making no more evils in
the world, in which already there was one too many, even that which thou did
suffer. And indeed, that forgiveness is the best which is the most perfect
negative; that is* in malice be children; whose pretty quarrels though they be
fierce as a sudden spark, yet they are as innocent as the softest part of their
own flesh, Ignoramus sine pace Communionem. S. Hieron Epist. 62. ad Theophilum.
and as soon out as that sudden spark, and forgotten perfectly as their first
dream: and that is true forgiveness: and without this we can never pray with
just and perfect confidence and expectations.

1 Pet. 3.7.
St. Peter gives this precept in a considerable instance; Give honor unto the
wife as unto the weaker vessel that your prayers be not hindered; that is,
consider that they are weak and tender, easily moved, and soon disordered;
their understanding is less, and their passions more; and if it happens to be
so, bear their burdens, comply with their innocent passions, pity their
infirmities, supply the breaches made by their indiscretions, take no notice of
little inconveniences: Counsel sweetly, reprove tenderly, strike no fires, and
enkindle no flames; that is, do all that you can for peace, without peevish
quarrels and little commencements of a Domestic War: for if you give way to
any thing of this nature, it will hinder your prayers; for how shall the
husband and the wife pray together if they be angry at each other? For without
love and without peace it is to no purpose to pray. The devotion of a man that
is not in actual peace and kindness with his wife, is like a hot dead coal, it
will burn his fingers that touches it; but it is wholly useless: but he that
lives in peace with her, in love and prudent conduct, his devotion is a flaming
fire; it kindles all that is round about it, it warms and shines, it is
beauteous in it self, and it is useful to others; it is fit for the house, and
fit for the Altar; it will set the Incense on smoking, and put the sacrifice
on fire. And so it is in every instance of society and conversation; but I
instanced in this the rather, because charity at home and a peaceable society
in a Family is the first of all public unions. When Philip of Macedon
persuaded the Greek Ambassadors that they should invite their Cities to peace
and concord, Demaratus of Corinth began to laugh at him for his counsel, and
thought it a thing ridiculous for him to speak of peace among the Greek
Republics, who was always wrangling at home with his wise Olympias, But as to
the present matter,

The fourth Council of Carthage refused to accept the oblations of quarrelling
and angry persons; Cap. 93: Council. Carth. 4. Oblationes dissidentium fratrum,
neque in Sacrario, neque in Gazophylacio Episcopi recipiant.

Nunquam mihi contingat turbatum ad pacis accedere sacrificium; cum ira and
disceptatione accedere ad sacramentum, in quo Deus indubitanter est,
reconcilians mundum sibi. Certe non recipitur munus quodcunque meum quod defero
ad Altar, nisi ante placato fratre, quem me forte laesisse meminero, quanto
minus si meipsum non pacavero prius? S. Bernard, de praecept: and dispens.

Quam sibi pacem promittunt inimici fratrum?


it is like that of the High Priests in the case of Judas his restitution of
the money, they would not put it into the Treasury because it was the price of
blood. Now because our blessed Master in his Law has handled all great angers
and uncharitableness under the title of murder; The Church thought it
reasonable not to receive the offerings, that is to reject from the Communion
all those persons that were in mutual feuds, enmities and fierce angers. I
wonder (says St. Cyprian) what peace they can look for that are at war with
their brethren? Possunt tales acerrimis inediis macerari donec reconcilientur.
Fabian. did. 90. cap. si quis.
These men may be compelled by the injunction of s^vere fastings to be
reconciled: said Fabianus the Martyr. And in the decree of P. Victor it was
expressly commanded, Epist. 2. ad Afros.
that they should be driven from the communion of all faithful people, who are
not in peace, and have no charity to all their Brethren. This decree was
renewed and earnestly pressed in the Council of Agatho. Placuit ut (sicut
plerunque fit) quicunque odio aut longinqua inter se lite dissenserint and ad
pacem revocari divina intention nequiverint, a Sacerdotibus civitatis primitus
arguantur, Quod si inimicitias deponere perniciosa intention noluerint, de
Ecclesiae coetu justissima excommunicatione pellantur. Council. Agath. can. 31.
They that will not by the grace of God working within them lay aside the
hat^ed and long suits and dissentions, first let them be reproved by the
Priests of the City. But if they will not at their reproof lay aside their
enmities, let them by a most just excommumunication be driven from the
Congregations of the Church. Det ille veniam facile, cui venia est opus.

(...).

Libanius.


] Which Decree the Church of England has inserted into the second Rubric
before her office of Communion; of which I shall afterward give account. But
for the present we may consider that it is infinitely reasonable, that he that
needs and comes for a great pardon, should not stick at the giving of a little,
and he that desires to be like God, and comes to be united to him, should do
like him, that is rejoice in remitting offenses rather than in punishing them.
In this as in all other things we must follow Gods example; for in this alone
he else will follow ours. In imitating him it is certain we are innocent; and
if in this he follows us, though we be wicked, yet he is holy, because revenge
is his, and he alone is to pay it. If therefore we will forgive, he will; if we
will not, Si repetes, repetet, si durus es, ille rogantem
Abjiciet, fusas conteret atque preces.
In reliquis exempla tibi, namque omnibus ille
Praebet, at hic sequitus quod prior ipse facis:
Utque solet speculum quas cepit reddere formas.
Aequa ita lanx lanci dia futura tua est.
Antholog. Billii.
neither will he: for he makes his spear as long, and his angers as lasting as
we do ours. But this duty, and the great reasonableness and necessity I shall
represent in the excellent words of the Talmudists, recorded also by the famous
Bensirach Ecclus. 28.1, 2.3.
[ He that revengeth shall find vengeance of the Lord, and he will surely keep
his sins in remembrance. Forgive thy neighbor the hurt that he has done unto
thee, so shall thy sins also be forgiven when thou prayest. One man keeps
anger against another, and does he seek healing from the Lord? He shows no
mercy to a man that is like himself, and does he ask forgiveness for his own
sins? If he that is but flesh nourish hatred, who will entreat for pardon of
his sins?] The duty is plain, and the reason urgent, and the Commandment
express, and the threatening terrible, and the promise excellent. There is in
this no more to be said; but that we consider concerning the manner of reducing
it to practice, in order to our preparation to a worthy Communion: and consider
the special cases of conscience relating to this great duty.

1. Therefore we are bound to forgive every man that offends us. For concerning
every one of our Brethren it is equally true, that he is an excellent creation,
that he is thy brother, that he is heir of the same hopes, born to the same
inheritance, descended of the same Father, nursed by the Church which is his
Mother and thine; that there is in him Gods Image drawn by the same hand,
described in the same lines; that there are in him many good things for which
he can be loved, and many reasons in him for which he ought to be pardoned; God
has made many decrees for him, and the Angels minister to him, and Christ died
for him, and his soul is very precious in the eyes of God, and in Heaven it
self the man whom thou hate is very considerable; and there, there are great
desires for his temporal and eternal happiness, and why should thou despise,
and why should thou stand out against all this?

2. Not only every man, but every offense must be forgiven. The Wise man says,
[ That for some things there will be no returning again: a blow indeed, or an
evil word may be pardoned; but for upbraiding and pride, and disclosing
secrets, and a treacherous wound every friend will depart, Ecclus. 22.22.
and never return again.] But he only tells how it will be, not what ought to
be; what it is likely to be in matter of fact; not how it should be in case of
conscience: and he means this of societies and civil friendships; but in
Religion, we go higher, and even these also, and greater than these must be
pardoned; unless we would prescribe a limit to Gods mercy in the remission of
our sins. He will pardon every sin of ours, for the pardon of which we can
rightly pray; but yet we must pray for it, and hope it upon no measures but
those of our, forgiveness; Jupiter omnipotens precibus si flecteris ullis,
Aspice nos, hoc tantum, ut si pietate meremur, Da deinde auxilium. Aeneid. 2.
O Jupiter (said the distressed Prince) hear our prayers according to our
piety, look upon us, and as we do, so give us help, and there is no instance
that can be considerable to the lessening or excusing of this duty. Dimittenda
sunt debita, non pecuniae solum, sed omnium causarum, culparum, criminum,
quicquid homo incurrere poterit; in his tibi quum incurrerit alter, ignosce.
We must forgive not only injuries in the matter of money; but in all errors
and crimes whatsoever in which any man can sin, and thou can be offended.

3. Although in these things there is no difficulty; yet in the intention and
expressions of this duty there is some. For if it be inquired what is meant by
forgiving; many men suppose it is nothing but saying, I forgive him with all my
heart, and I pray God forgive him; But this is but words, and we must have more
material significations of it then so, because nothing can commute for the
omission of the necessary parts of this duty. It is therefore necessary that we
observe these measures.

1. Every man that has received injuries be they never so great, must have a
mind perfectly free from all intentions of revenge in any instance whatsoever.
For when the question is concerning forgiving him that did the wrong, every man
can best answer his question by placing himself in the seat of him that did the
offense, and considering to what purposes, and by what significations, and in
what degrees, and to what event of things himself would fain be pardoned, if he
were in his case and did repent the injury and did desire pardon. That Is the
measure and the rule; and we learn it from Homo sine peccato esse non potes,
and vis semper tibi dimitti. Dimitte semper. Quantum vis tibi dimitti, tantum
dimitte. Quoties vis dimitti tibi toties dimitte imo quia vis totum dimitti
tibi, totum dimitte. Chrysologus.
Chrysologus. Qui ne tuberibus propriis offendat amicum
Postulat, ignoscat verrucis illius; aequum est
Peccatis veniam poscentem reddere rurfus.
Horat. 1. Sermon. 3.
Thou art a sinful man, and thou would that God and man should always
forgive thee. Do thou forgive always; so much, so often, so entirely as thou
would be pardoned thy self; so much, so often, and so entirely give pardon
to thy enemy: and this together with the reason of it is well expressed in the
Gospel of the Nazarens. If thy Brother sins against thee in words, and offers
thee satisfaction seven times in a day, receive him. Simon his Disciple says
unto him, seven times in a day? The Lord answers, yea, I say unto you, seventy
times seven times. For even amongst the Prophets also, after they were
anointed with the Holy Ghost, there was found the word of sin, that is, they
also offended in their tongues.

Against this there is no objection, but what is made by the foolish discourses
of young men, fighters and malicious, who by the evil manners of the world are
taught to call revenge gallantry, and the pardoning of injuries to be
pusillanimity and cowardice: for this Devil that dwells in tombs and and cannot
be bound with chains, prevails infinitely upon this account amongst the more
glorious part of mankind; but (as all other things are, which oppose the wisdom
of God) is infinitely unreasonable; there being nothing in the world a greater
testimony of impotency and effiminacy of spirit than a desire of revenge. Who
are so cruel as Cowards, and who so revengeful as the weakest and the most
passionate women? Wise Crysippus, and gentle Thales, and the good old man who
being to drink his poison refused to give any of it to his persecutor; these
men did not think revenge a pleasure, or a worthy satisfaction. -- quippe minuti
Semper and infirmi est animi, exiguique voluptas
Ultio, continuo sic collige, quod vindicta
Nemo magis gaudet quam foemina
Crysippus non dicet idem, nec mite Thaletis
Ingenium. dulcique senex vicinus Hymetto,
Qui partem acceptae saeva inter vincla cicutae
Accusatori nollet dare.
Juvenal.
Fot what man is so barbarous as to recover his leprosy by sucking the life
blood from dying infants? a good man would rather endure ten leprosies than one
such remedy. Such a thing is revenge; it pretends to cure a wound but does it
with an intolerable remedy. It was the song of Cyclops to his sheep; feed you
upon the tender herbs, I mean to feed upon the flesh and drink the blood of the
Greeks; this is a violence not only to the laws and manners, Pascite vos
herbas, sociis ego pascor Achivis.
but even to the very nature of men. Lions indeed and Tygres do with a strange
curiosity eye and observe him that struck them, and they fight with him above
all the hunters; to strike again is the return of beasts; but to pardon him
that smote me, is the bravest amends and the noblest way of doing right unto
our selves; whilst in the ways of a man and by the methods of God, we have
conquered our enemy into a friend. But revenge is the disease of honor, and is
as contrary to the wisdom and bravery of men as dwelling in rivers and
wallowing in fires is to their natural manner of living, and he who out of
pretense of valor pursues revenge is like to him, who because fire is a
glorious thing, is willing to have a St. Anthonies fire in his face.

2. He that is injured must so pardon, as that he must not pray to God to take
revenge of his enemy. It was noted as a pitiful thing of Brutus, that when his
army was broken and himself exposed to the insolences of his enemies, and that
he could not revenge himself, he cried out most passionately in the words of
the Greek tragedy (...).
, to Jupiter to take vengeance of young Octavius. But nothing is more against
the nobleness of a Christian spirit, and the interest of a holy communion, than
when all meet together to pray for all, and all for every one, that any man
should except his enemy; that he who prays for blessings to the whole mystical
body of Christ, should secretly desire that one member should perish. If one
prays for thee, Quidenim prodest siunus prote oret ad Dominum and alius
adversum te Deum interpellet? S. Chrysostom. in 5. Matthew.
and another prays against thee, who knows whether thou shall be blessed or
accursed?

3. He that means to communicate worthily must so forgive his enemy, as never
to upbraid his crime any more. For we must so forgive as that we forget it; not
in the sense of nature, but perfectly in the sense of charity. For to what good
purpose can any man keep a record of a shrewd turn, but to become a spy upon
the actions of his enemy, watchful to do him shame, or by that to aggravate
every new offense? It was a malicious part of Darius, Herod lib. 5.
when the Athenians had plundered Sardis, he resolving to remember the evil
turn till he had done them a mischief, commanded one of his servants that every
time he waited at supper, he should thrice call upon him, Sr. remember the
Athenians. The Devil is apt enough to do this office for any man; and he that
keeps in mind an injury, needs no other tempter to uncharitableness but his own
memory. He that resolves to remember it, never does forgive it perfectly; but,
is the under officer of his own malice. ^or as rivers that run under ground do
infallibly fall into the sea and mingle with the salt waters: so is the injury
that is remembered; it runs under ground indeed, and the anger is head, but it
tends certainly to mischief; and though it be sometimes less deadly for want
of opportunity, yet it is never less dangerous.

4. He that would communicate worthily must so pardon his enemy, that though he
be certain the man is in the wrong, and sinned against God in the cause, yet he
must not under pretense of righting God and Religion and the laws, pursue his
own anger and revenge, Quae vindicta prior quam cum formido superbos
Flectit, and assuetum spoliis affligit egestas?
Claudian de bello Getico.

and bring him to evil. Every man is concerned that evil be to him that loves
it, but we cozen our selves by thinking that we have nothing to do to pardon
Gods enemies, and vile persons. It is true, we have not; but neither has any
private man any thing to do to punish them; but he that cannot pardon Gods
enemy, can pray to God that he would: and it were better to let it all alone,
than to destroy charity upon pretense of justice or Religion. For if this
wicked man were thy friend, it may very well be supposed that thou would be
very kind to him, though he were Gods enemy: and we are easy enough to think
well of him that pleases us, let him displease whom he list besides.

5. He may worthily communicate, that so pardons his enemy, as that he
endeavor to make him to be his friend. Are you ready to do him good? Can you
relieve your enemy, if he were in want? Yes; it may be you can, and you wish it
were come to that. And some men will pursue their enemy with implacable
prosecutions till they have got them under their feet; and then they delight to
lift them up, and to speak kindly to the man, and to forgive him with all the
nobleness and bravery in the world. Nostrapte culpa facimus ut malis expediat
esse, Dum nimium dici nos bonos studemus and benignos. Terent. in Phorm.
But let us take heed, lest instead of showing mercy we make a triumph. Relieve
his need and be troubled that he needs it. Rescue him from the calamity which
he has brought upon himself, or is fallen into by misadventure, but never
thrust him down, that thou may be honored and glorious by raising him from
that calamity in which thou art secretly delighted, that he is entangled.
Lycurgus of S^arta in a tumult made against him by some Citizens lost an eye:
which fact the wiser part of the people infinitely detesting, gave the villain
that did it into their Princes power; and he used it worthily; he kept him in
his house a year, he taught him virtue, and brought him forth to the people a
worthy Citizen. To pardon thy enemy as David pardoned Absalom, that is true
charity; and he that does so pardon, needs no further inquiry into the case of
conscience. It was an excellent saying of Seneca. [When thou do forgive thy
enemy, Cum autem ignoscis, ita beneficium tuum tempera, ut non ignoscere
videaris sed absolvere: quia gravissimum poenae genus est contumeliosa venia.
rather seem to acquit him than to pardon him; rather excuse the fault, than
only forbear the punishment: for no punishment is greater, than so to order thy
pardon, that it shall glorify thy kindness, and upbraid and reproach his sin.

6. He that would be truly charitable in his forgiveness, and with just
measures would communicate, must so pardon his enemy, that he restore him to
the same state of love and friendship as before. This is urged by St. Bernard;
Tam liberaliter Dominus omnem condonavit injuriam, ut jam nec damnet
ulciscendo, nec confundat improperando, nec minus diligat imputando. St.
Bernard in Cantic.
as the great imitation of the Divine mercy. God has so freely, so entirely
pardoned our sins, that he neither condemns by revenging, nor confounds by
upbraiding, nor loves less by imputing. He revenges not at all, he never
upbraides, and when he has once pardoned, he never imputes it to any evil
purposes any more, And just so must our reconciliation be; we must love him as
we loved him before; for if we love him less, we punish him, if our love was
valuable; then he is forgiven indeed when he has lost nothing. I should be
thought severe if I should say that the true forgiveness and reconciliation
does imply a greater kindness after than before; but such is the effect of
repentance, and so is the nature of love. [ There is more joy over one sinner
that repents, than over ninety and nine just persons that need no
repentance:] and a broken Nam in hominum aetate multa eveniunt hujusmodi
Capiunt voluptates, mox rursum miserias,
Irae interveniunt, redeunt rursum in gratiam.
Verum irae si quae forte eveniunt hujusmodi
Inter eos rursum si reventum in gratiam est
Bis tanto amici sunt, inter se quam prius.
Plaut. in Amp.
love is like a broken bone, set it well, and it is the stronger for the
fracture. When Nicanor railed upon Philip of Macedon, he slighted him, and he
railed still; he then reproved him, but withal forgave him, and still he
railed; but when he forgave him, and g^ve him a donative, he sealed Nicanors
pardon, he confuted his calumny, and taught him virtue.

But this depends not upon the injured person alone, but upon the return and
repentance of him that did it. For no man is the better with God for having
sinned against him; and no man for having injured his brother can be the better
beloved by him: But if the sinner double his care in his repentance, and if the
offending man increase his kindness, justice, and endearments in his returns
to friendship, then it is the duty of charity so to pardon, so to restore as
the man deserves; that is, the sin must not be remembered in anger, to lessen
the worthiness of his amends. And this is that which our Blessed Savior says,
[ If he shall return and say, I repent, thou shall forgive him.]

But the understanding of this great duty will require a little more
exactness: let us therefore inquire more particularly into the practical
Questions or Cases of Conscience relating to this duty.

1. How far we are bound to forgive our enemy that does repent, and how far him
that does not?

2. How long and how often must we proceed in our pardon to the penitent?

3. What indications and signs of repentance are we to require and accept as
sufficient?

4. Whether after every relapse must the conditions of his pardon be harder
than before?

5. Whether the injured person be bound to offer peace and seek for
reconcilement? or whether may he let it alone, if the offending party does not
seek it?

6. Whether the precept of charity and forgiveness obliges us not to go to Law?

7. What charity or forgiveness the offended Husband or Wife is to give to the
other in case of adultery repented of?

Question I. Whether we are to forgive him that does not repent, and how far if
he does, and how far if he does not?
If he have done me no wrong, there is nothing to be forgiven; and if he offers
to give me satisfaction, he is out of my debt. But if he has been injurious,
and does not repair me, then I have something to pardon. But what reason is
there in that Religion that requires me to reward a sinner with a gift, to take
my enemy into my bosom, to invite new injuries Veterem ferendo injuriam
invitas novam.
by suffering and kindly rewarding the old? For by this means we may have
injuries enough, and sin shall live at the charge of the good man's piety, and
charity shall be the fuel of malice; what therefore is our duty in this case?

I answer, That there is a double sort of pardon or forgiveness: The first and
least is that which neither exacts revenge our selves, nor requires it of God,
nor delights in it if it happens: and this is due to all; those very enemies
that do not repent, that cease not still to persecute you with evil, must thus
be pardoned; whether they care for it or no, whether they ask it or ask it not.
For these we must also pray, we must bless them, we must speak as much good of
them as occasion and justice do require, and we must love them; that is, do
them justice, and do them kindness; and this expressly required of us by our
blessed Savior Mat. 5.24.
.

But there is also another forgiveness; that is, a restitution to the first
state of trust; to love him as well, to think as well of him; and this is only
due to them that repent, and ask pardon and make amends as they can: for then
the proper office of thy charity is to pity thy brothers infirmity, to accept
his sorrow, to entertain his friendship and his amends, and to put a period to
his repentance for having troubled thee. For his satisfaction and restitution
has taken away the material part of the injury; and thou art as well as thou
were before, or at least he would fain have thee so; and then there can be
nothing else done but what is done by thy charity; and by this thou must bear a
share in his sorrow, believe his affirmation, accept his repentance, cancel his
guilt, take off the remanent obligations, remove suspicion from him, entertain
no jealousies of him, but in all things trust him where charity is not
imprudent.

For it is not always safe to employ a person that has deceived my trust and
done me wrong. But if you perceive that he may wisely be trusted and employed,
charity must take off the objection of his former sailing. If by repentance he
has cut off the evil that he did thee, and that evil by which he did it, then
if you refuse to employ him because he once did you wrong, it is revenge and
not prudence. If he offended thee by pride, by anger, by covetousn^sse, it is
not enough that he say, Sir, forgive me, I will make you amends: It is enough
to make you pardon him, and perfectly to be reconciled to him; but unless his
repentance has destroyed his covetousness, his anger, or his pride, the evil
principle remains, and he will injure thee again. Which thing if wisely and
without pretenses thou can really perceive, to trust or to employ him in such
instances in which he formerly did thee injury, is not prudent nor safe; and no
charity ties thee to be a fool, and to suffer thy self to be tempted. Only be
careful that you do not mistake jealousy for prudence, and so lose the rewards
of charity; lest when we think our selves wise, we become fools.

Question II. How long and how often must we proceed in our forgiveness, and
accept of the repentance of injurious persons?
To this we need no answer but the words of our Blessed Savior; Luke 17.4.
If thy Brother trespass against thee seven times in a day, and seven times in
a day turn again to thee, saying, I repent, thou shall forgive him. Now this
seven times in a day, and seventy times seven times, is not a determined
number, but signifies infinitely. Seven times in a day do I praise thee, said
David. From this definite number some Ages of the Church took their pattern for
their Canonical hours. It was well enough, though in the truth of the thing he
meant, I will praise thee continually: and so must our pardoning be. For if
Christ has forgiven thee but seventy times seven times (says St. Austin) then
do thou also stop there; de verbis Domini.
let his measure be thine. If he denied to spare thee for the next fault, do
thou so to thy Brother. But St. Hierom observes concerning this number, That
Christ required us to forgive our Brother seventy times seven times in a day;
that is, four hundred and ninety times; meaning, that we must be ready to
forgive him oftener than he can need it. Ut toties peccanti fratri dimitteres in
die, quoties ipse peccare non posset.
Now though he that sins frequently and repents frequently, gives great reason
to believe that his repentances are but pretended, and that such repentances
before God signify nothing; yet that is nothing to us; it may be they are
rendered ineff^ctual by the relapse, and that they were good for the present, as
Ahabs was: but whether they be or be not, yet if he be not ashamed to repent so
often, we must think it no shame and no imprudence to forgive him, and to
forgive him so, that he be restored entirely to his former state of good
things; that is, there must be no let in thy charity; if there be in prudence,
that is another consideration: But his second repentance must be accepted as
well as his first, and his tenth as well as his fifth. And if any man think it
hard so often to be tied to accept his repentance, let him understand that it
is because himself has not yet been called to judgment; he has not heard the
voice of the exactor, he has not yet been delivered to the tormentors, nor
summed up his own accounts, nor beheld with amazement the vast number of his
sins. He that has in deepest apprehension placed himself before the dreadful
Tribunal of God, or felt the smart of conscience, or has been affrighted with
the fears of hell, or remembers how often he has been spared from an horrible
damnation, will not be ready to strangle his Brother, and afflict him for a
trifle, because he considers his own dangers of perishing for a sum which can
never be paid, if it never be forgiven.

Question III. What indications and signs of repentance are we to require and
to accept as sufficient?
I answer, that for this circumstance there is as proper an use and exercise of
our charity as in the direct forgiveness. We are not to exact securities and
demonstrations Mathematical, nor to demand the extremity of things. If thy
enemy be willing to make an amends, accept of his very willingness for some
part, and his amends for the other. Let every good act be forwardly
entertained, and persuade you heartily that all is well within. If you can
reasonably think so, you are bound to think so; for after all the signs of
repentance in the world he may deceive you; and whether his heart be right or
not, you can never know but by the judgment of charity; and that you may better
use betimes. For when ever your returning enemy says he does repent (that is,
gives humane and probable indications of his repentance;) you cannot tell but
that he says true; and therefore you must forgive. The words of Christ are
plain; if he returns, saying, I do repent: then it is a duty, and we can stay
no longer; for he that confesses his sin, and prays for pardon, has done
great violence and mortification to himself; he has punished his fault
Poenaeque genus vidisse precantem.
; and then there is nothing left to be done by the offended party but to return
to mercy and charity. Poenaeque genus vidisse precantem.
But in this affair it is remarkable what we are commanded by our blessed Lord:
Agree with thine adversary quickly, etc. l^ft thou be constrained to pay the
utmost farthing. Plainly intimating; that in reconcilements and returns of
friendship there is supposed always something to be abated, something clearly
forgiven: for if he pay thee to the utmost farthing, thou have forgiven nothing
It is merchandise and not forgiveness to restore him that does as much as you
can require. Be not over righteous, says Solomon; that is, let charity do
something of thy work, allow to her, place, and powers, and opportunity. It was
an excellent saying of St. Bernard: [ God is never called the God of revenges,
Sermon. 5. de Natali. Recte non pater judiciorum vel ultionum dicitur, sed pater
misericordiarum: quod miserendi causam sumat ex proprio, judicandi and
ulciscendi magis sumat ex nostro; feil. ex nostris peccatis.
but the Father of mercies; because the original of his revenges he takes from
us and our sins, but the original and the causes of his forgiveness he takes
from himself:] and so should we; that we restore him that did us wrong to our
love again; let it not be wholly, because he has done all that can be
required, but something upon our own account; let our mercy have a share in it;
that is, let us accept him readily, receive him quickly, believe him easiy,
expound all things to the better sense, take his word, and receive his
repentance; and forgive him at the beginning of it; not to interrupt his
repentance, but to encourage it: and that is the proper work of charity in the
present Article.

Question IV. Whether after every relapse must the conditions of his pardon be
harder than before?
I answer, that I find no difference in the expression of our blessed Savior.
It is all one after seven times, and after seventy times, and after seventy
times seven times; If he shall return saying I repent, that is all is here
required. But then because by saying [I repent] is not meant only the speaking
it, but also doing it; must at least be probable that he does so, as well as
say so; therefore although as soon as he does so, so soon you must forgive him,
yet

1. After the first forgiveness, and at the second and third offense, we are
not obliged so readily to believe his saying, as after the first offense; at
which time although he did violence to justice and charity, yet he had not
broken his faith as now he has; and therefore the oftener he has relapsed, the
more significations he ought to give of the truth of his repentance. Veniam
delicti assequutus, si iterum peccat, gravius judicium sibi preparat. Sum.
moral.
He that is pardoned and sins again cannot expect so easily to be acquitted the
third time as at the first, says S Basil. At the first fault we must believe
his saying, because we know nothing to the contrary; but when he has often
said so, and it is seen so often that he did not say true, he that is forgiven
and then relapses is obliged to do more the next time he pretends repentance.

2. Alt^ough we ^re bound to forgive him entirely even after a thousand
injuries, if he does truly repent; yet this person cannot expect to be
employed, or to be returned to all his former capacities of good; because it is
plain, he has not cured the evil principle, the malicious heart, or the evil
eye, the slanderous tongue, or the unjust hand; his covetous desire, and his
peevish anger: and then though we must be ready in heart to receive him to all
the degrees of his former condition, when he shall be capable, and is the same
man that ought to be employed; yet till he be so, or appears so in prudent and
reasonable indications, he must be pardoned heartily, and prayed for
charitably, but he must be handled cautiously, It must not be harder for thee
to pardon him after ten thousand relapses and returns: but after so much
variety of folly and weak instances, it will be much harder for him to say and
prove he does repent. But in this our charity must neither be credulous, nor
morose; too easy, nor too difficult; but it is secure, if it pardons him, and
prays for him whether he repents or no.

3. There are some significations of repentance, which charity never can
refuse; but must accept the offending person as a convert and a penitent.

1. Such is open and plain confession of the fault, with the circumstances of
shame and dishonor; for he that does so much rudeness to himself as to endure
the shame of his sin, rather than not to return to duty; gives great testimony
that he returns in earnest. And this can no ways be abated, unless he have
done so before; and that his confession is but formal, and his shame is passed
into shamelesness. In this case we may expect some more real argument.

2. Whatsoever are the great usual signs and expresses of repentance before
God, those also are to be accepted by us when they are done before men; and
though we may be deceived in these things, and God cannot: yet they are the
best we can get, and something we must rely upon. And because like God we
cannot discern the hearts of men; yet we rightly follow his example, when we do
that which is the next best, and expound the action to the best and most
favorable sense of charity.

3. An oath if it be not taken lightly is a great presumption of an innocent, a
sincere and a repenting soul. It is the sign of an ill mind not to trust him
that swears seldom, and always solemnly, Quisquis juranti nihil credit Illemet
facile pejerare scit.
and for ought we know, justly, said Amphides. For a solemn sacred oath is a
double hedge, Apposito juramento cautio^ and diligentior animus fit; a duobus
enim sibi tum cavet, and ne laedat amicos, and ne peccet in Deos. Sophocles.
and it is guarded by a double fear; lest I abuse my friend, and lest I provoke
my God: and the blessed Apostle says, That an oath is the end of all strife;
meaning, amongst persons who can cease to strive, and can cease to be
injurious. It is so among them who have Religion, and who can be fit for
society. For there is no man whose oath it can be fit to take, but it is also
fit, that having sworn, he should be trusted. But it is seldom that our charity
can be put to such extremities: and in no conversation can it happen, that a
man shall do an injury, and repent, and do it again twenty times, and a hundred
times in the revolution of a few days. If such things could be, those men are
intolerable upon other accounts, and though charity must refuse no man, and
forgiveness must always stand at your door ready to let in all that knock, yet
the accidents of the world, caution and prudence, and innocent fears, will
dispose of our affairs in other channels of security, and cut off the occasions
of such disputes; so certain is that observation of St. Heirom which I
men^ioned before; that we are tied to forgive oftener than our Brother can sin:
but then also so safe are we, whose charity must be bigger than the greatest
temptation: and yet no temptation is like to happen but what is less than an
ordinary charity.

Question V. Whether the injured person be bound to offer peace? Or may he let
it alone, and worthily communicate, if the offending party does not seek it?
To the Question, whether of the parties must begin the peace? I answer, that
both are bound. For although he that did the injury is bound in conscience and
justice to go to him whom he has injured, and he is not a true penitent if he
does not; and he must not for his part be accepted to the Communion; of which I
am to give account in the Chapter of repentance; yet because we are now upon
the title of Charity, I am to add, that if the Criminal does not come;
Dissentio ab aliis, a te reconciliatio incipiat. Senec.
the offended person must offer peace; he must go or send to him. If others
begin the quarrel, do thou begin the peace, said Seneca. For sometimes the
offender desires pardon, but dares not ask it: he begs it by interpretation and
tacit desire; consult therefore with his modesty, his infirmity, and his
shame. He is more bound to do it than thou art, yet thou can better do it
than he can. It is not always safe for him: it is never unsafe for thee. It
may be an extreme shame to him; it is ever honorable to thee: it may be
sometimes to his loss; it is always thy gain: for this was the resolution of
Hesiod's Riddle, (...)
Half is more than the whole; A dinner of herbs with peace is better than a
stalled Ox with contention; and therefore upon all accounts it is for thy
advantage to make the offer.

I add also, it is thy duty. I do not say, that in justice thou art bound; but
in charity thou art, and in obedience to thy Lord. Mat. 18.15.
If thy Brother offend thee, go and tell him. Go thou, says Christ. For by so
doing we imitate God, whom though we have so often, so infinitely offended, yet
he thought thoughts of peace, and sent to us Ambassadors of peace Cogitans
cogitationes pacis Deus prior nos accessit and legatos ministrosque
reconciliationis ad nos destinavit. S. Gregor.
, and Ministers of reconciliation. When Pompey and Marcus Crassus were to quit
their Consulships, Cueius Aurelius, I know not upon what account, ran into the
Forum, and cried out, that Jupiter appearing to him in his dream commanded that
they should be reconciled before they were discharged by the people: which when
the people also required, Pompey stirred not but Crassus did; he reached out
his hand to his Colleague, saying, I do nothing unworthy of my self, O Romans,
If I first offer peace to Pomp^y, whom you honored with the title of Great
before he was a Man, and with a Triumph before he was a Senator. We cannot want
better arguments of peacefulness: It is no shame to thee to offer peace to thy
offending Brother, when thy God did so to thee, who was greatly provoked by
thee, and could as greatly have been revenged; and it is no disparagement that
thou should desire the reconcilement with him for whom Christ became a
Sacrifice, and to whom he offers, as he does to thee, the Communion of his body
and blood. * Thou art (I say) bound in charity to thy Brothers soul, whose
repentance thou can easily invite by thy kind offer, and thou make his
return easy, thou take away his objection and temptation, thou securest thy
own right better, and art invested in the greatest glory of mankind; thou do
the work of God, and the work of thy own soul; thou carriest pardon, and ease
and mercy with thee; and who would not run and strive to be first in carrying a
pardon, and bringing messages of peace and joyfulness?

Consider therefore that death divides with you every minute; you quarrel in
the morning, and it may be you shall dye at night; run quickly and be
reconciled for fear you anger last longer than your life. It was a pretty
victory which Euclid got of his angry Brother, who being highly displeased,
cried out, Let me perish if I be not revenged: Dispeream, si non persuasero.
But he answered, And let me perish if I do no not make you kind, and quickly
to forget your anger. That gentle answer did it, and they were friends
presently, and for ever after. It is a shame if we be out done by Heathens, and
especially in that grace, which is the ornament and jewel of our Religion, that
is, in forgiving our enemies, in appeasing anger, in doing good for evil, in
returning prayers for cursings, and gentle usages for rude treatments: this is
the glory of Christianity Christi sanguis de cruce clamans pacem loquitur, and
reconciliationem; quin idem sanguis quoniam a nobis bibitur, si mod^ digne
bibitur, clamat in corporibus nostris verba pacifica. S. Cyprian.
, as Christianity is the glory of the world. I end this with the advice of St.
Bernard: let every man who desires to come worthily to the Sacrament of peace,
the communion of Christ's body; for the wrong that he does be ready to ask
pardon, and for the wrong that he receives be ready to give pardon, and so
Christ's members will be in peace.

Quest. VI. Whether the precept of forgiveness, and the charity of the
Communion must of necessity put a period to all Lawsuits?
To this I answer; that suits at Law in matters Criminal relating to injuries
done or suff^r'd are so often mingled with interests of anger and revenge, they
are so often conducted violently and passionately; that he who forbi^s angers
and reve^ge, does also in effect forbid suits of Law upon the account of
injuries received. But this is to be understood only of such repetitions of
right, or vindications of wrong as cannot or will not be separated from
revenge. Thus if the Law which God gave to Moses in the matter of injuries,
were the measure of our judicatories. [An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a
tooth] it were not lawful to go to Law to get his eye put out that had
extinguished mine: for this does not repair me, but only afflicts him. A Wolf
is in nature less hateful than a Viper. He wounds that he may drink the blood,
and kills that he may eat: but the Viper smites that he may kill, (...) S.
Chrysostom. homil. 27. in 1 Cor.
and gets nothing by it. So is every Lawsuit that vexes one and repairs no
man. But the rules and measures of conscience in this particular are briefly
these.

1. If the injury be transient and passes away in the Act; it is not lawful for
a Christian to go to Law, because he cannot rescind the act, and he cannot
repair himself, and that which remains is nothing but revenge, which can never
consist with charity.

2. The case is the same if the injury be permanent, but irremediable; for if
nothing can be rescinded, if no amends can be made, it is but a fantastic
pleasure to delight in the affliction of him that injured me. If cutting off
his arm would make mine grow; if striking him upon the face would bring me a
new tooth in stead of that which he struck out of mine, then there might be a
just cause of going to Law; but when the evil remains after all that the Law
can do; it is enough that I lost a limb, I will not lose my charity; which i^
left me to make amends to me, and to procure a blessing to make me reparation.
If by my arm I got my living, it is fit that he that cut my arm off should give
me maintenance; because he can repair my loss of livelihood, though he can
never restore my arm; and to cause him to be barely afflicted for my
affliction, when I am not relieved by his affliction, is barbarism and a rude
uncharitableness. To revenge is but the more excusable way of doing injury.
Nay, Inhumanum verbum est and quidem pro injusto receptum ultio, and a
contumelia non differt nisi ordine. Qui dolorem regerit, tantum excusatius
peccat. Seneca.
Maximus Tyrius says, it is worse; the revenging man is worse than the
injurious: and therefore to prosecute him in Law who did me wrong, and cannot
now amend me, (...).
is but uncharitableness acted under the visor of authority, so Methridates
affirmed that usually men carry arms against a thief Adversus latronem, si
nequeunt pro salute, pro ultione tamen sua ferrum omnes stringere.
, for revenge as much as for their security: it is in many cases nothing else
but revenge.

3. He that has received an injury must not avenge himself by going to Law,
though with a purpose to prevent another injury that is tolerable and
inconsiderable. The reason is, because if he fears an evil that is but little,
the smalnes of the evil, and the uncertainty of its event are not considerable
if compared to the evil of revenge that is included, to the trouble of the
suit, to the evil of our Brothers punishment, to his shame and to his smart, to
his expense and his disorder: and the charity of forgiveness shall never have a
proper season for its exercise, or an opportunity to get a reward, if every
excuse and every degree of temptation, or seeming warranty, can legitimate that
action which is more like a revenge, than it can be to prudence, and a
reasonable caution.

All quarrellngs and contentions at Law for little matters are arguments of
impatience, of a peevish spirit, and an uncharitable mind. -- (...),
He is a very miserable man that is unquiet when a mouse runs over his shoe,
or a fly does kiss his cheek, Whatsoever is little and tolerable must be let
alone, said Aristides; (...).
and Apollonius answered, that wars must not be undertaken for great causes,
nor suits at Law for little ones. There is in such persons who run to Courts
and complain for every small offense, such a stock of anger and peevishness,
and such a spirit of fire within them, that every breath and every motion from
without can put it into a flame; and the Devil will never be wanting to
minister occasions to such prepared materials. It is told in the Annals of
France, that when the Kings of England and France in a deadly war had their
armies ready to join b^ttel; the French officers having felt the force of the
English valo^r, were not willing to venture the hazard of a battle, and
persuaded their King to offer conditions of peace. The treaty was accepted, and
the two Kings withdrew into an old Chapel in the field; where when they had
dicours'd themselves into kindness, they resolved to part friends and to
appoint Commissionners to finish the Treaty. But as they were going out, a
great Serpent issued out of the ruinous wall and made toward the Kings, who
being affrighted with the danger, drew their swords and in that manner ran out
of the Chapel. Their guards who in equal numbers attended at the door, seeing
their Princes in a fright and with their swords drawn, supposed they were
fighting, and without any sign, instantly drew upon each other; which alarm the
two armies taking, instantly engaged in a bloody fight, and could not for all
the power of their Kings be totally disengaged till the night parted them. Just
such is the danger of an angry and quarrelsome spirit. He has his sword by his
side, and his army in the field, his hand is up and his heart is ready; and he
wants nothing but an occasion, a Serpent to set him on; and that will never be
wanting as long as the old Serpent the Devil has any malice or any power. But
let us not deceive our selves: we are bound very far by the laws of charity to
the soul of our Brother; and we are very much concerned that he be saved, and
therefore our Blessed Savior commanded us, if our brother have sinned against
us, to reprove him; Luke 17.3.
not presently to hale him up to the Judge, or deliver him up to the Law; but
to use means and charitable instruments, not for his vexation but his
conversion. And he little regards his brothers soul, who by suits of Law and
arts of affliction provokes him to more anger, or hardens him in his sin, or
hinders his repentance, or vexes him into impatience.

But to return to the particular case. The preventing of every evil is not a
sufficient pretense (though it were true) to commence a suit at Law, For when
our blessed Savior commands us to reprove our offending brother; he speaks of
such a one as is still in wrong and the state of injustice, a person from whom
we are not sure but we may receive another injury, and yet even to this person
we are commanded to be charitable in our reproof and private admonition, but
are not permitted to be quick and fierce in our complaints at Law. For it is
not dishonorable if a wise man be railed at, be smitten, be cheated, be
derided by fools and evil persons: but to do any thing of this again, that is
inhumane and inglorious. But this case is fully determined even by a heathen:
(...). Plato.
you must not return evil to your enemy, although we be in danger to suffer a
greater mischief* and therefore not vex him at Law. For that is the defense of
beasts; who cannot keep themselves harmless but by doing a greater mischief: a
tooth or a claw, a horn or a heel, these defend the beast; who that he may not
receive a wound, defends himself so that he will kill his enemy. And yet this
amongst evil men is called prudent.

It is not by this discourse intended that we may not take securities of him
against future mischiefs, if we can do it without doing him a mischief; but
under the color of securing our selves for the future, we must not be revenged
for what is past; neither must our revenge in small matters be used at all as
an instrument of our security. If we can be secured without his affliction, we
must take that way to be secured; but if by revenges and direct inflictions of
evil, or procurations of punishment, we attempt it, we are not charitable. And
this is the perfect meaning of our blessed Savior, If thine enemy take thy
cloak, let him take thy coat also; and if he strike thee on thy right cheek,
tu^n thy left to him, and let him strike thee again. These words are not to be
understood literally and precisely; not so as to forbid all securities or
avoiding of future evils; for Christ himself did not do so when an evil servant
smote him; and St. Paul did not so when the High Priest commanded him to be
smitten on the face; they neither of them received it silently, nor turned the
other cheek. And what if he that smote one cheek will smite no more? or will
smite the same? How if we are not able to bear a second blow? Or how if the
offering the other cheek provoke thy enemy to scorn thee, and tempt or provoke
him to strike thee, who intended no such second blow? And were it not evidently
better to withdraw from him that smites? or to sweeten him with gentle
language? It is therefore certain these words are to be understood in the sense
of prudence, equity, and charity; that is, when you are injured, you may use
all that is for your innocent defense and unmingled guards; you may without all
peradventure pray him to be quiet, you may give him reasons and arguments to
let you alone; you may give good words; you may give blessing for cursing,
that is certainly permitted; or you may run away; you may flee from City to
City; or you may complain to him; you may reprove him, and expostulate the
injury with him, as Christ did, and as did St. Paul. But what is then meant by
turning the other cheek? Our blessed Savior using an idiotism of his own
language and a phrase used by the Prophet in the prediction of Christ's
meekness and passion, he turned his che^ks to tht nippers, means, that we must
not resist with doing violence or affliction to him that smites; any innocent
guard, but nothing violent; any thing that is harmless, but nothing vexations,
but rather than do another evil, suffer another;] and this evidently
demonstrates, that the preventing of every injury is no sufficient warrant to
legitimate the bringing of our enemy to be punished at Law for what is past.
The sum is this.

No man is forbidden to lock his doors, to bar his windows, or to run from
evil, or to divert it, or to reprove it. But, 1. In this question we speak of
evil already done, and against revenges, not against defenses; for that which
is done cannot be undone; and therefore revenge is foolish and malicious: but
that which is not done, may be prevented by all arts of gentleness and
innocence; and therefore defenses are prudent, and they are lawful. 2. We speak
here of little dangers and tolerable evils; and a man must not go to Law
because the Musician keeps false time with his foot; (...).
it is not for a small matter that a man must disquiet his Brother; he must
rather suffer two, than do one evil.

4. But if the evil we fear be intolerable, and yet c^rtain, or very probable
to happen, we may appeal to the Law for sanctuary or defense, though this
appeal do procure affliction to our enemy; always provided that this evil be
not directly intended, nor desired secretly, nor delighted in when it happens,
and be made as little as it can, prosecuted with as easy circumstances,
without vexatious measures, but not without necessity.

For in all ent^rcourses with our enemy there are but two things to be
considered by us: how we may do him good, how we may keep our selves from evil.
The latter the Law of Charity and collateral duties do permit or enjoin
respectively; but of the former our Blessed Savior has made special
provision. For when our blessed Lord commanded us first to reprove secretly our
offending Brother, and then before witness if there be need; the reason he
gives is only that we may bring him to repentance, that you may gain him by
rescuing his soul from guiltiness, and his actions from injuriousnesse. If
this course will not prevail, then tell it to the Church; complain of him
publicly, bring him before the Christian Judicatories; but still that he may
repent; for if he repents, he must be thy brother still, loved as dearly,
treated as friendly, caressed as sweetly, handled as tenderly, conversed with
as obligingly. But if none of all this will prevail for his good, then look you
only to the other part of the permission; that is, that you be secured from his
evil: you have done all that you are tied to do for his repentance in this
method, but you have not yet done all that you are tied to do in charity; for
still you must afford him all those kindnesses which Christ requires of thee
for thy enemy; that is, to pray for him, and to love him. But you may secure
your selves by all means which his violence and your case has m^de necessary.

But this I say is in case the evil be intolerable, or that ^o avoid it be a
matter of duty, or charity to those to whom you are obliged. Though my old
friend and new enemy Ca^bo do me little spites, and kill my Deer, or shoot my
Pigeons, or trespass upon my grass, I must not be avenged on him at the Law,
or right my self by afflicting him, but strive for the rewards of patience, and
labor for the fruits of my charity, and for the rest use all the guards of
prudence that I can: yet if he takes away my childrens portions, or fires my
houses, or exposes me and mine to beggary or destitution, I must do that duty
which my charity to my children, and my justice does oblige me; I may defend my
childrens right, though that defense exposes him to evil that does the evil. I
may not let Carbo alone, and suffer my children to be undone. I must provide
for my own, according to their condition and states of life; if this provision
be but necessary or competent, according to prudent, modest, and wise accounts,
and be not a contention for excesses and extravagancies of wealth. He that goes
to Law for another, has greater warrant than he that does it for himself; for
it is more likely to be charity in their case, and revenge in my own; and
certainly in the disputes of charity our children are to be preferred before
our enemies.

In short. If the vexation that is brought by the suit of Law upon an injurious
person be not revenge, and if the defense be necessary, or greatly charitable,
and if the injury be intolerable or greatly afflictive, in all these cases
Christ has left us to the liberties of Nature, and Reason, and the Laws.

5. No man must in his own case prosecute his enemy to death or capital
punishment. The reasons are, because no man's temporal evil, his injury, his
disgrace, his money, and his wound are not a competent value for the life of a
man; and when beyond this, there is no evil that we can do, it can in no sense
consist with charity that goes so far. He that prosecutes his enemy to death
forgives nothing, forbears nothing of that injury; he means no good to his
enemy, desires not his amendment, is not careful of his repentance, is not
ambitious to gain a brother, to secure the interest of a soul for God, to get
himself the rewards of charity; and it is a sad thing to make thy adversary pay
the utmost farthing, even whilst he is in the way, and to send him to make his
accounts to God reeking in his sins, and his crimes broad blown about his ears.
There are not many cases in which it can consist with the spirit of
Christianity for the Laws themselves to put a criminal hastily to death See
Rule of Conscience, Book 3. Chap. 2. page 114.
. Whatsoever is necessary that is lawful; and of the necessities of the
public, public persons are to judge; only they are to judge according to the
analogy and gentleness of the Christian Law, by a Christian spirit, and to
take care of souls as well as of bodies and estates. Nemo dubitabit quin si
nocentes mutari in bonam mentem aliquo modo possint, sicut posse interdum
conceditur, salvos eos esse magis e repub. sit, quam puniri. Quintil.
If the criminal can be amended, as oftentimes he can, it is much better for a
Commonwealth that a good Citizen be made, than that he be taken away while he
is evil (...).
. Strabo tells of some Nations dwelling about Caucasus that never put their
greatest malefactors to death: and Epist. 160. alicui utili operi eorum integra
membra deserviant.
Diodorus says, that Sabacon, a pious and good King of Egypt, changed capital
punishments into slavery and profitable works, and that with excellent
success, because it brought more profit to the public, and brought the
criminal to repentance and a good mind. Balsamo says the Greek Emperors did
so; and St. Augustine advises it as most fitting to be done.

But if this in some case be better in the public it self, it is necessary in
the private; and it is necessary in our present inquiry, in order to charity
preparatory to the holy Communion: and in the Council of Eliberis there is a
Canon, [ If any Christian accuse another at the Law, and prosecute him to
banishment or death, let him not be admitted to the Communion, no not so much
as in the article of death.] For he whose malice passed unto the death of his
brother, must not in his death receive the Communion of the faithful; and the
seal of the Charities of God. But this was severe, and it is to be understood
only to be so, unless when we are commanded to prosecute a criminal, by the
interest of necessary justice, and public charity, and the command of the
Laws: But in other cases, he that has done so, let him repent greatly, and
long, and at last Communicate: That Is the best expedient.

Question VII. Whether the Laws of Forgiv^^esse, and the Charities of the
Communion, oblige the injured person to forgive the adulterous Husband or Wife,
if they do repent?
There are two cases in which it is so far from being necessary, that it is not
lawful to do some things of kindness, which in all other cases are indeed true
charity, and highly significative of a soul truly merciful, and worthy to
Communicate.

See Rule of Conscience.

Book 1. chap. 5. rule 8. Council. ^liber. 2.


1. When to retain the adulterous person is scandalous; (as in the Primitive
Church it was esteemed so in Clergy men) then such persons though they be
penitent, must no^ be suffered to cohabit; they must be pa^doned to a^l
purposes which are not made unlawful by accident, and to all purposes which may
minister unto their repentance and salvation: but charity must not be done to a
single person with offense to ^he Church; and a Criminal must not receive
adv^ntage by the prejudice of the holy and the innocen^. Against this I have
nothing to oppose, but that those ^hurches which di^ fo^bid this forgiven^sse,
upon pretense of scandal, should also have considered whether or no that the
forgiveness of the Criminal Uxoris vitium tollas opus est aut sere^:
Qui tollit vitium, uxorem commodiusculam
^ibi praestat; qui sert, sese meliorem facit.
Varro.
, and the charitable toleration of the injury, and the patient labors of love,
and the endeavors of rep^^tance, be not only more profitable to them both, but
also more exemplar to others.

2. The other is the case of direct d^nger; if the sin of the offending party
be promoted by the charity of the injured man or woman, it is made unlawful so
far to forgive as to cohabit; if this charity will let her loose to repent of
her repentance, it turns to uncharitableness, and can never be a duty.

But except it be in these cases, it is not only lawful, but infinitely
agreeable to the duty of charity, to restore the repenting person to his first
condition of love and society. But this is such a charity, as although it be a
counsel of perfection, and a nobleness of forgiveness, yet that the
forgiveness shall extend to society, and mutual endearments of cohabitation,
is under no Commandment; because the union of Marriage being broken by the
adultery, that which only remains of obligation is the charities of a Christian
to a Christian, without the relation of Husband and Wife. The first must be
kept in the height of Christian dearnesse and communion; but if the second can
minister to the good of Souls, it is an heroic charity to do it; but in this
there ought to be no snare, for the^e is no commandment.

To the answers given to these Cases of Cons^ience, I am to add this caution;
That although these cases are only the inquiries and concerns of private
persons, and do not oblige P^inces, Parents, Judges, Lords of Servants, in
their public c^pacity, and they may justly punish the offender though the
injury be done against themselves See Rule of Conscience, Book 4.
, yet in these cases the punishment must be no other than Quomodo scalpellum
and abstinentia and alia quae profutura torquent: sic ingentia vitia prava
dolor corporis animique corrigimus. Seneca.
as the lancet or the cupping-glasse, as fasting, or ill-tasting drugs; they
are painful, but are also wholly given as ministeries of health. For so
sometimes we put crooked sticks into the fire, we bow and beat and twist them,
not to break, but to make them strait and useful. So we correct the evil
inclinations of our children, and the intolerable manners of our servants, by
afflictions of the body and griefs of the mind: all is well so long as it is
necessary, and so long as it is charitable. I remember that when Augustus was
to give sentence upon a Son that would have killed his Father, he did not
according to the severity of the Laws command him to be tied in a Sack with a
Cock, a Serpent, and an Ape, and thrown into Tiber, Memor non de quo censeret,
sed cui in consilio esset.
but only to be banished whither his Father pleased; remembering, that although
the Son deserved the worst, yet Fathers loved to inflict the least; and
although in Nature none ought to drink but the hungry and the thirsty, yet in
Judicatories none ought to punish but they that neither hunger nor thirst;
because they that do it against their wills, exceed not the measures of charity
and necessity. Imple Christian Judex pii patris officium.
But both Fathers and Princes, Judges and Masters, have their limits and
measures before they smite, and other measures to be observed when they do
smite. O Christian Judge do the office of a pious Father, said St. Austin to
Count Marcellinus. A man should not use a man prodigally Homini non est homine
prodige utendum.
but be as sparing of another man's blood as of his own. Duo ista nomina cum
dicimus, homo and peccator, non utique frustra dicuntur: quia peccator est,
corrige; quia homo miserere. S. August. apud Gratian.
Pun^sh the sinner, pity the man.

But to conclude these inquiries fully. It is very considerable, that in many
cases, even when it is lawful to bring a Criminal to punishment, or to go to
Law, and that it is just so to do; yet this whole dispute being a question of
charity, we are to go by other measures than in the other; and when in these
cases we do nothing but what is just; we must remember that we are Christians,
and must never expect to go to heaven, unless we do also what is charitable.

Therefore inquire no more into how much is just and lawful in these cases; but
what is charitable, and what is best, and what is safest; for then the cases of
conscience are best determined, when our reward also shall greatly be secured.
For it is in these inquiries of charity in order to the holy Communion, as it
is in the Communion it self. Not every one shall perish that does not receive
the holy Communion; but yet to receive it is of great advantage to our souls in
order to our obtaining the joys of heaven: so is every expression of charity;
that very action which in some cases may be safely omitted, may in all cases,
where there is not a contradicting duty, be done with great advantages. For he
that thinks to have the reward, and the heaven of Christians by the actions of
justice and the omissions of charity, is like him who worships the Image of the
Sun, while at the same time he turns his back upon the Sun himself. This is so
essentially reasonable, that even the Heathens knew it, and urged it as a duty
to be observed in all their sacrifices and solemnities. When you pray to God
(said one of their own Prophets) and offer a holy cloud of frankincense, come
not to the gentle Deity, with ungentle hearts and hands: -- justa precari
Thure pio, caedumque feros avertite ritus.
Mite and cognatum est homini Deus --
Silius Ital. 4.
for God is of the same cognation or kindred with a good man; gentle as a man,
apt to pity, apt to do good; just, as we ought to be, but infinitely more than
we are: and therefore he is not good, cannot partake with him who is
essentially and unalterably so.

Peter Comestor tells of an old opinion and tradition of the Ancients, that
forty years before the day of Judgment the Bow which God placed in the clouds
shall not be seen at all: meaning, that since the Rainbow was placed there as
a sign of mercy and reconcilement, when the Sacrament of mercy and peace shall
disappear, then God will come to judge the world in fire and an intolerable
tempest, in which all the uncharitable, unforgiving persons shall for ever be
confounded.

Remember always what the Holy Jesus has done for thee: I shall represent it
in the words of St. Bernard: In Cantica.
[ O blessed Jesus, we have heard strange things of thee. All the world tells
us such things of thee that must needs make us to run after thee. They say,
that thou despisest not the poor, nor refusest the returning sinner. We are
told, that thou did pardon the Thief when he confessed his sin, and confessed
thee; and Mary Magdalen when she wept; and did accept the Syrophoenician when
she prayed; and would not give sentence of condemna^ion upon the woman taken
in adultery, even because she looked sadly, and was truly ashamed: thou did
not reject him that sat at the receipt of Custom, nor the humble Publican,
nor the Disciple that denied thee, nor them that persecuted thy Disciples, no,
not them that crucified thee. These are thy precious ointments, apt with their
sweetness to allure all the world after thee, and with their virtue to heal
them. After thee and thy sweet Odours, O blessed Jesu, we will run.] Happy is
he that says so, and does so, enkindling his charity in the blood of Christ
(as St. Ignatius his expression is) transcribing his example into our
conversation; (...).

Ad Ephesians.


for we can no way please him, but by being like him: and in the blessings of
Christ, and the Communion of his body and blood, the uncharitable and revenging
man shall never have a portion.

SECT. V. Devotions relative to this grace of Charity; to be used by way of
exercise and preparation to the Divine Mysteries; in any time or part of our
life: but especially before and at the Communion.
The Hymn, containing acts of love to God and to our Neighbor. COme behold the
works of the Lord: what desolations he has made in the earth.

He makes Wars to cease unto the ends of the earth: he breaks the bow, and
cutteth the spear in sunder, he burns the chariot in the fire.

But unto the wicked said God, what have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or
that thou should take my Covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou hate
instruction, and castest my words behind thee?

Thou sit and speak against thy Brother; thou slanderest thine own
mothers Son.

These things thou have done, and I kept silence: but I will reprove thee, and
set them in order before thine eyes.

Now consider this ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces and there be
none to deliver.

Deliver me from bloud-guiltiness O God, thou God of my salvation; and my
tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness.

Blessed is he that considers the poor: the Lord will deliver him in the time
of trouble,

The Lord will deliver him and keep him alive, and he shall be blessed upon the
earth; and thou will not deliver him into the will of his enemies.

The Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing: thou will make all
his bed in his sickness.

But I said, Lord be merciful to me: heal my soul for I have sinned against
thee.

Yet the Lord will command his loving kindness in the day time, and in the
night his song shall be with me, and my prayer unto the God of my life:

O send out thy light and thy truth, let them lead me, let them bring me to thy
holy Hill, and to thy Tabernacles.

Then will I go unto the Altar of God my exceeding joy: yea upon the harp will
I praise thee O God my God.

The righteous shall be glad in the Lord, and shall trust in him; and all the
upright in heart shall glory.

Do good O Lord to them that are true of heart, and evermore mightily defend
them: Do good in thy good pleasure unto Sion, build thou the walls of Jerusalem.

In God will I praise his word: in the Lord will I praise his word: Thy vows
are upon me O God, I will render praises unto thee.

For thou have delivered our souls from death: wilt not thou deliver our feet
from falling, that we may walk before God in the light of the living?

I will love thee O God, and praise thee for ever, because thou have done it:
and I will wait on thy name, for it is good before thy Saints.

Glory be to the Father, etc. A Prayer for the grace of Charity, etc.
O Most gentle, most merciful and gracious Savior Jesu, thou did take upon
thee our nature to redeem us from sin and misery; thou were for us led as a
Lamb to the slaughter, and as a Sheep before the shearer is dumb, so thou
openedst not thy mouth; thou turnedst thy back to the smiters, and thy cheeks
to the nippers, thou were mocked and whipped, crucified and torn, but thou did
nothing but good to thy enemies, and prayedst with loud cries for thy
persecutors, and did heal the wound of one that come to lay violent hands
upon thee; O plant in my heart gentleness and patience, a meek and a long
suffering spirit; that I may never be transported with violent angers, never be
disordered by peevishness, never think thoughts of revenge; but may with
meekness receive all injuries that shall be done to me, and patiently bear
every cross accident, and with charity may return blessing for cursing, good
for evil, kind words for foul reproaches, loving admonitions for scornful
upbraidings, gentle treatments for all derisions and affronts, that living all
my days with meekness and charity, keeping peace with all men, and loving my
neighbor as my self, and thee more than my self, and more than all the world,
I may at last come into the regions of peace and eternal charity, where thou
live, who love all men, and would have none to perish, but all men to be
saved through thee, O most merciful Savior and Redeemer Jesu, Amen.

An act of Forgiveness to be said with all earnestness and sincerity before
every Communion.
O God, my God, I have sinned grievously against thee: I am thy debtor in a
vast and an Eternal debt, and if thou should take the forfeiture, I shall be
for ever bound in eternal prisons, even till I pay the utmost farthing: But I
hope in thy mercies, that thou will forgive me my ten thousand Talents; and I
also do in thy presence forgive every one that has offended me; whoever has
taken my goods privately and injuriously, or hurt my person, or contrived any
evil against me whether known or unknown; who ever has lessened my reputation,
detracted from my best endeavors, or has slandered me, or reproached,
reviled, or in any word or way done me injury; I do from the bottom of my soul
forgive him; praying thee also that thou will never impute to him any word, or
thought, or action done against me; but forgive him as I desire thou would
also forgive me all that I have sinned against thee, or any man in the world.
Give him thy grace, and a holy repentance for whatever he has done amiss;
grant he may do so no more: keep me from the evil tongues and injurious actions
of all men, and keep all my enemies from all the expresses of thy wrath: and
let thy grace prevail finally upon thy servant, that I may never remember any
injury to the prejudice of any man, bu^ that I may walk toward my enemies as
Christ did; who received much evil, but went about seeking to do go^d to every
man; and if ever it shall be in my power and my opportunity to return evil, O
then grant that the spirit of love and forgiveness may triumph over all anger,
and malice, and revenge; that I may be the Son of God, and man love God, and
prove my love to thee by my love to my Brother, and by obedience to all thy
Laws, through the Son of thy love, by whom thou art reconciled to mankind, our
blessed Lord and Savior Jesus, Amen.

Verse. Remember not Lord our offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers,
neither take thou vengeance of our sins.

Resp. Spare us good Lord, spare thy people whom thou have redeemed with thy
most precious blood, and be not angry with us for ever, Amen.

CHAP. V. Of Repentance, preparatory to the Blessed Sacrament.
SECT. I.
WHen Isaac and Abimelech had made a covenant of peace and mutual agreement,
they would not confirm it by a Sacramental Oath till the next morning, that
they might swear fasting, for the reverence and religious regard of the solemn
Oath (says Lyra.) But Philo says they did it Symbolically, to represent that
purity and cleanness of soul which he that swears to God, or comes to pay his
vows, ought to preserve with great Religion. He that in a religious and solemn
address comes to God, ought to consider whether his body be free from
uncleanness, and his soul from vile affections. He that is righteous, Rev.
22.11.
let him be righteous still; and he that is justified, let him be justified,
yet more, says the Spirit of God; and then it follows, He that thirsts, let
him come and drink of the living waters freely and without money: -- 17.
meaning, that when our affections to sin are gone, when our hearts are clean,
then we may freely partake of the feast of the supper of the Lamb.

For as in natural forms, the more noble they are, the more noble dispositions
are required to their production; so it is in the spiritual: for when Christ is
to be efformed in us, when we are to become the Sons of God, flesh of his
flesh, and bone of his bone, we must be washed in water, and purified by faith,
and sanctified by the spirit, and cleansed by an excellent repentance; we must
be confirmed by a holy hope, and softened by charity. So God has ordered in the
excellent fabric of humane bodies: First our meat is prepared by fire, then
macerated by the teeth, then digested in the stomach, where the first
separation is made of the good from the bad, the wholesome juyces from the more
earthy parts: these being sent down to earth, the other are conveyed to the
Liver, where the matter is separated again, and the good is turned into blood,
and the better into spirits; and thence the body is supplied with blood; and
the spirits repair unto the heart and head, that thence they may be sent on
Embassies for the ministeries of the body, and for the work of understanding.
So it is in the dispensation of the affairs of the soul: The ear, which is the
mouth of the soul, receives all meat, and the senses entertain the fuel for all
passions, and all interests of virtue and vice. But the understanding makes the
first separation, dividing the clean from the unclean: But when the spirit of
God comes and purifies even the separate matter, making that which is morally
good to be spiritual and holy, first cleansing us from the sensualities of
flesh and blood, and then from spiritual iniquities that usually debauch the
soul, then the holy nourishment which we receive passes into divi^e
excellencies. But if sensuality be in the palate, and intemperance in the
stomach; if lust be in the liver, and anger in the heart, it corrupts the holy
food, and makes that to be a savor of death, which was intended for health and
holy blessi^gs.

But therefore when we have lived in the corrupted air of evil company, and
have sucked in the vile juices of coloquintida and the deadly henbane; when
that is within the heart which defiles the man, the soul must be purged by
repentance, it must be washed by tears, and purified by penitential sorrow. For
he that comes to this holy Feast with an unrepenting heart, is like the flies
in the Temple upon the day of Sacrifice: the little insect is very busy about
the flesh of the slain beasts; ^^ta praegusto Deum,
Moror inter aras,
Templa perlustro omnia.

she flies to every corner of the Temple; and she tastes the flesh before the
portion is laid before the God: but when the nidour and the delicacy has
called such an unwelcome guest, she corrupts the Sacrifice, and therefore dies
at the Altar, or is driven away by the officious Priest. So is an unworthy
Communicant; he comes it may be with p^ssion and an earnest zeal; he hopes to
be fed, and he hopes to be made immortal; he thinks he does a holy action, and
shall receive a holy blessing; but what is his portion? It is a glorious thing
to be feasted at the Table of God; glorious to him that is invited and
prepared, ^st glori^sus sane convictus Deum,
Sed illi qui invitatur, non qui invisus est.

but not to him that is unprepared, hateful, and impenitent.

But it is an easy thing to say that a man must repent before he communicates;
so he must before he prays, before he dies, before he goes a journey, the
whole life of a man is to be a continual repentance See the doctrine and
practice of Repentance, Chap. 1. and 2.
; but if so; then what particular is that which is required before we receive
the holy Communion? For if it be an universal duty of infinite, extent, of
unlimited comprehension; then every Christian must always be doing some of the
offices of repentance: but then, which are the peculiar parts and offices of
this grace which have any special and immediate relation to this solemnity? for
if there be none; the Sermons of repent^nce are nothing but the general
doctrine of good life, but of no special efficacy in our preparation.

The answer to this, will explicate the intricacy, and establish the measures
of our duty in this proper relation, in order to this ministry.

SECT. II. The necessity of repentance in order to the holy Sacrament.
1. THe holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper does not produce it is intended
effect upon an unprepared subject. He that gives his body to that which is
against the spirit, and his spirit to the affections of the body, cannot
receive the body of Christ in a spiritual manner. He that receives Christ, must
in great truth be a servant of Christ. It is not lawful (says Justin Just.
Martyr apol. 2.
Martyr) for any one to receive the holy Eucharistical bread and to drink of
the sacred Calice, Non per id quod recte foris oblatum est sacrificium ad se
ducit Deum, intus habens peccatum. Ire. l. 4. c. 23. (...),
but to him that believes, and to him that lives according to Christ's
Commandment. For as St. Paul argues of the infinite undecency of fornication,
because it is a making the members of Christ to become the members of an
harlot: upon the same account it is infinitely impossible that any such
polluted persons should become the members of Christ to the intents of blessing
and the spirit. How can Christ's body be communicated to them who are one flesh
with an harlot? and so it is in all other sins: we cannot partake of the Lords
table, Non been inaequales veniunt ad aratra juvenci.
and the table of Devils. A wicked person and a Communicant are of contrary
interests, of differing relations, designed to diverse ends, fitted with other
dispositions, they work not by the same principles, are not weighed in the same
balance, nor meted by like measures: and therefore they that come must be
innocent or return to innocence; that is, they must repent, or be such persons
as need no repentance: and St. Ambrose gives this account of the practice of
the Church in this affair. This is the Ubique mysterii ordo servatur, ut prius
per remissionem peccatorum Vulneribus medicina tribuatur, postea alimonia
mensae coelestis exuberet. lib. 6. in Luc. c. 37.
order of this mystery which is every where observed, that first by the pardon
of our sins our souls be healed, and the wounds cured with the medicine of
repentance, and then that our souls be plentifully nourished by this holy
Sacrament: and to this purpose he expounds the parable of the prodigal son
saying [that no man ought to come to this Sacrament unless he have the wedding
ring and the wedding garment; Nemo huc accedere debet nisi qui signaculum
justitiae custodierit, aut receperit lib. 7. c. 66.
] unless he have received the seal of the spirit, and is clothed with white
garments, the righteousness and justification of the Saints. And to the same
purpose it is, that St. Cyprian complains of some in his Church, who not having
repented, not being put under discipline by the Bishop and the Clergy, yet had
the Sacrament ministered to them: Lib. 3. epist. 14. Nondum poenitentia acta,
nondum fact^ exomologesi, nondum manu eis ab Episcopo and Clero imposita
Eucharistia eis datur. 1 Cor. 11.28.
against whom he presses the severe words of St. Paul; He that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself; that is, he that repents not
of his sins before he comes to the Holy Sacrament, comes before he is prepared,
and therefore before he should: and St. Basil has a whole chapter on purpose
to prove [that it is not safe for any man that is not purged from all pollution
of flesh and spirit to eat the body of the Lord] and that is the title of the
chapter: St. Basil. lib. 2. de baptism. cap. 3.
The wicked think to appease God with rivers of oil, and hecatombs of oxen, and
with flocks of sheep: they think by the ceremony and the gift to make peace
with God; Quid juvat hoc, templo nostros immittere mores
Et bona Diis ex hac scelerata ducere pulpa?

to get pardon for their sin, and to make way for more: but they lose their
labor (says the comedy) and throw away their cost: Atque hoc scelesti illi in
animum inducunt suum
Jovem se placa^e donis hostiis.
Et operam and sumptum perdunt; ideo fit

because God accepts no breakers of their vows; he loves no man's sacrifice,
that does not truly love his service: what if you empty all the Maevanian
valleys, and drive the fat lambs in flocks unto the Altars? Quia nihil ei
acceptum est a peri juris supplicii.
what if you sacrifice a herd of white bulls from Clitumnus? -- qua nunc tibi
pauper acerra
Digna litem! nec si vacuet Maevania valles,
Aut praestent niveos Clitumnae novalia tautos
Sufficiam, sed saepe Diis hos inter honores
Cespes, and exiguo placuerunt farra Salino:
Statius.
One sacrifice of a troubled spirit, one offering of a broken heart is a better
oblation then all the weal^h which the fields of the wicked can produce. God by
the forms and rites of sacrifice (...). Philo.
teaches us how to come to the Altars, whether for Prayer or Eucharist; we must
be sure to bring no evil passion, no spiritual disease along with us; faith
Philo. The sacrament of the Lords Supper is the Christian sacrifice, and though
the lamb of God is represented in a pure oblation, yet we must bring something
of our own: our lusts must be crucified Quin horres, vererisque talia
committere, ac altaria frequentare? quomodo immaculata sacrorum mysteria and es
attingere? Hortor igitur te, ut vel committere hujusmodi desinas, vel a
venerandis altaris sacrificiis abstineas, ne quando ignem de coelo capiti
a^cersens tuo, turpe meritas poenas, ut optasti, luas. Sic Zosymum Presbyterum
arguit St. Isidorus Pelusiota. l. 5. ep. 12.
, our passions brought in fetters, bound in chains, and laid down at the foot
of the throne of God. We must use our sins as the asses first colt was to be
used among the Jews; there is no redeeming of it but only by the breaking of
its neck: and when a sinner comes to God groaning under his load, carrying the
dead body of his lusts and laying them before the Altar of God, saying [this is
my pride that almost ruined me: here is the corpse of my lusts, they are now
dead, and as carcasses are more heavy then living bodies, so now my sin feels
more ponderous because it is mortified: I now feel the intolerable burden, and
I cannot bear it.] When a sinner makes this address to God, coming with a
penitential soul, with a holy sorrow, and with holy purposes, then no oblation
shall be more pleasing, no guest more welcome, no sacrifice more accepted. The
Sacrament is like the word of God, Omnia Sacramenta obsunt indigne
tractantibus: prosunt tamen digne sumentibus, sicut and verbum Dei. S. August.
contr. epist. Parmen.
if you receive it worthily, it will do you good; if unworthily, it will be
your death and your destruction. Here the penitent can be cleansed, and here
the impenitent are consumed: here they that are justified shall be justified
still, and they that are unholy become more unholy and accursed: here they that
have not, shall have more abundantly, and they that have not, shall lose what
they have already: here the living are made strong and happy, and the dead do
die again.

He that gives honor to a fool (says Solomon) is like him that binds a
stone in the sling: Pro. 2^.8.
so we read it; but so, it is not easy to tell the meaning. The vulgar Latin
reads it: As he that throws a stone into the heap of Mercury: so is he that
gives honor to a fool: and so the Proverb is easy. For the Gentiles did of
old worship Mercury by throwing stones at him: now giving honor to a fool is
like throwing a stone at Mercury, that is, a strange and unreasonable act: for
as the throwing of stones is against all natural and reasonable way of Worship
and Religion; and is against the way of honor: so is a fool as strange and
unfit a person to receive it. But when Rabbi Manasses threw stones at Mercury
in contempt and defiance of the image and the false god, he was questioned for
idolatry, and paid his liberty in exchange for his outward worship of what he
secretly hated: but by his external act he was brought to judgment, and
condemned for his hypocrisy. This is the case of every one that in a state of
sins comes to the holy Sacrament; he comes to receive the bread of God, and
throws a stone at him; he pretends worship and secretly hates him; and no man
must come hither, but all that is within him, and all that is without, must be
symbolical to the nature and holiness of the mysteries, to the designs and
purposes of God. In short; The full sense of all this is expressed in the
Canon Law, in a few words. A Sacrament is not to be given but to him that
repents: Cap illud. did, 95. Non poenitentibus istud infundi non potest quia
Sacramenti genus est.
for there must no sinful habit, or impure affection remain in that tabernacle
where God means to place his holy spirit. It is like bringing of a swine into
the Propitiatory: such a presence cannot stand with the presence of the Lord.
It is Dagon before the Ark; the Chechinah, the glory of the Lord will depart
from that unhallowed place.

But because the duty of Repentance, as it is a particular grace, is limited
and affirmative, and therefore is determinable by proper relations and
accidents, and there is a special necessity of repentance before the receiving
of the Sacrament; we must inquire more particularly:

1. What actions or parts of repentance are necessary in our preparation to the
receiving these Divine mysteries.

2. How far a penitent must be advanced in a good life, before he may come
safely; and how far, before he may come with confidence.

3. What significations of repentance are to be accepted by the Church.

4. Whether in case the duty be not performed, may every Minister of the
Sacrament refuse to admit the wicked person, or the imperfect penitent that
offers himself and persists in the desire of it.

SECT. III. What actions of repentance are specially required in our
preparations to the Holy Sacrament?
THe particular actions of repentance, which are to be performed in their
proper seasons, which cannot be always actual because they have variety, and
cannot be attended to altogether, all such particulars of repentance are then
in their season, they have this for their opportunity. For it is an admirable
wisdom of God so to dispose the times and advantages of Religion, that by the
solennities of duty our dispersions are gathered up, our wanderings are united,
our indifferencies are kindled, our weariness is recreated, our spirits are
made busy, our attention is called upon, our powers are made active, our
virtues fermented: we are called upon, and looked after, and engaged. For as it
is in motion, and as it is in lines, a long and a straight progression
diminishes the strength, and makes languishing and infirmity; but by doubling
the point, or making a new Center the moving body gathers up its parts and
powers into a narrower compass, and by union, as by a new beginning, is rescued
from weakness and diminution: So it is in the life of a Christian; when he
first sets forth, he is zealous and forward, full of appetite, and full of holy
fires: but when his little fuel is consumed, and his flame abates, when he goes
on and grows weary, when he mingles with the world, and by every conversation
is polluted or allayed; when by his very necessary affairs of life he is made
secular and interested, apt to tend his civil regards, and to be remiss in the
spiritual; by often and long handling of money, beginning too much to love it:
then we are interrupted in our declining piety, we are called upon by Religion,
and by the sacredness of this holy duty are made to begin again, not to go
back, but to be re-enkindled.

Every time we receive the holy Sacrament all our duties are summed up; we make
new vows, we chastise our negligence, we mend our pace, we actuate our holy
purposes, and make them stronger, we enter upon Religion as if we had never
done any thing before; we bring again our first penitential heats: and as when
we pray, and pray long, our devotion slackens, and our attention becomes
trifling, and by wandering thoughts we are gone very far from the observation of
the offices; the good man that ministers calls out to us, Let us pray: and then
the wandering thoughts run home, then we are troubled that we have lost so much
of our ^rayers, as we have not attended to; then we begin ag^in, and pray the
more passionately by how much we observe our selves to have been more negligent
before. If God did not particularly call upon us by these religious
necessities, and stop us by the solemn return of the Sacrament, and stir up our
fires, and remind us of our duty, and make actual seasons and opportunities for
actual and great attendencies on religion, if God did not make some days, and
some necessities, and some opportunities for heaven; the soul and her interest
would not be at all regarded. For this life is the day for the body, and our
needs do indeed require so much attendance, and employ so much of our
affections, and spend so much of our time, that it is necessary some
abstractions and separations of time and offices be made.

Receiving the holy Sacrament is like a Lock upon the waters; which makes them
rise higher, and begin a fuller stream as from a new principle of emanation: So
that the repentance which is the duty of our life and dispersed over all the
parts and periods of it, like the waters in the first Creation upon the face of
the whole earth, is gathered together against the day of the Lords Communion as
into a bosom and congregation of penitential waters. * Then you are to mourn
for your sins, and to resolve against them, then you are to remember what vows
you have already made and broken, how often you have prevaricated in your duty,
and by what temptations you are used to fall: then you are to renew the
strength of your purposes, to fortify your tenderest part, and to cut off all
advantages from the enemy: then you must prune your Vine, -- enodes trunci
resecentur, ut inde
Exeat in coelum ramis faelicibus arbor.

and make the branches bleed; then the Bridegroom comes, and you must trim your
Lamp, and adorn it with the culture of Religion: that is, against the day of
Communion, you must sum up all the parts of your repentance; for the Sacrament
is a summary of all the mysteries, and all the duty of the whole religion of a
Christian. Parum est baptizari, and Eucharistiam accipere, nisi quis factis and
opere perficiat. S. Cyprian.
But Baptism and the holy Eucharist do nothing for us unless we do good works,
and perfect them with a conjugation of holy duties, bringing forth fruits meet
for repentance.

But our iniquity must be yet a little more particular.

There are some actions of repentance which must be finished and made perfect
before we receive the holy Communion: and there are some which will be
finishing all our life. Concerning the first the question is, which they are,
and what must be done concerning them. Concerning the second, we are to inquire
how far we must have proceeded in them before we may communicate.

Those parts of repentance which must be finished before we approach the
blessed Sacrament, are these:

1. We must have renounced, perfectly renounced all affections to sin, and
firmly purpose to amend all, to sin no more, to lead a new life in all solid
and material practices of virtue. This we learn from Origin: [We eat the bread
which is made a holy thing, (...). Lib. 8. advers. Celsum.
and which sanctifies and makes holy all them who use it with holy and salutary
purposes] and designs of living holily: not by a solemn and pompous profession
only, but with a real and hearty resolution: resolving not to say so, and be a
fool; but to say so, because indeed we mean so; not to profess it because it is
the custom of Christians, and the expectation of the solemnity, but because we
intend really to be quit of the sin for ever. Now concerning our purposes of
amendment, these things are to be taken careof:

1. That they be made prudently, attentively, sincerely, and with intuition
upon a credible, possible, and designed effect. For there are some that make
vows (purposes I cannot call them) which they believe impossible to keep, and
no man can wisely purpose such things, of which he has such belief: but they
believe themselves inevitably engaged to commit a sin, and yet as inevitably
engaged to say they will not. The Greeks tell of a famous fool among them; her
name was Acco, who when she saw her self in a glass, would discourse as wisely
as she could to the other woman, and supposed her own shadow to be one of her
neighbors; with whom sometimes she had great business, but always huge
civilities; only she could never agree which of them should go away first, or
take the upper hand. Such wise resolvers are some persons: they take the shadow
of it for a substance, and please themselves by the entertainment of the images
of things; and think that the outside and the words of a promise are the only
thing that God requires; they and their promises do not know which shall go
away first; the resolution quickly dies, and the man presently after; but the
sin lives and abides there still, and will do so for ever. Cast about and see;
you have promised what you are likely to perform; and do you intend it in good
earnest never to consent to a sin, in no circumstance, and for no argument, and
by no temptation? For he that resolves never to commit that, which he knows he
shall commit, is like him who resolves he will never die; his vain resolution
sets not his death back one hour. It is hypocrisy and lying to say it before
God, and it is folly and madness to pretend that we will do it, to our selves;
but of this I h^ve already spoken Chap. 2. Sect. 3.


2. He that in his preparation to the holy Communion purposes to live a holy
life, must not judge of the goodness of his purposes by the present
intendment, but by the consequent performance. He must not think it is well
yet, because many good purposes are broken by temptations, disordered by
supervening accidents, frustrate by impotency, and laid aside by the purposes
to the contrary; (...). See Great Exemplar, Part 2. Sect. 12. n. 34.
such which Plutarch compares to windy eggs, which though they look fairly, yet
produce no birds. Now by this consideration it is not intended that a man must
defer his Communion till he has fully performed all his purposes of a holy
life, for then he should never Communicate till he dies: but by this we are
advised to make such inq^iry, and to use such cautions, and to require such
indications of the reality of our purposes, as becomes wise, interested, and
considering persons, who are undone if they be deceived, and receive damage by
the profane and u^holy usages of the Divine Mysteries, if they were cozened
and abused themselves in the sinceri^y and ^fficacy of their preparatory
purposes. Plato tells that Alc^biades did sometimes wish Socrat^s h^d been
dead, because he was ashamed to see him, for that he had not kept the promises
which he had so often made to him. If we who often have communicated, do find
that the purposes of reformation which we have formerly made proved
ineffective; if we perceive that we have begged pardon for our lust, and yet
still remain under the power of the passion; if we have deplored our pride, and
yet cannot endure to have others preferred before us; if we have resolved
against our hasty angers, and yet after the Communion find our peevishness to
return as often Talis mensae fuisti particeps, and cum omnibus deberes esse
mitior, and clementior, and par Angelis, fuisti omnium curdelissimus.
Gustavisti sanguinem Dominicum, and ne sic quidem fratrem agnoscis. St.
Chrysostom. homil. 27. in Corinth.
, and to abide as long, and still to forage and to prevail, we are like those
foolish birds who having conceived by the wind, lay their eggs in the sand, and
forget the place, and the waters wash them away.

In such cases as these something more must be done besides making resolutions.
Let every man make some experiment of himself, and give some instances of
performance, and get ground of his passion; and make no great haste to pass
instantly to the holy Communion; you may more safely stay one day longer, than
pass on one minute too soon: but be sure of this, the fierce saying of a few
warm and holy words is not a sufficient preparation to these sacred Mysteries;
and they who upon such little confidencies as these have hastened hither, --
accipimus sacra data pocula dextra
Quae simul arenti fitientes hausimus ore
Et pudet and reseram; pro verbis edere coepi
Murmur, and in terram, toto procumbere vultu.
Metamorph. 15.
have afterward found causes enough to deplore their profane follies and
presumptions; for they see when they have eaten the Sop, they go out to sin
against the Lord; as soon as the sacred Calice has refreshed their lips, they
dishonor God with their mouths, and retain their affections here below fastened
to earth and earthly things.

This is it that makes our Communions have so little fruit. Men resolve to be
good, and then Communicate; they resolve they will hereafter, but they are not
yet, and yet they will Communicate; they resolve, and think no more of it, as
if performance were no part of the duty and the obligation. In such cases it is
not good to be hasty; Proinde quicquid est, da spatium and tempus tibi,
Quod ratio nequit, saepe sanavit mora.

for a little stay will do better than twenty arguments to enforce your
purposes. You must make new resolutions, and re-enforce your old; but if you
have already tried, and have sound your purposes to be easily untwisted, and
that, like the Scenes at Masks, they were only for that show, to serve at
that solemnity, learn to be more wary and more afraid the next time. The first
folly was too bad, but to do so often is intolerable. But here are two Cases to
be resolved.

Question I. But of what nature and extent must our preparatory resolution be?
Must we resolve against all sin, or against some kinds only? If only against
some sorts, then we are not clean all over. If against all, then we find it
impossible for us to perform it: And then either it is not necessary to
resolve, or not necessary to perform, or not necessary to Communicate.
I answer; It is one thing to say, I shall never fall, I shall never be
mistaken, I shall never be surprised, or I shall never slacken my watchfulness
and attention; and another thing to resolve against the love and choice of
every sin. It is not always in our powers to avoid being surprised, or being
deceived, or being dull and sleepy in our carfulness and watches. Every good
and well-meaning Christian cannot promise to himself security; but he may be
tempted, or over-pressed with a sudden fear when he cannot consider, and be put
sometimes to act before he can take counsel: and though there is no one sin we
do but we do it voluntarily, and might escape it if we would make use of the
grace of God; yet the inference cannot run forth to all: we cannot therefore
always escape all; any one we can, but not every one. The reason is, because
concerning any one if we make a question, then we can and do deliberate; then
we can attend, and we can consider, and summon up the arts and auxiliaries of
Reason and Religion, and we can hear both sides speak; and therefore we can
choose: for he that can deliberate, can take either side; for if he could not
choose when he has considered which to choose, he were more a fool in
considering, than by any inconsideration in the world; for he not only does
unreasonably by sinning, but he considers unreasonably and to no purpose, since
his consideration cannot alter the case. Certain it is, by him that can
consider, every sin can be avoided: But then, this is as certain, that it is
not possible always to consider; but surprise and ignorance, haste and dullness,
indifference and weariness, are the entries at which some things that are not
good will enter; but these things are such, which by how much they are the
less voluntary, by so much they are the less imputed.

Thus therefore he that means to Communicate worthily, must resolve against
every sin, the greatest and the least; that is, 1. He must resolve never to
commit any sin concerning which he can deliberate: and, 2. He must resolve so
to stand upon his g^ard, that he may not frequently be surprised; he must use
prayer against all, and prudent caution in his whole conversation, and all the
instruments of grace for the destruction of the whole body of sin: and though
in this valley of tears there are but few so happy souls as to triumph over all
infirmities, we know of none, and if God has any such on earth, they are
peculiar jewels kept in undiscerned cabinets; yet all that intend to serve God
heartily, must aim at a return to that state of innocence, to the possibility
of which Christ has as certainly recovered us, as we lost it by our own
follies and the sin of Adam: that is, we must continually strive, and every day
get ground of our passions, and grow in understanding and the fear of God, that
we be not so often deluded, nor in so many things be ignorant, nor be so easily
surprised, nor so much complain of our weakness, nor the imperfection of our
actions be in so many instances unavoidable. But in the matters of choice, in
voluntary and deliberate actions, we must resolve not to sin at all. In these
things we must be more than conquerors.

2. He that intends worthily to Communicate, before his coming must quit all
his next and immediate occasions Invitat autem pauperes, debiles, caecos, ut
ostendatur quod nulla debilitas corporis excludit a regno rariusque delinquat
cui desit illecebra peccandi. St. Ambrose.
of habitual sins, all those states of evil, by which so long as he dwells he
cannot stand uprightly. For to resolve against all sin, and yet to retain that
temptation, which has been to this time stronger than all your resolutions, is
to abide in the midst of a torrent, against which you cannot swim, and yet
resolve never to be drowned Qui proponit sibi, and dicit habere volo quod
vincam: hoc est, vivere desidero, and volo sub ruina, August. de singul. Cleric.
. There is no dallying in this case: He that will not throw out the bond woman
and her son, he that will still retain the concubine, let him resolve what he
will, and will what he is commanded, and profess what he purposes; his
profession is nothing but words, and his resolutions will prove as unstable as
the thinnest air, which is not able to support a fly, unless with her wings she
fans it into an accidental thickness.

This may seem the hardest commandment of Christianity; and Christ calls it a
cutting off the right hand, and plucking out the right eye; as if it were the
greatest violence of the world. Indeed it is often times a great inconvenience
to our affairs and fortune: For it may be he by whom we live is he by whom we
sin, and we cannot eat but we must be in danger. If the case be so, it is
indeed harder to leave the sin; Projice quae cunque cortuum laniant, quae si
aliter extrahi nequirent, cor ipsum cum illis evellendum erat.
but yet the command of pulling out our eye is not the hardness, but is an act
of easiness, and an instrument of facilitation: For first it must be remembered,
that it is a question of souls, and no interest can be laid in balance against
a soul; it is moments against Eternity, money against heaven, life eternal
against a little pension; and therefore this precept of pulling out the right
eye is very easy, when it is made the price or instrument of avoiding eternal
torments: A man had better pull his heart out, than nurse a lust by which he
shall die for ever.

But then next to this it is considerable, that this precept of putting out the
right eye, that is, removing the next occasion of sin, is so far from being an
hard commandment, that it is perfectly a complying with our infirmities, and a
securing of our greatest interests; by this he conducts us tenderly, because we
have no strength. For if Christ had done as Xenocrates in Valerius, and
commanded his Disciples to dwell in danger that they might triumph more
gloriously, we had reason to suspect our selves, and to tremble under the load
of the imposition; but Christ knew it would never consist with our safety, and
never conduce to his Fathers glory; therefore Christ bids us to avoid the
occasion. (...).
He would not have weak and amorous persons to converse with fair women, that
make weak eyes, and by the eyes wound the heart of a foolish man. For as
Trithemius observes, good Angels never appeared in the likeness of women, they
are tempters and temptations: and therefore because of the danger Christ would
not have us look; unless we can do it with safety, we must not be in their
company. And therefore as God gave us legs and hands in great kindness, yet we
give money to have them cut off when they endanger the whole body: so must we
quite cut off the advantages of our estate, and the pleasures of our life,
rather than die eternally. There is no other variety but this; if we be tempted
in our state of life or of society, we must do violence to our fortune or our
will: But the particulars of the case are these.

1. If it be easy to quit the occasion, do it lest you be tempted; for it is
worth some pain to be secured in the question of your soul. When Alcibiades was
sent for from Sicily to Athens to be tried for his life, he hid himself, and
left this answer to be sent; (...).
It is better to decline a trial than to escape from under it: And so it is
here: It is glorious indeed to escape; but it is the safer way not to put it to
the venture; and therefore when you can, decline the trial; for he that
resolves to live, and yet will live under the ruins of a falling house, is but
little better than a fool.

2. If it be difficult to part with the tempting occasion of your sin, then
consider whether you can dwell with it, and yet not sin; if you can, you may;
for if you neither love your danger, nor can easily part with it, it is
sufficient that by plain force you resist it.

3. But if by sad experience you have learned your own weakness, and that as
long as you dwell near the furnace you are scorched with the flames, no
interest in this world must make you lose your hopes of the other. It is not
good to walk by a bank-side, or to play in the hollow seat of an aspe. He that
has escaped often is not secure; Nemo se tuto periculis offerre jam crebro
potest,
Quem saepe transit casus, aliquando invenit.
Tragoed.
but he that has already smarted under the calamity, has not so much left him
to alleviate the evil as the miserable excuse of, I did not think it: for he
has found that it was so dangerous. But therefore he must decline no trouble
Nec quisquam fruitur veris odoribus
Hyblaeis apibus aut spoliat favos.
Si fronti caveat, si timeat rubos.

that he may save his soul; and that estate is well spent that secures such an
interest. But if a man be afraid of his forehead, he must not gather honey from
a Bee-hive: and in many cases, if a man stands upon the matter of
inconvenience, he must not pretend to be a servant of God. Nunquam periculum
sine periculo vincitur. Senec.
If you dwell in a temptation you are in danger of Eternal death, and to be
secure against such a danger, what danger is it which a wise man will not
endure? All the glories of his Father could never have tempted Phaethon to have
come near one of the horses of the Sun after they had given him such an horrid
fall. Vitaret coelum Phaethon si viveret, et quos
Optavit stulte, tangere nollet equos.

When you have seen your self over-powred by the temptation, come not near it
any more: change your dwelling; let not one house hold you both, nor the same
stars ever see you meet.

But that this must be done before you receive the blessed Sacrament is
therefore affirmed; because no man can resolve against all sin, unless he be
stronger than his temptation, or fly from it. But he that chooses to dwell
with the next and proper opportunity of sin; either he directly loves the sin,
or by interpretation he loves not God, who will not for his service suffer the
inconvenience of leaving his Mistress, or venture the favor of his Patron, or
is afraid to grieve his tempter, or will at no hand suffer the diminution of
his fortune.

It may be deferred upon the same terms upon which it can be quite omitted:
that is, when upon any sure account we are impregnable against it; but if you
know not that, then you must fly away directly. If you cannot with water
quench your fi^e* take the wood from under it. I only add one general advice
which will fit all sorts of persons that desire truly to serve God and to
arrive at an excellent state of virtue; Although they live in the world and are
engaged by their duty and relations to many secular divertisements, yet as they
must do what they can to change these into Religion and into some good thing
one way or other; so by these difficulties and divertisements they will find it
to be impossible that they should do any thing that is greatly good; unless
they cut off all superfluous company, and visits and amusements. That which is
necessary is too much, and if it were not necessary it would not be tolerable,
but that which is more than needs, is a mil-stone about the neck of Religion,
and makes it impossible to be excellently virtuous.

Question. II. But is he that intends to communicate bound to quit all those
occasions of sin, by which himself was tempted, and did fall, and die?
1. I answer, That it is impossible he should. If you live in delights your
chastity is tempted; your humility is assaulted by receiving honor; St.
Bernard.
your Religion by much business: your truth by much talk; your charity by
living in the world; and yet we must not hasten out of it, nor swear eternal
silence, nor lay aside all our business, nor quit our preferment and honorable
employment, nor refuse all secular comforts and live in pains that we may
preserve these respective graces: and yet something we must do; some occasions
must be quitted, before we communicate. To that therefore the answer is certain
and indisputable; that the occasion that is immediate to the sin, must be
quitted in that in which it does minister to sin. A woman is not bound to spoil
her face, though by her beauty she has fallen: because her beauty was not the
immediate cause; it was her unguarded conversation, and looser society; the
laying her treasure open, or her wanton comportment. For beauty will invite a
noble flame, as soon as kindle a smoking brand; and therefore the face may be
preserved and the chastity too, if that be removed which brings the danger and
stands closer to the sin.

2. When Dionsius of Sicily gave to Aristippus five Attick talents, he and his
servant dragged them home upon their backs: but finding himself too glad of his
money, he threw it into the sea, as supposing the money to be the tempter, and
no safety to be had, as long as it was above the water. If he had thought
right, he had done right: if he could not have cured his covetousness and kept
the money, he had done well to part with it; but it may be he might have been as
safe, and yet wiser too. But the resolution is this. In this question
distinguish the next occasion from that which is farther off; and we are bound
to quit that not this, because the virtue may be secured without it. A man may
very well live in the world, and yet serve God; and if he be hindered by the
world, it is not directly that, but something else by which the cure must be
effected: but if nothing else will do it, then there is no distinction, no
difference between the nearest occasion and that which is farther off: for they
must be all quitted: the face must be disordered, the beauty sullied, the money
thrown away, the world renounced, rather than God be provoked to anger, and thy
soul ruined by thy inevitable sin.

3. He that comes to the holy Sacrament must before his coming so repent of his
injury, of his rapine, of his slander, or what ever the instance be, that
before he communicates he make actual restitution, perfect amends, entire
satisfact^on, and be really reconciled to his offended brother. This is to be
understood in these cases.

1. If the injury be remaining and incumbent on thy brother: for it is not fit
for thee to receive benefit by Christ's death, so long as by thee thy Brother
feels an injury. Thou art unjust so long as thou continuest the wrong: and if
the evil goes on, the repentance cannot: No man that repents does injure any
man: and this Eucharistical sacrifice will never sanctify any man unless he
have the holy spirit of God, Quando nec oblatio sanctificare illic possit ubi
spiritus sanctus non sit, nec cuiquam Dominus per ejus orationes and preces
profit qui Dominum [vel fratrem] violavit. St. Cyprian Epist. 63.
neither will the Lord bring advantages or give him blessing consequent to
these solemn prayers, if he has already injured the Lord, or proceeds to do
injury to his brother. There is no repentance unless the penitent as much as
he can, make that to be undone which is done amiss; and therefore because the
action can never be undone, at least undo the mischief; unty the bands of thy
neighbors arms, do justice and judgment; that's repentance; restore the
pledges; Ezekiel. 18.19.
give again that you had robbed, ask pardon for thy injury, return to peace,
put thy neighbor if thou can into the same state of good from whence by thy
sin he was removed. That a good repentance that bears fruit, and not that which
produces leaves only. When the heathens gods were to choose what trees they
would have sacred to them and used in their festivals; Jupiter chose the Oak,
Venus the Myrtle, Apollo loved the Laurel, but wise Minerva took the Olive.
Oliva nobis propter fructus est gratior.
The other trees gave no fruit; an useless apple from the Oak, or little
berries from the Laurel and the Myrtle; but besides the show, they were good
but for very little: but the Olive gives an excellent fruit, fit for food and
Physic, which when Jupiter observed, he kissed his daughter, and called her
wise: for all pompousness is vain, and the solemn Religion stands for nothing,
unless that which we do, be profitable and good for material uses. Cui bono?
To what purpose is our repentance? Why do we say we are sorrowful? What Is that?
Nollem factum. I wish I had never done it; for I did amiss. If you say as you
think, make that it shall be no more; do no new injury, and cut off the old.
Restore him to his fame, to his money, to his liberty, and to his lost
advantages.

2. But this must suppose that it is in thy power to do it. If it be in thy
power to do it, and thou do it not, thou can not reasonably pretend that
thou art so much as sorrowful. For what repentance is it which enjoyes the
pleasure and the profit of the sin, Si res aliena propter quam peccatum est,
cum reddi possit, non redditur, non agitur poenitentia sed singitur: si autem
non veraciter agitur, non remittitur peccatum, nisi restituatur ablatum: sed ut
dixi quum restitui potest. S. August. ad Macedon.
that reaps the pleasant fruits of it, that eats the revenues, that gathers the
grapes from our neighbors vine, that dwells in the fields of the Fatherless
and kneads his bread with the infusion of the widows tears? The snake in the
Apologue crept into the holy Phial of sacred oil. and lickt it up till she
swelled so big that she could not get forth from the narrow entrance, but she
was forced to refund it every drop, or she had there remained a prisoner for
ever. And therefore tell me no more thou art sorry for what thou have done:
Quod invenisti and non reddidisti, rapuisti: quantum potuisti, fecisti: qui
alienum negat, si potuit, tollit. St. Aug. de verb. Apost.
if thou retainest the purchase of thy sin, thou love the fruit of it, and
therefore can not curse the tree. Thou did never love the sin for it self
without the profit, and therefore if thou still do love that, thou love the
sin as much as ever; neither more nor less; but thou art still the same man.

Question III. But can it in no case be lawful to put off our restitution or
reconciliation with our brother? Is it not sufficient to resolve to do it
afterward, and in the mean time to receive the Sacrament? For if the heart be
peaceful, and the mind be just, the outward work may follow in its due time,
and all be well enough.
I answer: That a man is not tied in that Mathematical instant in which he
remembers his injustice to go and make restitution. He is not tied to go out of
the Church, or to rise at midnight, or to leave his meat, as Tobit did to go
and bury the dead; unless there ^e danger that if he do not do it then it shall
never be done at all: For in this case, he must do it, whether it be convenient
or inconvenient, whether it be seasonable or not. But every man is bound to do
it as soon as he morally can, and he must go about it, as he does about other
actions in which he is mightily concerned. If a man d^d diligently examine
himself, and yet thought not of the obligation (though that can hardly be
supposed; yet if it be so, and he did not think of it) till he were kneeling
before the holy Table, then it were sufficient to resolve to do it speedily
after, because he cannot without scandal remove and go forth, but without
prejudice to his brother he can stay till next day. If he inquired diligently,
and had a mind ready to do every thing which he could learn to be his duty,
there was no unworthiness in him to hinder him from coming; and this cannot be
prejudiced by a new and sudden discovery, if it be entertained with the same
justice and readiness of mind. But else; what you can learn in these cases
ought to be done at all, must be done before the Communion, if we can: that is,
there must be no let in the will, no imperfect resolution, no indifference of
affections to it. If it can be done before, it must. For so said our blessed
Savior, If at the Altar thou remembrest, go and be reconciled. That is, if
thou art not reconciled, if thou art not in charity, or if thou be in thy
heart still injurious, and have not a just and a righteous soul, go even from
before the Altar; but if thou have a real charity, and have done the duties of
these graces by a moral diligence; you may come; and a sudden remembrance of an
undiscovered obligation need not to expose thee to the reproach of a sudden
departure: provided I say always that thou were indeed truly reconciled, and
truly charitable. For by our Lords express command you must at no hand offer
till thou be in charity: till thou have forgiven, or till thou do cease
to hate, till thou be reconciled, that is our Saviors word; for it is the
inward grace which thou art tied to in all circumstances, and therefore in
that; but to the outward, something else may be necessary and fit to be
considered. Nothing can hinder thee from charity, in any circumstances
whatsoever; from present or actual restitution, many things may, and yet thou
be innocent. But if thou be an angry person, or an unjust, or malice be upon
thy heart, or injustice upon thy hand, let not thy hand be upon the Altar, nor
thy heart upon the Sacrament. If thy Brother has ought against thee, I know
not why thou should make have to receive the Sacrament, make have to be
reconciled: There is haste of this; there is no such haste of the other, but
that thou may stay, till thou have done thy duty.

Only remember this: Every deferring of it, is some degree of unwillingness to
do it; and therefore it is not good to trust thy own word, till thou have
served thy own end. After thou have received, thou will think that there is
less need than before, and therefore thou will make less haste. For what a
religious man said in the case of a dying person, is also in proportion true of
him who is to Communicate. He that will not restore presently if he can, is not
to be absolved, is not to be communicated, although he promise restitution.
Because it cannot be likely that he intends it heartily, that puts it off
longer than the day of its extreme, or the day of its positive necessity. Qui
tarde vult. diu noluit.
Let us not deceive our selves: of all the things in the world the holy
Sacrament was never intended to give countenance to sinners, or palliation to a
sin; warranty or color, excuse, or perpetuity. * There is a hard expression in
the Prophet, Ezekiel. 8.17.
They have filled the Land with violence; and have returned to provoke me to
anger, and lo, they put the branch to their nose] and behold they are as
mockers; So the LXX. read it; (...).
but make no mention of putting the branch to their nose. Theodotion puts them
both together: (...).
they hold out the branch like mockers; and to this Symmachus gives yet a
little more light; (...).
They lifted up the branch, making a noise like them that mock with their
noses. But this interpretation is something hard; there is yet an easier, and
that which makes these words pertinent to our present duty, and a severe
reproof to them who come to this holy service of God, not with the love of sons
and duty of servants, but with the disaffect^on of enemies. The carrying of
branches in the superstition of the Gentiles and the custom of the Jews was a
sign of honor. Thus they carried the Pine Tree before the shepherds God; they
gave the Cypress to Sylvanus, and the Abricot-tree to Isis; and the branches of
Palms the Jews did carry before our blessed Savior: and this is it that God
complains of; They carried branches as if they did him honor; but they held
them to their noses like mockers: that is, they mocked him secretly when they
worshipped him publicly; they came with fair pretenses and foul hearts; their
ceremony was religious all over, but their lives were not answerable. The
difficulty came from the homonymy of the Hebrew word, (...)
which signified a Bran^h and a noise: and it will be as difficult to
distinguish an hypocrite from a Communicant, unless we really purpose to live
better, and do so; unless we leave the next occasions to sin, and do justice
and judgment, and cease to do evil, and cause that my brother shall no longer
feel the evils of my injustice, and of my foolish crimes.

SECT. IV. How far we must have proceeded in our General repentance and
emendation of our lives before we Communicate?
TO this I answer, that No man is fit to Communicate, but he that is fit to
die: that is, he must be in the state of grace; and he must have trimmed his
lamp: he must stand readily prepared by a state of repentance; and against the
solemn time, he must make that state more actual, and his graces operative.

Now in order to this, it is to be considered; that preparation to death has
great latitude; and not only he is fit to die who has attained to the fullness
of the stature of Christ, to a perfect man in Christ Jesus; but every one who
has renounced his sin with heartinesse and sincerity, and has begun to
mortify it. But in these cases of beginning, or of Infancy in Christ; though
it be certain that every one who is a new Creature, though but newly become so,
is born of God, and has life abiding in him, and therefore shall not pass
into condemnation: yet concerning such persons the Rulers of Souls and
Ministers of Sacraments have nothing but a judgment of charity, and the
sentences of hope relating to the persons; the state is so little and so
allayed, and so near to the late state of death from which they are recovering,
that God only knows how things are with them; yet because we know that there is
a beginning in which new converts are truly reconciled, there is a first period
of life, and as we cannot say in many cases that this is it; so in many we
cannot say, this is not; therefore the Church hopes well of persons that die in
their early progressions of piety; and consequently refuses not to give to them
these divine Mysteries. Whoever are reconciled to God, may be reconciled to the
Church; whose office it is only to declare the Divine Sentence, and to
administer it, and to help toward the verification of it.

But because the Church cannot be surer of any person that his sins are
pardoned, that he is reconciled to God, that he is in the state of Grace, that
if he then dies he shall be saved, than a man himself can be of himself and in
his own case, which certainly he knows better than any man else; and that our
degrees of hope and confidence of being saved when it is not presumption, but
is prudent and reasonable, does increase in proportion to our having well used
and improved Gods grace, and inlarges it self by our proportions of
mortification and spiritual life; and every man that is wise and prudent,
abides in fears and uncertain thoughts, till he has gotten a certain victory
over all his sins; and though he dies in hope, yet not without trembling, till
he finds that he is more than conqueror; therefore in proportion to this
address to death, must also be our address to the holy Sacrament. For no man is
fit to die, but he that can be united unto Christ; and ^he only that can be so,
must be admitted to a participation of his body and his blood. It is the same
case, in both we dwell with Christ; and the two states differ but in degrees;
it is but a passing from altar to altar, from that where the Minister of the
Church officiates, to that where the head of the Church does intercede.

There is this only difference; there may be some proportions of haste to the
Sacrament, more than unto death, upon this account; because the reception of
the Sacrament in worthy dispositions does increase those excellencies in which
death ought to find us; and therefore we may desire to communicate, because we
perceive a want of grace; and yet for the same reason we may at the same time
be afraid to die; because after that, we can receive no more; but as that finds
us, we shall abide for ever. But he that fears justly, may yet in many cases
die safely; and he shall find that his fears when he was alive were useful to
the caution and zeal and hastiness of repentance; but were no certain
indication that God was not reconciled unto him. The best and severest persons
do in the greatest parts of their spiritual life complain of their imperfect
state, and feel the load of their sins, and apprehend with trembling the sad
consequents of their sins, and every day contend against them; and forget all
that is past of good actions done, and press forwards still to more grace, and
are as hungry as if they had none at all and those men if they die, go to
Christ and shall reign with him for ever; and yet many of them go with a
trembling heart, and though considering the infinite obliquity of them they
cannot overvalue their sins, yet considering the infinite goodness of God, and
his readiness to accept it, they undervalue their repentance, and are safe in
their humility, and in Gods goodness, when in many other regards they think
themselves very unsafe. Now such men as these must not be as much afraid to
communicate as they are afraid to die; but these and all men else must not
communicate till they be in that condition, that if they did die* it would go
well with them: and the reason is plain: because every friend of God dying so,
is certainly saved; and he that is no friend of God is unworthy to partake of
the Table of the Lord.

But for the reducing the Answer of this Question to practice and to particular
considerations: I am to advise these things.

1. Because no man of an ordinary life, and a newly begun repentance ought
hastily to pronounce himself acquitted, and in the state of grace, and in the
state of salvation, in this rule of proportion; we are only to take the
judgment of charity, not of certainty, and what is usually by wise and good men
sup^osed to be the certain, though the least measure of hopeful expectations in
order to death, that we must suppose also to be our least measure of repentance
preparatory to the blessed Sacrament.

2. This measure must not be taken in the days of health and carelessness; but
when we are either actually in apprehension, or at least in deep meditation of
death; when it is dressed with all such terrors and material considerations,
that it looks like the King of terrors, and at least makes our spirits full of
fear and of sobriety.

3. This measure must be carefully taken without the allay of foolish
principles, or a careless spirit, or extravagant confidences of personal
predestination, or of being in any sect; but with the common measures which
Christians take when they weigh sadly their sins and their fears of the Divine
displeasure; let them take such proportions which considering men rely upon
when they indeed come to die; for few sober men die upon such wild accounts as
they rely upon in talk and interest when they are alive. He that prepares
himself to death, considers how deeply God has been displeased, and what has
been done toward a reconciliation; and he that can probably hope by the usual
measures of the Gospel that he is in probability of pardon, has by that learnt
by what measures he must prepare himself to the holy Sacrament.

4. Some persons are of a timorous conscience, and apt to irregular and
unreasonable fears, and nothing but a single ray from heaven can give them any
portions of comfort, and these men never trust to any thing they do, or to any
thing that is done for them; and fear by no other measures but by consideration
of the intolerable misery which they should suffer if they did miscarry; and
because these men can speak nothing and think nothing comfortable of themselves
in that agony, or in that meditation; therefore they can make use of this rule
by the proportions of that judgment of charity which themselves make of others;
and in what cases, and in what dispositions they conclude others to die in the
Lord; if they take those or the like measures for themselves, and accordingly
in those dispositions address themselves to the holy Sacrament, they will make
that use of this rule which is intended, and which may do them benefit.

5. As there are great varieties and degrees of fitness to death; so also to
the holy Sacrament; he that has lived best, has enough to deplore when he
dies, and causes enough to beg for pardon of what is past, and for aids in the
present need; and when he does communicate, he has in some proportion the same
too; he has causes enough to come humbly, to come as did the Publican, and to
say, as did the Centurion, Lord, I am not worthy: but he that may die with most
confidence because he is in the best dispositions, he also may communicate with
most comfort, because he does it with most holiness.

6. But the least measures of repentance; less than which cannot dispose us to
the worthy reception of the holy Mysteries are these:

1. As soon as we are smitten with the terrors of an afflicted conscience, and
apprehend the evil of sin, or fear the Divine Judgments, and upon that account
resolve to leave our sin, we are not instantly worthy and fit to communicate.
Attrition is not a competent disposition to the blessed Sacrament; because
although it may be the gate and entrance of a spiritual life, yet it can be no
more, unless there be love in it; unless it be contrition, it is not a state of
favor and grace, but a disposition to it. He that does not yet love God,
cannot communicate with Christ; and he that resolves against sin out of fear
only, or temporal regards, has given too great testimony that he loves the sin
still, and will return to it, when that which hinders him shall be removed.
Faith working by charity is the wedding garment; and he that comes hither not
vested with this, shall be cast into outer darkness. But the words of St. Paul
are express as to this particular. Gal. 5.6.
In Christ Jesus nothing can avail but faith working by love; and therefore
without this, the Sacrament it self will do no good; and if it does no good, it
cannot be but it will do harm. Our repentance disposing us to this Divine
feast, must at least be contrition, or a sorrow for sins, and purposes to leave
them, by reason of the love of God working in our hearts.

2. But because no man can tell whether he has the love of God in him, but by
the proper effects of love, which is keeping the Commandments; no man must
approach to the holy Sacrament upon the account of his mere resolution to leave
sin: until he has broken the habit, until he has cast away his fetters,
until he be at liberty from sin, and has shaken off its laws and dominion; so
that he can see his love to God entering upon the ruins of sin, and perceives
that Gods Spirit has advanced his Scepter, by the declension of the sin that
dwelt within; till then he may do well to stand in the outward Courts; lest by
a too hasty entrance into the Sanctuary he carry along with him the abominable
thing, and bring away from thence the intolerable sentence of condemnation. A
man cannot rightly judge of his love to God, by his acts and transports of
fancy, or the emanations of a warm passion; but by real events and changes of
the heart. The reason is plain, because every man has first loved sin, and
obeyed it, and until that obedience be changed, that first love remains, and
that is absolutely inconsistent with the love of God: an act of love, that is,
a loving ejaculation, a short prayer affirming and professing love, is a very
unsure warrant for any man to conclude that his repentance is indeed
contrition: for wicked persons may in their good intervals have such sudden
fires; and all men that are taught to understand contrition to be a sorrow for
sins proceeding from the love of God, and that love of God to be sufficiently
signified by single acts of loving prayer, can easily by such forms and ready
exercises fancy, and conclude themselves in a very good condition at an easy
rate. But contrition is therefore necessary, because attrition can be but the
one half of repentance; it can turn us away from sin, but it cannot convert us
unto God; that must be done by love, and that love, especially in this case, is
manifestly nothing else but obedience: and until that obedience be evident and
discernable, we cannot pronounce any comfort concerning our state of love;
without which no man can see God, and no man can taste him or feel him without
it.

3. A single act of obedience in the instance of any kind where the scene of
repentance lies, is not a sufficient preparation to the holy Sacrament, nor
demonstration of our contrition: unless it be in the case of repentance only
for single acts of sin. In this case, to oppose a good to an evil, an act of
proportionable abstinence to a single act of intemperance, for which we are
really sorrowful* and (as we suppose) heartily troubled, and confess it, and
pray for pardon, may be admitted as a competent testimonial that this sorrow is
real, and this repentance is contrition; because it does as much for virtue, as
in the instance it did for vice: always provided that whatsoever aggravations
or accidental grandeurs were in the sin, as scandal, deliberation, malice,
mischief, hardness, delight, or obstinacy, be also proportionably accounted for
in the reckonings of the repentance. But if the penitent return from a habit or
state of sin, he will find it a harder work to quit all his old affection to
sin, and to place it upon God entirely; and therefore he must stay for more
arguments than one or a few single acts of grace: not only because a few may
proceed from many causes accidentally, and not from the love of God; but also
because his love and habitual desires of sin must be naturally extinguished by
many contrary acts of virtue; and till these do enter, the old love does
naturally abide. It is true, that sin is extinguished not only by the natural
force of the contrary actions of virtue, but by the Spirit of God, by aids from
heaven, and powers supernatural; and Gods love hastens ou^ pardon and
acceptance; yet still, this is done by parts and methods of natural
progression; after the manner of nature, though by the aids of God; and
therefore it is fit that we expect the changes, and make our judgment by
material events, and discerned mutations, before we communicate in these
mysteries, in which whoever unworthily does communicate, enters into death.

4. He that has resolved against all sin, and yet falls into it regula^ly at
the next temptation, is yet in a state of evil, and unworthiness to
communicate; because he is under the dominion of sin, he obeys it, though
unwillingly; that is he grumbles at his fetters, but still he is in slavery and
bondage. But if having resolved against all sin, he delights in none,
deliberately chooses none, is not so often surprised, grows stronger in grace,
and is mistaken but seldom, and repents when he is, and arms himself better,
and watches more carefully against all, and increases still in knowledge;
whatever imperfection is still adherent to the man unwillingly, does indeed
allay his condition, and is fit to humble and cast him down; but it does not
make him unworthy to communicate, because he is in the state of grace; he is in
the Christian warfare, and is on Gods side; and the holy Sacrament, if it have
any effect at all, is certainly an instrument or a sign in the hands of God to
help his servants, to enlarge his grace, to give more strengths, and to promote
them to perfection.

5. But the sum of all is this; He that is not freed from the dominion of sin,
he that is not really a subject of the Kingdom of grace; he in whose mortal
body sin does reign, and the Spirit of God does not reign, must at no hand
present himself before the holy Table of the Lord; because, whatever
dispositions and alterations he may begin to have in order to pardon and
holiness, he as yet has neither, but is Gods enemy, and therefore cannot
receive his holy Son.

6. But because the change is made by parts and effected by the measures of
other intellectual and spiritual changes, that is, after the manner of men,
from imperfection to perfection by all the intermedial steps of moral degrees,
and good and evil in some periods have but a little distance though they should
have a great deal; and it is at first very hard to know whether it be life or
death; and after that, it is still very difficult to know whether it be health
or sickness; and dead men cannot eat, and sick men scarce can eat with benefit,
at least are to have the weakest and the lowest diet: and after all this, it is
of a consequence infinitely evil, if men eat this Supper indisposed and unfit:
It is all the reason of the world that returning sinners should be busy in
their repentances, and do their work in the field (as it is in the parable of
the Gospel) and in their due time come home, and gird themselves and wait upon
their Lord, and when they are bidden and warranted, then to sit down in the
Supper of their Lord. But in this case it is good to be as sure as we can; as
sure as the analogy of these divine Mysteries require, and as our needs permit.

7. He that has committed a single act of sin a little before the Communion,
ought for the reverence of the holy Sacrament to abstain till he has made
proportionable amends; and not only so, but if the sin was inconsistent with
the state of grace, and destroyed or interrupted the divine favor, as in cases
of fornication, murder, perjury, any malicious or deliberate known great crime,
he must comport himself as a person returning from a habit or state of sin; and
the reason is, because he that has lost the divine favor cannot tell how long
he shall be before he recovers it, and therefore would do well not to snatch at
the portion and food of Sons, whilst he has reason to fear that he has the
state and calamity of Dogs, who are caressed well, if they feed on fragments
and crumbs that are thrown away.

Now this Doctrine and these cautions, besides that they are consonant to
Scripture and the analogy of this divine Sacrament, are nothing else but what
was directly the sentiment of all the best, most severe, religious and
devoutest ages of the Primitive Church. For true it is, the Apostles did
indefinitely admit the faithful to the holy Communion; but they were persons
wholly enflamed with those holy fires which Jesus Christ sent from heaven to
make them burning and shining lights; such which our dearest Lord, with his
blood still warm and fresh, filled with his holy love; such whose spirits were
so separate from the affections of the world, that they laid their estates at
the Apostles feet, and took with joy the spoiling of their goods; such who by
improving the graces they had received, did come to receive more abundantly;
and therefore these were fit to receive the bread of the strong (...)
. But this is no invitation for them to come who feel such a lukewarmnesse and
indifference of spirit and devotion, that they have more reason to suspect it
to be an effect of evil life, rather than of infirmity: for them who feel no
heats of love but of themselves; for them who are wholly immerg'd in secular
affections and interests; for them who are full of passions, and void of grace;
these from the example of the others may derive caution, but no confidence: So
long as they persever'd in the Doctrine of the Apostles, Act. 2.48.
so long they also did continue in the breaking of bread and solemn conventions
for prayer: for to persevere in the Doctrine of the Apostles signified a life
most exactly Christian; for that was the Doctrine Apostolical, according to the
words of our Lord, teaching to observe all things which I have commanded you.
Mat. 28.


And by this method the Apostolical Churches and their descendants did
administer these holy Mysteries; a full and an excellent testimony whereof we
have in that excellent Book of Ecclesiastical Hierarchy commonly attributed to
St. Dionys. Cap. 3.
The Church drives from the Sacrifice of the Temple [meaning the divine
Sacrament] such persons for whom it is too sublime and elevated: First, those
who are not yet instructed and taught concerning the participation of the
Mysteries: Next, (...).
those who are fallen from the holy and Christian state, [meaning Apostates,
and such as have renounced their Baptism, or fallen from the grace of it, by a
state of deadly sin, or foulest crimes.] Thirdly, they who are possessed with
evil spirits: And lastly, those who indeed have begun to retire from sin to a
good life, but they are not yet purified from the phantasms and images of their
past inordinations, by a divine habitude and love, with purity and without
mixture. And to conclude, they who are not yet perfectly united to God alone,
and to speak according to the style of Scripture, they who are not entirely
inculpable and without reproach. And when St. Soter exhorted all persons to
receive upon the day of the Institution, or the vespers of the Passion, he
excepted those who were forbidden because they had committed any grievous sin.

But what was the Doctrine and what were the usages of the Primitive Church in
the ministry of the Blessed Sacrament, appears plainly in the two Epistles of
St. Basil to Amphilochius in the Canons of Ancyra, those of Peter of
Alexandria, Gregory Thaumaturgus, and Nyss^en, which make up the Penitential of
the Greek Church, and are explicated by Balsamo; in which we find sometimes the
penance of two years imposed for a single theft; four years, and seven years,
for an act of uncleanness, eleven years for perjury, fifteen years for
adultery and incest; that is, such persons were for so many years sep^rate from
the Communion, and by a holy life and strict observances of penitential
impositions, were to give testimony of their contrition and amends. The like to
which are to be seen in the Penitentials of the Western Church; that of
Theodorus Archbishop of Canterbury, that of venerable Bede, the old Roman, and
that of Rabanus Maurus Archbishop of Mentz: The reason of which severity we
find thus accounted in St. Basil; [ All this is done that they may try the
fruits of their repentance: (...)^ cap. 2. ad Amphiloch,
For we do not judge of these things by the time, but by the manner of their
repentance.] For the Bishop had power to shorten the days of their separation
and abstention; and he that was an excellent penitent was much sooner admitted;
but by the injunction of so long a trial, they declared that much purification
was necessary for such an address. And if after, or in these penitential years
of abstention, they did not mend their lives, though they did perform their
penances, they were not admitted. These were but the Churches signs; by other
accidents and manifestations if it happened that a great contrition was
signified, or a secret incorrigibility became public, the Church would admit
the first sooner, and the latter not at all. (...). ibid.
For it was purity and holiness that the Church required of all her
Communicants; and what measure of it she required, we find thus testified: [
The faithful which has been regenerated by baptism ought to be nourished by
the participation of the divine Mysteries; and being clothed with Jesus
Christ, Lib. 1. de bapt. cap. 3.
and having the quality of a child of God, he ought to receive the nutriment of
life eternal, which the Son of God himself has given us: and this nutriment is
obedience to the word of God, and execution of his will, of which Jesus Christ
has said, Man lives not by bread alone; but my meat is to do my Fathers will]
and a little after he affirms [that whereas St. Paul says that Jesus Christ
has appointed us to eat his body in memory of his death, the true remembrance
which we ought to have of his death, is to place before our eyes that which the
Apostle says, that we were wholly dead, and Jesus Christ died for us, to the
end that we should no more live unto our selves, but to him alone, and that so
we should do him honor, and give him thanks for his death by the purity of our
life, without which we engage our selves in a terrible damnation if we receive
the Eucharist.] And again: [He that, not having this charity which presses us,
and causes us to live for him who died for us, dares approach to the Eucharist,
grieves the holy Spirit. For it is necessary that he who comes to the memorial
of Jesus Christ, who died and rose again for us, should not only be clean from
all impurity of flesh and spirit; but that he should demonstrate the death of
him who died and rose for us, by being dead unto sin, to the world, and to
himself, and that he lives no more but only to God through Jesus Christ.] And
therefore St. Cyprian complains as of a new and worse persecution, Vide etiam
S. Cyprian. lib. de lapsis and epist. 28.
that lapsed persons are admitted to the Communion before they have brought
forth fruits of a worthy repentance; and affirms, that such an admission of
sinners is to them as hail to the young fruits, as a blasting wind to the
trees, as the murren to the cattle, as a tempest to the ships: The ships are
overturned and broken, the fruits fall, the trees are blasted, the cattle die,
and the poor sinner by being admitted too soon to the ministeries of eternal
life, falls into eternal death. And if we put together some words of S^.
Ambrose, S. Ambr. lib. 5. de Sacram. c. 2.
they clearly declare this Doctrine, and are an excellent Sermon: Thou come
to the Altar, the Lord Jesus calls thee; he sees thee to be clean from all sin,
because thy sins are washed away, therefore he judges thee worthy of the
c^lestial Sacraments, and therefore he invites thee to the heavenly banquet:
Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth] But some desire to be admitted to
penance, Lib. 2. de poenit. c. 9.
that presently they may receive the Communion: These men do not so much desire
themselves to be absolved, as that the Priest be bound; for they do not put off
their own evil conscience. Lib. 1. de poenit. c. 16.
] But I would that the guilty man should hope for pardon; let him require it
with tears, seek it with sighs, beg to obtain it by the weepings of all the
people, and if he be denied the Communion again and again, let him consider
that his prayer was not sufficiently earnest; let him weep more and pray more]
To which I shall add some like words of St. Austin, Sermon. 252. de tempore.
[Therefore my dearest Brethren, let every one consider his conscience, and
when he finds himself wounded with any crime, first let him take care with
prayers and fastings and alms to cleanse his conscience, and so let him receive
the Eucharist.... for he that knowing his guilt, shall humbly remove himself
from the Altar for the amendment of his life, shall not fear to be wholly
ex-communicate from that eternal and celestial banquet: For this Divine
Sacrament is not to be eaten with confidence and boldness, Homil. 24. in 1 Corinthians. (...).
but with fear and all manner of purity, says St. Chrysostom; for impudence
in these approaches will certainly slay the souls.] For th^s is the body
whither none but Eagles are to gather; because they ought to be sublime and
elevated souls, such which have nothing of earthliness in them, that do not sit
and prey upon the ground, that are not immerg'd in the love of Creatures; but
such whose flight is toward heaven, whose spirit does behold the Sun of
Righteousness with a penetrating contemplation, and piercing eyes: for this is
the Table of Eagles, and not of Owls] And therefore this Saint complains of
some [who did approach to the Eucharist as it were by chance, or rather by
custom and constraint of Laws, rather than by argument and choice. In
whatsoever estate their souls are, they will partake of these Mysteries because
it is Lent, or because it i^ the feast of the Epiphany: but certain it is, that
it is not the time which puts us into a capacity of doing this action. For it
is not Lent nor the Epiphany which makes us worthy to approach to the Son of
God; (...). Homil. 3. in 1. cap. Epist. Ephesians.
But the sincerity and purity of the soul: with this come at any time; but
without this, never. In fine, it is the general doctrine of the holy Fathers,
and the public practice of the Primitive Church, that no impenitent person
should come to these divine Mysteries: and they that are truly penitent should
practice deep humility, and undergo many humiliatio^ns, and live in a state of
repentance, till by little and little they have recovered the holiness they
had lost, and must for a long time live upon the word of God, before they
approach to the holy Table to be nourished by his body. For so should every
prodigal child cry unto his Lord, Homil. de prodigo.
[ Drive me not O Lord out of thy doors, lest the enemy espying a wanderer and
a vagabond, take me for a slave. I do not yet desire to approach to thy holy
Table, thy mystical and terrible Table; for I have not confidence with my
impure eyes to behold the holy of holies. Only suffer me to enter into thy
Church amongst the Catechumens, that by beholding what is there celebrated, I
may by little and little enter again into the participation of them; to the end
that the Divine Waters of thy Word running upon me, may purify my ears from
the impressions which have been made upon them by ungodly songs, and from the
filthiness they have left behind; and seeing how the righteous people partake
by a holy violence of thy precious jewels, I may conceive a burning desire to
have hands worthy to receive the same excellencies. I end this collection of
the ancient Doctrine of the Church with recitation of the words of Gennadius,
De dogmat. Eccles. c. 53.
[ I persuade and exhort Christians to receive the Communion every Lords day;
but so that if their mind be free from all affection of sinning: For he who
still has will or desires of sin, he is burdened and not purified by receiving
the Eucharist. And therefore although he be bitten [or griev'd] with sin, let
him for the future renounce all will to sin, and before he communicate let him
satisfy with prayers and tears; and being confident of the mercy of our Lord,
who uses to pardon sins upon a pious confession, let him come to the Eucharist
without doubting. But this I say of him who is not pressed with capital and
deadly sins; for such a person, if he will not receive the Eucharist to
judgment and condemnation, let him make amends by public penance, and being
reconciled by the Bishop or Priest, let him communicate. I doubt not also but
such grievous sins may be extinguished by private satisfactions; but this must
be done by changing the course of his life, by a professed study of Religion,
by a daily and perpetual mourning or contrition, that through the mercy of God
he may do things contrary to these whereof he does repent; and then humbly and
suppliant let him every Lords day communicate to the end of his life.

This advice of Gennadius declares the sentiment of the Church, that none must
communicate till they have worthily repented, and in the way of piety and
contrition made amends for their faults as well as they may; and have put
themselves into a state of virtue contrary to their state of sin, that is, have
made progression in the reformation of their lives; that they are really
changed and become new men, not in purpose only, but actually and in the
commencement of holy habits. And therefore it is remarkable that he advises
that these persons who do not stand in the place of public penitents, should
upon the commission of grievous faults enter into Religion; he means into
solitude, and retirement, and renunciation of the world, that by attending
wholly to the severities and purities of a religious life, they may by such
strictnesses and constant piety be fitted for the communion. Now whatever ends
besides this, the Divine Providence might have, yet it is not to be neglected,
that when the ancient discipline of the Church, of penances and satisfactions
was gone into desuetude, the Spirit of Religion entered more fully into the
world, and many religious orders and houses were instituted, that at least
there, the world might practice that severity in private which the change of
affairs in the face of the Church had taken from the public ministeries;
Penance went from the Churches into deserts and into Monasteries; but when
these were corrupted, and the manners of men were worse corrupted, it is hard
to say whither it is gone now. It may be yet done in private, and under the
hand of a spiritual guide; or by the spirit of penance in the heart of a good
man, and by the conduct of a wise counselor; but besides that the manners of
men are corrupted, the doctrines also are made so easy, and the Communion
given to sects and opinions, or indifferently to all; that it is very rare to
see them who have sinned grievously repent worthily; who therefore can never be
worthy communicants, for no impenitents can partake of Christ, S. Hierom in
Isai. c. 3. Princeps poenitentiae and caput eorum qui salvantur per
poenitentiam Christus est.
who as S. Hierom calls him, is the prince of penance, and the head of them who
by repentance come unto salvation. But this was his advice to them that commit
grievous sins, such which lay the conscience wast, and whose every single
action destroys our being in the state of grace.

But as for them whose sins are but those of daily incursion, and of infirmity,
or imperfection, such which a great diligence and a perpetual watchfulness
might have prevented, but an ordinary care would not; these must be protested
against, they must not join with our consent, our will must be against them,
and they must be confessed and deplored, and prayed against before we may
communicate. Non saturantur ergo nisi famelici: qui a vitiis perfect
jejunantes divina Sacramenta percipiunt in plenitudine virtutis. Et quia sine
peccato electi etiam viri esse non possunt, quid restat, nisi ut a peccatis
quibus eos humana fragilitas maculare non desinit, evacuari quotidie conentur?
Nam qui quotidie non exhaurit quod delinquit, et si minima sint peccata quae
congerit, paulatim anima repletur, atque ei auferunt fructum internae
Saturitatis. Gregor. lib. 2. in Reg. cap. 1.
This is the sense of the Church of God.

Having established this great general measure of preparation, it will not be
very difficult to answer that great question often disputed amongst spiritual
persons: viz.

Question. I. Whether is it better to communicate seldom or frequently?
To this I answer; That it is without peradventure very much better to receive
it every day, than every week; and better every week, then every month:
Christiani omni die carnes agni comedunt, said Origin, Christians every day eat
of the flesh of the sacrificed lamb. Ad Caesaream patriciam.
And St. Basil expressly affirms, that to communicate every day and to partake
of the body and blood of Christ, is excellent and very profitable; Christ
himself having manif^stly said it, he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood,
has life eternal. For if the Sacrament does no benefit to souls, and produces
no blessings, then a man can institute a Sacrament; for he may appoint any
thing that shall be good for nothing. But if it be an instrument in the hand of
God to procure blessings to us, and spiritual emolument, if it be a means of
union with Christ; who would not willingly live with him and converse with him
for ever? It is good to be with Christ: and S. Hierom said; I would to God that
we could always receive with a pure conscience and without self-condemnation.
It is without dispute, that it is better to be with Christ in all the ways of
being with him Quocunque loco fuero
Jesum meum desidero:
Quam laetus si invenero!
Quam felix si tenuero!

than to be away from him one hour, this therefore ought to be no part of the
question.

But because there is more required to the receiving Christ, than eating the
Symbols, and a man may eat to his condemnation, and increase his sins, and
swell his sad accounts and be guilty of Christ's body and blood, if he does not
take heed; therefore first men must be prepared, and be in the state of
holiness; or else they may not receive at all, and they that are so, may
receive it frequently; Contr. Jovin. and epist. ad Lucin.
the oftener the better. So Hierom and St. Austin tell that even till their
days the cu^tome of receiving every day remained in the Churches of Rome and
Spain; and all the Ancient Fathers exhort to a frequent communion; but just as
Physicians exhort men to eat the best and heartiest meats; not the sickly and
the infant, but the strong man and the healthful. And this we find thus
determined by S. Chrysostom: Homil. 17. in ep. ad Heb.
[ There are some living in deserts who receive but once in a year, or it may
be once in two years: what then? whom shall we account best of? them that
receive but once, or that receive but seldom, or that receive frequently?
Neither one, nor the other: But them that communicate with a sincere
conscience, with a pure heart, (...).
and an unreprovable life. They that are such, let them always communicate:
and they that are not so, let them not approach so much as once; because they
do nothing but draw upon themselves the judgments of God, and make themselves
worthy of condemnation.] To which if we add the excellent discourse of S.
Austin in this question, the consequents of it may suffice to determine the
whole inquiry. [ Some will say, that the Eucharist is not to be received every
day. If you ask why? he tells you; because some days are to be chosen in which
a man may live more purely and continently, that so he may come to so great a
Sacrament more worthily, because he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and
drinks damnation to himself. On the other side, another says; if thou have
received so great a wound, and contracted so violent a disease, that such
remedies are to be deferred; every such man ought by the authority of the
Bishop to be removed from the Altar and put to penance, and by the same
authority be reconciled. For this is to receive unworthily, then to receive
when a man should be doing penance, and not according to his own pleasure offer
himself to, or withdraw himself from the Communion. But if his sins be not so
great, as to deserve excommunication, he ought not to separate himself from the
daily medicine of the Lords Body. Between these, possibly a man may determine
the question better; if he admonishes that men should abide in the peace of
Christ. But let every one do what according to his faith he piously believes
ought to be done. For neither of them dishonours the body and blood of the
Lord, if they in their several ways contend who shall most honor the most
holy Sacrament. For Zachaeus and the Centurion did not prefer themselves before
one another, when the one received Christ into his house, and the other said he
was not worthy to receive him under his roof; both of them honoring our
Blessed Savior by a diverse, and almost a contrary way, both of them were
miserable by sins, and both of them obtained mercy.] Now from the words of
these two Saints put together, we may collect these resolutions.

1. The question does no way concern evil men, desperately or greatly wicked;
for they so remaining, or committing such sins, quae non committit omnis bonae
fidei speique Christianus S. Aug. de verbis Apost. ser. 29. c. 6.
; which exclude men from the Kingdom of heaven, and cannot stand with the hopes
of a good man, are separate from the Spirit of the Lord, and ought not to touch
the body of our Lord.

2. Neither does it concern such imperfect persons and half Christians, who
endeavor to accord the rules of the Gospel with their irregular and ruling
passions; who would enter into heaven, and yet keep their affections for earth
and earthly interests; who part stakes between God and the world, and resolve
to serve two Masters; who commit oftentimes deliberate and great sins, and
repent, and yet sin again when the temptation comes* for they are yet very far
from the Kingdom of God, and therefore ought not to be admitted to the portion
of sons, and the bread of children.

3. It concerns only such whose life does not dishonor their profession; who
pretend to be servants of Christ, and indeed are so in great truth; whose faith
is strengthened with hope, and their hope animated with charity; who cannot
pretend to be more perfect than men, yet really contend to avoid all sin, like
the children of God, who have right to be nourished by the body of the Lord,
Corpus Christi quod ipsi sunt, S. August. de civit.

Dei. li. 22. cap. 10.


because they are indeed members of his body, and joined in the same Spirit.
The question is not between the Publican and the Pharisee; but between the
converted Publican and the proselyte Centurion; between two persons, who are
both true honor ours of Christ. and penitent sinners, and humbled persons, and
have no affection for sin remaining: the question then is, which is more to be
commended, he that out of love receives Christ, or he who out of humility and
reverence abstains because he thinks himself not worthy enough. To this St.
Chrysostom answers,

4. They that are such have a right to receive every day; and because they are
rightly disposed it is certain that a frequent Communion is of great advantage
to them, and therefore they that frequent it not are like to be losers: For
this is the daily bread, Eucharistia medicina est aegrotis, peregrinantibus
diaeta, debiles confortat, valentes delectat, languorem sanat, sanitatem
firmat: fit homo mansue^ior ad correptionem, pati^ntior ad laborem, ardentior
ad amorem, sagacior ad cautelam, ad obediendum promptior, ad gratiarum actiones
devotior. S. Bernard.
the heavenly supersubstantial bread, by which our souls are nourished to life
eternal. This is the medicine against our daily imperfections and intrudings of
lesser crimes and sudden emigration of passions: it is the great consignation
of pardon; and St. Ambrose argues well; [ If Christ's blood is powered forth for
the remission of sins; then I ought, as often (...). S. Ignat. Epist. ad Ephesians.
as I can, receive it when it is poured forth to me, that because I sin often,
I may perpetually have my remedy.] Which discourse of his, is only to be
understood of those imperfections of our life which perpetually haunt those
good men who are growing in grace, until they come to perfection and
consummation in grace.

5. They that in conscience of their past sins, and apprehension of their
repentance do abstain for fear of irreverence and the sentence of condemnation;
do very well as long as they find that their sin returns often, or tempts
strongly, or prevails dangerously; and because our returns to God and the
mortifications of sin are divisible, and done by parts and many steps of
progression; they that delay their Communion that they may be surer, do very
well, provided that they do not stay too long; that is, that their fear do not
t^rn to timorousness, their religion do not change into superstition; their
distrust of themselves into a jealousy of God; their apprehension of the
greatness of their sin into a secret diffidence of the greatness of the Divine
mercy. And therefore in the first conversions of a sinner, this reverence may
be longer allowed to a good man, than afterward. But it must be no longer
allowed than till he has once communicated. For if he has once been partaker
of the Divine mysteries since his repentance; he must no longer forbear; for in
this case it is true, that he who is not fit to receive every day, is fit to
receive no day. If he thinks that he ought wholly to abstain, let him use his
caution and his fear to the advantages of his repentance, and the heightning of
his longings; but if he may saf^ly come once, he may piously come often. He
cannot long stand at this distance, if he be the man he is supposed: But for
the time of his total abstention let him be conducted by a spiritual guide whom
he may safely trust. For if he cannot by the usual methods of repentance, and
the known Sermons of the Gospel be reduced to peace, and a quiet conscience;
let him declare his estate to a spiritual Guide, and if he thinks it fit to
absolve him, that is, See the second exhortation in the office of the Communion.
to declare him to be in the state of grace and pardon; it is all the warrant
which with the testimony of Gods Spirit bearing witness to our spirit we can
expect in this world. I remember what a religious person said to Petrus
Celestinus, Apud Surium.
who was a great Saint, but of a timorous conscience in this particular, Thou
abstainest from the blessed Sacrament because it is a thing so sacred and
formidable that thou can not think thy self worthy of it. Well, suppose that.
But I pray who is worthy? Is an Angel worthy enough? No c^r^ainly, if we
consider the greatness of the mystery. But consider the goodness of God, and
the usual measures of good men, and the commands of Christ inviting us to come,
and commanding us, and then, Cum timore and reverentia frequenter operare;
Receive it often with fear and reverence. To which purpose these two things
are fit to be considered.

1. Supposing this fear and reverence to be good and commendable in his case
who really is fit to communicate, but does not think so; yet if we compare it
with that grace which prompts a good man to take it often, we may quickly
perceive which is best. Certainly that act is in its own nature best which
proceeds from the best and the most perfect grace; but to abstain, proceeds
from fear; and to come frequently, being worthily disposed, is certainly the
product of love and holy hunger, the effect of the good Spirit, who by his holy
fires makes us to thirst after the waters of salvation. S. Bonavent. de
profectu relig. lib. 2. cap. 77.
As much then as love is better than fear; so much it is to be preferred that
true penitents and wellgrown Christians should frequently address themselves to
these Sacramental Unions with their Lord.

2. The frequent use of this Divine Sacrament proceeds from more, as well as
from more noble virtues. For here is obedience and zeal, worship and love,
thanksgiving and oblation, devotion and joy, holy hunger and holy thirst, an
approach to God in the ways of God, union and adherence, confidence in the
Divine goodness, and not only hope of pardon, but a going to receive it; and
the omission of all these excellencies, cannot in the present case, be
recompensed by an act of religious fear: For this can but by accident and upon
supposition of something that is amiss, Stultus est timor and reverentia minus
prudens illius, qui ad Dominum se vocantem and invitantem non accedit, sed
procrastinat. Gerson in Magnificat.
be at all accounted good, and therefore ought to give place to that which
supposing all things to be as they ought, is directly good, and an obedience to
a Divine Commandment.

For we may not deceive our selves: the matter is not so indifferent, as to be
excused by every fair pretense: It is unlawful for any man unprepared by
repentance and its fruits, to communicate; but it is necessary that we should
be prepared that we may come. For plague and death threaten them that do not
communicate in this mysterious banquet; (...). Homil. 24. in 1 Cor. 10.
as certainly as danger is to them who come unduly and as it happens.] For the
Sacrament of the Lords body is commanded to all men, says Tertullian; Tertul.
de coron. mil. c. 3.
and it is very remarkable what St. Austin said in this affair. Lib. 19. c. 11.
ad Faustum.
[ The force of the Sacraments is of an unspeakable value, and therefore it is
sacrilege to despise it. For that is impiously despised without which we
cannot come to the perfection of piety.] So that although it is not in all
cases the mere not receiving that is to be blamed, but the despising it; yet
when we consider that by this means we arrive at perfection, all causless
recusancy, is next to contempt by interpretation.

One thing more I am to add, whereas some persons abstain from a frequent
Communion for fear lest by frequency of receiving they should less esteem the
Divine mysteries, and fall into lukewarmness and indevotion; the consideration
is good: and such persons indeed may not receive it often, but not for that
reason; but because they are not fit to receive it at all. For whoever grows
worse by the Sacrament, as Judas after the Sop, has an evil spirit within him;
for this being by the design of God a savor of life; it is the fault of the
receiver if it passes into death, and diminution of the spiritual life. He
therefore that grows less devout, and less holy, and less reverent, must start
back and take physic and throw out the evil spirit that is within him; for
there is a worm in the heart of the tree, a peccant humor in the stomach, it
could not be else, that this Divine nutriment should make him sick.

Question II. But is every man bound to communicate that is present, or that
comes into a Church where the Communion is prepared, though but by accident,
and without design; and may no man that is fit, omit to communicate in every
opportunity?
To this I answer: That in the Primitive Church it was accounted scandalous and
criminal to be present at the holy Offices, and to go out at the celebration of
the Mysteries. [ What cause is there, O Hearers, De verb. Domini secund. Joh.
Sermon. 2.
that ye see the Table and come not to the Banquet?] said St. Austin. [If thou
stand by, and do not communicate, thou art wicked, thou art shameless, thou art
impudent. So St. Chrysostom: Homil. 3. ad cap. 1. Ephesians.
and to him that objects, he is not worthy to communicate, he answers, that
then neither is he fit to pray. And the Council of Antioch Apud Zonaram.
and of Bracara commanded that those who did not communicate should be driven
from the Churches. And Palladius tells, Hist. SS. patrum. c. 19.
that when St. Macarius had by his prayers cured a poor miserable woman that
was bewitched, and fancied her self to be a horse; he advised her, Never to
depart from the Church of God, or to abstain from the Communion of the
Sacraments of Christ. For this misfortune has pr^vailed upon you because for
these five weeks you have not communicated.]

Now this was but a relative crime; and because their custom was such S.
Cyprian. l. 4. ep. 7.

S. Ambros. l. 5. de sacram. c. 4.

S. Aug. Epist. 118.

Eusebius. l. 1. de demonstr. evang. c. 10.


(which is always to be understood according to their acknowledged measures,
viz. that only pious persons were to be meant, and required in that
expectation; this will not conclude that of it self, and abstracting from the
scandal, it was in all cases unlawful to recede from the mysteries at
sometimes. ^or sometimes a man may be called off by the necessities of his
calling, or the duties of charity or piety. A General of an Army, a Prince, a
Privy Counselor, a Judge, a Merchant may be very fit to communicate, even then
when they cannot, or it may be ought not to stay. But if he can stay, and be a
good man, and rightly disposed by the habits of a good life, he ought to stay
and communicate; and so much the rather, if it be in any degree scandalous to
go away. The reason is; because if he be a good man, he can no more be
surprised by an unexpected Communion, than by a sudden death; which although it
may find him in better circumstances, yet can never find him Unprovided. But in
this case, St. Austins moderate determination of the case is very useful, Let
every one do as he is persuaded in his mind; for a man may with a laudable fear
and reverence abstain; if he shall be persuaded that he ought not to
communicate unless besides his habitual grace, he has kindled the fires of an
actual devotion and preparation special: and so much the rather, because he may
communicate very frequently, and to great purposes and degrees of a spiritual
life, though he omit that single opportunity in which he is surprised; and
though it be very useful for a good man to communicate often, yet it is not
necessary that he communicate always; only let every pious soul consider, that
it is argument of the Divine love to us, that these fountains are always open;
that the Angel frequently moves these waters, and that Christ says to every
prepared heart as to the multitudes that followed him into the wilderness, I
will not send them away fasting lest they faint in the way. And if christ be
ever ready offering his holy body and blood, it were very fit we should
entertain him: for he never comes but he brings a blessing.

Question III. But how often is it advisable that a good man should
Communicate? Once in a year, or thrice, or every month, or every fortnigbt;
every sunday, or every day?
This question has troubled very many; but to little purpose. For it is all
one as if it were asked, How often should a healthful man eat; or he that has
infirmities, take Physic? And if any man should say that a good man should do
well to pray three times a day; he said true; and yet it were better to pray
five times, and better yet to pray seven times; but if he does, yet he must
leave spaces for other duties. But his best measures for public and solemn
prayer, is the custom of the Church in which he lives; and for private, he can
take no measures but his own needs, and his own leisure, and his own desires,
and the examples of the best and devoutest persons, in the same circumstances.
And so it is in the frequenting the holy Communion. The laws of the Church must
be his least measure. The custom of the Church may be his usual measure;
Metuebat Maria, ne amor Magistri sui in corpore suo refrigesceret, si corpus
ejus non inveniret, quo viso recalescebat. Origin. homil. 1. ex variis.
But if he be a devout person; the spirit of devotion will be his certain
measure; and although that will consult with prudence and reasonable
opportunities, yet it consults with nothing else; but communicates by its own
heights and degrees of excellency. Ad Eustoc. Virg. c. 9.
St. Hierom advises Eustochium, a noble Virgin, and other religious persons to
communicate twice every month; some did every Sunday; and this was so general a
custom in the Ancient Church, that the Sunday was called, The day of bread;
Hom. 5. de resurrect.
as we find in St. Chrysostom: and in consonancy to this the Church of England
commands that the Priests resident in Collegiate or Cathedral Churches should
do so: and they whose work and daily employment is to Minister to religion,
cannot in such circumstances pretend a reasonable excuse to the contrary. But I
desire these things may be observed:

1. That when the Fathers make a question concerning a frequent Communion, they
do not dispute whether it be advisable that good people should communicate
every month, or every fortnight, or whether the more devout and less employed
may communicate every week; for of this they make no question; but whether
every days Communion be fit to be advised, that they question: and I find, that
as they are not earnest in that, so they indefinitely give answer, that a
frequent Communion is not to be neglected at any hand, if persons be worthily
prepared.

2. The frequency of Communion is to be estimated by the measures of devout
people in every Church respectively. And although in the Apostolical Ages they
who Communicated but once a fortnight were not esteemed to do it frequently;
yet now they who communicate every month, and upon the great Festivals of the
year besides, and upon other solemn or contingent occasions, and at marriages,
and at visitations of the sick, may be said to communicate frequently, in such
Churches where the Laws enjoin but three or four times every year, as in the
Church of England, and the Lutheran Churches. But this way of estimating the
frequency of Communion is only when the causes of inquiry are for the avoiding
of scandal, or the preventing of scruples; but else, the inward hunger and
thirst, and the spirit of devotion married to opportunity, can give the truest
measures.

3. They that communicate frequently, if they do it worthily, are charitable
and spiritual persons, and therefore cannot judge or undervalue others that do
not. For no man knows concerning others by what secret principles and imperfect
propositions they are guided. For although these measures we meet with in
Antiquity are very reasonable, yet few do know them; and all of them do not
rely upon them; and their own customs, or the private word of their own guides,
or their fears, or the usages of the Church in which they live, or some leading
example, or some secret impediment which ought not, but is thought sufficient;
any of these, or many other things, may retard even good persons from such a
frequency as may please others; and that which one calls opportunity, others do
not; but however, no man ought to be prejudiced in the opinion of others: For
besides all this now reckoned, The receiving of the holy Sacrament is of that
nature of good things which can be supplied by internal actions alone, or
sometimes by other external actions in conjunction; and it has a suppletory of
its own, viz. Spiritual Communion, (of which I am to give account in its proper
place.) And when we consider that some men are of strict consciences, and some
Churches are of strict Communions, and will not admit Communicants but upon
such terms which some men cannot admit, it will follow that as S. Austins
expression is, Men should live in the peace of Christ, and do according to
their Faith: but in these things no man should judge his Brother. In this no
man can directly be said to do amiss, but he that loathes Manna, and despises
the food of Angels, or neglects the Supper of the Lamb, or will not quit his
sin, or contend toward perfection, or has not the spirit of devotion, or does
any way by implication say, That the Table of the Lord is contemptible.

4. These rules and measures now given, are such as relate to those who by
themselves or others are discernably in, or discernably out of the state of
grace. But there are some which are in the confines of both states, and neither
themselves nor their guides can tell to what dominion they do belong.
Concerning such, they are by all means to be thrust or invited forward, and
told of the danger of a real or seeming neutrality in the service of God; of
the hatefulness of tepidity, of the uncomfortablenesse of such an
indifference: and for the Communions of any such person, I can give no other
advice, but that he take his measures of frequency by the Laws of his Church,
and add what he please to his numbers by the advice of a spiritual guide, who
may consider whether his Penitent, by his conjugation of preparatory actions,
and heaps of holy duties at that time usually conjoined, do or is likely to
receive any spiritual progress: For this will be his best indication of life,
and declare his uncertain state, if he thrive upon his spiritual nourishment.
If it prove otherwise, all that can be said of such persons is, that they are
members of the visible Church, they are in that net where there are fishes good
and bad, they stand amongst the wheat and the tares, they are part of the lump,
but whether leavened or unleavened, God only knows; and therefore they are such
to whom the Church denies not the bread of Children; but whether it does them
good or hurt, the day only will declare: for to such persons as these the
Church has made Laws for the set time of their Communion. An. Christi 236. ut
Sabellicus and Volaterranus referunt.
Christmas, Easter, and Whitsontide were appointed for all Christians that were
not scandalous and openly criminal, by P. Fabianus; and this Constitution is
imitated by the best constituted Church in the world, our dear Mo^her the
Church of England: and they who do not at these times, or so frequently
communicate, are censured by the Council of Agathon Can. 18.
as unfit to be reckoned among Christians, or Members of the Catholic Church.
Now by these Laws of the Church, it is intended indeed that all men should be
called upon to discuss and shake off the yoke of their sins, and enter into
the salutary state of repentance; and next to the perpetual Sermons of the
Church, she had no better means to engage them into returns of piety; hoping
that by the grace of God and the blessings of the Sacrament, the repentance
which at these times solemnly begins, may at one time or other fix and abide;
these little institutions and disciplines being like the sudden heats in the
body, which sometimes fix into a burning, though most commonly they go away
without any further change. But the Church in this case does the best she can,
but does not presume that things are well; and indeed as yet they are not: and
therefore such persons must pass further, or else their hopes may become
illusions, and make the men ashamed.

5. I find that amongst the holy Primitives they who contended for the best
things, and loved God greatly, were curious even of little things; and if they
were surpised with any sudden undecency, or a storm of passion, they did not
dare that day to communicate. [ When I am angry, or when I think any evil
thought, or am abused with any illusion or foul fancy of the night, intrare
non audeo, I dare not enter, said St. Jerome, Advers. Vigilant.
I am so full of horror and dread, both in my body and my mind.] This was also
the case of St. Chrysostom, who when Eusebius had unreasonably troubled him
with an unseasonable demand of justice against Antonine, just as he was going
to consecrate the blessed Sacrament, departed out of the Church, and desired
one of the Bishops, who by chance was present, Palladius in vita S. Chrysostom.
to do the office for him; for he would not offer the Sacrifice at that time,
having some trouble in his Spirit.

2. To this are to be reduced all such great actions which in their whole
constitution are great and lawful; but because so many things are involved in
their transaction, whereof some unavoidably will be amiss, or may reasonably be
supposed so, may have something in the whole and at the last to be deplored: In
such cases as these, some great examples have been of advices to abstain from
the Communion, till by a general but a profound repentance for what has been
amiss, God is deprecated, and the causes of Christian hope and confidence do
return. In the Ecclesiastical History we read, that when Theodosius had fought
prosperously against Eug^nius the Usurper of the Empire, when his cause was
just and approved by God, not only giving testimony by the prediction and
warranty of a religious Hermit, but also by prodigious events, by winds and
tempests fighting for him, and by which he restored peace to the Church, and
tranquillity to the Empire: yet he by the advice of S. Ambrose abstained a while
from the holy Sacrament, and would not carry blood upon his hands Tu genitor
cape sacra manu, patriosque penates
Me bello e tanto digressum, and caede recenti
Attrectare nefas: donec me flumine vivo
Abluero --
Aeneid. 1.
, though justly shed, unto the Altar; not only following the president of
David, who because he was a man of blood might not build a Temple, but for fear
lest some unfit appendage should stick to the management of a just employment.

3. Of the same consideration it is, if a person whose life should be very
exemplar, is guilty of such a single folly which it may be would not dishonor
a meaner man, but is a great vanity and reproach to him; a little abstention,
and a penitential separation (when it is quit from scandal) was sometimes
practiced in the Ancient Church, and is advisable also now in fitting
circumstances. Thus when Gerontius the Deacon had vainly talked that the Devil
appeared to him one night, and that he had bound him with a chain, St. Ambrose
commanded him to abide in his house, and not to come to the Church, till by
penances and sorrow he had expiated such an indiscretion, which to a man had in
reputation for wisdom, is as a fly in a box of ointment, not only useless, but
mischievous. And S. Bernard commends S. Malachie because he reproved a Deacon
for attending at the Altar the day after he had suffered an illusion in the
night. In vita S. Malachiae, Cui injungens poenitentiam, non debueras, inquit,
hodie ministrasse, sed verecunde te subtrahere sacris, and defer tantis
tamque Divinis mysteriis, ut hac humilitate purgatus, dignius exinde
ministrares.
It had been better he had abstained from the Altar one day, and by that
intermediate expiation and humility have the next day returned to a more worthy
ministry.

4. One degree of curious caution I find beyond all this, in an instance of St.
Gregory the Great, in whose life we find, that he abstained some days from the
holy Communion, because there was found in a Village near to Rome a poor man
dead, no man could tell how; but because the good Bishop feared he might have
been starved, and that he died for want of provision; he supposing it might
reflect upon him as a defect in his Government, or of his personal Charity,
thought it fit to deplore the accident, and to abstain from the Communion, till
he might hope for pardon, in case he had done amiss.

If these things proceed from the sincerity of a well disposed spirit, that can
suffer any trouble rather than that of sin, the product is well enough, and in
all likelihood would always be well, if the case were conducted by a prudent
spiritual guide; for then it would not change into scruples and superstition.
But these are but the fears and cautions and securities of a tender spirit; but
are not an answer to the Question, Whether it be lawful for such persons to
Communicate? For certainly they may, if all things else be right; and they may
be right in the midst of such little accidents. But these belong to the
questions of perfection and excellencies of grace; these are the
extraordinaries of them who never think they do well enough: and therefore they
extended no further than to a single abstention, or some little proportionable
retirement; and may be useful when they are in the hands of prudent and
excellent persons.

SECT. V. What significations of Repentance are to be accepted by the Church in
admission of Penitents to the Communion.
THis inquiry will quickly be answered, when we consider that the end why the
Church enjoins public or private amends respectively to any convict or
confessed Criminal, she only does it as a Mother and a Physician to souls, and
a Minister of the Divine Pardon, and the Conductress of penitential Processes:
she does it that the man may be recovered from the snare of the enemy, that she
may destroy the work of the Devil, that the sinner may become a good Christian:
and therefore the Church, when she conducts any man's repentance, is bound to
enjoin so many external Ministeries, that if they be really joined with the
external contrition and reformation, will do the work of reconcilement in the
Court of heaven. The Church can exact none but what she can see or some way
take external notice of; but by these externals intends to minister to the
internal repentance; which when it is sufficiently signified by any ways that
she may prudently rely upon as testimonies and ministeries of a sufficient
internal contrition and real amends, she can require no more, and she ought not
to be content with less.

It is therefore infinitely unsafe and imprudent to receive the Confessions of
Criminals, and after the injunction of certain cursory penances, Si cito
rediret homo ad pristinam beatitudinem, ludus illi esset cadere in mortem. S.
Aug. Sermon. 34. de diversis.
to admit them to the Blessed Sacrament without any further emendation, without
any trial of the sincerity of their conversion, before it is probable that God
has pardoned them, In ipsa Ecclesia ubi maxim misereri decet, quam maxim
decet forma justitiae, nequis a communionis consortio abstentus, brevi
lachrymula atque ad tempus parata, vel etiam uberioribus fletibus Communionem,
quam plurimis debet postulare temporibus, facilitate sacerdotis extorqueat. S.
Ambros. in Psalm. 118. in haec verba. Miserere mei secundum eloquium tuum.
before their affections to sin are dead, before the spirit of mortification is
entered, before any vice is exterminated, or any virtue acquired: Such a
loosnesse of discipline is but the image of repentance (whether we look upon it
as it is described in Scripture, or as it was practiced by the Primitive
Church) which at least is a whole change of life, a conversion of the whole man
to God. And it is as bad when a notorious criminal is put to shame one day, for
such a sin which could not have obtained the peace of the Church under the
severity and strictness of fifteen years, amongst the holy Primitives. Such
public Ecclesiastical penances may suffice to remove the scandal from the
Church, when the Church will be content upon so easy terms; for she only can
tell what will please her self. But then such discipline must not be esteemed a
sufficient ministry of repentance, nor a just disposition to pardon. For the
Church ought not to give pardon, or to promise the peace of God upon terms
easier than God himself requires; and therefore when repentance comes to be
conducted by her, she must require so much as will extinguish the sin, and
reform the man, and make him and represent him good.

All the liberty that the Church has in this, is what is given her by the
latitude of the judgment of charity; and yet oftentimes a too easy judgment is
the greatest uncharitableness in the world, and makes men confident and
careless and deceived: and therefore although gentle sentences are useful when
there is danger of despair or contumacy, yet that is rather a palliation of a
disease than a cure; and therefore the method must be changed as soon as it
can, and the severe and true Sermons of the Gospel must be either proclaimed
aloud, or insinuated prudently and secretly, and men be taught to rely upon
them and their consequents, and upon nothing else; for they will not deceive
us. But the corrupt manners of men, and the corrupt doctrines of some Schools,
have made it almost impossible to govern souls as they need to be governed.

The Church may indeed choose whether she will impose on Criminals any exterior
significations of repentance, but accept them to the Communion upon their own
accounts of a sincere conversion and inward contrition; but then she ought to
do this upon such accounts as are indeed real and sufficient, and effective and
allowed; that is, when she can understand that such an emendation is made, and
the man is really reformed, she can pronounce him pardoned; or which is all
one, she may communicate him. And farther yet; she can by Sermons declare all
the necessary parts of repentance, and the conditions of pardon, and can
pronounce limited and hypothetical or conditional pardons; concerning which the
penitent must take care that they do belong to him. But if she does undertake
to conduct any repentances exteriously, it is to very little purpose to do it
any way that is not commensurate to that true internal repentance which is
effective of pardon. Indeed every single act of penance does something toward
it; but why something should be enjoined that is not sufficient, and that falls
infinitely short of the end of its designation, though the Church may use her
liberty, yet it is not easy to understand the reason. But I leave this to the
consideration of those who are concerned in Governments public, or in the
private conduct of souls, to whom I earnestly and humbly recommend it; and I
add this only, that when the Ancient Churches did absolve and communicate dying
penitents, though but newly returned from sin, they did it de been esse, or
with a hope it might do some good, and because they thought it a case of
necessity, and because there was no time left to do better: but when they did
as well as they could, they could not tell what God would do; and though the
Church did well, it may be it was very ill with the souls departed. But because
that is left to God, it is certain some things were done upon pious confidence
and venture, for which there was no promise in the Gospel.

That which the Church is to take care of is, that all her children be
sufficiently taught what are the just measures of preparation and worthy
disposition to these Divine mysteries; and that she admits none, of whom she
can tell that they are not worthy; such as are notorious adulterers, homicides,
incestuous, perjurers, habitually peevish to evil effects, and permanently
angry (for this I find reckoned amongst the Primitive Catalogues of persons to
be excluded from the Communion) rapines, theft, sacrilege, Si permansissemus
illa in munditia quae nobis per baptismum data est, vere faelices essemus, sed
non permansimus. Cecidimus enim per nostram culpam, non solum in peccata, sed
etiam in crimina, propter quae peccatores ab Ecclesia separantur: qualia sunt,
Homicidia, adulteria, fo^nicationes, sacrilegia, rapinae, furta, falsa
testimonia, superbia, invidia, avaritia, diutina iracundia, Ebrietas assidua.
Fulbert. Carnot. Ser. 2. ad Populum.
false witness, pride, covetousness and envy. It would be hard to reduce this
rule to practice in all these instances, unless it be by consent and voluntary
submission of penitent persons. But that which I remark is this: that Proud
persons and the Covetous, the Envious and the Angry were esteemed fit to be
excommunicate; that is, infinitely unfit to be admitted to the blessed
Sacrament; and that by the rules of their discipline they were to do many
actions of public and severe penance and mortifications before they would
admit them.

Now then the case is this. They did esteem more things to be required to the
integrity of repentance, and God not to be so soon reconciled, and the Devil
not soon dispossessed, and men's resolutions not so fit to be trusted, and more
to be required to pardon than confession and the pronouncing absolution; all
this otherwise than we do, and therefore so long as they did conduct
repentances; they required it as it should be; being sure that no repentance
that was joined with hope and charity could be too much, but it might quickly
be too little; and therefore although the Church may take as little as she
please for a testimonial of repentance, and suppose the rest is right though it
be not signified; yet when she either in public or in private is to manage
repentances she must use no measure, but that which will procure pardon, and
extinguish both the guilt and dominion of sin. The first may be of some use in
government; but of little avail to souls, and to their eternal interest:
therefore in the first she may use her liberty and give her self measures, in
the latter she has no other but what are given her by the nature of
repentance, and its efficacy and order to pardon, and the designs of God, for
the reformation of our souls and the extermination of sin.

SECT. VI. Whether may every Minister of the Church and Curate of Souls reject
impenitent persons, or any criminals from the holy Sacrament, until themselves
be satisfied of their repentance and amends?
SEparation of sinners from the Blessed Sacrament was either done upon
confession and voluntary submission of the penitent; or by public conviction
and notoreity. Every Minister of religion can do the first, for he that submits
to my judgment, does choose my sentence; and if he makes me Judge, he is become
my subject in a voluntary Government: and therefore I am to judge for him when
it is fit that he should communicate: only, if when he has made me Judge, he
refuses to obey my counsel, he has dissolved my Government, and therefore will
receive no further benefit by me. * But concerning the latter of these; a
separation upon public conviction or notoreity; that requires an authority
that is not precarious and changeable. Now this is done two ways; either by
authority forbidding, or by authority restraining and compelling; that is, by
the word of our proper ministry, dissuading him that is unworthy from coming,
and threatening him with Divine judgments if he does come; or else rejecting of
him, in case that he fears not those threatenings, but persists in his desires
of having it.

Now of the first of these, every Minister of the Word and Sacraments is a
competent Minister; for all that minister to souls are to tell them of their
dangers, and by all the effects of their office to present them pure and
spotless unto God; the Seers must take care that the people may see; lest by
their blindness they fall into the bottomless pit. And when the Curates of
souls have declared the will of God in this instance, and denounced his
judgments to unworthy Communicants, and told to all that present themselves who
are worthy, and who are not, they have delivered their own souls; all that
remains is, that every person take care concerning his own affairs.

For the second, viz denying to minister to Criminals though demanding it with
importunity; that is an act of prudence and caution in some cases, and of
authority in others. When it is matter of caution, it is not a punishment but a
medicine; according to those excellent words of S. Cyprian; To be cast out
(viz.; for a time, from the Communion) is a remedy and a degree toward the
recovery of our spiritual health: Nam ejici remedium est and gradus ad
recuperandam sanitatem. lib. de dupl. Martyr.
and because it is no more; it cannot be pretended to be any man's right to do
it; but it may be in his duty when he can; but therefore this must depend upon
the consent of the penitent. For a Physician must not in despite of a man cut
off his leg to save his life: the sick man may choose whether he shall or no.
But sometimes it is an act of authority; as when the people have consented to
such a discipline, or when the secular arm by assisting the Ecclesiastical,
has given to it a power of mixed jurisdiction; that is, when the spiritual
power of paternal regiment which Christ has given to his Ministers the supreme
Curates, is made operative upon the persons and external societies of men. Now
of this power the Bishops are the prime and immediate subjects, partly under
Christ, and partly under Kings; and of this power, inferior Ministers are
capable by delegation, See Rule of conscience, l. 3. c. 3. and 4.
but no otherwise; they being but Deputies and Vicars in the cure of souls
under their superiors, from whom they have received their order and their
charge. And thus I suppose we are to understand the Rubric before our
Communion office; which warrants ^he Curate not to suffer open and notorious
evil livers by whom the Congregation is offended, and those between whom he
perceives malice and hatred to reign, to be partakers of the Lords Table. In
the first, the case is of notorious Criminals, and is to be understood of a
notoreity of Law; and in this the Curate is but a publisher of the Judges
sentence: In the second, the Criminal is ipso facto excommunicate; and
therefore in this the Curate is but the Minister of the Sentence of the Law, or
at least has a delegate authority to pass the Churches Sentence in a matter
that is evident. But this is seldom practiced otherwise than by rejecting such
persons by way of denunciation of the divine Judgments; and if it be so
understood, the Curate has done his duty which God requires; and I believe the
Laws of England will suffer him to do no more by his own authority.

But this is to be reduced to practice by the following measures.

1. Every man is to be presumed fit, that is not known to be unfit; and he that
is not a publi^k Criminal, is not to be supposed unworthy to Communicate. It
may be he is; but that himself only knows, and he can only take care; but no
man is to be prejudiced by imperfect and disputable principles, by conjectures
and other men's measures, by the rules of Sects and separate Communities:
Omnibus Episcopis and Presbyteris interdicimus segregare aliquem a sacra
communione, antequam causa monstretur propter quam sanctae regulae hoc fieri
jubent. Collat. 9. tit. 15. c. 11. de Sanctissimis Ep^scopis.
And if a man may belong to God and himself not know it, he may do so when his
Curate knows it not.

2. No man may be separated from the Communion for any private sin, vehemently
or lightly suspected. This censure must not pass but when the crime is manifest
and notorious; that is, when it is delated and convict in any public Assembly,
Civil or Ecclesiastical, or is evident to a Multitude, or confessed. This is
the express Doctrine of the Church in St. Austin's time, Nos a communione
quenquam prohibere non possumus, nisi aut sponte confessum, aut in aliquo
judicio Ecclesiastico vel saeculari nominatum atque convictum. Homil. 50. and
de Medicin^ poenit. super illud 1 Cor. 5. si quis frater.
who affirms that the Ecclesiastics have no power to make separations of
sinners not confessed nor convict. And besides many others it relies upon this
prudential consideration which Linwood has well observed; [ Every Christian
has a right in the receiving the Eucharist, De celebrat. Missar.
unless he loses it by deadly sin: Therefore when it does not appear in the
face of the Church that such an one has lost his right, it ought not in the
face of the Church to be denied to him; otherwise a license would be given to
evil Priests, according to their pleasure with this punishment to afflict whom
they list.]

3. Every sinner that has been convict, or has confessed, and affirms himself
to be truly penitent, is to be believed, where by the Laws of the Church he is
not bound to pass under any public discipline: For no man can tell but that
he says true; and because every degree of repentance is accepted to some
dispositions and proportions of pardon, and God has not told us the just
period of his being reconciled, and his mercy is divisible as our return, and
unknown to us; he that knows that without repentance he eats damnation, and
professes upon that very account that he is penitent, may be taught as many
more things as the Curate please, or as he is supposed to need; but must not be
rejected from the Holy Communion, if he cannot be persuaded. ^or this judgment
is secret, and is to pass between God and the soul alone; for because no man
can tell, no man can judge; and the Curate who knows not how it is, cannot give
a definite sentence.

4. But if there come any accidental obligation upon Criminals; as if by the
Laws of a Church to which they are subjected, it be appointed they shall give
public evidence and amends, they are to be judged by those measures, and are
not to be restored ordinarily, See Rul^ of Conscience, l. 3. c. 1. etc. 4.
till they have by public measures proved their repentance. This relies upon
all those grounds upon which obedience to Ecclesiastical Rulers is built.

5. It is lawful for the Guides of souls to admit to the Communion such persons
whom they believe not to be fit and worthily prepared, if they will not be
persuaded to retire: It is evident in the case of Kings and all Supreme Powers,
and great Communities, and such who being rejected will be provoked into malice
and persecution. S. Cyprian, sive quicunque sit Author libri d^ duplici
Martyrio.
[ Such indeed the Church sometimes tolerates, lest being provoked they
disturb the people of God: but what does it profit them not to be cast out of
the Assemblies of the godly, if they deserve to be cast out? To deserve
ejection is the highest evil; and to no purpose is he mingled in the
Congregations of the faithful, who is excluded from the society of God, and the
mystical body of Christ.] And it is also evident in the Societies of the
Church, which we know by the words of Christ and by experience are a mixed
multitude: And since the Scripture does not exempt a secret sinner from the
Communion, why will thou endeavor to except him? It is St. Austins argument.
And who shall rej^ct every man that he believes to be proud, Ad hoc enim altar
quod nunc in Ecclesia est, in terra positum, ad Mysteriorum Divinorum signacula
celebranda, multi etiam scelerati possunt accedere: quoniam Deus commendat in
hoc tempore patientiam suam, ut in futuro exerat severitatem suam. Ad illud
autem altar quo praecursor pro nobis introivit Jesus, quo caput Ecclesiae
praecessit, membris caeteris secuturis, nullus eorum accedere poterit, de
quibus dixit Apostolus, Quoniam qui talia agunt regnum Dei non possidebunt. S.
Aug. homil. 50. c. 9.
or covetous, or envious? Who shall define pride, or convince a single person
of a proud heart, or of his latent envy? and who shall give rules by which
every single man that is to blame can be convinced of covetousness? If it be
permitted to the discretion of the Parish Priest, you erect a gibbet and a rack
by which he shall be enabled to torment any man; and you give him power to
slander or reproach all his neighbors; if you go about to give him measures
you shall never do it wisely or piously; for no rules can be sufficient to
convince any proud man; and if you make the Parish Curate judge of these rules,
you had as good leave it to his discretion; for he will use them as he please:
and after all, you shall never have all the people good; and if not, you shall
certainly have them hypocrites; and therefore it cannot be avoided, but unfit
persons will be admitted: for since the Kingdom of Grace is within us. and Gods
chosen ones are his secret ones, and he only knows who are his, it will be
strange that visible Sacraments should be given only to an invisible Society:
and after all, if to communicate evil men be unavoidable, it cannot be unlawful.

I do not say that persons unprepared may come; for they ought not, and if they
do, they die for it: but I say, if they will come it is at their peril, and to
no man's prejudice but their own, if they be plainly and severely admonished of
their duty and their danger; and therefore that every man must judge of his own
case with very great severity and ^ear, even then when the Guides of souls must
judge with more gentlenes^ and an easier charity; when we must suspect our
little faults to be worse than they seem, and our n^gligences more inexcusable,
and sear a sin when there is none, and are ready to accuse our selves for every
indiscretion, an^ think no repent^nce great enough for the foulness of (...)
sin^, and at the same time when we judge for oth^^s, we ought to esteem their
certain good th^ng^ better than they do, and their certain evils less^, and
their disputable good things certain, and ^h^ir u^certain evils none at all, or
very excusable. And therefore it was to very great purpose that the Apost^e
gave command, that every man should examine himself and so let him ea^ In hac
ergo poenitentia majorem quisque in se severit^tem debet exercere ut a seipso
judicatus non judicetur a Deo, sicut idem Apostolus ait. Si enim nos
judicaremus, a Domino non judicaremur. Ascendat itaque homo adversum se
tribunal mentis suae, si timet illud quod oportet nos exhiberi ante tribunal
Christi, ut illud recipiat Unusquisque quod per corpus gessit, sive bonum, sive
malum; constituat se ante faciem suam ne hoc ei postea fiat. Nam minatur hoc
Deus peccatori, dicens, arguam te, and statuam te ante faciem tuam. Atque ita
constituto in cord judicio, adsit accusatrix cogitatio, testis conscientia,
carnifex timor. Inde quidam sanguis animi consitentis per lachrymas profluat.
Postremo ab ipsa mente talis sententia proferatur, ut se indignum homo judicet
participatione corporis and sanguinis Domini: ut qui separari a regno coelorum
timet per ultimam sententiam summi Judicis, per Ecclesiasticam disciplinam a
Sacramento coelestis panis interim separetur. Versetur ante oculos imago futuri
judicii, ut cum alii accedunt ad altar Dei, quo ipse non accedit, cogitet quam
sit contremiscenda illa poena, qua percipientibus aliis vitam aeternam, alii in
mortem praecipitantur aeternam. S. August. homil. 50. c. 9.
, that is, let it be done as it may be done thoroughly; let him do it whose case
it is, and who is most concerned that it be done well; let it be done so that
it may not be allayed and lessened by the judgment of charity; and therefore
let a man do it himself: For when the Curate comes to do it, he cannot do it
well, unless he do it with mercy; for he must make abatements, which the
sinners case does not often need in order to his reconciliation and returns to
God, where severity is much better than gentle sentences. But the Minister of
Religion must receive in some cases such persons who ought not to come, and who
should abstain when themselves give righteous judgment upon themselves.

For if it be lawful for Christian people to communicate with evil persons, it
is lawful for Christian Priests to minister it; it being commanded to the
people in some cases to withdraw themselves from a Brother that walks
inordinately; but no where commanded, that a Minister of Religion shall refuse
to give it to him that requires it, and is within the Communion of the Church,
and is not yet as an heathen and a publican: and it is evident, that in the
Churches of Corinth the Communion was given to persons who for unworthiness
fell under the divine anger; and yet no man was reproved but the unworthy
Communicants, and themselves only commanded to take care of it. For he that
says the people may not communicate with wicked persons, falls into the error
of the Donatists, which St. Austin and others have infinitely confuted; but he
that says the people may, ought not to deny but that the Priest may; and if he
may communicate with him, it cannot be denied but he may minister to him. But
this was the case of the Sons of Israel, who did eat Manna, and drank of the
rock Quemadmodum tu comedis Christi corpus, sic illi Manna; and quomodo tu
bibis sanguinem sic illi aquam ex petra. S. Chrysostom. homil. 18. in 2 Corinthians.
; and yet that rock was Christ, and that Manna was also his Sacrament, and yet
with many of these God was angry, and they fell in the wilderness. And if
Baptism was given as soon as ever men were converted, in the very day of their
change, and that by the Apostles themselves, and yet the same Christ is there
consigned and exhibited; we may remember that in Scripture we find no
difference in the two Sacraments as to this particular. But in this there needs
not much to be said; they that think things can be otherwise, and have tried,
have declared to all the world by the event of things, that although the guides
of souls may by wise and seasonable discourses persuade and prevail with some
few persons, yet no man can reform the world; and if all were rejected whose
life does not please the Curate, some will not care, and will let it quite
alone; and others that do care, will never the more be mended, but turn
hypocrites; and they are the worst of men, but most readily communicated: Some
other evils do also follow; and when we have reckoned schisms, partialities,
reproaches, Ne dum purgatissimam Ecclesiam volunt instituere, brevi nullam
habeant. Bullinger ad Bezam.
animosities and immortal hatreds between Priest and People, we have not
reckoned the one half.

6. When to separate Criminals can be prudent and useful, and is orderly,
limited, and legal, it ought not to be omitted Quantum ruboris civitari
turpiter se gorendo incusserunt, tantum laudis graviter puniti adferant. Valor.
Max.
upon any consideration, because it is the sinews and whole strength of
Ecclesiastical discipline, and is a most charitable ministry to souls, and
brings great regard to the holy Sacrament, and produces reverence in the
Communicants, and is a deletery to sin, and was the perpetual practice of the
best Ages of the Church, and was blessed with an excellent corresponding piety in
their Congregations; Ezekiel. 13.18.
upon which account, and of other consideraons, S. Cyprian De lapsis and lib.
3. ep. 15.
, S. Basil Epist. ad Amphil. c. 2.84.85.
, S. Chrysostom Non parva vobis imminet ultio, si quem cujuspiam conscium
nequitiae, hujus mensae participem concedatis, sanguis ejus de vestris manibus
exquiretur. S. Chrysostom. homil. 60. ad pop. Antioch.
, and diverse others, call upon Prelates and people to exercise and undergo
respectively this Ecclesiastical discipline.

See Rule of conscience, l. 3. c. 4. rule 9. p. 257.
But this has in it some variety 1. For if the person be a notorious, a great
and incorrigible Criminal, refusing to hear, the Church proceeding against him
upon complaint, confession or notoreity, and consequently to be esteemed as a
Heathen and a Publican; then comes in the Apostolical rules; 1 Cor. 5.11.

2 Thessalonians. 3.6.


with such a one not to eat; and withdraw from such a one, for there is no
accord between Christ and Belial, between a Christian and a Heathen or an
Unbeliever; that is, one who is thrust into the place and condition of an
Infidel, and give not that which is holy unto Dogs. 2. But if he be within the
Communion of the Church, and yet a Criminal, not delated, not convict, not
legally condemned; and yet privately known to be such, or publicly suspected
and scandalous; the Minister of Religion must separate him by the word of his
ministry, and tell him his danger, and use all the means he can to bring him to
repentance and amends before he admits him; if the Minister of Religion omits
this duty, he falls under the curse threatened by God in the Prophet, Ezekiel. 3.18.
If he does not warn him, if he does not speak to the wicked to give him
warning to save his life; his blood shall be upon him. 3. If there be a regular
jurisdiction established, and this spiritual authority be backed with the
secular, it must be used according to the measures of its establishment, and
for the good of the Church in general, and of the sinner in particular; that
is, although the person be not as a heathen, and excommunicate by the Churches
sentence, yet he must be rejected for a time, and thrust into repentance and
measures of satisfaction, and as he must not refuse, so must not the Minister
of the Sacrament otherwise admit him; and in this sense it was that S.
Chrysostom said, he would rather lose his life, Homil. 83. in Matthew.
than admit unworthy men to the Lords Table.

7. But because piety has suffered shipwreck; and all discipline h^th been
lost in the storm, and good manne^s have been thrown over board; the best
remedy in the world that yet remains and is in use amongst the most p^ous sons
and daughters of the Church, is that they would conduct their repentance by the
continual advices and ministry of a spiritual guide; for by this alone or
principally, was the primitive piety and repentances advanced to the excellency
which we often admire but seldom imitate, and the event will be, that besides
we shall be guided in the ways of holiness in general, we shall be at peace as
to the times and manner of receiving the holy Sacrament, our penitential
abstentions and season^ble returns: and we shall not so frequently feel the
effects of the Divine anger upon our persons as a reproach of our folly, and
the punishment of our unworthy receiving the Divine mysteries. And this was
earnestly advised and pressed upon their people by the holy Fathers, who had as
great experience in their conduct, as they had zeal for the good of souls [ Let
no man say; I repent in private; I repent before God in secret. God who alone
does pardon, does know that I am contrite in heart. For was it in vain, was it
said to no purpose; whatsoever ye shall loose in earth shall be loosed in
heaven? we evacuate the Gospel of God, we frustrate the words of Christ] so S.
Austin. [And therefore when a man has spoken the sentence of the most severe
medicine, Homil. 49.
let him come to the Presidents of the Church, who are to minister in the power
of the Keys to him; and beginning now to be a good son, keeping the order of
his Mother, let him receive the measure and manner of his repentances from the
Presidents of the Sacraments. Ibid.
] Concerning this thing, I shall never think it fit to dispute, for there is
nothing to enforce it, but enough to persuade it, but he that tries, will find
the benefit of it himself, and will be best able to tell it to all the world.

SECT. VII. Penitential Soliloquies, Ejaculations, Exercises, and preparatory
Prayers to be used in all the days of preparation to the Holy Sacrament.
I.
ALmighty and eternal God, the fountain of all virtue, the support of all holy
hope, the Author of pardon, of life, and of salvation; thou art the comforter
of all that call upon thee; thou have concluded all under sin, that thou
might have mercy upon all: Look upon me O God, and have pity on me lying in
my blood and misery, in my shame and in my sins, in the fear and guilt of thy
wrath, in the shadow of death, and in the gates of hell. I confess to thee O
God what thou know already; but I confess it to manifest thy justice, and
to glorify thy mercy who have spared me so long, that I am guilty of the
vilest and basest follies which usually dishonor the fools and the worst of
the sons of men.

II.
I have been proud and covetous, envious and lustful, angry and greedy,
indevout and irreligious; restless in my passions, sensual and secular, but
hating wise counsels, and soon weary of the Offices of a holy Religion. I
cannot give an account of my time, and I cannot reckon the sins of my tongue.
My crimes are intolerable, and my imperfections shameful, and my omissions
innumerable; and what shall I do O thou preserver of men? I am so vile that I
cannot express it, so sinful that I am hateful to my self, and much more
abominable must I needs be in thy eyes. I have sinned against thee without
necessity, sometimes without temptation, only because I would sin, and would
not delight in the ways of peace: I have been so ungrateful, so foolish, so
unreasonable, that I have put my own eyes out, that I might with confidence and
without fear sin against so good a God, so gracious a Father, so infinite a
Power, so glorious a Majesty, so bountiful a Patron, and so mighty a Redeemer,
that my sin is grown shameful and aggravated even to amazement. I can say no
more, I am ashamed, O God, I am amazed, I am confounded in thy presence.

III.
But yet O God thou art the healer of our breaches, and the lifter up of our
head; and I must not despair; and I am sure thy goodness is infinite, and thou
do not delight in the death of a sinner; and my sins, though very great, are
infinitely less than thy mercies, which thou have revealed to all penitent and
returning sinners in Jesus Christ. I am not worthy to look up to heaven; but be
thou pleased to look down into the dust, and lift up a sinner from the dunghill;
let me not perish in my folly, or be consumed in thy heavy displeasure. Give me
time and space to repent; and give me powers of Grace and aids of thy spirit;
that as by thy gift and mercy I intend to amend whatsoever is amiss, so I may
indeed have grace and power faithfully to fulfill the same. Inspire me with the
spirit of repentance and mortification, that I may always fight against my sins
till I be more than conqueror. Support me with a holy hope, confirm me with an
excellent, operative, and unreprovable faith, and enkindle a bright and a
burning charity in my soul: Give me patience in suffering, severity in judging
and condemning my sin, and in punishing the sinner, that judging my self, I may
not be condemned by thee; that mourning for my sins, may rejoice in thy pardon;
that killing my sin, I may live in righteousness; that denying my own will, I
may always perform thine; and by the methods of thy Spirit I may overcome all
carnal and spiritual wickednesses, and walk in thy light, and delight in thy
service, and perfect my obedience, and be wholly delivered from my sin, and for
ever preserved from thy wrath, and at last pass on from a certain expectation
to an actual fruition of the glories of thy Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen, Amen, Amen.

1. I am in thy sight O Lord a polluted person; sin like a crust of leprosy
has overspread me: I am a scandal to others, a shame to my self, a reproach to
my relations, a burden to the earth, a spot in the Church, and deserve to be
rejected and scorned by thee.

2. But this O God I cannot bear: It is just in thee to destroy me; but thou
delightest not in that: I am guilty of death; but thou love rather that I
should live.

3. O let the cry of thy Sons blood, who offers an eternal Sacrifice to thee,
speak on my behalf, and speak better things than the blood of Abel.

4. My conscience does accuse me, the Devils rejoice in my fall and aggravate
my crimes, already too great; and thy holy Spirit is grieved by me: But my
Savior Jesus died for me, and thou pittiest me, and thy holy Spirit still
calls upon me, and I am willing to come; but I cannot come unless thou drawest
me with the cords of love.

5. O draw me unto thee by the Arguments of charity, by the endearments of thy
mercies, by the order of thy providence, by the hope of thy promises, by the
sense of thy comforts, by the conviction of my understanding, by the zeal and
passion of holy affections, by an unreprovable faith and an humble hope, by a
religious fear and an increasing love, by the obedience of precepts and
efficacy of holy example, by thy power and thy wisdom, by the love of thy Son
and the grace of thy Spirit: Draw me O God, and I will run after thee, and the
sweetnesses of thy precious ointments.

6. I am not worthy O Lord, I am not worthy to come into thy presence, much
less to eat the flesh of the Sacrificed Lamb: For my sins, O Blessed Savior
Jesus, went along in confederation with the High Priests, in treachery with
Judas, in injustice with Pilate, in malice with the people.

7. My sins and the Jews crucified thee; my hypocrisy was the kiss that
betrayed thee; my covetous and ambitious desires were the thorns that pricked
thy sacred head; my vanity was the knee that mocked thee; my lusts disrobed
thee, and made thee naked to shame and cruel scourgings; my anger and malice,
my peevishness and revenge, were the bitter gall which thou did^t taste; my
bitter words and cursed speaking were the vinegar which thou did drink; and
my scarlet sins made for thee a purple robe of mockery and derision; and where
shall I vile wretch appear, who have put my Lord to death, and exposed him to
an open shame, and crucified the Lord of Life?

8. Where should I appear but before my Savior, who died for them that have
murdered him, who has loved them that hated him, who is the Savior of his
enemies, and the life of the dead, and the redemption of captives, and the
advocate for sinners, and all that we do need, and all that we can desire?

9. Grant that in thy wounds I may find my safety, in thy stripes my cure, in
thy pain my peace, in thy cross my victory, in thy resurrection my triumph, and
a crown of righteousness in the glories of thy eternal Kingdom. Amen, Amen.

S. Austins penitential Prayer.
Before thy eyes, O gracious Lord, we bring our crimes; before thee we expose
the wounds of our bleeding souls. That which we suffer is but little; but that
which we deserve is intolerable: We fear the punishment of our sins, but cease
not pertinaciously to proceed in sinning: Our weakness is sometimes smitten
with thy rod, but our iniquity is not changed; our grieved mind is troubled,
but our stiff neck is not bended with the flexures of a holy obedience; our
life spends in vanity and trouble, but amends it self in nothing: When thou
smitest us, then we confess our sin; but when thy visitation is past, then we
forget that we have wept: When thou stretchest forth thy hand, then we promise
to do our duty; but when thou take off thy hand, we perform no promises: If
thou strikest, we cry to thee to spare us; but when thou sparest, we again
provoke thee to strike us.

Thus O God the guilty confess before thee; and unless thou give us pardon,
it is but just that we perish: But O Almighty God our Father, grant to us what
we ask, even though we deserve it not; for thou made us out of nothing, else
we had not any power to ask.] Pardon us, O gracious Father, and take away all
our sin, and destroy the work of the Devil; and let the enemy have no part nor
portion in us; but acknowledge the work of thy own hands, the price of thy own
blood, the sheep of thy own fold, the members of thy own body, the purchase of
thine own inheritance; and make us to be what thou have commanded; give unto us
what thou have designed for us; enable us for the work thou have enjoined us,
and bring us to the place which thou have prepared for us by the blood of the
everlasting Covenant, and by the pains of the Cross, and the glories of thy
Resurrection, O blessed and most glorious Savior and Redeemer Jesus. Amen.

CHAP. IV. Of our Actual and Ornamental Preparation to the Reception of the
Blessed Sacrament.
SECT. I.
HE that is dressed by the former measures is always worthy to communicate;
(...).
but he that is always well vested, will against a wedding day be more adorned;
and the five wise Virgins that stood ready for the coming of the Bridegroom,
with oil in their lamps and fire on their oil, yet at the notice of his coming
trimmed their lamps, and made them to burn brighter. The receiving of the
Blessed Sacrament is a receiving of Christ; and here the soul is united to her
Lord; and this Feast is the Supper of the Lamb, and the Lamb is the Bridegroom,
and every faithful soul is the Bride; and all this is but the image of the
state of blessedness in heaven, where we shall see him without a vail, whom
here we receive under the vail of Sacraments; and there we shall live upon him
without a figure, Panem Angelorum sub Sacramento manducamus in terris, eundem
sine Sacramento manifestius edemus in coelis, non ministerio corporali saepe
repetitis actionibus ad eundem revertentes: Sed consummato Sacerdotio nostro
erit and permanebit perpetua and stabilis, implens and reficiens nos
sufficientia, qua proferet se palam absque ullis integumentis, omnibus
conspicabilis summi praesentia sacerdotis. S. Cyprian. de coena Dom. cap. 2.
to whom we are now brought by significations and representments corporal. But
then as we here receive the same thing as there, though after a less perfect
manner; it is also very fit we should have here the same, that is, a heavenly
conversation, though after the manner of men living upon the earth. It is true,
that the blessed souls receive Christ always, and they live accordingly, in
perpetual uninterrupted glorifications of his name, and conformities to his
excellencies. Ecce panis Angelorum
Factus cibus viatorum.
Qui nos pascis hic mortales,
Tuos ibi commensales
Cohaeredes and Sodales
Fac Sanctorum civium.
Hymn. Eccles.
Here we receive him at certain times, and at such times we should make our
conversation celestial, and our holiness actual, when our addresses are so; so
that in our actual addresses to the reception of these divine Mysteries, there
is nothing else to be done, but that what in our whole life is done habi^ually,
at that time be done actually* No man is fit to die, but he who is safe if he
dies suddenly; and yet he that is so fitted, if he hears the noise of the
Bridegrooms coming, will snuff his lamp, and stir up the fire, and apply the
oil; and so must he that has warning of his Communion.

He that communicates every day, must live a life of a continual Religion; and
so must he who in any sense communicates frequently, if he does it at all
worthily; but he that lives carelessly, and dresses his soul with the beginnings
of virtues against a Communion day, is like him that repents not till the day
of his death; if it succeeds well, it is happy for him; but if it does not, he
may blame himself for being confident without a promise. Every worthy
Communicant must prepare himself by a holy life, by mortification of all his
sins, by the acquisition of all Christian graces; and this is not the work of a
day, or a week; but by how much the more these things are done, by so much the
better we are prepared.

So that the actual address and proper preparation to the Blessed Sacrament is
indeed an inquiry whether we are habitually prepared; that is, whether we be in
the state of grace; whether we belong to Christ, whether we have faith and
charity, whether we have repented truly. If we be to communicate next week, or
it may be to morrow, these things cannot be gotten to day, and therefore we
must stay till we be ready. And if by our want of preparation we be compelled
for the s^ving of our souls, and lest we die, to abstain from this holy feast,
let us consider what our case would be if this should be the last coming of the
Brideg^oom. This is but the warning of that; this is but his last coming a
little antedated; and God graciously calls us now to be prepared here, that we
may not be unprepared then; but it is a formidable thing to be thrust out when
we see others enter.

And therefore when the Masters of spiritual life call upon us to set apart a
day, or two, or three, for preparation to this holy Feast, they do not mean
that any man who on the Thursday is unfit and unworthy, should be fitted to
communicate on Sunday; but that he should on those days try whether he be or
no, and pass from one degree of perfection to a greater, from the less perfect
to the more; for let us think of it as we please, there is no other
preparation; and it might otherwise seem a wonder to us, why St. Paul who
particularly speaks of it, and indeed the whole New Testament, should say
nothing of any particular preparation to this holy ^east; but only gives us
caution that we do not receive it unworthily, but gives us no particular rule
or precept but this one, that a man should examine himself, and so let him eat:
I say, this might seem very strange, but that we find there is and there can be
no worthy preparation to it but a life of holiness, and that every one who
names the Lord Jesus should depart from iniquity; and therefore, that against
the day of Communion there is nothing peculiarly and signally required, but to
examine our selves, to see if all be right in the whole; and what is wanting
toward our proportion of perfection and ornament, to supply it. So that the
immediate preparation to the holy Communion can have in it but three parts and
conjugations of duty.

1. An examination of our conscience.

2. An actual supply of such actions as are wanting.

3. Actual devotion, and the exercise of special graces by way of prayer, so to
adorn our present state and dispositions.

SECT. II. Rules for Examination of our Consciences against the day of our
Communion.
HOw we are to examine our selves concerning such states of life and
conjugations of duty as are properly relative to the great and essential
preparation and worthiness to communicate, I have already largely considered
Cap. 2.
: Now I shall add such practical advices which may with advantage minister to
the actual reception, such which concern the immediate preparatory and
ornamental address; that we may reduce the former Doctrine to action and
exercise against that time; and this will serve as an appendix, and for the
completing the former measures.

1. In the days of your address consider the greatness of the work you go
about; that it is the highest mystery of the whole Religion you handle; that it
is no less than Christ himself in Sacrament that you take; that as sure as any
Christian does ever receive the Spirit of God, so sure every good man receives
Christ in the Sacrament; that to receive Christ in Sacrament is not a
diminution or lessening of the blessing; it is a real communion with him, to
all material events of blessing and holiness; that now every Communicant does
an act that will contribute very much to an happy or unhappy eternity; that by
this act and its appendages a man may live or die for ever; that a man cannot
at all be supposed in any state, that this thing will be indifferent to him in
that state, but will set him forward to some very great event; that this is the
greatest thing that God gives us in the world, and if we do it well, it is the
greatest thing we can do in the world; and therefore when we have considered
these things in general, let us examine whether we be persons in any sense
fitted to such glorious communications, and prepared by such dispositions which
the greatness of the Mystery may in its appearance seem to require. Some may
perceive their disproportion at the first sight, and need to examine no
farther. It is as if a Jew in Rome with his basket and bottle of hay should be
advised to stand Candidate for the Consulship; you mock him if you speak of it:
and therefore if you find your case like this, start back and come not near. It
is (...), there is Divinity in it; and to the wicked it brings brimstone and
fire.

2. Next to this general consideration, examine your self concerning those
things in which you are or may be offensive to others: For although every man
is to begin at home, yet that which is first to be changed is that which is not
only evil in it self, but afflictive to others; that which is sin and shame,
that which offends God and my neighbor too; that is, it is criminal, and it is
scandalous. Examine therefore thy self about injuriousness, robbery,
detraction, obloquy, scolding, much prating, peevish conversation, ungentle
nature, ap^ness to quarrel, and the like: For thus if like Zachary and
Elizabeth we walk unblameably, and unreprovable before all the world, certain
it is, the Church will not reject us from the Communion; and we have purchased
a good deg^ee in the faith, and shall think our condition worth preserving and
worth improving.

3. Examine thy self concerning all entercourses in the matter of men, whether
any unhandsome contract was made, any fraudulent bargain, any surprise or
out-witting of thy weaker, thy confident, or unwary Brother; and whatever you
do, place that right: For money is a snare; and in contracts we are of all
things soonest deceived, and are very often wrong, and yet never think so, and
we do every thing before we part with this. But when every thing is set right
here, we may better hope of other things; for either they are right, or will
with less difficulty be made so.

4. Like to this, for the matter of the inquiry, is that we examine our selves
in the matter of our debts, whether we detain them otherwise than in justice we
are obliged? Here we must examine whether we be able to pay them? If so,
whether presently or afterward? By what we are disabled? Whether we can and
ought to alter the state of our expenses? What probability we have to pay them
at all? How we can secure that they shall be paid? and if they cannot, how much
can we do toward it? And what amends can we make to our Creditors? And how we
mean to end that intercourse? For this ought to be so far at least stated, that
we may be sure we do no injustice, and do no injury that we can avoid. This is
a material consideration, and of great effect unto the peace of conscience, and
a worthy dispo^ition to the holy Communion.

5. Let us examine our selves how we spend our time. Is it employed in an
honest calling, in worthy studies, in useful business, in affairs of
government, in something that is charitable, in any thing that is useful? But
if we throw away great portions of it, of which we can give no sober account;
although the Laws chastise us not, and appoint no guardians to conduct our
estates, as it does to fools and mad men; yet we are like to fall into severer
hands; and God will be angry. But they are very unfit to entertain Christ, who
when they have received his Sacrament resolve to dwell in idleness and foolish
divertisements, and have no business but recreation. At the best, it is but a
suspicious state of life, that can give no wise account to God and the
Commonwealth.

6. Examine thy self in the particulars of thy relation; especially where thou
governest and take accounts of others, and exactest their faults, and art not
so obnoxious to them as they to thee. Princes, and Generals, and Parents, and
Husbands, and Masters think more things are lawful to them toward their
inferiors, than indeed there are; and as they may easily transgress in
discipline and reproof, so they very often fail in making provisions for the
souls and bodies of their inferiors; and proceed with more confidence and to
greater progressions in evil because they pass without animadversion, or the
notice of laws. These persons are not often responsible to their subordinates,
but always for them; and therefore it were good that we took great notice of
it our selves, because few else do.

7. Let us examine our selves concerning the great and little accidents of our
private intercourse and conversation in our family; especially between man and
wife in the little quarrellings and accidental unkindnesses wherein both think
themselves innocent, and it may be both are to blame. If the matter be
disputable, then do thou dispute it with thy self, or rather condemn thy self;
for if it be fit to be questioned, it is certainly in some measure fit to be
repented of. For either in the thing it self, or in the misapprehension of the
thing, or in the not expounding it well, or in the not suffering it, or in the
not concealing it, or in the not turning it into virtue, or in the not
forgiving it, or not conducting it prudently, it is great odds but thou art to
blame. These little rencontres between man and wife are great hindrances to
prayer, 1 Pet. 3.7.
as St. Peter intimates; and by consequence do infinitely indispose us to the
greatest solennity of prayer, the holy Sacrament; and therefore ought to be
strictly surveyed, and the principles rescinded, and the beginnings stopped, or
else we shall communicate without fruit.

8. Be sure against a day of Communion to examine thy self in those things
which no law condemns, but yet are of ill report, such as are sumptuous and
expensive clothing, great feasts, gaudy dressings, going often to Taverns,
fantastic following of fashions, inordinate merriments, living beyond our
means; in these and the like, we must take our measures by a proportion to the
prudence and severity of Christian Religion, and by observation of the customs
and usages of the best and wisest persons in every condition of men and women.
For that we do things which are of good report is a precept of the Apostle: and
as by little illnesses in the body; so by the smallest indispositions in the
soul, if they be proceeded in, we may finish ^he method of an eternal death.
And these things, although when they are argued, may in many particulars by
witty men be represented in themselves as innocent, yet they proceed from an
evil and unsafe principle, and not from a spirit fitted to dwell with Christ,
and live upon Sacraments and secret participations.

9. Let us with curiosity examine our souls in such actions which are condemned
by the Laws of God and man respectively, but are not defined, and the guilty
person cannot in many cases be argued and convinced; such as are pride and
covetousness. For when external actions can proceed from many principles, as a
haughty gate from pride, or an ill habit of body, or imitation, or carelessness,
or humor; it will be hard for any man to say, I am proud because I lift up my
feet too high; and who can say that a degree of care and thriftiness in my case
and in my circumstances is covetousness? Here as we must be gentle to others,
so we must be severe to our selves; and not only condemn the very first entries
of an infant sin; but suspect his approaches, and acknowledge a fault before it
be certain and evident.

In these things we must the rather examine our selves; because we can be the
most certain accusers of our selves; and the inquiries are of great
concernment, because they are that curiosity of piety and security of condition
which becomes persons of growth in grace, and such as are properly fitted to
the Communion: and indeed they are of things most commonly neglected; men
usually living at that rate* that if they be not scandalous, they suppose
themselves to be Saints and fitted for the nearest intercourse with Christ.

These instances of examination do suppose that we have already examined our
selves concerning all habits of sin, and laid aside every discernable weight,
and repented of every observed criminal action; and broken every custom of
lesser irregularities, and are reformed by the measures of Laws and express
Commandments, and are changed from death to life; and that we are persons so
far advanced that we need not to regard what is behind, but to press forward
toward the state of a perfect man in Christ Jesus. For he that is in that
state of things, that he is to examine how many actions of uncleanness, or
intemperance, or slander he has committed since the last Communion, is not fit
to come to another, but must change his life, and repent greatly before he
comes hither.

SECT. III. Of an actual supply to be made of such actions and degrees of good
as are wanting; against a Communion-day.
1. IF on a Communion-day, we need very much examination, we can make but
little supply of those many defects which it is likely a diligent inquiry will
discover; and therefore it is highly advisable, that as we ought to repent
every day, and not put it all off till the day of our Communion or our death;
so we should every day examine our selves, at the shutting in of the day, or at
our going to bed; for so St. Basil, St. Chrysostom, Sermon. 1. de instit.
Monach. Sermon. de poenit. in illud Psalmi. In Cubilibus vestris compungimini.
lib. 50. homil. 44.
St. Anthony and St. Austin, St. Ephrem and St. Dorotheus do advise. Others
advise that it be done twice every day: and indeed the oftener we recollect our
selves: 1. The more weaknesses we shall observe, and 2. the more faults
correct, and 3. watch the better, and 4. repent the more perfectly, and 5.
offend less, and 6. be more prepared for death, and 7. be more humble, and 8.
with ease prevent the contracting of evil habits, and 9. interrupt the union of
little sins into a chain of death, and 10. more readily prevail upon our
passions, and 11. better understand our selves, and 12. more frequently
converse with God, and 13. oftener pray, and 14. have a more heavenly
conversation, and in fine, 15. be more fitted for a frequent and holy Communion.

2. The end of examination is, 1. That we grieve for all our sins. 2. That we
resolve to amend all. * 3. That we actually watch and pray against all:
Therefore it is necessary that when we have examined against a Communion day;
1. We always do actions of contrition for every thing we have observed to be
amiss; 2. That we renew our resolutions of better obedienc^, 3. And that we
pray for particular strength against our failings.

3. He that would communicate with fruit must so have ordered his examinations,
that he must not always be in the same method. He must not always be walking
with a candle in his hands, and prying into corners; but they must be swept and
garnished, and be kept clean and adorned. His examinations must be made full
and thoroughly and be productive of inferior resolutions, and must pass on to
rules and exercises of caution. That is, 1. We must consider where we fail
oftenest. 2. From what principle this default comes. 3. What are the best
remedies. 4. We must pass on to the real and vigorous use of them: and when the
case is thus stated and drawn into rules and resolutions of acting them; we are
only to take care we do so; and every day examine whether we have or no. But we
must not at all dwell in this relative and preparatory and ministering duty. But
if we find that we have reason to do so; let us be sure that something is
amiss; we have played the hypocrites, and done the work of the Lord negligently
or falsely.

4. If any passion be the daily exercise or temp^ation of our life, let us be
careful to put the greatest distress upon that, and therefore against a
Communion-day, do something in defiance and diminution of that; chastise it, if
it has prevailed: reenforce thy resolutions against it, examine all thy aids,
see what has been prosperous, and pursue that point; and if thou have not at
all prevailed, then know, all is not well; for he communicates without fruit,
who makes no progressions in his mortifications and conquest over his passions.
It may be we shall be long exercised with the remains of the Canaanites; for it
is in the matter of Passions as Seneca said of Vices, Pugnamus, non ut penitus
vincamus, sed ne vincamur.
We fight against them not to conquer them entirely, but that they may not
^onquer us; not to kill them, but to bring them under command; and unless we do
that, we cannot be sure that we are in the state of grace; and therefore cannot
tell if we do, or do not worthily communicate. For by all the exterior actions
of our life we cannot so well tell how it is with us, as by the observation of
our affections and passions, our wills and our desires. For I can command my
foot, S. Aug. lib. 8. confess. cap. 9.
and it must obey; and my hand, and it cannot resist; but when I bid my
appetite obey, or my anger be still, or my will not to desire, I find it very
often to rebel against my word, and against Gods word] Therefore let us be
sure to take some effective course with the appetite, and place our guards upon
the inward man; and upon our preparation days do some violence to our lusts
and secret desires, by holy resolutions, and severe purposes, and rules of
caution, and by designing a course of spiritual arts and exercises for the
reducing them to reason and obedience: something that may be remembered; and
something that will be done. * But to this let this caution be added; that of
all things in the world we be careful of relapses into our old follies or
infirmities; for if things do not succeed well afterward, they were not well
ordered at first.

5. Upon our communion days, and days of prep^ration; let us endeavor to
stir up every grace which we are to exercise in our conversation; and thrust
our selves forward in zeal of those graces: that we begin to amend our
lukewarmness, and repair our sins of omission. For this is a day of sacrifice;
and every sacrifice must be consumed by fire, and therefore, now is the day of
improvement, and the proper season for the zeal of duty; and if upon the solemn
day of the soul we do not take care of omissions, and repair the great and
little forgetfulnesses, and omissions of duty, and pass from the infirmities of
a man to the affections of a Saint, we may all our life time abide in a state
of lukewarmness, disimprovement and indifference; To this purpose,

6 Compare day with day, week with week, Communion with Communion, time with
time, duty with duty, and see if you can observe any advantage, any ground
gotten of a passion; any further degree of the spirit of mortificaton, any new
permanent fires of devotion; for by volatile, sudden and transient flames we
can never guess steadily. But be sure never to think you are at all improved
unless you observe your defects to be, 1. fewer: 2. or lighter: or 3. at least
not to be the same; but of another kind and ins^ance, against which you had not
made particular provisions formerly; but now upon this new observation and
experience you must.

7. Upon or against a Communion day endeavor to put your soul into that order
and state of good things, as if that day you were to die; and consider that
unless you dare die upon that day, if God should call you, there is but little
reason you should dare to receive the Sacrament of life, or the ministry of
death. He that communicates worthily is justified from sins; and to him death
can have no sting, to whom the Sacrament brings life and health; and therefore
let every one that is to communicate place himself by meditation in the gates
of death, and suppose himself seated before the Tribunal of Gods Judgment, and
see whether he can reasonably hope that his sins are pardoned, and cured, and
extinguished. And then if you judge righteous judgment, you will soon find
what pinches most, what makes you most afraid, what was most criminal, or what
is least mortified; and so you will learn to make provisions accordingly.

8. If you find any thing yet amiss, or too suspicious, or remaining to evil
purposes, the relics of the scattered enemy after a war, resolve to use some
general instrument of piety or repentance, that may, by being useful in all the
parts of your life and conversation, meet with every straggling irregularity,
and by perpetuity and an assiduous force clear the coast. 1. Resolve to have
the presence of God frequently in your thought. 2. Or endeavor and resolve to
bring it to pass to have so great a dread and reverence of God, that you may be
more ashamed and really troubled and confounded to sin in the presence of God
than in the sight and observation of the best and severest man. 3. Or else
resolve to punish thy self with some proportionable affliction of the body or
spirit for every irregularity or return of undecency in that instance in which
thou sets thy self to mortify any one special passion or temptation: Or 4.
Firmly to purpose in every thing which is not well, not to stay a minute, but
to repent instantly of it, severely to condemn it, and to do something at the
first opportunity for amends: Or 5. To resolve against an instance of infirmity
for some short, sure, and conquerable periods of time: as if you be given to
prating, resolve to be silent, or to speak nothing but what is pertinent for a
day; or for a day not to be angry; and then sometimes for two days; and so
diet your weak soul with little portions of food till it be able to take in and
digest a full meal: Or 6. Meditate often every day of death, or the day of
judgment. By these and the like instruments it will happen to the remains of
sin, as it did to the Egyptians; what is left by the Hail, the Catterpiller
will destroy; and what the Catterpiller leaves, the Locusts will eat. These
instruments will eat up the remains of sin as the poor gather up the gleanings
after the Carts in harvest.

9. But if at any Communion and in the use of these advices you do not perceive
any sensible progression in the spirit of mortification or devotion; then be
sure to be ashamed, and to be humbled for thy indisposition and slow
progression in the discipline of Christ: and if thou be humbled truly for
thy want of improvement, it is certain thou have improved. And if you come with
fear and trembling, it is very probable you will come in the spirit of
repentance and devotion.

These exercises and measures will not seem many, long and tedious Quisquis
amore venit, nescit se far laborem
Nemo laboret jacet, quisquis amore venit.

as the rules of art; if we consider that all are not to be used at all times,
nor by every person; but are instruments fitted to several necessities, Ven.
Fortunat. lib. 3. epigr. 37.
and useful when they can do good, and to be used no longer. ^or he that uses
these or any the like advices by way of solemnity, and in periodical returns,
will still think fit to use them at every Communion as long as he lives; but he
that uses them as he should, that is, to effect the work of reformation upon
his soul, may lay them all aside, according to his work is done. But if we
would every day do something of this; if we would every day prepare for the day
of death, or which is of a like consideration, for the day of our Communion; if
we would every night examine our passed day, and set our things in order; if we
would have a perpetual intercourse and conversation with God; or, which is
better than all examinations in the world, if we would actually attend to what
we do, and consider every action, and speak so little that we might consider
it, we should find that upon the day of our Communion we should have nothing to
do, but the third particular, that is, the offices of Prayer and Eucharist, and
to renew our graces by prayer and exercises of devotion.

SECT. IV. Devotions to be used upon the morning of the Communion.
1. O Blessed Lord, our gracious Savior and Redeemer Jesus, King of Kings and
Lord of Lords; thou art fairer than the children of men; upon thee the Angels
look and behold and wonder; what am I O Lord, that thou who fillest heaven and
earth, should descend and desire to dwell with me, who am nothing but folly
and infirmity, misery and sin, shame and death?

2. I confess, O God, that when I consider thy greatness and my nothing, thy
purity and my uncleanness, thy glory and my shame; I see it to be infinitely
unreasonable and presumptuous that I should approach to thy sacred presence,
and desire to partake of thy Sacraments, and to enter into thy grace, and to
hope for a part of thy glory. But when I consider thy mercy and thy wisdom,
thy bounty and thy goodness, thy readiness to forgive, and thy desires to
impart thy self unto thy servants; then I am lifted up with hope; then I come
with boldness to the throne of grace. Even so O Lord because thou have
commanded it, and because thou love it should be so.

3. It was never heard O Lord from the beginning of the world, that thou did
ever despise him that called upon thee, or ^orsake any man that abides in thy
fear, or that any person who trusted in the Lord, was ever confounded. But if I
come to thee, I bring an unworthy person to be united unto thee; if I come not,
I shall remain unworthy for ever; If I stay away, I fear to lose thee; If I
come, I fear to offend thee, and that will lose thee more, and my self too at
last. I know O God I know, my sins have separated between me and my God; but
thy love and thy passion, thy holiness and thy obedience has reconciled us:
and though my sins deter me, yet they make it necessary for me to come; and
though thy greatness amazes me* yet it is so full of goodness that it invites
me.

4. O therefore blessed Savior, who did for our sakes take upon thee our
passions and sensibilities, our weaknesses and our sufferings, who were hungry
after the temptation of the Devil, weary and thirsty in thy discourse with the
woman of Samaria, who did weep over Lazarus, were afflicted in the garden,
whipped in the Consistory, nailed on the Cross, pierced with a spear, wrapped in
li^nen, laid in the grave, and so art become a (...) High Priest and pitiful to
our infi^^^^ie^; be pleased to receive a weary sinner, (...) overburd^ne^
^^nscience, an afflicted polluted soul i^to thy c^re and conduct, into thy
custody and ^^re. I know that a thousand years of tears and sorrow, the purity
of Angels, the love of Saints, and the humiliation of the greatest penitent is
not sufficient to make we worthy to dwell with thee, to be united to thy
infinity, to be fed with thy body, and refreshed with thy purest blood, to
become bone of thy bone, and flesh of thy flesh, and spirit of thy spirit.

5. But what I cannot be of my self, let me be made by thee; I come to thee,
wounded and bruised and bleeding; for thou art my Physician, arise then with
healing in thy wings; I am thirsty and faint, as the Heart longs after the
water brooks, so longs my soul after thee O God; thou art the eternal
fountain, from whence spring the waters of comfort and salvation; I am hungry
and empty and weak, and I come running after thee because thou have the words
of eternal life; O send me not away empty, for I shall faint and die; I cannot
live without thee. O let virtue go forth from thee and heal all my sickness; do
thou appear to my soul in these mysteries; heal my sores, purify my stains,
enlighten my darkness, turn me from all vain imaginations and illusions of the
enemy, all perverseness of will, all violence and inordination of passions,
sensual desires and devilish angers, lust and malice, gluttony and pride, the
spirit of envy and the spirit of detraction; let not sin reign in my members,
nor the Devil lead my will captive, nor the world abuse my understanding and
debauch my conversation.

6. O Jesus be a Jesus unto me: and let this Sacrament be a savor of life, and
thy holy body the bread of life, and thy precious blood the purifier of my
sinful life. Grant I may receive these Divine mysteries for the amendment of my
life, and the defensative against my sins; for the increase of virtue and the
perfection of my spirit; Grant that I may from thee thus Sacramentally
communicated derive prevailing grace for the amendment of my life; spiritual
wisdom for the discerning the ways of peace; the spirit of love, and the
spirit of purity; that in all my life I may walk worthy of thy gracious favors
which thou give to me unworthy; that I may do all my works in holiness and
right intention, that I may resist every temptation with a never fainting
courage, and a caution never surprised, and a prudence never deceived.

7. Sweetest Savior, I come to thee upon thy invitation, and thy commandment;
I could not come to thee but by thee; O let me never go from thee any more, but
enter into my heart; feed me with thy word, sustain me with thy spirit, refresh
me with thy comforts, and let me in this divine mystery receive thee my dearest
Savior; and be thou my wisdom and my righteousness,, my sanctification and
redemption; let me receive this holy nutriment as the earnest of an eternal
inheritance, as a defensative against all spiritual danger, for the eviction of
all the powers of the enemy, as an incentive of holy love, and a strengthening
of my faith, for the increasing of a holy hope, and the consummation of a
heavenly love, that thou being one with me, and I with thee, I may by thee be
gracious in the eyes of thy heavenly Father, and may receive my portion amongst
the inheritance of Sons, O eternal and most gracious Savior and Redeemer Jesu.
Amen, Amen.

CHAP. VII. Of our Comportment in and after our Receiving the Blessed Sacrament.
SECT. I. Of the Circumstances and Manner of Reception of the Divine Mysteries.
IT is the custom of the Church of great antiquity, and proportionable regard,
that every Christian that is in health should receive the Blessed Sacrament
fasting. The Apostles and primitive Bishops at first gave it after Supper, or
together with it; but that soon passed into inconvenience; and some were
drunken, and some were empty and despised, and the Holy Sacrament was
dishonored, and the Lords body was not discerned, and God was provoked to
anger, and the sinners were smitten and died in their sin; as appears in the
sad narrative which St. Paul makes of the misdemeanors and the misfortunes in
the Corinthian Churches. 1 Cor. 11.21, 30.
Something like to which, is that which Socrates tells of some Christians in
Egypt; they celebrated the Holy Communion at evening, but never till they had
fill^d themselves with varities of choice meat. (...). Socrat. l. 5. epist.
118. ad Januar.
Of some also in Africa that communicated at evening St. Austin speaks; and of
others who communicated both morning and evening: At evening, because S. Paul
called it (...), the Lords Supper; and in the morning, from the universal
custom of the Church, which in most places from the very days of the Apostles
prevailed, that the holy Eucharist should be given to none but to them that
were fasting: which thing was also decreed in the third Council of Carthage,
and has been observed ever since. Ut Sacramenta Altaris non nisi a jejunis
hominibus celebrentur, excepto uno die anniversario, quo coena Domini
celebratur. Vide Zonar. in hunc Canon: and Council Matiscon. 2. and Petrum
Abailardum epist. 8.
And in this the Church has not without good reason taken up the custom.

For besides that the intemperance of them that f^asted before they
communicated, did not only give scandal to the Religion, but did infinitely
indispose them that came, and dishonor the Divine Mysteries; and such
feastings would for ever be a temptation and a snare, and therefore could not
be cured so well as by taking the occasion away; besides these things, the
Church observed, that in the time of the Synagogue, the Servants of God did
religiously abstain from meat and drink upon all their solemn feast days, till
their great Offices of Religion were finished; and that upon this account the
Jews were scandalized at the Disciples for eating the ears of corn early on
their Sabbath; and Christ excused them only upon the reason of their hunger,
that is, upon necessity or charity: and after all, even by natural reason and
experience we find that they pray and worship best who are not laden with meat
and drink; and that therefore this solemnity being the greatest worship of God
in the whole Religion, consequently ought to be done with all advantages; it
was therefore very reasonable that the Church took up this custom; and
therefore they who causelessly do prevaricate it, shall bear their own burden,
and are best reproved by St. Paul's words. We have no such custom, nor the
Churches of God. But sick people and the weak are as readily to be excused in
this thing, as the Apostles were by Christ in the case before mentioned: For
necessity and charity are to be preferred before such ceremonies and
circumstances of address.

1. When you awake in the morning of your Communion day, give God thanks
particularly that he has blessed thee with so blessed an opportunity of
receiving the Symbols of pardon, the ministry of the Spirit, the Sacrament of
Christ himself, the seed of immortality, and the Antepast of heaven, and hasten
earlier out of your bed: The cock crowing that morning is like the noise that
is made of the coming of the Bridegroom; and therefore go out to meet him, but
rise that you may trim your lamp. When you are up, presently address your self
to do such things as you would willingly be found doing when the Bridegroom
calls, and you are to appear before him to hear your final sentence.

2. Make a general confession of your sins, and be very much humbled in the
sense and apprehension of them. Compare the state and union of all your evils,
with the state and grandeur of that favor which God intends that day to
consign to you; and then think what you are, and what God is; what you have
done, and what God intends to do; how ill you have deserved, and yet how
graciously you are dealth with. And consider what an infinite distance there is
between that state which you have deserved, and that good which you are to
have; by considering how intolerable your case would have been, if God had
dealt with you as you deserve, and as he has dealt with very many who sinned
no more than you have done; and yet in what felicities you are placed by the
mercies of your good God; that you are in the hopes, and in the methods, and in
the participations of pardon and eternal life.

3. The effect of this consideration ought to be, that you make acts of general
contrition for all your sins known and unknown: That you renew your purposes
and vows of better obedience: That you exercise acts of special graces; and
that you give God most hearty and superexalted thanks with all the transports
and ravishments of spirit, for so unspeakable, so unmeritable, so unrewardable
a loving kindness.

4. Worship Jesus: Love him; dedicate thy self to him; recollect what he has
done for thy soul, what glories he laid aside, with what meanness he was
invested, what pains he suffered, what shame he endured, what excellencies he
preached what wisdom he taught, what life he lived, what death he died, what
Mysteries he has appointed, by what ministeries he conveys himself to thee,
what rare arts he uses to save thee; and after all, that he intercedes for thee
perpetually in heaven, presenting to his heavenly Father that great Sacrifice
of himself which he finished on the Cross, and commands thee to imitate in this
Divine and Mysterious Sacrament; and in the midst of these thoughts and
proportionable exercises and devotions, address thy self to the solemnities and
blessings of the day.

5. Throw away with great diligence and severity all unholy and all earthly
thoughts; and think the thoughts of heaven: for when Christ descends he comes
attended with innumerable companies of Angels, who all behold and wonder, who
love and worship Jesus; and in this glorious employment and society let thy
thoughts be pure, and thy mind celestial, and thy work Angelical, and thy
spirit full of love, and thy heart of wonder; thy mouth all praises, investing
and incircling thy prayers as a bright cloud is adorned with fringes and
margents of light.

6. When thou see the holy man minister, dispute no more, inquire no more,
doubt no more, be divided no more; but believe, and behold with the eyes of
faith and of the spirit, that thou see Christ's body broken upon the Cross,
that thou see him bleeding for thy sins, S. Cyprian de coena Dom. sanguinem
sugimus, etc.
that thou feedest upon the food of elect souls, that thou put thy mouth to
the hole of the rock that was smitten, to the wound of the side of thy Lord,
which being pierced streamed forth Sacraments, and life, and holiness, and
pardon, and purity, and immortality upon thee.

7. When the words of Institution are pronounced, all the Christians used to
say Amen; giving their consent, (...). Justin Martyr.
confes^ing that faith, believing that word, rejoicing in that Mystery which is
told us when the Minister of the Sacrament in the person of Christ says, This
is my body, This is my blood; This body was broken for you, and this blood was
poured forth for you; and all this for the remission of your sins. And
remember, that the guilt of eternal damnation which we have all incurred, was a
great and an intolerable evil, and unavoidable if such miracles of mercy had
not been wrought to take it quite away; and that it was a very great love which
would work such glorious mercy, rather than leave us in so intolerable a
condition. A greater love than this could not be; and a less love than this
could not have rescued us.

8. When the holy Man reaches forth his hands upon the Symbols, and prays over
them, and intercedes for the sins of the people, and breaks the holy bread,
Illud quaeso vir Sapientissime ipsa re approbes; quis sit iste Deus quem vobis
Christiani quasi proprium vendicatis, and in locis abditis praesentem vos
videre componitis? dixit Maximus Medaurensis in epist. ad S. Augustinum tom. 2.
ep. 43. post medium.
and pours forth the sacred calice, place thy self by faith and meditation in
heaven, and see Christ doing in his glorious manner this very thing which thou
see ministered and imitated upon the Table of the Lord; and then remember that
it is impossible thou should miss of eternal blessings, which are so
powerfully procured for thee by the Lord himself; unless thou will despise all
this, and neglect so great salvation, and chusest to eat with swine the dirty
pleasures of the earth, rather than thus to feast with Saints and Angels, and
to eat the body of thy Lord with a clean heart and humble affections.

9. When the consecrating and ministering hand reaches forth to thee the holy
Symbols, say within thy heart as did the Centurion, Lord I am not worthy: but
entertain thy Lord as the women did the news of the resurrection, with fear and
great joy (...). Mat. 28.8
; or as the Apostles, with rejoicing and singleness of heart Act. 2.46. Atque
illud etiam scire cupio quo consilio aut qua mente fueris ut in epulo C. Arcii
familiaris mei cum toga pulla accumberes? quis unquam coenavit atratus? Cicer.
epist. ad Atticum. Qui potui (dixit Aaron) cum tristis fuerim, offerre
sacrificium?
; that is, clear, certain and plain believing, and with exultation and delight
in the loving kindness of the Lord.

10. But place thy self upon thy knees, in the humblest and devoutest posture
of worshippers, and think not much in the lowest manner to worship the King of
Men and Angels, the Lord of heaven and earth, the great lover of souls, and the
Savior of the body; him whom all the Angels of God worship; him whom thou
confessest worthy of all, and whom all the world shall adore, and before whom
they shall tremble at the day of judgment: For if Christ be not there after a
peculiar manner, whom or whose body do we receive? But if he be present to us,
not in mystery only, but in blessing also, why do we not worship? But all the
Christians always did so from time immemorial. No man eats this flesh unless he
first adores, In Psalm. 99.

Vide etiam S. Ambros. carnem Christi in Mysteriis adoramus. de Spir. S. lib.
3. cap. 12. S. Bernard. de coen Domini ad Petrum presbyterum.


said S. Austin: [ For the wise men and the Barbarians did worship this body in
the manger with very much fear and reverence: let us therefore who are Citizens
of heaven at least not fall short of the Barbarians. But thou see him not in
the Manger, but on the Altar; and thou beholdest him not in the Virgins arms,
but represented by the Priest, and brought to thee in Sacrifice by the holy
Spirit of God] So. St. Chrysostom argues: and accordingly this reverence is
practiced by the Churches of the East, Johannes Petrus Maffeu^, hist. Ind.
Orient. lib. 2. circa med.
and West, and South; by the Christians of India; by all the Greeks, Resp. ad
Quaesi. 6.
as appears in their answer to the Cardinal of Guise; by all the Lutheran
Churches; by all the world, sa^es Erasmus; only now of late, Vide Erasm. lib.
9. epist. ad Pellicanum cujus initium [Evangelii vigor.
some have excepted themselves. But the Church of England chooses to follow the
reason and the piety of the thing it self, the example of the Primitive Church,
and the consenting voice of Christendom [ And if it be irreverent to sit in
the sight and before the face of him whom you ought to revere; how much more in
the presence of the living God, where the Angel the president of prayer does
stand, must it needs be a most irreligious thing to sit, unless we shall
upbraid to God; that our prayers to him have wearied us?] It is the argument of
Tertullian. Lib. de orat.
To which many of the Fathers add many other fair inducements, but I think they
cannot be necessary to be produced here; because all Christians generally kneel
when they say their prayers, and when they bless God, an^ I suppose no man
communicates but he does both; and therefore needs no other inducement to
persuade him to kneel, Ante focos olim scamnis considere longis.
Mos erat: at mensae credere adesse Deos.
Ovid. 5. ^astor.
especially since Christ himself, and St. Stephen, and ^he Apostle St. Paul
used that posture in their devotions; that or lower; for St. Paul kneeled upon
the shore; and our Lord himself fell prostrate on the earth. But to them that
refuse, I shall only use the words of Scripture, which the Fathers of the
Council of Turon applied to this particular: Why art thou proud O dust and
ashes? And when Christ opens his heart and gives us all that we need or can
desire; it looks like an ill return, if we shall dispute with him concerning
the humility of a gesture and a circumstance.

11. When thou do receive thy Lord, do thou also receive thy Brother into thy
heart and into thy bowels. Thy Lord relieves thee, do thou relieve him; and
never communicate but be sure to give thy alms for one part of thy offering.
St. Cyprian does with some vehemence upbraid some wealthy persons in his time
who came to the celebration of the Lords Supper, and neglected the Corban, or
the ministering to the Saints. Remember that by mercy to the poor the sentence
of doomsday shall be declared; because what we do to them we do to Christ; and
who would not relieve Christ who has made himself poor to make us rich? And
what time is so seasonable to feed the members of Christ, as that, when he
gives his body to feed us, and that, when his members are met together to
confess, to celebrate, to remember, and to be joined to their head and to one
another? In short, The Church always has used at that time to be liberal to
her poor; and that being so seasonable and blessed an opportunity, and of it
self also a proper act of worship and sacrifice, of religion and homage, of
thankfulness and charity; it ought not to be omitted; and it can have no
measure, but that of your love, and of your power, and the other accidents of
your life and your religion.

12. As soon as ever you have taken the holy Elements into your mouth, and
stomach; remember that you have taken Christ into you, after a manner indeed
which you do not understand, but to all purposes of blessing and holiness, if
you have taken him at all. And now consider that he who has given you his Son,
with him will give you all things else: therefore represent to God through
Jesus Christ all your needs, and the needs of your relatives; signify to him
the condition of your soul; complain of your infirmities; pray for help against
your enemies; tell him of your griefs; represent your fears, your hopes, and
your desires. But it is also the great sacrifice of the world which you have
then assisted in, and represented; and now you being joined to Christ are
admitted to intercede for others, even for all mankind, in all necessities, and
in all capacities; pray therefore for all for whom Christ d^ed; especially for
all that communicate that day, for all that desire it; that their prayers and
yours being united to the intercession of your Lord, may be holy and prevail.

13. After you have given thanks, and finished your private and the public
devotions, go home, but do not presently forget the solemnity, and sink from
the sublimity of devotion and mystery into a secular conversation, like a
falling star, from brightness into dirt. The Ethiopians would not spit that day
they had communicated, thinking they might d^shonour the Sacrament if before
the consumption of the Symbols they should spit: but although they meant
reverence, yet they expressed it ill. It was better which is reported of St.
Margaret a daughter of the King of Hungary, that the day before she was to
communicate she fasted with bread and water: and after the Communion she
retired her self till the evening, spending the day in meditations, prayers,
and thanksgiving; and at night she eat her meal. Her employment was very well
sitted to the day; but for her meal, it is all one when she eat it, so that by
eating, or abstaining she did advantage to her spiritual employment. But they
that as soon as the office is finished part wi^h Christ, and carry their mind
away to other interests, have a suspicious indifferency to the things of God.
They have brought their Lord into the house, and themselves slip out at the
backdoor, Otherwise does the Spouse entertain her beloved Lord, Cant. 3.4.
I found him whom my soul loves, I held him, and would not let him go. He that
considers the advantages of prayer which every faithful soul has upon a
Communion day, will not easily let them sl^p; but tell all his said stories to
his Lord, and make all his wants known; and as Jacob to the A^gel, will not let
him go till he has given a blessing. Upon a Communion-day Christ who is the
beloved of the soul is gone to rest, and every secular employment that is not
necessary and part of duty, and every earthly thought does waken our Beloved
before he please, let us take heed of that.

14. But what we do by devotion and solemn religion that day, Tu pane vitae
accepto, facis rem mortis, and non horreseis? Nescis quam multa mala
proficiscantur and subeant ex deliciis. S. Chrysostom. homil. 27. in 1 Cor.
we must do every day by the material practice of virtues; we must verify all
our holy vows and promises; we must keep our hearts curiously; restrain our
passions powerfully; every day proceed in the mortification of our angers and
desires; in the love of God and of our neigh^^urs, and in the patient
toleration of all injuries which men offer, Ille crucem, plagas, alapassputa
aspera passus,
Ostendit tibi quae te tolerare decet.
Walafrid. Abbas de Pass.
and all the evil by which God will try us. Let not drunkenness enter, or evil
words go forth of that mouth through which our Lord himself has passed. Ora
ego servabo puris non sordida sacris.
Queis nostrum supero cum Patre, jungo genus.
Nazianz.
The Heathens used to be drunk at their Sacrifices; but by this sacrifice
Eucharistical it is intended we should be filled with the Spirit. (...).
If we have communicated worthily, we have given our selves to Christ; we have
given him all our liberty and our life, our bodies and our souls, our actions
and our passions, our affections and our faculties, what we are, and what we
have; and in exchange have received him; and we may say with St. Paul, I live:
but not I; Gal. 2.20.
But Christ lives in me. So that we must live no more unto the world, but unto
God; and having fed upon Manna, let us not long to return to Egypt to feed on
Garlic. For as when men have drank wine largely, the mind is free and the
heart at liberty from care: so when we have drank ^he blood of Christ, the cup
of our salvation, the chains of the old man are untied, Pros^^l^^ E^angelium
Ab^t in viam ^entium:
Q^i sanctae pacis o^^um elegerat,
Redit ad ollas carnium:
Regale sacerdotium
Ad c^^nis impropertium degenerat.
Sic Petrus Bl^sensis deplorat recidivationem ad carnis delicias.
Post S^. Communionem.

and we must forget our secular conversation] So St. Cyprian, S. Cyprian lib.
2. epist. 3. ad Caecilium.
: But the same precept is better given by Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15.
, But the love of Christ constrains u^, becuase we thus judge -- that he died
for all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but
unto him which died for them and rose again. Therefore if any man be in Christ,
he is a new creature: old things are past away, b^hold all things are become
new. He that has communicated; and does not afterward live by the measures of
that days duty, has but acted a scene of Religion but himself shall dearly
pay the p^ice of the pompous and solemn hypocrisy.

Remember that he is sick, who is not the better for the bread he eats; and if
thou do not by the aids of Christ whom thou have received subdue thy passion
and thy sin, thou have eaten the bread of idleness; S. Hier. in Pro. 31.27.
for so (says St Hierom) does every one, who when he has taken of the
Sacrific^ of the Lords body, does not persevere in good works, imitating that
in deed which he has celebrated in mystery. Let us take heed; for the Angels
are present in these mysteries to wait upon their Lord and ours: and it is a
matter of great caution which was said by Vincentius Ferrerius: Sermon. 4. de
corpore Christi.
The Angels that assist at this Sacrament, would kill every unworthy
Communicant; unless the Divine mercy and long sufferance did cause them to
forbear a speedy execution, that the blessed Sacrament might acquire its
intention, and become a favor of life unto us.

SECT. II. Acts of Virtues and Graces relative to the Mystery, to be used
before or at the Celebration of the Divine Sacrament.
I. The Address.
IT is well, O sweetest Savior Jesus, it is very well that thou art pleased to
be a daily Sacrifice for us, and to become our daily supersubstantial bread to
feed our souls. Certain it is, that we by our daily failings and the remaining
pollution of our sins, frequently sink down to the bottom of thy displeasure.
But do thou grant that being refreshed by the Sacrament and recreated by thy
grace, strengthened by thy spirit, and comforted with thy miraculous sweetness,
my heart and my affections may be lifted up on high.

II.
O grant that by thee my soul may be lifted up to thee, and from her self may
pass into thee, with a pure mind, with an unfeigned Religion, with an
unblameable faith and burning devotion, with filial piety and a profound
reverence. For thou art the true God, the word of life, the bright Image and
splendor of thy Fathers Glory, the reward of the Saints and the Lord of
Angels, the brightness of eternal light, the unspotted mirror of eternal
purity.

An Act of Love.
Thee alone O Lord my soul desires; thou art eternal sweetness in my soul. If
the perfume of thy ointment be sufficient to all the the world, what is the
refection of thy Table? If we live by every word proceeding out of thy mouth,
what felicity and joy is it to live upon thee the eternal Word, chewing thee by
faith, and digesting thee by love, and entertaining thee in our hearts for
ever? How shall not my bowels melt into thee the Sun of righteousness? How is
it that I do not forget all deliciousness besides thee?

A single pleasure, poor and empty, wearying and unsatisfying, has often made
me to forget thee. Now that thou art truly and effectively present with me, how
can any other pleasure in the world seem pleasant to me any more? I will forget
all the world, I will quit all the world to live on thee, if thou please O
dearest Savior: but do thou open thy ark and repositories of sweetness, and
fill my soul and all my desires, that there may be no room for any thing else.

Thou have called unto me to open my hand and thou would fill it: But I would
not open it; I held the world fast, and kept my hand shut, and would not let it
go. But do thou open it for me; not my hand only, but my mouth; not my mouth,
but my heart also.

An Act of Desire after Jesus.
O blessed Jesus, that have said, Prove. 8.
it is thy delight to be with the sons of men: Thou have made thy self the
companion of our journeys, the light of our ignorance, the remedy of our
infirmity. Dwell with me sweetest Savior, and delight in me. It is no small
thing I ask; O my God, can it ever be that my God should delight in me? That Is
too much O God; Grant that I may delight in thee, and do thou delight to pardon
me, to sanctify and to save me.

Grant that I may never offend thee, that I may never grieve thy Holy Spirit,
that I may not provoke the Angel of the everlasting Covenant to anger. But thou
delightest in the works of thy hand, in the graces of the Spirit, in thy own
excellencies and glories. Endue me with thy graces; fill me with thy
excellencies; let me communicate of thy spirit; and then enjoy these thy
delights with thy servant; for thou can not else delight in me. Thou art thy
own essential joy, and everlasting blessedness, and inseparable felicity: But
this thou have said, that thou delightest to be with the Sons of men, because
thou truly love us. Blessed be thy Name for ever and ever.

An Act of Thanksgiving.
O Blessed Savior Jesus, I adore the secrets of thy eternal wisdom, I admire
the mysteriousness of our salvation, and I love and praise and give all
possible thanks to thee the Author of our spiritual life, the Deliverer that
came out of Sion, the Redeemer of thy people, the spoiler of all spiritual
wickedness in heavenly places, the conqueror over sin and death, the triumpher
over Devils; thou have taken from our strongest enemies all their armor, and
divided the spoil: Grant that I may know nothing but thee, account all things
loss in comparison of thee, and endeavor to be made conformable to thee, in
the imitation of thy actions and obedience of thy Laws; in the fellowship of
thy sufferings, in the communion of thy graces, and participation of thy
glories; that beginning here to praise thy Name according as I can, I may
hereafter for ever rehearse and adore thy excellencies according to the
measures of glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Ejaculations and Meditations to be used at any time; but particularly after
the Consecration of the Symbols, when the holy Man that ministers is bringing
the Sacrament.
1. O holy Jesu, I behold thee stretched upon the Cross, with thy arms spread,
ready to embrace and receive all mankind into thy bosom.

2. I come Lord Jesus, I come; O take me to thee in the comprehensions of an
unalterable, of an everlasting love: for thou have opened thy heart as well as
thine arms, and have prepared a lodging place for me in the seat of love.

3. I see the Symbols, the holy bread, and the blessed cup; but I also
contemplate thy authority establishing these rites; I adore thy wisdom, who
have made these Mysteries like thy own infancy; I see thy self wrapped up in
swaddling clouts, and covered with a vail: I hear thy voice blessing these
Symbols, thy mercy reaching out my pardon, thy holy Spirit sanctifying my
spirit, thy blessed self making intercession for me at the eternal Altar in the
heavens.

4. Thy infinite arm of mercy is reached unto us, and our arm of faith reaches
unto thee: Blessed be Jesus, who will be joined unto his servants.

5. This is thy body, O blessed Savior Jesus, S. Ambr. Sermon. 44. de S. Latrone.
and this is thy blood; but these are not thy wounds. My Lord had the smart,
but we the ease; his were the sufferings, but ours the mercy: he felt the load
of stripes, but from thence a holy balm did flow upon us: He felt the thorns,
but we shall have the Crown: and after he had paid the price, we got the
purchase. Holy Jesus! Blessed be God.

6. I adore thy unspeakable goodness; I delight in thy unmeasurable mercy; I
rejoice in thy cross; I desire to know nothing but the Lord Jesus and him
crucified. 1 Cor. 1.23, 24.
O let the power of thy Cross prevail against all the powers of darkness: Col.
1.20.
let the wisdom of thy Cross make me wise unto salvation: let the peace of thy
Cross reconcile me to thy eternal Father, 1 Cor. 15.57.
and bring to me peace of Conscience: let the victory of thy Cross mortify all
my evil and corrupt affections: let the triumph of thy Cross lead me on to a
state of holiness, that I may sin no more, but in all things please thee and in
all things serve thee, and in all things glorify thee.

7. Great and infinite are thy glories; infinite and glorious are thy mercies;
who is like unto the Lord our God who dwells on high, and yet humbles
himself to behold the things that are in Heaven and earth? Heaven it self does
wholly minister to our salvation; God takes care of us, God loves us first. God
will not suffer us to perish; but imployes all his attributes for our good. The
Son of God dies for us: the holy Spirit descends upon us and teaches us: the
Angels minister to us: the Sacrament is our food; Christ is married to our
souls: and heaven it self is offered to us for our portion.

8. O God my God assist me now and ever, graciously and greatly: Grant that I
may not receive bread alone; for man cannot live by that; but that I may eat
Christ; that I may not search into the secret of nature, but inquire after the
miracles of grace. I do admire, I worship, and I love. Thou have overcome, O
Lord, thou have overcome; Ride on triumphantly because of thy words of truth
and peace; load my soul in this triumph as thy own purchase; thy love has
conquered, and I am thy servant for ever.

9. Thou will not dwell in a polluted house; make my soul clean, and do thou
consecrate it into a Temple, O thou great Bishop of our souls, by the
inhabitation of thy holy spirit of purity: Let not these teeth that break the
bread of Angels, ever grind the face of the poor; let not the hand of Judas be
with thee in the dish; let not the eyes which see the Lord, any more behold
vanity; let not the members of Christ ever become the members of a harlot, or
the ministers of unrighteousness.

10. I am nothing, I have nothing, I desire nothing but Jesus, and to be in
Jerusalem the holy City from above. Make haste O Lord, Behold my heart is
ready, my heart is ready: Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

When the holy Man that Ministers reaches the consecrated Bread, suppose thy
Lord entering into his Courts, and say,
Nempe amor in parva te jubet esse casa.
Lord I am not worthy thou should come under my roof; but speak the word
Lord, and thy servant shall be whole.

After receiving of the Bread, pray thus:
Blessed be the Name of our gracious God: Hosannah to the Son of David; Blessed
is he that comes in the name of our Lord. Hosannah in the highest: Thou O
blessed Savior Jesus have given me thy precious body to be the food of my
soul; and now O God, I humbly present to thee my body and soul, every member
and every faculty, every action and every passion. Do thou make them fit for
thy service: Give me an understanding to know thee, and wisdom like as thou
did to thy Apostles; ingenuity and simplicity of heart, like to that of
Nathanael; zeal and perfect repentance, like the return of Zacheus. Give me
eyes to see thee as thy Martyr Stephen had; an ear to hear thee as Mary, a hand
to touch thee as Thomas, a mouth with Peter to confess thee, an arm with Simeon
to embrace thee, feet to follow thee with thy Disciples, an heart open like
Lydia to entertain thee; that as I have given my members to sin and to
uncleanness, so I may henceforth walk in righteousness and holiness before thee
all the days of my life. Amen, Amen.

If there be any time more between the receiving the holy Body, and the blessed
Chalice, then add,
O immense goodness, unspeakable mercy; delightful refection, blessed
peace offering, effectual medicine of our souls; Holy Jesus, the food of elect
souls, celestial Manna, the bread that came down from heaven, sweetest
Savior; grant that my soul may relish this divine Nutriment with spiritual
ravishments and love great as the flames of Cherubims: and grant that what thou
have given me for the remission of my sins, may not ^y my fault become the
increase of them. Grant that in my heart I may so digest thee by a holy faith,
so convert thee into the unity of my spirit by a holy love, that being
conformed to the likeness of thy death and resurrection by the crucifying of
the old man, and the newness of a spiritual and a holy life I may be
incorporated as a sound and living member into the body of thy holy Church, a
member of that body whereof thou art head; that I may abide in thee, and bring
forth fruit in thee, and in the resurrection of the Just, my body of infirmity
being reformed by thy power may be configured to the similitude of thy glorious
body, and my soul received into a participation of the eternal Supper of the
Lamb; that where thou art, there I may be also, beholding thy face in glory O
blessed Savior and Redeemer Jesus, Amen.

When the holy Chalice is offered, attend devoutly to the blessing, and join in
heart with the words of the Minister; saying Amen.
I will receive the Cup of salvation and call upon the Name of our Lord.

After receiving of the holy Cup; pray thus:
It is finished: Blessed be the name of our gracious God; Blessing, glory,
praise and honor, love and obedience, dominion and thanksgiving be to him that
sits on the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever.

I bless and praise thy Name, O eternal Father, most merciful God, that thou
have vouchsafed to admit me to a participation of these dreadful and desirable
mysteries: unworthy though I am, yet thy love never fails: and though I too
often have repented of my repentances and fallen back into sin, yet thou never
repentest of thy loving kindness: Be pleased therefore now in this day of
mercy, when thou openest the treasures of heaven, and rainest Manna upon our
souls to refresh them when they are weary; of thy infinite goodness to grant
that this holy Communion may not be to me unto judgment and condemnation; but
it may be sweetness to my soul; health and safety in every temptation; joy and
peace in every trouble; lig^t and strength in every word and work, comfort and
defense in the hour of my death against all the oppositions of the spirits of
darkness; and grant that no unclean thing may be in me who have received thee
into my heart and soul.

II.
Thou dwell in every sanctified soul, she is the habitation of Sion, and
thou ta^est it for thine own; and thou have consecrated it to thy self by the
operation of glorious mysteries within her. O be pleased to receive my soul
presented to thee in this holy Communion for thy dwelling place, make it a
house of prayer and holy meditations, the seat of thy Spirit, the repository of
graces: reveal to me thy mysteries, and communicate to me thy gifts; and love
me with that love thou bear to the Sons of thy house: Thou have given me thy
Son, with him give me all things else which are needful to my body and soul in
order to thy glory, and my salvation, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

III. An act of Love and Eucharist to be added if there be time and opportunity.
O Lord Jesu Christ, Fountain of true and holy love, nothing is greater than
thy love, nothing is sweeter, nothing more holy: Thy love troubles none; but is
entertained by all that feel it with joy and exultation, and it is still more
desired, and is ever more desirable: Thy love O dearest Jesu gives liberty,
drives away fear, feels no labor, but suffers all; it eases the weary, and
strengthens the weak, it comforts them that mourn, and feeds the hungry. Thou
art the beginning and the end of thy own love; that thou may take occasion
to do us good, and by the methods of grace to bring us to glory. Thou give
occasion, and createst good things, and producest affections, and stirrest up
the appetite, and do satisfy all holy desires. Thou have made me, and fed
me, and blessed me, and preserved me, and sanctified me that I might love thee,
and thou would have me to love thee, that thou may love me for ever. O
give me a love to thee that I may love thee as well as ever any of thy servants
loved thee; according to that love which thou by the Sacrament of love workest
in thy secret ones.

Abraham excelled in faith, Job in patience, Isaac in fidelity, Jacob in
simplicity, Joseph in chastity, David in religion, Josiah in zeal, and Manasses
in repentance; but as yet thou had not communicated the Sacrament of love;
that grace was reserved till thou thy self should converse with man and teach
him love.

Thou have put upon our hearts the sweetest and easiest yoke of love; to enable
us to bear the burden of man and the burden of the Lord; give unto thy servant
such a love, that whatsoever in thy service may happen contrary to flesh and
blood, I may not feel it; that when I labor I may not be weary* when I am
despised I may not regard it; that adversity may be tolerable, and humility be
my sanctuary, and mortification of my passions the exercise of my days, and
the service of my God, the joy of my soul; that loss to me may be gain, so I
win Christ; and death it self the entrance of an eternal life, when I may live
with the Beloved, the joy of my soul, the light of my eyes, My God, and all
things, the blessed Savior of the world, my sweetest Redeemer Jesus. Amen.

An Eucharistical Hymn taken from the Prophecies of the Old Testament relating
to the blessed Sacrament.
Praise ye the Lord; I will praise the Lord with my whole heart; in the
Assembly of the upright, and in the Congregation.

He has made his wonderful works to be remembered, the Lord is gracious and
full of compassion: He has given meat unto them that fear him, he will ever be
mindful of his Covenant.

His bread shall be fat, and he shall yield royal dainties.

Binding his Foal unto the vine, and his Asses colt unto the choice vine: he
washed his garment in wine, and his clothes in the blood of grapes.

In this mountain shall the Lord of Hosts make unto all people a feast of fat
things, a feast of wine on the lees.

He will swallow up death in victory, and the Lord God will wipe away tears
from off all faces, and the rebuke of his people shall he take away from off
all the earth, for the Lord has spoken it.

And the Lord their God shall save them as the flock of his people, for how
great is his goodness, and how great is his beauty? Corn shall make the young
men cheerful, and new wine the virgins.

The Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his Temple, even the messenger of
the Covenant whom ye delight in.

He shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that
they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness.

O Israel return unto the Lord thy God: for thou have fallen by thine iniquity.
Take with you words, and turn to the Lord* saying,

Take away all iniquity and receive us graciously: so will we render the calves
of our lips: for in thee the Fatherless finds mercy.

The Lord has said, I will heal their backslidings, I will love them freely,
for mine anger is turned away.

They that dwell under his shadow shall return: they shall revive as the corn,
and blossom as the Vine; the memorial thereof shall be as the wine of Lebanon.

The poor shall eat and be satisfied; they shall praise the Lord that seek him;
your heart shall live for ever: for he has placed peace in our borders, and
fed us with the flower of wheat.

For from the rising of the Sun even unto the going down of the same, the Name
of the Lord shall be great among the Gentiles, and in every place Incense shall
be offered unto his Name and a pure offering: for his Name shall be great among
all Nations.

Who so is wise, he shall understand these things, and the prudent shall know
them: for the ways of the Lord are right, and the just shall walk in them: but
the transgressors shall fall therein.

Glory be to the Father, etc. A Prayer to be said after the Communion in behalf
of our souls and all Christian people.
1. O most merciful and gracious God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord
of glory; thou art the great lover of souls, and thou have given thy holy Son
to die for our salvation, to redeem us from sin, to destroy the work of the
Devil, and to present a Church to thee pure and spotless and undefiled; relying
upon thy goodness, trusting in thy promises, and having received my dearest
Lord into my soul, I humbly represent to thy divine Majesty the glorious
sacrifice which our dearest Jesus made of himself upon the Cross, and by a
never ceasing intercession now exhibites to thee in heaven in the office of an
eternal Priesthood; in behalf of all that have communicated this day in the
Divine Mysteries in all the Congregations of the Christian world; and in behalf
of all them that desire to communicate, and are hindered by sickness or
necessity, by fear or scruple, by censures Ecclesiastical, or the sentence of
their own consciences.

2. Give unto me O God and unto them a portion of all the good prayers which
are made in heaven and earth; the intercession of our Lord, and the
supplications of all thy servants; and unite us in the bands of the common
faith and a holy charity; that no interests or partialities, no sects or
opinions may keep us any longer in darkness and division.

3. Give thy blessing to all Christian Kings and Princes, all Republics and
Christian Governments; grant to them the Spirit of mercy and justice, prudence
and diligence; the favor of God and the love of their people; and grace and
blessing, that they may live at peace with thee and with one another;
remembering the command of their Lord and King, the serene and reconciling Jesus.

4. Give an Apostolical Spirit to all Ecclesiastical Prelates and Priests;
grant to them zeal of souls, wisdom to conduct their charges, purity to become
exemplar, that their labors and their lives may greatly promote the honor of
the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus. O grant unto thy flock to be fed with wise and
holy shepherds; men fearing God and hating covetousness; free from envy, and
full of charity; that being burning and shining lights, men beholding their
light may rejoice in that light and glorify thee our Father which art in
heaven.

5. Have mercy upon all states of men and women in the Christian Church, the
Governors and the governed, the rich and the poor, high and low; grant to every
of them in their several station to live with so much purity and faith,
simplicity and charity, justice and perfection, that thy will may be done in
Earth as it is in Heaven.

6. Relieve all oppressed Princes, defend and restore their rights, and
suppress all violent and warring spirits that unjustly disturb the peace of
Christendom: Relieve and comfort all Gentlemen that are fallen into poverty and
sad misfortunes: Comfort and support all that are sick, and deliver them from
all their sorrows, and all the powers of the enemy, and let the spirit of
comfort and patience, of holiness and resignation, descend upon all Christian
people whom thou have in any instance visited with thy rod: And be graciously
pleased to pity poor mankind; shorten the days of our trouble, and put an end
to the days of our sin, and let the Kingdom of our dearest Lord be set up in
every one of our hearts, and prevail mightily and for ever.

7. I humbly present to thy Divine Majesty this glorious Sacrifice which thy
servants this day have represented upon earth in behalf of my dearest
Relations, [Wife, Children, Husband, Parents, Friends, etc.] Grant unto them
whatsoever they want, or wisely and holily desire; keep them for ever in thy
fear and favor: grant that they may never sin against thee, never fall into
thy displeasure, never be separated from thy love and from thy presence; but
let their portion be in the blessing and in the service, in the love and in the
Kingdom of God for ever and ever.

8. Have mercy upon all strangers and aliens from the Kingdom of thy Son; let
the sweet sound of thy Gospel be heard in all the corners of the earth; let not
any soul, the work of thy own hands, the price of thy Sons blood, be any longer
reckoned in the portions of thy Enemy; but let them all become Christians; and
grant that all Christians may live according to the Laws of the holy Jesus,
without scandal and reproach, full of faith and full of charity.

9. Give thy grace speedily to all wicked persons, that they may repent and
live well, and be saved: To all good people give an increase of gifts and
holiness, and the grace of perseverance and Christian perfection: To all
Heretics and Schismatics grant the Spirit of humility and truth, charity and
obedience; and suffer none upon whom the Name of Christ is called to throw
themselves away, and fall into the portion of the intolerable burning.

10. For all mankind whom I have and whom I have not remembered, I humbly
represent the Sacrifice of thy eternal Son, his merits and obedience, his life
and death, his resurrection and ascension, his charity and intercession;
praying to thee in virtue of our glorious Savior, to grant unto us all the
graces of an excellent and perfect repentance, an irreconcilable hatred of all
sin, a great love of God, an exact imitation of the holiness of the ever
blessed Jesus, the spirit of devotion, conformable will and religious
affections, an Angelical purity and a Seraphical love; thankful hearts, and joy
in God; and let all things happen to us all in that order and disposition as
may promote thy greatest glory and our duty, our likeness to Christ and the
honor of his Kingdom. Even so Father let it be, because it is best, and
because thou love it should be so; bring it to a real and unalterable event
by the miracles of grace and mercy, and by the blood of the everlasting
Covenant poured forth in the day of the Lords love; whom I adore, and whom I
love, and desire that I may still more and more love, and love for ever. Amen,
Amen.

SECT. III. An Advice concerning him who only Communicates Spiritually.
THere are many persons well disposed by the measures of a holy life to
communicate frequently; but it may happen that they are unavoidably hindered.
Some have a timorous conscience, a fear, a pious fear, which is indeed
sometimes more pitiable than commendable. Others are advised by their spiritual
Guides to abstain for a time, that they may proceed in the virtue of repentance
further yet, before they partake of the Sacrament of love: and yet if they
should want the blessings and graces of the Communion, their remedy which is
intended them would be a real impediment. Some are scandalized and offended at
irremediable miscarriages in public Doctrines or Government, and cannot
readily overcome their prejudice, nor reconcile their consciences to a present
actual Communion. Some dare not receive it at the hands of a wicked Priest of
notorious evil life. Some can have it at no Priest at all, but are in a long
journey, or under a Persecution, or in a Country of a differing persuasion.
Some are sick; and some cannot have it every day, but every day desire it.

Such persons as these, if they prepare themselves with all the essential and
ornamental measures of address, and eanestly desire that they could actually
Communicate, they may place themselves upon their knees, and building an Altar
in their heart, celebrate the death of Christ, and in holy desire join with all
the Congregations of the Christian world, who that day celebrate the holy
Communion; and may serve their devotion by the former Prayers and actions
Eucharistical, changing only such circumstantial words which relate to the
actual participation: And then they may remember and make use of the
comfortable Doctrine of S. Austin; Sermon. 11. de verbi^ Domini.
[ It is one thing (says that learned Saint) to be born of the Spirit, and
another thing to be fed of the Spirit: As it is one thing to be born of the
flesh, which is when we are born of our mother; and another thing to be fed of
the flesh, which is done when she suckles her Infant by that nourishment which
is changed into food that he might eat and drink with pleasure, by which he was
born to life: when this is done without the actual and Sacramental
participation, it is called spiritual Manducation.] Concerning which I only add
the pious advice of a religious person; Bles. in reg. Tyron. Spirit. sect. 4.
n. 3.
Let every faithful soul be ready and desirous often to receive the holy
Eucharist to the glory of God: But if he cannot so often Communicate
Sacramentally as he desires, let him not be afflicted, but remain in perfect
resignation to the will of God, and dispose himself to a spiritual Communion:
For no man and no thing can hinder a well-disposed soul, but that by holy
desires she may, if she please, communicate every day.

To this nothing is necessary to be added, but that this way, is to be used
never but upon just necessity, and when it cannot be actual: not upon
peevishness and spiritual pride; not in the spirit of schism and fond opinions;
not in despite of our Brother, and contempt or condemnation of the holy
Congregations of the Lord; but with a living faith, and an actual charity, and
great humility, and with the Spirit of devotion; and that so much the more
intensly and fervently, by how much he is really troubled for the want of
actual participation in the Communion of Saints; and then, that is true which
S. Austin said, Tract. 25. and 26. in Johan.
Creed and manducasti; Believe and thou have eaten. Adora Jesum.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books to be sold by Tho. Basset, at his shop under St.
Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet.
SCintilla Altaris: Primitive Devotion in the Feasts and Fasts of the Church of
England. By Edw. Spark D. D. And also Devotions on the three grand Solemnities
last added to the Liturgy of the Church of England: viz. The Fifth of November.
viz. The Thirtieth of January. viz. The Twenty ninth of May.
By the same Author.

Officium Quotidianum: or, A Manual of Private Devotions: By the Most Reverend
Father in God Dr. William Laud, late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

The New Common Prayer, with choice Cuts in Copper newly engraven; Suited to
all the Feasts and Fasts of the Church of England throughout the year, in all
the Pocket-Volumes.

A Collection of all the Statutes in force from the year 1640. to this present
time, in a fair Character, Printed by His Majesty's Printers.

The Reader is also desired to take notice, That there is another Counterfeit
Impression, in a small Character, and very imperfect, wanting ten Acts now in
force; said to be Printed by Ja. Flesher, Hen. Twyford, and J. Streater, with
Mr. Manbee 's Name of Lincoln's Inn in the Title.


