TO PREVENT The Export of Bullion, FOR PURCHASING FLAX, HEMP, and LINEN.
ENgland and Ireland being under one Government, and lying so near to each
other, must partake in each others Fortune for ever. And the Land of Ireland,
being so very productive of Flax and Hemp, and the People's natural Inclination
tending to Spinning, would, with a small Encouragement, soon give Life to the
Linen Manufactory there; but at present, what to do with what they now make,
they are at at a loss, the overplus resting useless (being cheaper made in
other Parts, though not in England,) which is their only Hindrance to a more
vigorous Progress therein, and necessitates the Improvement of their Lands, and
their Labors in other Husbandry.

It being conceived to be the Interest of both Kingdoms to propagate the Linen
Manufactory in Ireland, I humbly propose, That all Flax, Hemp, and the
Manufactures thereof of the Growth of Ireland, may be Imported into England
Duty-Free, which will be of many Advantages to England, for,

1. That what Ireland produces, will abate the like Quantities from other
Nations, which now do greatly occasion the Balance of Trade to our prejudice,
for no one sort of Commodity does so exhaust our Treasure, as Flax, Hemp, and
Linen.

2. It will employ their Lands and Hands, in Productions and Manufactories
different from England.

3. They being of our selves do pursue the same Modes, all they can, in
Apparel, House, Furniture, etc. and would do more, might the Payments, they are
able to make, be accepted in England, whereby the better Quantities of English
Manufactures (Woollen not excepted,) would be uttered there; in lieu whereof
they are now constrained to produce such Commodities as will best vend among
themselves, and procure best Returns from Foreign Parts.

To set down the many Advantages it may be to both Nations would be too large
for so small a Treatise, and therefore I shall leave it here with the Wisdom of
our Legislators, to consider whether it is, or is not, the Advantage of
England, to encourage the Linen Manufactory, by the admitting the Import from
thence Custom-Free.

D. T.


