Hieragonisticon: OR, CORAH'S DOOM, BEING AN ANSWER To Two Letters of Enquiry
into the Grounds and Occasions of the Contempt of the Clergy and Religion.

In Vindication of the Contemned.

By way of Epistle to the Author of the said Enquiry.

Contra Rationem, nemo sobrius; contra Scripturam, nemo Christianus; contra
Ecclesiam, nemo pacificus. London, Printed by Tho. Milbourn, for Dorman Newman
at the Kings-Armes in the Poultry, 1672.

An Answer to two Letters of Enquiry into the Grounds and Occasions of the
Contempt of the Clergy and Religion, in Vindication of the Contemned: By way of
Epistle, etc.
SIR,
THe Reformed Religion and Clergy (England's Glory) being by you betrayed to
Contempt, under pretense of an amicable Enquiry into the Grounds and Occasions
of it; (which I here offer to make good) I cannot conceive, how I may better
manage my vouched Vindication of both, then,

1. By Vnriddling the mystery of your Inquest to the Laity; and

2. By answering to your Process formed in it, against Religion and Clergy.

This therefore is the method which I will observe in the present Contest,
which, had I reckoned it -- Certamen de Oleastro, a debate about matters of no
greater consequence, than are, Achilles's Toes, the Graecian's Boots, or
Neapolitan Chestnuts, etc. I had never, I assure you, contrasted you in, to
your, the worlds, or my own trouble.

As touching the First General, viz. the Vnriddling of the Mystery, and
detecting of the stratagem, project, and imposture of your Inquisition; and
that in order to the prepossessing and guarding of the Laity against it:

This, Sir, I will endeavor by way of distinct gradual paragraphs, commenced,
not (a Nannaco) from Adam, or the Prae-adamites; nor yet from your great Mormo
Belshazzar; but from the very Genealogy of the Christian Religion, by you
impeached; thence proceeding ab Equis ad Asinos, till in fine, Sphinx do upon
the matter become his own Oedipus; and your Riddle (whether one in the Mystery
of Iniquity, or not, the Reader shall be Judge) as legible, as that plain
truth, as great a one as any that occurrs throughout your whole Rhapsody,
namely, Let. 2. page 10
that there is a near relation between Atheism, and Contempt of the Clergy,
wherein, let me tell you, you have in a manner prophesied your own doom, as
Caiaphas did our Savior's, unawares.

First then, Sir,

The Christian Faith, or Religion, is, That which God the Father, (the original
Author of Truth as well as Being) has delivered to his Son; his Son, to his
Apostles; his Apostles, to his Church; the primitive, to succeeding Churches;
and all, to their respective Members and Matriculates: This is a prescript of
the learned Apologist, and Defender of the Faith, that ever the Church
enjoyed; namely, the great Tertullian; and with me, a grand piece of Orthodoxy.

Again Sir,

This Religion thus conveyed from God the Father, by his Son, to his Apostles,
and by the intermediation of both, to his Church; has been in all the
successive Ages thereof, from the Apostles downwards. to this present time; and
will be to the end of the world, published, preached, and propagated, by a
constituted Hierarchy, or continual Series of persons of holy Order and Office,
duly authorized and qualified thereunto; styled the Lights of the World, the
Stewards of Divine Mysteries, the Ambassadors of Christ, the Pastors,
Teachers, Guides, Angels, and Overseers of the Church: For this, Sir, besides
its congruity to the principles of general Equity, I would produce
Scripture-Arguments, but that I fear lest they might share in the common lot of
sacred Promises, Precepts, Narratives, etc. by your over-daring Wit
facetiously abused. -- sacra sacris! Hence Sir it follows,

Thirdly,

There cannot be a more compendious method or stratagem devised, for
propagating of any sinister innovation or revolution, Pagan or Papal, in matter
of Religion; and the most Atheistick, Idolatrous, loose licentious principles
and practices whatsoever, even to an universal re-paganizing of a Nation; than
either by utterly subverting of an Orthodox Clergy therein, or else by
rendering it useless and unserviceable: For if either the Persons of those
Sacred Stewards, Teachers, Guides, and Supervisers, be removed; or (which is
all one as to use and serviceableness in the Church) their authority rebated
and infringed; those Lights, either quite exstinct, or at leastwise eclipsed;
those sacred Pipes cut or stopped, etc. what other can the sequel be, then gross
Ignorance? And what may not be obtruded upon an Ignorant Laity, of all that the
arbitrary Laws and lusts of their new Masters, (to whose service and blind
obedience they are now most humbly envassal'd) shall impose? their swallow
being sufficiently prepared by this time, not for their Gnats only (Tush^
(that is ordinary with the blind to a proverb) but for their Camel! -- the Beast
himself! for a nauseous deadly Crambe! a blasted Nehushtan! for Stocks, Stones,
Idols, Images, and what you will, even to -- an unknown God! which undoubtedly
is the reason why Satan and his Accomplices, have in most of the Catastrophes
that have befallen the Church, still commenced the tragedy from the Ministry,
(witness both history and experience) addressing all their power and policy, to
an utter, either extirpation, or exauctoration of the same. This, Sir, I have
likewise adopted, into my Creed, as following consequentially from the former.

Fourthly,

The most artificial and expedite way, either to destroy the Clergy, or (which
is much the same) to render it useless and unserviceable to the Church; as this
is, to destroy Religion; is to expose and betray it, to misprision and Contempt
in the Laity. This, Sir, I take to be as high a strain of Politics, as ever
Socinian, Loyolite, or Jesuited Pandor throughout the world could write himself
master of; and indeed, a very sacra anchora in the Romish Sea; for all other
artifices failing, Enchantments, Arguments, Anathemaes, Menaces, Massacres,
Altar-Coals; the Learned Quill, the Charming Cup, the sacred Key, the thirsty
Sword, etc. inter sacrum and saxum -- Ahab's prejudice will do the business:
The Jesuite's Powder Plot, An. Dom. 88. was a shrewd stratagem, as being
levelled at the Community, in Ruler and Representative (where each unite stands
for thousands) universally devoted to a tout a coup, such an epitomized stroke
upon the English, as the enraged Caligula imprecated to his offending Romans,
without the trouble of a repetition: But now those Ghostly Politicians are
taught by experience, that sacred enterprises never luck more prosperously,
then when managed surdo verbere; and that the Serpent is far more serviceable
in the cause, then the Dragon; as acting with less noise, and greater
execution: Once thoroughly leaven an ungovernable Laity with contempt, and
prejudice against their Clergy, and what the consequents hereof might prove,
may be perceived without a prospective-glass; this active ferment will
doubtless by degrees foment the whole mass of Blood and Spirit, with which it
once incorporates, to an utter rejection of that, which it ought (if called
for) to be expended in defense of; and thus the contemner, poor wretch! (which
is the very accent of his misery) will prove felo de se, a self-aggressor, like
Chorah -- Clergy-contempt in the Laity, being like to that granum thuris in
calice vini, amongst the Jews, an intoxicating Cup propin'd at the very
instant of execution, to the end that the Malefactor might be the less sensible
of his fatal exit: the Application is easy. This paragraph, Sir, I do likewise
hold for Canonical.

Fifthly,

All designs of innovation and imposture whatsoever, in Church or state, are
most effectually both insinuated and propagated under some specious pretense
and color of vouched friendship, to that very interest which is by the
Projector or Impostor predestined to ruin; as enquiry into grievances or
enormities, Civil or Ecclesiastic, under color of redress, as ignorance (for
instance) or poverty in the Clergy; and contempt hereupon conceived in the
Laity; or the like: The most notorious Triumvirate that were ever Co-actors in
the same bloody Tragedy, are known to have successively prologued their
respective parts and interludes, with some specious Salute; Herod, his cruelty,
with a free-will-offer of worship; as if he meant that his devotion should
hallow his design: Judas, his treachery, with a hail Master; accoasting our
Savior with a Kiss, whilst he betrayed him to the spear: Pilate, his
injustice, with an innocent ceremony; the foulest of facts, with clean washen
hands. And thus Sir, the Trade began, which has been ever since indefatigably
prosecuted, and that to a mavelous emprovement in your modern Church-Sophies,
as though co-inspired from the same Tripus with their Predecessors: an Ephod,
and a Teraphim! the Devil in Samuel's Mantle! an Angel of light! the Wolf in
Sheep's Clothing! a Herodian Votary! an Atheist or Loyolite incognito! Ghostly
Mascaradoes! Our Savior in his Interest, Truth, Clergy, etc. (as formerly in
his Person,) re-betrayed with a Kiss! all those are matters a la mode in this
Generation, as if it were a kin to the Sileni, a most complaisant sort of
People; who (as I have read) kill, as Courtiers greet, with huggs and embraces:
And to give the Devil his due, of all persons in the World, none such absolute
masters of this saculty, as the Pope's Creatures, Romish Agents, Emissaries,
Seminaries, Pandors, Proctors, Parasites, Minions, and mercenary Hackneyes; the
Wisdom of that holy Court having observed, an unsafe exposal of their other
methods to Letts, or Laws, which this innocent indiscernable one is free from:
and what their language in reference to the case in hand may be, is easily
conjecturable; -- If ever we compass our grand propagating design, amongst the
English; and in order thereunto, that of fomenting popular contempt and
prejudices against their Clergy, it must necessarily be managed with all the
fair friendlike, smooth, plausible pretenses, cajolling insinuations, and
dextrous compliances imaginable; they being a People whom of all others, we may
sooner humble-Servant, then all-arm to our side; be it therefore by all means
resolved, that we appear their seeming friends, till we render them their own
Real Enemies, in plucking out their own Eyes, and pulling down of the house
upon themselves, though to the eternal ruin of the whole. And, Sir, amongst
those, (which I suppose you are not ignorant of) the deztrous Praevaricator and
Aequivocator, is still esteemed the lucrous Python, and Demetrius; by means of
those all-saving shifts of mental reserves and Equivocations, and through an
ambidextrous managery thereof, an officious slandering, maligning, and
traducing, not of a foreign, but even of their own Religion; yea, renouncing,
impugning, nay, abjuring of it (possibly by authority from St. Peter's -- I
know not the Man, etc.) all authenticated by that Canon which makes the end to
specify the means; that is, to justify the most horrid and execrable,
provided they may but (as the gainful Damsel, to her Master) obstetricate to
the interests of the sacred Corban; all which, I would make out here, but that
I am confined to a few sheets: I am sure my narrative is truth, however matter
of fact be apocryphal; as also the next ensuing: And now -- in te convertitur
ferrum, O Rutili.

Sixthly and lastly, to make gradual application of the whole,

Such a Pagan-Papal project and design, Sir, as is above specified, namely, of
propagating and promoting in England, atheism, Libertinisme, Profaneness, and
loose licentious principles and practices; seems to be couched and carried on,
in and by your Letters of Enquiry, etc. Sir, Paganism and Papisme in matter of
imposture and design, I confound, as being coincident in unitertio: what more
ordinary with Romish Seminaries, then to deal by their Proselytes, as their
Father-Tempter did (in his very last assault) by our Savior? namely, to carry
them from the Temple, to the Mountain? expecting that worshipful compliance in
the latter, which they know, they cannot hope for in the former: an immediate
remove from any bewedded persuasion, were matter of invincible difficulty,
Nullus fit transitus ab extremo ad extremum, nisi per intermedium; therefore
they first alienate from a true Church, before they once offer to matriculate
into their own; first Re-paganize, and then Re-baptize with Holy Water; person
or people being never so well prepared to swallow their Camel, as when first
resolved into their materia prima of pure naturals; the pre-atheized Popeling
ever proving the most Votive Vassal of the Triple Crown: (...), then, your
fundamental Ax, Sir, seems to be laid to the very root, with a raze it -- even
to the foundation, both ministerial (the Clergy) and scriptural, (Religion) and
in both, the personal (the Messiah) and in all God himself! and could you
string the Rainbow, and dispatch out of it, the most virulent arrow that ever
Satan fledged, through all the sub-sphears into the Empyrean it self, what
could you do more? Again, This design, Sir, you advance and promote by
exposing the Clergy and Religion to popular contempt; the very ready way I
confess! there being a near relation (by your own tongue-trip-testimony)
between atheism and contempt of the Clergy; this you endeavor; first, by
representing the Clergy, to the Laity, as the most insignificant, ridiculous,
despicable order of all the Sons of the first Adam, or Pretenders to the
second; defaming, vilifying, reproaching, maligning, traducing, slandering,
deriding, mocking and flouting of them -- ex cathedra, from off the seat of the
scornful, alias, that of the Beast: Secondly, by turning Divinity into drollery
(the peccant humor of the times) as if you (and a Duumvirate more, whom I
could name, for -- res ad triarios) meant, since you can nor charm, nor awe,
dispute, nor live it down, to evaporate it in a scoff! making amends to lame
polemicks, with smart Ironicks, scornful invectives, facetious sarcasmes and
satyricisme (Ishmael's Sword, That of the Spirit failing you) the cardinal
points of your mock- Religion; insomuch, that it has been said (by some in my
hearing) that such a man alone, (meaning the Author of the Contempt, etc.) was
able to Jeer all Religion quite out of the World; (to your commendation Sir!)
and of what influence such Wildfire as this is, may have upon a pre-disposed
Laity (which is you know titio ad ignem) is of easy conjecture: Lastly, Sir,
This contempt of the Clergy and Religion, you stily insinuate into, and foment
in the Laity, under color and pretense of a friendly Enquiry into the grounds
and occasions of it; giving the world (till better acquainted with you) to
hope, that you mean no other (God knows your heart, not you) then as a
fast-friend to both parties, to redress the same, if Just, in the Clergy; or if
Unjust, in the Laity; whereas on the contrary, Sir, to the common damage of
both, having prefaced your Inquisition, as Pilate did his, with washen hands,
you have joined issues with him in the sequel; of Inquisitor, turning Accuser
of the brethren; as if in coining of your facetious Religion, you had been
prompted and inspired, by that Gentleman 's Ghost; like as the Trent-Councel
was in theirs, by the Pope's ('it is a known story) posted thither from Rome in a
Cloak-Bagg; or as (a senior Impostor) Mahomet was in his, by his Hellish Monk.

I deny not, Sir, but that there are scattered here and there throughout your
Letters, several cunning retrieves and healing Expressions, (like, you know
whose, as it were's, and as I may say soes) which some Myops that cannot see
beyond the Channel, may happily reckon salve sufficient in the case; but latet
anguis, should your asseverations countervail a peremptory flat remonstrance in
terminis, against Pope and Popery, and that accented with all the high
rhetorical (alias Hectorical) amplifications of oathing, swearing, and cursing,
that -- you know not the Beast; all this is no more Segnior, (which I hope your
Reader will make a right use of) then what the most devout Popeling that ever
trudged on bare Ten-toes to kiss his Paw, is pro re nata, (especially when the
grand propagating work is concerned) tolerated, authorized, yea obliged to do;
and yet by a certain mysterious kind of antiperistasis remain good Catholic
still; such an universal help at maw, is that canonical salvo of Equivocation
and mental reserves; all Justifyable by that odd maxim in the Civil Law,
adopted into their Canon for fundamental, -- authoritas Majorum in illicitis
excusat, of which I Will palate our Reader with one little gusto for all, in the
business of Confession, and that from an ingenuous Papist himself; (Catalina,
Cethegum!) namely, the Learned Divinity-Reader in Salmantica, Francisco a
Victoria, whose words are these in the name of all the Romish Doctors, (I would
quote, book and page, but that it is out of fashion) Sed quid faciet Confessor,
cum interrogatur de peccato, etc. What shall a Confessor do (says he) if he
be asked of a sin that he has heard in confession? may he say, that he knows
not of it? I answer, according to all our Doctors, that he may: But what if he
be compelled to swear? I say that he may and ought to swear, that he knows it
not, in that it is understood, that he knows it not besides confession; and so
he swears true: But suppose, that the Judge or Prelate, shall maliciously
require of him upon his oath, whether he know it in confession, or no? I answer
that a man thus urged, may still swear that he knows it not in confession; in
that it is understood, that he knows it not to reveal it, or so as that he may
tell. And thus much of their matter of confession,and that in another concern
too; test and taste sufficient of what we may make of them in their other
methods and mysteries; the impartial be Judge: so then, should I hear confess
you, Sir, Lupum auribus! I see what I must trust to; till such time as the
Heavens bless us with a witty Convict, tuning the Instrument ad canendam
palinodiam; that is plainly, Sir, till you exchange your seat of the scornful,
for a stool of repentance; and give the world as public testimony and
assurance, of your awful respects, honor and veneration for both Clergy and
Religion for the future, as you have already, of Contempt.

And what if I suppose, Sir, (what I will not yield) that you had no formal
intent, or the least design in the world to betray either Clergy and Religion
to Contempt, on the one side; or the Laity to Atheism, Popery, or the like, on
the other? and that all the mischief and execution committed or committible by
either edge of Ishonael's sword, were mere chance-medley; finis openis, non
operantis; yet this being the immediate, direct, concurrent tendency of both
your Letters, as may appear from the general fram, scope, series, tenor and
contexure of the whole (for your speech bewrays you Segnior) your self, the
world, yea very Nature may Justify the Church of England, in guarding and
securing her self, both in her Clergy and Laity, (and in both, her endeared
Religion) against the pernicious influences and growing mischiefs of your
Pestilent Rhapsody ((...)) namely, those two near correlates (by your own
confession) the contempt of the one; and atheism, etc. in the other; and what
dismal train those may carry with them, ut Caecias, nubes; as also in
animadverting upon you as no better, then Heathen or Heretic, without, (what
as your friend I advise you at your first return from Devonshire) a public
recantation.

And thus, Sir, I have made the way to my text (as your contemned Clergy use to
do by theirs,) as smooth and plain as any thing, with a Preface, (as you may
remember) not from Adam, but from Alpha, the Ancient of days himself, though
my business in part (your doom) ly at the farther end, (almost the very last
verses) of all the Bible; so that it now remains, that I turn allegata into
probata, and make good what I have here charged your Letters withal; that I
may not seem to speak without-book.

The first thing then that offers it self in your Letters, Sir, is the very
theme and title thereof, viz. The Grounds and Occasions of the Contempt of the
Clergy and Religion enquired into: Being then that Religion and Clergy (an
individual Conjugate in themselves, as well as in your Epistles) is the
subject matter of your Inquest; being that a previous contempt of both de facto
is by you (but too truly) supposed; and the redress hereof de futuro by you
pretended; It will necessarily follow, that if instead of redressing of this
contempt, either by removing (to your power) the grounds and occasions of it,
if Just and deserved, in the Clergy; or by removing it, if unjust and
undeserved, in the Laity; your Letters administer false and unrighteous grounds
and occasions of additional contempt, etc. If so (I say); it will necessarily
follow, that the project and design of your Enquiry can be nothing less,
nothing else, then that of propagating Atheism, etc. in the Laity, by means of
a confirmed unjust Contempt of their Clergy, (between which, there is such a
near relation, by your own confession) and that (else your politics were as
faulty as your cause) under the disguise of a friendly pretense: It is a grand
maxim in Law (but only with a Civilian) non defendere videtur qui latitat;
very silence or nonappearance for the accused etc. much more publication
without vindication (as in the present case) is an implicit charge; so that
the very negative, your non-vindicating of Religion and Clergy from that
Contempt which you both (too truly) presuppose, and divulge, is an indirect
proscription and exposal of both, to a further degree and confirmation of it;
your Inquisition, interpretative (though there were no express) accusation! and
hence, according to this rule, the properest paraphrase upon your Text (and I
dare say, most congruous to the original) must be this: -- The Grounds and
Occasions of the Contempt and Contemptibility both of the Clergy ( Person and
Function) and of Religion, under Color of Friendly Enquiry into the same, and
pretense of Redress of the present G^^tempt, but with a real intent of
fomenting and propagating a further and firmer Prejudice, and (what has a near
relation thereunto) Atheism, etc. alleged or administered, and in perpetuam
rei memoriam published to the world, by Oath, ex officio, etc. And now -- ex
ungue Leonem!

But Sir (to subsume a fortiori) in stead of Vindication of Religion and
Clergy, or the pretended redress of popular contempt of both (by you both
supposed and divulged) you have exposed and betrayed both, to, (what you have
fowly bewrayed in your self), accumulative prejudice, and a confirmed contempt;
and in order to the more effectual propagation hereof, and your Atheistick,
Antichristian design herein, in a a most defamatory, reproachful and
blasphemous manner traduced and abused the doctrinal foundation of both, viz.
the Holy Scriptures, to the infringing and subverting (what you can) the sacred
authority (and consequently, the necessity and utility) of the same, and
therein the Christian Faith founded thereupon; for which you must be
accountable.

As touching your first and chief assault, Sir, This being made (as is said)
upon the doctrinal foundation of both Religion and Clergy, the Holy Scriptures,
and in them the personal, God and his Christ, or rather this complex, God in
Christ (if those phrases may not be offensive to you) and thus at once,
antiscriptural, antichristian, atheistical; I Judge it necessary that I first
by way of defense, prepossess the Reader against it; and then for conviction,
in a few instances amongst many, a little exemplify it.

As for the former, I cannot better prepossess the Reader, nor counter-work
you, then by asserting from the very principles of Reason (the only
significant topic in this case) the authority by you debased and disparaged,
namely, That of the Holy Scriptures, which I will briefly perform in these few
ensuing paragraphs, wherein I consult not so much his judgment, as his memory;
the reality, as the rationality of his Faith; as being rather prompter hereof,
then founder; hoping that I have not herein to do with more Atheists, then one;
nor fearing in defense of such a rational interest, to encounter them all.

First then, Sir,

That there is an One only true and living God; that to this God, is due from
the Creature, all possible worship and service; that upon the right performance
of this worship, depends all true and certain happiness; are all truths
demonstrable from principles of common Reason; (else I am willing to take shame
for my assertion) viz. That of a true Deity, partly from natural Conscience, as
being in its latitude, both Conservatory of common connate notions and
principles (of which, that of a Deity, divine worship, and concomitant Reward,
are the chief) the very Light and Law of nature; and also witness and judge, by
way of domestic process in matters of fact vicious or virtuous, accusing or
excusing according to the tenor of that Law; hence called by Gregory
Nazianzen, the Souls-paedagogess (which would you become tractable disciple to,
I should not yet despair of you, for none such ever died Atheist or Infidel)
and by Basile the Great, a natural Judicatory, most certainly authorized from a
supreme Law, and Lawgiver, who can be no other than the true God, whose
authentic and righteous Will is therein exemplified: Partly again, by rational
collection, or conclusion of one absolute first Cause and Principle from
obvious effects; that being the production of the Creatures, can neither be
infinite, that is, of one by another, the present by a former, those again by a
former, and so still on, (far beyond Adam, and the Prae-adamites) even in
infinitum, by way of a direct unbounded procession: nor yet Circular; that is,
of a second, by a first; a third, by a second; another, by that; and so round
to the first again, producing and reproducing each other, by way of continual
circulation; (both those ways being palpably inconsistent, absurd, and
irrational) it must of necessity be Original, proceeding from one only
universal, supreme, absolute, and independent Being, the Original Author of all
things, which is no other then Jehovah, the only true God. Deny this, Sir, and
unman your self.

Again, that of Religious Worship, is evicted from the former; the very same
principle convincing of the truth of a Godhead, and of Religious Worship due
from Man, as natural Tribute and Homage to this God, as being not only a
superexcellent nature in Himself; but absolute, and sovereign Proprietary in,
and Benefactor to his Creature, more especially Man, his Vsufructuary for life
and being: Himself independent upon any thing; all things necessary dependants
upon him! Insomuch, that there was never person or people in the world, who did
not always Join with their sense and conscience of a Deity, Religious and
devotional acknowledgments; witness sacred Rituals, Temples, Altars,
Sacrifices, Festivals, etc. amongst the most Barbarous of Nations; and thus it
is observable, that the Gentiles are not taxed by their Doctor in his Letter to
the Old Romans, with a total neglect of Worship, but with defect in the manner
of it; as being unsuitable and incongruous to the Divine Nature and Will.
Lastly, that of a certain Reward and Happiness attending upon the due
performance of this Worship, (as opposite misery upon the neglect of it) is no
less congruous to the Principles of Natural Reason, than either of the former;
as being convincingly manifest, partly from the infinite goodness and
righteousness of God, being equally disposed to reward Virtue, and punish Vice;
partly from the intrinseck Equity and Justice of the thing it self.

In fine then, Sir,

The truth of a Godhead, Religious Worship due to this God; true Happiness and
Reward depending upon this Worship, are all Articles of a very Heathen's Creed,
as well as of that of a Christian; as being the dictates of Nature, as well as
of Scripture; (Read by the Light of Sun, Moon, and Stars;) common principles of
Reason, as well as Articles of Faith; perspicuous to the World in general, in
common with that impropriated part of it, the Church; and therefore in the
business of Religion, supposed as general Preliminaries, and (as it is in all
other Arts and Sciences) confessed Principles; for he that comes unto God, (as
Candidate in this Sacred Profession) must believe that God is, and that he is a
Rewarder of them that diligently seek him: A Godhead! Religion! Concomitant
Reward and Happiness! Common-Creed! wherein all Heathens, and Pagans, Jews,
Mahometans, etc. (whose several Testimonies I must not here insert) as well as
Christians, universally throughout the world, are Joint Confessors, save here
and there a Protagoras, Diagoras, Lucian, the Author of the Contempt of the
Clergy, etc. and such like Desperadoes, who yet never durst, out of a Fever,
expressly deny any of all the Three, a GOD, his WORSHIP, or a FVTVRE STATE: or
suppose they live the Pope's Life, questioning what they dare not, cannot deny;
( Clement the Seventh is the Man I mean) his Three Dying-Resolves, will be
their certain, though too late Conviction, viz. Whether there be a God? Whether
the Soul be Immortal? Whether there be a Heaven and Hell?

Again, Sir,

That in order to the due knowledge of this God, the right and acceptable
performance of this worship, and the discovery and attainment of this
happiness, a special Revelation of the Divine Mind and Will, and Rule of Faith
and Life, is to the creature absolutely necessary; that a scriptural Rule and
Revelation, is most convenient; and that to afford the creature such a Rule is
most congruous to the sacred nature and honor of God; are all rational truths
as well as the former: For, Sir, as touching the necessity of such a Rule and
Revelation; although a person might by the conduct of the Light and Law of
Nature, emproved by the accessory help of the works of Nature, discover and
learn, That there is a God, yea, and in some degree, what He is both in his
negative Attributes, independency, infinity, immutability, etc. and in his
affirmative-goodness, wisdom, power, etc. yea, and those in their very
eminencies, -- omnisciency, omnipotency, etc. and the like, as the necessary
and essential properties of the first Cause: Likewise, that there is religious
worship due to this God; yea, and that he ought to be worshipped, (...), in a
way and manner most acceptable to himself: Lastly, that reward and happiness
attends and depends upon that Worship; yea and in some respect, what objective
happiness and chief good is, viz. God himself, ( qui omnis beatitudinis,
fastigium, meta, finis, as said the Divine Plato, like as his Master Socrates,
the former) the very sum, adequate measure and boundary of all real
blessedness: yet notwithstanding all this; What Unity of Essence in Trinity of
Persons is; One, in Three, without division! Three, in One, without confusion!
God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, all one individual Spirit;
the proper object of divine Worship: What the right and acceptable manner of
performing that Worship: Wherein that true formal happiness consists, which
attends thereupon; and by what means, attainble, etc. Those, Sir, believe it,
are not at all discoverable by that common Light, by reason of that infinite
disproportion which is between such a defective medium and the object; and
hence, in the Academy, the Lyceum, the Stoa, and other Athenian Phrontisteries,
would have found no more credit, then the doctrine usually preached for a
hundred years last past in the Church of England has in your books --
Follies! Let. 1. page 59.
else what meant the Heathenish polytheisme, and great Armado of mock-Deities
(alias Mortals bewrayed by the Tombs they had, as well as Temples) thirty
thousand strong! as it is in Hesiod's muster-roll copied by St. Augustine; of
whom three thousand amongst the very Graecians as it is in Homer's (whose
(...), if with you as Canonical, as belike his Iliades and Odysses are, then we
know at once, what is your Creed, your Bible, and Practice of Piety) six
thousand amongst the Romans, as it is in Varro's, more Gods then there are of
Contemned Clergy all England over; what meant their monstrous Idolatries?
their two hundred eighty eight Beatitudes (recounted by the learned Roman now
mentioned)? and such like stuff (of which to speak with the Father, me piget
quod illos non puduit) and that not amongst the ruder Plebeians only, but even
persons of more defecated intellectuals, their polished Sophies, Ingeniosoes,
Vertuosoes, and the most refined of all Nations and professions; the Egyptian
Priests, the Persian Magi, the wisest Grecian Philosophers, Stoics,
Peripateticks, Platonicks, etc. the most inquisitive Roman Naturalists, the
Grecian and Roman both Orators and Poets, even the very Princes in either
Faculty; Demosthenes and Tully in the one, and in the other (which your Reader
may chance to wonder at) Protestant-Homer, Let. 2. page 43 45, 46.
and (which is yet stranger) Virgil the (undoubted) Nonconformist, had he but
held out to Bartholomew the Famous; the only persons of either Persuasion, I
assure you, that I ever read or dreamed of, to have come from Rome or Athens:
What (I say) can the Pagan Mock-deities, Idolatries, and imaginary Beatitudes
in the very judgment of the most strenuous Advocates of pure Naturals, portend
other, then an utter Insufficiency of natural light, for the ends and purposes
above specified; namely, the administering of the due Knowledge of the True God,
True Worship, and True Happiness? Therefore a New Light, or supernatural Rule
and Revelation, is absolutely necessary: Again, Sir, the expediency of a
scriptural or written Rule, may appear from a threefold danger and
inconveniency which an unwritten one is liable to; namely, that of oblivion and
forgetfulness; that of depravation and corruption, by unjust additions,
detractions, falsifications, and forgery; and lastly, that of utter destruction
and suppression; the first, through the treachery of Humane memory; the two
last, through the implacable enmity of Satan, and his Accomplices against God,
his Truth and Church: From all which, a written Rule and Revelation is more
secure, as being a public Record and Repertory, whereunto recourse may be had
upon all occasions, as well for relief to Memory, as for trial, or redress of
questioned and impeached Truth; hence called by St. Peter, a surer word of
Prophecy, than Vocal or Unwritten; to wit, not by a certainty (...) of
veracity, for all Divine Revelation is equally sure in this sense, because
equally true, but (...) of security, upon the accounts mentioned: True it is,
God was pleased to instruct his Church for the first Two thousand years, and
upwards, only viva voce, by a vocal Revelation of his Mind and Will (for ought
certainly known to the contrary;) but then, Sir, the constitution of the
Church, was, during that long Era, only domestical, confined within the Line
and Limits of particular Families, which compared with the longaevity, and
great age of the Aborigines of the World, gives us plainly to understand, that
Sacred Truth might have been easily (...) by tradition from father to son,
conveyed and preserved all that time, pure, entire, and incorrupt, free from
the abovenamed Inconveniences; yea, one single Trinmvirate might have
performed this, for the whole Two thousand years mentioned; namely, Adam,
Methuselah, and Shem, Methuselah living above Two hundred years with Adam; and
Shem, (who lived to the Fiftieth of Isaack's Age, which was about the Two
thousandth, one hundredth, and Fiftieth of the Age of the World) about a
hundred with Methuselah: But now, being that the Church-Line has been since
far extended, her constitution advancing from Domestical, to National; and from
That, to Oecumenick, and Universal, (Japhet persuaded to co-tabernacle with
Shem;) and moreover the Life of Man very much since curtailed, being contracted
by Sacred Horoscope, to seventy, or at most, eighty years; yea, very rarely
protracted to that; insomuch, that many successive Sages of the Church, would
not suffice to perform that now, which that one single ternion did before; and
thus the case infinitely altered: It follows, that for a preventive expedient
against the Threefold Inconveniency above-specified; namely, oblivion,
corruption, and suppression; a scriptural and written Rule is most Convenient.
And lastly, that it is most congruous to the Nature and Honor of GOD, to
indulge his Creatures, such a Revelation, Rule, and Directory; is most
convincingly manifest from his own infinite Perfections partly, and partly from
the concerns of his Glory and Honor in his own Worship being rightly
performed, and his Creature's Happiness being fully secured; for, to urge but
one argument in this one piece of Sacred Economy (which is Nemesius's
concerning a Divine Providence in general) should not God, in condescension to
his Creatures necessity and convenience mentioned, as well as in compliance
with the Interest of his own Honor therein concerned, afford him such a
Revelation of his Mind, and Will, and Rule of Faith and Life; this
non-indulgence, or refusal, must necessarily proceed, either from want of
Wisdom, or of will, or of power and sufficiency in God; as if either he were
not Wise enough, to understand how to gratify his Creature, or indeed consult
his own interest herein; or not Good, Gracious, and Kind enough to his
Creature, or Faithful enough to his own interest, to do it; or else in case of
both Skill and Will, yet not Able or Sufficient enough hereunto: But now being
that God (as is evident by the very light of Nature) is infinitely Wise,
infinitely Good, and All-sufficient, it were desperate treasonable Blaspemy
committed against Heaven, to assert any of those Defects; and therefore in
fine, by the best of consequence, as a special supernatural Revelation of the
divine Mind and Will, and Rule of Faith and Life, is to the Creature absolutely
Necessary; and a Scriptural and Written one, most Convenient; So it is most
congruous and suitable to the Divine both nature and honor, to afford and
indulge his Creature, this most needful useful, Scriptural Rule and Revelation.

Lastly, Sir,

That this necessary-expedient Revelation of God and his Will, this Canon Rule
and Directory of Divine Doctrine, and Worship, and Christian Faith and Life,
etc. is no other then what is contained in that System. of Sacred Truth, the
Volume of the Scripures of the Old and New Testament, as approved and received
throughout the Reformed Churches; is as rationally demonstrable as either of
the former; This being that only Revelation to which the necessary properties
and conditions of such a Canon do appertain; which are summarily these two,
namely, Divine Authority in respect of the Original, and universal sufficiency
in respect of the end; it being absolutely requisite that such a Rule, should
both proceed from (not Man, Church or Angel, but) God himself, as its Author;
and also by due proportion correspond to the ends and intendments specified, as
a plain and plenary description of, and direction to, the true God, true
Worship, true Happiness, and the appropriated means of the acceptable
performance of that Worship, and infallible attainment of that Happiness; what
more Rational? and may that Instrument, Method and Model of Revelation, be for
ever exploded the Church of God as apocryphal, which is devoid of either
property; The one is a compound of infallible Veracity and authoritative Power,
expressed in the Revelation; as being by its Sacred Author, whose essential
properties those are, both inspired and instituted for the only authentic and
unalterable Canon of his Church; the former requiring our Faith, the latter our
Obedience; Both in their respective analysis, ultimately resolvable into the
same as their very formal and Fundamental Reason, a principle of natural
Conscience as well as that of the Authors eternal Power and God Head. So that,
the Christian Religion framed by this Canon, is of all others, the most
rational, as being founded, partly upon the Veracity of that God who can
neither deceive, nor be deceived; partly upon his Supremacy or potestative
Right by virtue whereof quicquid libet licet, he may, as the Creature's
Sovereign Proprietary, enjoin and exact of him, whatsoever Worship or Service
his own absolute, but righteous Will, shall dictate or direct: and if any of
the English Clergy offer to court your assent or obedience hereunto as other,
let them for ever inherit your Contempt: The other property again, (by me
considered as relating to both matter and manner of Revelation) is the absolute
perfection of the Canon, whereby it is conceived, as a Sacred Pandect or
Ecyclopoedy, expressly or implicitly, directly or consequentially, to
comprehend the whole Counsel of God concerning all things necessary to be
either known and believed, or observed and practiced, in order to God's Glory
and Man's happiness, with so much clearness and perspicuity, as that all both
literate and illiterate, may in a due and diligent perusal of the same, attain
to a competent skill and knowledge therein: So that, that only Revelation must
necessarily be the authentic Organ and Instrument, Canon and Rule of Divine
Doctrine and Worship, Christian Faith and Obedience, to which those two
Canonical properties and conditions agree, viz. that authority in respect both
of inspiration and institution; and that all sufficiency in respect both of
matter and manner of discovery; so as that all Faith and Obedience yielded to
the Revelation, must be resolved into the veracity and supremacy of its Author,
expressed therein as the formal object or objective Reason of both (as well as
into the universally perfect and all-sufficient Testimony it self as the
material one); and not into the testimony either of Church with the Papist, or
of Spirit with the Enthysiast, both committing a most absurd and putid Circle
in giving the reason of their hope; asserting the truth and authority of the
Canon, by those respective testimonies; and again in a reversed method, the
truth of those testimonies, (as being no other way known to be true) by the
Canon; therefore to be equally declined: Now that the Revelation of God and his
Will contained in the Books of the Old and New Testament, as they are approved
and received throughout the Reformed Churches, is that one only Revelation
which is thus both inspired, and also by eternal sanction, instituted and
appointed of God for the all-sufficient and absolutely perfect Canon of his
Church, and that both as touching the Doctrine therein contained, and its
accessory mode of scription; it being wholly committed to writing by God's Holy
Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists, being all by the Holy Ghost, as his
immediate Actuaries, extraordinarily qualified for, irresistibly incited to,
and infallibly guided and acted in the work; commenced by Moses the first, and
finally concluded and perfected by St. John the last of Canonical Writers; may
be very rationally evicted; (and that to an utter exclusion not only of the
Jewish Talmud, the Turkish Alchoran, Popish Traditions, Enthsiastick Fancies,
etc. from having part or lot in the Sacred Canon; but of matters of a higher
predicament, namely, all vocal Revelation, such as was that whereby God
instructed his Church for the first two thousand Years and upwards, and the
many Sermons of Christ and his Apostles not recorded, though equally inspired
of God, with the Scriptural; as also several Prophecies, as those of Gad,
Nathan, Iddo, and others, which were not only equally inspired, but likewise
recorded, yet irrecoverably lost, as being only accommodated pro tunc to some
particular state, condition, and exigency of the Church, which once satisfied,
they were judged unnecessary to be incorporated into the universal Canon.)
Where I advertise the Reader, that the sufficiency of the Scriptures, is
evicted in their authority; for it being once agreed upon, that the Revelation
contained therein, is of a truth the Word of God, we cannot more question its
sufficiency then its testimony, whereof this is a signal part, namely that, It
is as inspired of God, so as his Sacred Institutes, profitable for Doctrine,
for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction, etc. sufficient to perfect every
individual Man and the whole Church of God; That whatsoever things were
written, were written for our Learning, etc. That this word must be
indeclinably observed without turning to the right hand or to the left; That
nothing must be added to this Word, or diminished from it, upon peril of
accumulative misery, denounced by St. John the last and longest liver of
Canonical Writers, (as has been said) in the very last of his writings, namely
the very close of the Canon, by way of penal sanction, and ratification of the
whole; So that the very crisis of this weighty concern of stating and settling
our Faith and obedience in and to the Holy Scriptures, lies in the evidence of
the Divine Authority thereof, after this discursive method; That which is the
Word of God, ought necessarily to be believed and obeyed; But the Revelation
contained in the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, is the Word of God;
Therefore this Revelation ought necessarily to be believed and obeyed: The
major or first proposition, is a conclusion of natural Reason, founded and
following upon God's essential veracity and supremacy (as has been said) the
dictates of the very Light and Law of Nature, as well as that of a Deity it
self: The minor or assumption, namely, that the Revelation contained in the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, is the very Word of God; is apparent
upon a threefold testimony, namely, that of the Church, that of the Scriptures
themselves, and that of the Holy Ghost; of which the two former only are
argumentative, the one as Humane and Ministerial; the other, as Divine and
Canonical: as for that of the Holy Ghost, He being the efficient cause of our
Faith and obedience, his testimony indeed is most certainly persuasive to a
person's own Conscience; but this testimony, being private and internal, (like
the Hidden Manna which no man knows, saving he that receives it) and the
truth or divinity hereof being with all opponents equally questionable with
that of the Word it self; it can be no ways convictive to others: Well then,
to urge only the two former, and that very briefly; As touching the first of
those, namely, the testimony of the Church, which I here consider (and observe
it, Sir,) not under the notion of a Church, (for as such it is only knowable
by the Scriptures, not they by it;) but as a collective Body or society of
prudent and honest faithful Witnesses, professing and attesting the Holy
Scriptures, and the Religion therein prescribed; so that the Argument stands
thus; That Revelation which is by a society of prudent honest and faithful
Witnesses, who are neither deceived themselves, nor deceivers of others,
professed and attested to be the Word of God, in all rational construction and
evidence, is such; But the Revelation contained in the Scriptures of the Old
and New Testament, is by such a society of prudent honest and faithful
Witnesses, etc. professed and attested to be the Word of God; Ergo, etc. The
major or first proposition Sir, I reckon unquestionable with all Atheists and
Infidels throughout the world; for certainly, as essential infallibility in God
by virtue whereof in genere entis, he can neither deceive, nor be deceived, is
the ground of an infallible assurance in matters of Divine testimony; so a
rational infallibility in a society of prudent honest and faithful men, who
therefore cannot be suspected to be in genere moris, either deceived in
themselves, or deceivers of others, is a sufficient ground of rational
assurance, in matter of humane testimony, (as is that in question, viz, a
humane testimony of a divine Revelation); for what more can be required in the
case? As for the roof of the minor or assumtion, all that is required hereunto,
is the eviction of the prudence, honesty and faithfulness, of those Witnesses,
or the rational infallibility of themselves and and their testimony, namely,
that they are such as can neither be suspected of being deceived in themselves,
nor yet of any imposture or intent of deceiving others; where I understand as
to our immediate concern in the case, the present Testifiers especially,
without a perplexing recourse had to the first; being that the credit of the
preceding is still successively secured in the subsequent Churches; thus being
once persuaded of the prudence and honesty of the present Church, namely, that
she is so wise and prudent as not to have been deceived by the next preceding
from whom she received the Scriptures; and so honest and ingenuous as not to
deceive the Reader, or my self, or the next ensuing; we are accordingly assured
of the same both prudence and honesty, and consequently rational infallibility
in the former; and so in the next to that, and so on to the very Apostles and
first witnesses: Now then, Let the intellectuals and morals; the wisdom,
prudence, and discretion; the honesty, fidelity, and integrity of the present
Witnesses of the Divinity of the Scriptures be impartially scanned; and all
compared with the multitude of the Testifiers (a wise man may sometimes both be
deceived and deceive, but a multitude can hardly, if ever; in regard of choice
of direction in case of error, or detection in case of forgery) the publicity
and openness of the testimony, and consequently, its lyableness to conviction,
if false or fraudulent; the hazard of loss of peace, ease, and quiet; honor,
credit, and reputation; profits, pleasures and wordly delights; means of
subsistence, liberty; yea, life it self, which that Testimony and Profession
exposes to: a practice quite contrary to the Law of Nature, which obliges to
self-preservation, but that it is warranted by those higher severe laws of
Mortification and Self-denial, etc. as to all those endearments, prescribed in
the Scriptures, by them attested; which whether observed, or not observed, is a
certain conviction of a faithful testimony, the observance being matter of
credit thereunto; non-observance of disgrace, which by foregoing the
profession, might be avoided; and lastly, the vigilance, subtilty, and potency
of Enemies and opponents, past and present; for whom it was, and is easy in
case of imposture, at once both to detect and to destroy; who yet either have
been wholly silent under the public attestations of Sacred Truth, or have
added thereunto their own acknowledgments, (instances whereof, History abounds
withal); or lastly, have disputed the same with the sword, rather then with
argument, though the Gates of Hell never could nor shall prevail herein: Let
those I say, and the like, be all duly scanned and compared together; and then
undoubtedly, the conclusion can be no other, then that the Testifiers and
Witnesses of the Revelation (or Doctrine confirmed by Miracles,) contained in
the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, are and have been a prudent,
honest, and faithful Society, which can, or could neither be suspected of
Error, or of being deceived in themselves; nor yet of imposture, or intent of
deceiving others; and consequently, that this same Word or Revelation by them
thus attested and professed, is of a truth the Word of God: At leastwise the
whole may be of such virtue and influence as to beget in us that veneration and
reverend esteem for those Testifiers, and the Scriptures by them testified,
together with the Religion which according to the prescript thereof they
profess, as to bring us to the Bible, and to persuade us to a research of the
Scriptures with the applauded Bereans, whether things be so as is reported;
(without which, take notice, my testimony for the Scriptures, ought to be of
more force with you, then yours against them, can be expected to be with me,
mine being with you only of suspected partiality; yours with me, of manifest
prejudice;) and then are we half-Proselytes already; for, Sir, the Divine
Authority of the Scriptures may convincingly appear to one thus prepared by the
subordinate and introductory attestation of the Church, from the superior
Testimony of the Scriptures themselves (the second thing propounded to be
spoken to) namely that evidence which may be collected from the intrinseck
characters and cognizances of Divinity as so many dignifying prerogatives,
enstamp'd upon the Word it self, as that which (...) (as says Athanasius) as
in a manner self-manifestative; and hence (which is remarkable) frequently
likened to the objects or mediums of our natural senses, as light, voice and
sound, smell, savor and taste, fire and heat, etc. whence any that has his
senses exercised to the discerning hereof, may gather, that as the things
mentioned do indemonstrably discover themselves to be what they are, so the
Holy Scriptures whereof those are figurative resemblances, do infallibly prove
themselves to be Divine: Now these three or four Characters of the Scriptures
seem of all others to be more especially argumentative and convictive of their
Divinity to natural Conscience; namely, 1. the majesty of their style, witness
those many majestic Titles of Divinity, which the Author does therein assume
to himself, (which I must not hear recount) importing either independency of
being, or universality of perfection, or absolute power and authority, or
excellency of operation, etc. but all no less then Divinity; and amongst other
particulars, that magisterial affidavit -- Thus says the Lord, familiar to the
Holy Scriptures, and pretended to in no writings in the world besides: 2. The
transcendency, spirituality, and sanctity of the matter and contents, both in
doctrines and duties; the great mysteries of the Godhead and godliness; three
distinct persons, in one nature, in the one; two distinct natures, in one
person, in the other: the mystery of diverse, yea adverse, both natures and
persons united in one Covenant; the mystery of Regeneration; the mystery of the
Resurrection, etc. and other Doctrines and Duties as opposite to man's corrupt
Will, as these are to his Reason, as the doctrines of original sin; the
impotency of pure naturals, in spirituals; the servitude and Bondage of
Free Will, etc. the duties of mortification of the Flesh, self-denial, and that
strange retaliation of evil with good, and hatred with returns of Love, etc.
infallible marks of Sanctity; as is also finally the universal tendency and
intendment of the whole contexture; namely, the exaltation and advancement of
God, and debasement of the Creature, peculiar to Holy Writ, beyond all other
whatsoever: 3. The sincerity and impartiality of the Writers and Compilers, who
appear to be so far from concealing, that on the contrary, they have faithfully
divulged upon Record, each other's, nay, almost each his own defaults and
infirmities; Moses, his Grandfather Levi's iniquity; his Brother Aaron's
Idolatry; his and his sister Miriams sedition, and his own faulty precipitancy:
David, Mose's rashness and inconsideracy, and his own Murder and Uncleanness:
the Evangelists, their very Master's humane infirmities, as hunger, thirst,
weariness, fear, etc. and their own dullness of understanding; impertinent
Queries; St. John's and James' ambition; Thomas's incredulity; Peter's triple
denial of his Lord and Master, recorded by St. Mark, his own Disciple: Paul's
dissension with Barnabas, and accessory guilt of Stephen's Death, recorded by
St. Luke his own Follower: St. Paul, Peter's Judaizing, and his own Blasphemy
and Persecution, etc. an unquestionable conviction of the faithfulness and
truth of their Testimony, not to be matched by any Writers whatsoever besides,
4. And lastly, the jnfallibility and veracity of their predictions; the
predictions themselves are recorded in the Holy Scriptures, the accomplishment
of them is sufficiently attested, partly by Humane History, partly by
experience; and (to argue with Bellarmine) if Scriptural predictions of things
to come, be true, as is approved by the event, why not scriptural attestations
of things present? All which duly considered what peruser of those Sacred
Digests, will not assent to and conclude upon the Divine Authority of the same?
till this same assent introduced by the Testimony of the Church, as the
preparative medium by which (per non propter) our Faith and obedience in and to
the Holy Scriptures is first in order of time, though not of Dignity,
pre-engaged, be perfected and ripened into a firm persuasion, by the concurrent
certificative Testimony of the Holy Ghost, as the efficient cause thereof
(exerted in, if distinct from, the admirable efficacy of the Doctrine it self,
upon the mind and judgment, the heart, will, and affections, etc.) namely, that
the Revelation, (that is the doctrine confirmed by miracles, both co-attested
canonically in the Scriptures, and ministerially by the Church) contained in
the Books of the Old and New Testament, (as they are approved and received
throughout the Reformed Churches) is of a truth the Word of God, etc.

There be several other Secondary and Collateral arguments of the Divinity of
of the Scriptures, as the cessation of Gentile-Oracles; the subversion of
Pagan-Idols by virtue hereof, like the fall of Dagon before the Ark; the
implacable Malice, rage and fury of Satan and his accomplices against them; the
Divine Judgments upon their inveterate Opponents; the invincible courage,
constancy, and resolution of their Confessors and Martyrs; the quality of the
Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists, their first Publishers and Writers; the
admirable preservation of them against all opposition; the confession of
Adversaries, Jews, Gentiles, Sibylls, Philosophers, Heathens and Heretics,
etc. touching the divine truth thereof; And also several other Internal marks
and cognizances of Divinity, as antiquity, consent of parts, efficacy of
doctrine, and the like: But the former being only known to us by humane
Testimony, it is plain, that the prudence, and discretion, the honesty and
integrity of the present Witnesses of the Divinity of the scriptures, as
persons Rationally Infallible, or such as cannot in reason be suspected of any,
either active or passive deceit and imposture in the case; is and must to any
considerate person appear to be equivalent to all the rest, and a more sure and
compendious argument for fixing and settling of our belief in the particular;
The latter I have omitted, as not so argumentative or convictive to
natural-Conscience, (which I have here more especially addressed my endeavor
to) as the others above urged. But that none may wonder why I urge not here the
argument of miracles, which others of the greatest Fame lay such a main stress
upon, I will give you and the world this brief account of it: Miracles are
considerable in reference to the case in hand, but two ways, namely, as either
matter of Divine testimony, co-attested together with the doctrine by them
confirmed, canonically in the Scriptures; or else as matter of humane
testimony, co-attested together with the said doctrine, ministerially in and by
the Church; (as has been preasserted): Now in short, Sir, under neither
consideration, are Miracles, or can they rationally be supposed to be, the
argument of our Faith, but only the partial Object thereof, as matter of Divine
testimony (as has been said) in the Scriptures, and matter of Humane testimony
in the Church; and therefore requiring a correspondent assent to both: Where,
for a further account of my self, I crave leave to Remonstrate against a very
Eminent and worthy Divine of the quorum of the Clergy by you contemned, now
living, who in a Book as noted as himself, holds this of Miracles for the main
convictive Argument of the Divine Authority of the Scriptures as though best
now, because such of old; which is a mere fallacy, a non causa pro causa,
partly, and partly, ab accidente; for First, to argue ab absurdo from his own
Hypothesis, namely this, That which Christ himself in his time used as the best
argument to prove the Divine Authority of his doctrine, is the best still; to
which I subsume; But so it is, that that of visible miracles, was the best
argument which Christ used to prove the Divine authority of his doctrine;
making the Ear-witnesses of the one, Eyewitnesses of the other, as infallibly
demonstrative signs and seals of Divinity; and then the conclusion follows
full of absurdity, viz. that that of visible miracles (obvious to our Eyes, as
those were which he wrought in the days of his flesh, to his, then-proselytes)
is the best argument that can be used still to prove the Divinity of his
doctrine, (the scriptures); or, (which is all one) Christ must re-descend into
the world, and work New miracles ( visible as his first) before he can have New
converts; Absurd! Again, If that which Christ himself used as the best Argument
to prove the Divinity of his Doctrine, (which is known to have been visible
miracles) be the best still, then are we under an unavoidable necessity of
incurring the same guilt, to wit, non-conviction and positive unbelief, (or, in
the same Authors opinion, (which I do not here dispute) the sin against the
Holy Ghost) with those reprobated Infidels in the days of Christ, through our
being destitute of the same provisions against it, namely, visible miracles;
Nay more, we are under a necessity of incurring sin, without possibility of
remedy, -- a necessity of sinning, through want of the preventive, visible
miracles, -- without possibility of remedy, because the positive unbelief
mentioned, and sin against the Holy Ghost (if those be distinct) are known by
scripture-verdict to be unpardonable, this gross absurdity follows by
necessary consequence, and how injurious, nay, blasphemous, against the
Wisdom, Goodness, Holiness, and Justice of God, the asserting of such a thing
were, is easy to determine: Thirdly Dilemmatically, that Reverend Author must
necessarily consider miracles either as Recorded in the Scriptures, or, as
Reported by the Church; (for as visible they were peculiar to Christ's
Contemporaries and Eyewitnesses) If as Recorded in the Scriptures; as such
they being part of the Divine testimony, which is this complex, the Doctrine of
Christ confirmed by Miracles, they are not the Argument, but the Object of our
Faith; and we believe not the Scriptures for the Miracles, but the Miracles for
the Scriptures, as part of the sacred narrative, and together with the Doctrine
by them confirmed, and jointly with them therein Recorded, the Collateral
Object of our belief: If again as Reported by the Church; then by my Authors
Divinity, the testimony of the Church, is the main, or best Argument that can
be used, to prove the Divine Authority of the Scriptures; A train of
Absurdities! and if we abstract from the testimony of both Scriptures and
Church; let any tell me what significancy Miracles are of in the case: The
Author (I assure you) is a person approved for Eminent, both Learning and
Piety, and indemnified from your two extenuative Characters, of which in their
due place; but personal respects must vail to the interest of the truth; I can
easily declare with him, that I believe that Doctrine to be of God, which is
confirmed by undeniable Miracles; I can as easily declare, that I believe all
true Miracles to be of God, because they exceed all created power; but the
critical Query in the case, (by him omitted) is, how shall one be assured, that
such Miracles were ever wrought (as Christ's turning of Water into Wine; for
instance, his Raising of Lazarus from the Dead, and his Curing of all manner of
Diseases, etc.) for confirmation of his Doctrine? the two former, one may, by
the very light of nature, be assured of, and yet question the last: This
certainly is no otherwise attested, then first in a secondary and subservient
order by the Church, as a Ministerial mean of conveying to us, the truth of
matter of Fact; and next, in a superior order by the Scriptures themselves, as
the the Canonical Records of the same; and in both, in conjunction with the
Doctrine by them confirmed; and both Doctrine and Miracles, as the complex and
conjunct object of our Faith, equally credible upon Testimony; which Faith is
(as has been said) by the concurrent testimony, and inward illumination and
motion of the public spirit of the Holy Scriptures, viz. the Holy, Ghost,
ripened into this firm persuasion, that the Revelation contained in the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, that is, both the Doctrine it self,
and the narrative of the Miracles, by which it was confirmed, as collateral
parts and contents thereof, is of a truth the Word, not of Man, nor Angel, but
of GOD himself; and the only authentic Canon, and Rule, of Divine faith,
worship, and obedience; which, I thank God, I am as much confirmed in the
belief of, not only to speak, with Campian in another persuasion, quam me
vivere, as that I live, but as surely as that there is a God by whom I live;
else had long ere now become a miserable prey to subtle Adversaries, who are
ever observed primarily (as you do) to attact their Opponents, in the
scriptural foundation, and that especially in its very fundamentality; namely,
the Divine Authority thereof, here Asserted, and I hope, Evicted. Thus, Sir, I
have gone a great way about, to bring you by the nearest way home; at
leastwise, if not to gain upon you, as a Proselyte, yet to guard your Reader
against you, as an Enemy: And now I Challenge you to do your Worst; the hurt
will be your own, none of mine, nor, I hope, of his, being that I have armed
him with an Antidote, he shall not need to fear (what I promised to produce in
the next place, viz.) your infective example: And indeed, Sir, your whole
Rhapsody seems to be nothing else but a continued exemplification of your
Atheism, and Blaspemy, expressed in depreciating, extenuating, debasing, and
what in you lies, nullifying the Divine Authority of the Holy Scriptures, and
that in the most material Promises, Invitations, Precepts, Narratives, etc.
therein contained; which, could you, by your foul index expurgatorius, expunge
them the sacred Canon, as belike you have them your Creed, let the remainder be
branded for Apocryphal for me; for (to instance in a few) what greater Promise
is there recorded in the whole Book of God, then that in Malachi: -- Unto you
that fear my Name, shall the Sun of Righteousness arise with healing in his
Wings? Or Invitation, then that of Isaiah: -- Ho, every one that thirsts --
come ye, buy and eat; yea, come buy Wine and Milk without money, and without
price? Or Precept, then that early summons in our Savior's triennial
Preaching: -- Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand? Or Narrative, then
that of St. John: -- God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have Everlasting
Life? Or its Parallel, that of St. Paul, -- This is a faithful saying, and
worthy of all Acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the World to Save
Sinners? etc. And what a poor jejune, dilute, empty History were the Volume of
Holy Scripture, (and consequently how helpless and hopeless your case and mine,
and that of all Sinners universally) if depauperated of those, and their
parallel Evangelical contents, being that the (...), the very quintessence, the
life and spirit, the very soul and substance of that Blessed Revelation
consists therein; and yet most Blasphemously debased and profaned by your
self, and prostituted to Contempt in others, (for which you must be
accomptable); witness those facetious, but blasphemous Laconicks, with which
you Criticize thereupon, viz. that of The Moon of Righteousness upon the first;
A spiritual Sack-posset upon the next, The Soap of Sorrow, and Fullers-earth of
Contrition, upon the third; That of the Daughter of God, and Dauphin of Heaven,
upon the fourth; and that of a Christmas-Feast, consisting of Three Dishes,
etc. upon the last, and the like; which, who but your self can either read, or
relate, without Horror? I guess what your Reply might be here, namely, that
you have only transcribed the Blasphemies of others, to wit, those of the
Clergy, etc. But then remember, Sir, what the doctrine of the Civil Law is
(approved with all civil men) above alleged, namely, that Publication without
Vindication, is implicit Accusation, especially in a case of of such an
universal concern as are the Holy Scriptures, which your own interest therein
had obliged you to vindicate, but that (it is plain) you have renounced it. In
short then, supposing matter of fact to be matter of sad truth, namely, that
some unhappy Clergymen have, to the disgrace of their function, Religion, and
Scriptures, committed such horrid Blasphemies, (which as yet I do not enquire
into, but methinks if any such be, you should have by name, singled them out of
the society, to their deserved contempt) this will not justify you in what I
charge you withal; It being manifest, that you have not only divulged those
Blasphemies, but divulged them without the least vindication of the Holy
Scriptures, Religion, etc. thereby so greatly damnifyed and disparaged, which
(as has been said) is an implicit joining of issues with the first
Aggressors; nay, that you do industriously throughout your Letters, betray and
prostitute the same to accumulative contempt in the Laity, and that with all
imaginable artifice and advantage of an extemporary and occasional wit (to use
your own idiom in your own praise) that cursed Volupia to whose unhallowed
Shrines you have presumed to devote and sacrifice God's own Word and Oracles,
(though you might easily have made experiment thereof upon another Theme at a
much cheaper rate than that is like to prove, of adventurous jesting with a
two-edged tool) and what plainer instance or argument of A. theism? But for a
further and fuller exemplification and conviction hereof, I will first prompt
your Reader with this rule, that as in the sacred Decade or Ten commandments
in particular, so in the sacred Scriptures in general, he that offends in any
one point, is by Divine verdict guilty of all, to wit, intensively, in regard
the Divine authority of the whole is violated in any one particular. And now or
instance in particulars of Scripture, not by the Clergy, but by you, (and the
whole consequentially in those) abused, depreciated, and what in you lies,
exauctorated; I do in the next place, recommend to your Readers perusal, a few
pages of your second Letter noted in my Margent, where he shall find such a
Scheam of facetious Atheism; as I believe, he never read the like of, all his
lifetime; and this exemplified in a supposed Gentlman (personating your self
in showing extemporary and occasional wit, Let. 2. p. 187, 188, 189, 190.
in abusing the Holy Scriptures, in your own words, as is plain) much
resembling some a la mode Spark, or one of your high-bred Hects, dextrous in
the gentile strain, in a breath to damn himself, and humble-servant others; a
Bartholomew-Gentleman, I dare say, least of all, as being known to be no
affecter of ceremonies of State (which this Generoso abounds in) more than of
Church; his education not serving him for the one, more than his judgment for
the other's Well, this same Gentleman, alias the Author of the contempt of
Religion, is supposed to be intended for dinner, (probably a feast of luxurious
barrioadoes and esculadoes) in some good house or other; and how ingenious (to
give him your own epithet) he acquits himself both in going and returning, and
his demeanor there; quoting Canon for all his addresses, with suddenness of
apprehension, and experienental skill (as you there call it) in the application
of Scripture; the Reader, after perusal of your narrative, be judge. Straight
is the Gate, and narrow is the way, and few there be that find it, said our
Savior; profanely applied and prostituted to your narrow Alley, (a bad omen,
I assure you, of the broad way) The Psalmist's, Lift up your heads O ye Gates,
and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, to knocking at the Gate in the Porters
absence; The Prophet's Besome of destruction, and desolation of Babylon, to a
servants sweeping away a little dirt out of a Courtyard; Our Savior's, the
first shall be last, and the last shall be first; to the straining of a
complement of precedence, with shruggings, and beg-pardons; -- If ye have faith
like a grain of mustardseed, ye shall remove Mountains; to the removing of a
little of the mountain of mustard upon the Table: O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou
that killest the Prophets -- how often would I have gathered thee as a Hen
gathers her Chickens, etc. (an instance whereupon one would have thought you
should rather have spent tears, as Himself did, then costly jests) to a dish of
Chickens, commended for a dish of fat Jerusalems, etc. The Apostle's Tabitha,
arise, to every child, Boy, or Girl, that drops in the street: Our Savior's
invitation of relief, Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and
I will give you rest; to every Porter easing himself of his burden: The
Apostle's, Paul may plant, and Apollos may water, but it is God who gives the
encroase; to every water-bearer, etc. I am resolved to add one more, but what
is enough to turn my Gentleman's dinner into Belshazzars feast, (celebrated with
sacred utensils, as this is, with greater cost, sacred texts,) and the whole
into a Tragedy; you can by no means endure that the Minister should preface
from Belshazzar; and you term your Parson-Antagonist, inviting you to here him
preach, and promising you the best sermon in his budget, that he forbear the
name of Belshazzar; but how will you like to end with him, whom you can so
little endure the Minister should begin with? though you have not a Kingdom to
lose, yet you have that which is, or ought to be equally or more dear to you;
therefore capable of as fatal a Peers; -- O full of all subtilty and mischief,
thou Child of the Devil, thou Enemy of all Righteousness, will thou not cease
to pervert the right ways of the Lord? most justly applicable, to all
Scripture-vilifiers; and what son of Belial, or Bartesus himself? What Celsus
or Julian? What Faustus or Manes himself? What invidious Jew, Papist, or Pagan,
does more deserve to be ranked into that predicament, than does the Author of
the contempt of the Clergy, and Religion, personated by that parabolical
Gentleman? What more abusive, ignominious, blasphemous predicates, did ever the
Father of Lies, or Child of that Father, stigmatize the word of truth withal,
then he has? Aven-Gilion^ Lesbian Rule! Livius's Decades! Aesop's Fables! Nose
of wax! Inky Divinity! mute Doctress! Dumb, dead, killing Letter! and a
thousand such reproachful epithets, have not reflected a greater affront,
ignominy, and disparagement upon the Holy-Scriptures, to the infringing and
nullifiing, what Man or Devil can, their sacred authority, then has your
debasing prostitution thereof; and again, what greater instance or argument of
Atheism? For opposition and exaltation, (...), against Religion and against God
(or a Deity it self,) is a matter individual and inseparable in it self, as
well as in Antichrist's character; so that you may upon equal terms commence a
process or enquiry of contempt against both; I leave the application to the
Reader: But, I had almost forgot that you may probably be one of those that
hold no other canon than Homer's Iliades and Odysses, Let. 1. page 9.
or Virgil's Evangelical and Prophetical writings; the former, as containing
mystically both Law and Gospel; as his works are owned by you in general, for a
practice of piety, Let. 2. page 43.
wherein you tell your Correspondent, he may find all practical Divinity sum'd
up, cases of Conscience resolved, controversies decided, etc. (no wonder, you
term him Christian and Protestant) the other, as comprehending a body of
Divinity exactly agreeing with the primitive Doctrine and intentions of our
Savior, Let. 2. p. 45.46
fathered upon a Nonc. (alias your Hec or self; for I dare say, there is an
agreement in unitertio); indeed I have read of one converted by Virgil's fourth
Eclogue, but have suspended my belief of it hitherto; it may be you are the
man; and from such a Bible, such a practice of piety, such a body of Divinity,
such a Convert, what can the world expect? -- (...). I proceed.

Another assault of yours, Sir, is made upon the Ministerial foundation; (as
the former was upon the Doctrinal) namely, your Gorah-like Rebellion against
the Clergy of the Church of England, and those both in person and function.

As touching the person's of the Clergy, two things you except against, viz.
number and qualification: their qualification is reserved for an enquiry, under
the second general propounded: As to their number; your exception is, that they
are supernumerary, whereof you betray deep sense and sorrow; the Nation (say
you) is perfectly over-stock'd with professors of Divinity; Let. 1.115.
thus Aaron's fruitful Rod, is Corah's grudge: and for a remedy to this
prevailing spirituality, that you may lop what you cannot fell, you propound a
double expedient; One is, an anniversary vent, namely, a yearly Transport
beyond the Seas of so many Tunn of Divines; as well as of other commodities,
with which the Nation is over-stock'd; Let. 1. p. 119.
the other is a spiritual press upon Professors and Pulpiteers (as you are
sometimes pleased to style them) an Expedition to another holywar; the key
exchanged for the Croisade; but this I wonder, that you of all men should
advise, for you know Sir, that the holy Warriors vouch to fight not Turks
only, but Infidels; how beit, strange it is, if both ways of vent, namely,
either to a slavery in Turkey, the Barbados, or Indies; or to an honorable
adventure into the Holy Land, may not suffice to reduce the number; but sink or
swim, stand or fall, it is all one to you, what becomes of either Cargo or
Armado; so there be but a good riddance to the Nation of such
cumber-ground-Inmates; that is, of our Guides, Lights, Pastors, Seers and
Overseers! (We are beholden to you Sir,) and what the sequel hereof might be,
or your design in it, your Reader be Judge; I do but think how great your
grudge had been, had the whole English Clergy matched in number one single
order of another See, namely, that of St. Bennet of which it is bragged, that
it has been the fruitful Nursery of no less than Fifty-two Popes, Two hundred
Cardinals, sixteen hundred Archbishops, Four thousand Bishops, and Five
thousand Saints approved by the Church; or that of the Cordeliers or Minims,
computed by Sabbellicus in his Enneads, to be in Europe (besides the multitudes
in Asia, Africa, etc.) above Five hundred thousand, (a thing almost incredible)
out of whom, the General of the Order of St. Francis their Patron, has upon
all occasions offered to advance the Pope an Army Thirty thousand strong; and
all very well spared, besides a great many Tunns for Transport; whether the
commodity be good or nor, I leave to others to determine; Invidious grudge
against Englands Clergy, though the sum total amounts not to so many hundreds,
as there are of thousands in one single Romish order; this, I dare say, is
rancide and inveterate, though the spiritual press and tunnage may seem to be
spoken by a Jocoso; your Inquisition herein, in the case of our Clergy, somewhat
resembling that of the Roman Tyrants of old, in the case of Christians, whom
they tormented for a diversion: But this is not all; I suppose that the English
Clergy being divided into three parts, and a thousand in each tertia; that one
of those is dispatched away under their sacred Labarum for the Holy Land,
unanimously resolved to be either absolute Masters or Martyrs upon the spott; a
second shipped off amongst other domestic commodities with which the Nation is
over-stock'd, at so much par test or per tunn, for the Barbados or the
Indies, etc. to get their living as Adam got his by digging in grounds, or
mines under ground, as not worthy to live upon it; and all this jure
exterminij, by Act of Parliament too, prompted by your judicious motion; this
supposed, I say, the Ghostly Armado, the sacred Cargo, all shipped and gone, and
the Nation well rid of them; is all your spire, malice, and contempt, quite
spent and evaporated now! I doubt not; there is a tertia behind still, and (the
mischief of all) the office in and with them; the number of persons retrieved,
but the function still continues in the remainder; and whilst there is a
preaching Timothy, or a praying Joshua in England, to be sure, Amaleck cannot
prevail.

Therefore,

Your next attempt, Sir, is made upon the Ministerial Office and Function it
self, especially in those two grand Ministerial exercises, Preaching and Prayer
(both Manna and Incense) and that with such a strain of dialect, as deserves
the severest anathema in my Budgett; but I referr that piece of Justice to your
Reader: To begin with the latter; You severely criminate, and highly disparage
the Spirit and gift of Prayer, Let. 2. p. 155.
and (which yet is usual with both sorts of the English Clergy, Conformists and
Nonconformists) all conceived Prayer: Now what the Gift and Spirit of Prayer
is, a Learned, ingenious and worthy Prelate of our Church shall determine (who
knows but Episcopal Reverence may aw you into a submission?) whose Judgment in
the particular I persuade my self, is of general authority with all that are
sober and discerning; namely Bishop Wilkins, whose assertions in the case, are
these in his Discourse of Prayer, viz. the Gift of Prayer may be thus
described; It is such a readiness and faculty proceeding from the Spirit of
God, whereby a man is enabled upon all occasions, in a fit manner, to express
and enlarge the desires of his heart in this Duty: Unto the attaining of this
Gift in its true latitude and fullness, there are three sorts of Ingredients
required; viz. 1. Something to be infused by the Spirit of God, who must
sanctify and and spiritualize the judgment and affections, before we can either
apprehend or desire any thing as we should: 2. Some natural endowments and
abilities disposing us for this Gift, as readiness of apprehension, copiousness
of fancy, tenderness of affection, confidence and volubility of speech, which
are very great advantages to this purpose, being naturally much more eminent in
some then others. 3. Something to be acquired and gotten by our own industry,
namely, such a particular and distinct apprehension, both of our sins and
wants, and the Mercies bestowed upon us, that we may be able to express the
thoughts and dispositions of our minds concerning them, in such a decent form,
as may excite both in our selves and others, suitable affections: The first of
these is by some, styled the Spirit of Prayer, the two latter, the Gift of
Prayer, etc. This, Sir, is Diocesan Doctrine; and let that Clergyman undergo
your Contempt that pretends to other Gift or Spirit then what is here
described: But now, what do you think, will the World Judge of you, who advance
an all-Damning and illiterate Hector into a competition herein, Let. 1. p. 36.
with a Learned and Reverend Prelate? for you undertake, Sir, (to recriminate
you from your own censure) sub nomine penae, to procure one of the rankest
Hectors about Town, Let. 2. p. 157,
that shares his time between Swearing and Cursing (and something else) who
supposing he does, not put in sometimes an Oath, in stead of, O Lord, (and a
God damn him, by the common Law of autocatacrisy, in stead of God bless him,)
shall make a long well-worded, and affectionate Prayer, with confession of all
the Villainies committed since the Flood (Contempt of the Clergy, I hope,
amongst the rest) which shall draw forth as many Tears, and as deep Groans, as
any of the greatest pretenders to that Gift, or Spirit; that is to say, as any
Prayer of the Bishop himself, now mentioned, he being of the number of those
pretenders, as you are pleased to entitle them: And if this be not test
sufficient to the World, of what Spirit you are of, I will for ever abjure all
Spirit-discerning faculty; and I doubt not but this one signature of it, will
serve to debase your credit for ever with any impartial Reader, in order to
whose just verdict touching your project and principle of Atheism it is, that
I single out such matchless instances of your extemporal and occasional Wit;
which, let me tell you, none but some unsanctified Humster for your Hector,
will ever afford an Amen to, or reckon other then facetious villainy; and
remember for a check to it, though Noah's Flood, (mentioned in your Hector's
Litany) be past; yet St. Peter's Fire is still to come, which all your holy
Water cannot quench: Ignorant-Poor Clergy indeed: if a profligate
Hector-Rampant shall outvie them in their faculty, being no further hallowed
then with your outside consecration of a double Cap, Cassock and Girdle!

Again,

As touching the other grand part of the Ministerial Office, namely Preaching;
It is your peremptory assertion, Sir, in the Words of some great Patron, (an
Intimado, possibly, (...)) whom you adopt for your mouth, that such Preaching
as is usual (in the Church of England) is a hinderance of Salvation, Let. 1.
p. 81.
rather then the means to it; and the explication of what you intend by the
epithete, usual, you reserve to the good time, etc. but what I will give the
World to understand presently, and yet plough with no other then your own
Heiffer: That Preaching of the Word of God, by persons of Holy Order duly
authorized and qualified hereunto, is a Divine Institution: that such Preaching
is the ordinary means of Salvation; and that the Preaching usual in the Church
of England (of which a fuller vindication hereafter) is such; She (and I in
her) is obliged to believe till She see better Authority for altering of her
Creed or Clergy then you or your Masters are like to produce in haste: But the
emphasis of your assertion lies in the adjunct, viz. usual, with which you
epithet the Preaching by you taxed; and what you intend by usual Preaching in
the Church of England, must be traced by its extremes or opposites; Now then,
the extreme or opposite of usual Preaching must either be, 1. Extraordinary
high, performed in the Holy Tongues, Hebrew and Greek, through an immediate
illapse and inspiration of an infallible Spirit; and if so, -- Christus
corpore! Paulus ore! nothing less will serve your turn then, then (St.
Augustine's wish) the audible Preaching of Christ or an Apostle in person,
visibly re-incorporated into the Church: or else, 2. Extraordinary low and
mean, possibly by way, of prescribed Homily (the Church speaking in this, as
the Spirit, in the former) but this you know is performable by the meanest
Desk-Man (one of your Contemptibles) though never Master of other Language or
Literature then what he may owe to a Mothers, Nurses, or School-Dames
discipline: or 3. Extraordinary in respect of Church Office, order and degree,
as being performed only by Primates, or Prelates, etc. but neither do I take
this to be the meaning of your unusual Preaching; for besides the great breach
of charity implied in it, (as if all the Preachers in the Church of England
were Hinderers of Salvation, except only two saving Graces, and twenty four
Dominical Virtues) if once the inferior order and Body of the Clergy be
brought into Contempt, I am sure the Most and Right Reverend -- must look to
share in the Destiny: Or else lastly, -- but of that anon.

It is not a little observable, Sir, (and I hope your Reader will sense you
accordingly) that while you expose our Preachers to the contempt of the Laity,
you amuse them with dark Reserves, touching their Preaching: The Clergy and
Religion is the very Theme, Argument and subject matter of your Letters; those
you presuppose a contempt of; the Grounds and Occasions of this Contempt, you
have engaged in an Enquiry into, with pretense of friendly redress; those
grounds and occasions you summarily reduce to two, viz, the ignorance and
Poverty of the Clergy (of which anon); in the explication and demonstration of
those two characters, the Preachers are plainly described, whose Preaching you
averr to be a hinderance of Salvation: Now then the usual Preachers of the
Church of England, are plainly described by you, and in them, the usual
Preaching: what then can be the meaning or Mystery of your Reserve? that the
usual preaching that hinders Salvation, which one would think you have
sufficiently explained, yet you will not here go about to explain! Let. 1. p.
81. Let. 2. p. 101.
and that the reasons of your scrible, might be further explained when occasion
should require! undoubtedly profound, all naught! and that I may unmask and
detect you (according to my promise) I will spell out the Original by your own
Copy (for therein, as God would have it, (...), your speech bewrays you;) and
by good consequence draw a summary conclusion touching the design charged upon
you, from your own premises, and that in

A third assault made by you upon both Doctrinal and Ministerial foundation
jointly, the Reformed Religion, and Clergy, more expressly. Ad hominem then,

All such preaching as is at present usual in the Church of England, is a
hinderance of Salvation, rather then the means to it;

But the Preaching used in the Church of England for an hundred Years last
past, is such as is at present usual therein;

Therefore the Preaching used in the Church of England for an hundred Years
last past, is a hinderance of Salvation, etc.

Sir, of this Categorick Syllogism (for form unexceptionable, as you must
needs know, if your Logicks match your Ethics;) the premises are your own;
and I hope you will not deny the conclusion, which is a compendious gloss and
Comment upon the pestilent design of your Letters of Enquiry.

The Major proposition Consists of your own express words, above scanned; only
your indefinite is by me turned into an universal, which you know the Rules of
School will justify me in; as well as the matter in debate: such preaching, and
all such Preaching; are equivalent.

The minor proposition or assumption is your own too, as appears partly by
express words, partly by the scope, series, tenor and contexture of your
Discourse; disown it if you can. -- Let. 1. p. 58, 59
It would be an endless thing, Sir, (say you to your Correspondent) to count up
all the Follies that have been for an hundred Years last past Preached and
Printed of this kind: Now what kind of Follies you mean, is plain from your
foregoing Narrative concerning ridiculous Preaching, by way of impertinent,
nay, Let. 1. p. 32, 38 45, etc.
sometimes Blasphemous Metaphor, Similitude, Tales, or such as is apt to bring
Contempt upon the Preacher, and that Religion which he professes (of which
afterward, when I come to enquire into matter of Fact) so that the argument
stands thus: That Preaching which is full of Follies, or such useless and
ridiculous things, as are apt to bring Contempt upon the Preacher and the
Religion by him professed, is such as is at present usual in the Church of
England, (and therefore by you supposing it such, exposed to Contempt); But the
Preaching usual in the Church of England, for an Hundred Years last past, is
full of such Follies, etc. Then the conclusion follows by clear consequence,
viz. that therefore the Preaching usual in the Church of England for an Hundred
Years last past, is such as is at present usual therein; and consequently by
your own position, a hinderance of Salvation, rather then the means to it; the
Preachers Fools! and the Preaching Murder! That is to say, the Faith and
Doctrine usually Preached, yea, and Printed too (for both Press and Pulpit,
Writings as well as Sermons, are by you charged) contended for, lived and dyed
in, (yea, and by many of them sealing with their Blood, what they professed by
Tongue or Pen, dyed for) by our first Reformadoes, Protestant-Champions and
Church-Worthies, our Marian Martyrs, all our Orthodox Learned, Pious, Painful,
Preachers under the Reign of Q. Elizab. K. James, and Charles the first, in
times past; and what has been and still is under our present Sovereign King
Charles the II. usually Preached and published, is -- a hindrance of Salvation,
rather then the means to it! and consequently the Church of England since the
Sun of Righteousness arose in it, with his healing wing of Reformation, no true
Church; for as extra Ecclesiam nulla salus, there is no ordinary Salvation
without the Line of Church Communion; so there is no true Church without the
appropriated means of Salvation; -- and then according to your Divinity --
Ichabod! farewell Church of England! And now, Sir, what do you think of your
self upon recollection? or what will your Reader think of you? have I not here
convincingly made out against you, from your own Principles and positions, a
base unworthy pestilent design upon the Reformed Religion, and Clergy, and in
them, upon our Church, to (what in you lies) the utter subverting and
nullifying of the whole. And what you mean by your mysterious reserves, namely,
that what you intend by usual Preaching, Let. 1. p. 81. Let. 2. p. 101.
you will not here go about to explain; and the reasons of your Letters might
be further explained when occasion should require, (but I have done it to your
hand in a paraphrase very congruous to the original) what you mean, I say by
such Reserves and shrewd hints as those are, we may by this time very plainly
perceive, especially with the additional help of a short Gloss of your own,
dropped from you it seems unawares a great way off from the Text, where you
explain the good time -- by those (despaired of) days of virtue, Let. 1. p.
124.
of having the Tithes restored to the Church most unjustly robbed of them by
the Sacrilegious Church-Publican, Henry the Eight; to wit, when like a wise
Man, he rejected the Yoke of Papal Supremacy, -- Anglia non patitur duos
Caesares (which other Christian Princes, Issachar like, couch and crouch under)
and forraged (its Antichristian supports,) Monkish Nests and Nurseries, with
which the Nation was at that time much more overstock'd, then now it is with an
Orthodox Clergy; though in so doing he only killed the Pope's Body, (as Luther
said of him) in the mean time saving his Soul, etc. -- Increase of
Church-Patrimony, Sir, I do as heartily wish and pray for, as your self, but
I Will be sure, that it be a Reformed Church, which upon any such score I enter
into my Litany; but this you aim to subvert: But, good Sir, pray tell me, how
comes it to pass, that you adventure to explain the good time in the plausible
circumstance of Church-Tyth, which you do so mysteriously conceal in the
concern of usual-Church Preaching? It Is very odd! here you are express; but in
the case of Preaching, you treat your Reader with Morose Reserves -- what I
intend by usual Preaching, I shall not here go about to explain, -- the reasons
of my Writing may be further explained when occasion shall require: Sir, I do
not like these odd hints of your hic and nunc; I understood by your last, Let.
2. p. 200.
that you was gone into Devonshire, to secure the World from your being ever
troublesome in this kind any more, ( Amen, said I, a good riddance,) and what
other kind of trouble, you design, for it, the God of Heaven knows; -- your
reticentiae's of time, place, and occasion, when, where, and upon what account
you intend, (it may be by Letters of Credence to be produced in a good time)
further to explain to us, the reasons of your Enquiry, and what you understand
by usual Preaching in the Church of England, I must tell you, are very
suspicious: what? do you mean to comment upon it with the sensible gloss of
Fire, and Faggott? or a second dose of the Jesuite's Powder? or the new game of
Trapp-Law? or the other Coal from the Altar, (because the first did not the
business)? and thus of Inquisitor, turn Executioner? In the name of God,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, we defy the Devil and all his Works!

Being that your Charge, Sir, is commenced from, and coextended with Englands
Evangelick Century and blessed Era of Reformation (the hundred Years last
past) whereas had it been limited to the last twenty or thirty, we had less
suspected your morals) and consequently, Vulpes Bovem agit, the Reformed
Religion, and Clergy, therein attacted, and what in you lies, subverted;
insomuch, that it is plainly manifest, that the Christian Religion founded and
fixed in the Nation, is with you the Apple of contention, who therefore
criminates Ministers being two bent upon Preaching of it, Let. 2. p. 72.
( index sufficient of yours) It highly concerns the Church of England to stand
in Justification of her first Reformation; her original Protestancy and
remonstrance against, and separation from the Church of Rome; the Religion by
her professed; her Clergy, the official Preachers and Publishers of that
Religion; and the usual Preaching of that Clergy; which in her name, as her
Advocate, I have vouched to do. Well then,

The Essentials constitutive of a true Church, Sir, (of. the Mystical, as well
as of the natural Body,) being these three, namely, the Head, the Body, and
intimate Union and Communion between both; the only Head of the Christian
Church, being Jesus Christ, God and Man in one Person, appointed and anointed
by God the Father, King, Priest, and Prophet, thereof; the only mystical
Ligament, and bond of Community in this holy Corporation, being the Divine
Spirit, (originally derived from the Head, through the whole Body, the Church
as Heiress thereof, being the common foundation of that Sacred patronymick
Christian, under the New Testament, as well as of that other Meschiahim (as
Eusebius notes) under the Old) or, the Catholic Faith, the product of that
Spirit, or both; whence it comes to pass, that the Founder, Foundation,
Superstructure, and medium or instrument of conjunction, are all, in Holy
Scripture, propounded as so many Unites, admitting of no consort or collateral,
-- One God, and Father of all; One only Lord, Mediator, Savior, Foundation,
Name, Way, etc. One Body, One Spirit, Faith, Hope and Religion: And being that
the Religion professed and practiced in and by the Church of Rome, especially
since Trent-Council, (assembled and ended above your hundred years ago) is
inconsistent with, and destructive of this individual Headship, true Faith, and
Church-constitution; being nothing else but an Antichristian miscellany and
compound (oppositum in apposito) of God and the Creature, God-man and meer-man,
in the most material points and principles of Christianity; the Persons of
both, in point of Worship; the Power and Authority of both, in matters of
Faith; the Righteousness and Merit of both, in point of Satisfaction and
Justification; the Wills of both, in the act of Conversion; the Intercession of
both, in the great office of Mediation; yea, an universal co-equivalency, or
equal concurrence of Worth, Virtue, and Efficacy from both, throughout the
whole business of Redemption and Salvation; especially from Christ, and the
Virgin Mary, constituted therein Corredemptress with her Son, and Savioress a
latere, as if her Breasts, as well as his Sides, had been no less then
sacramental; and the Mothers Milk, and the Son's Blood equally saving: Moreover
(to prosecute this Religious medley) God and the Creature, in the Decalogue;
Christ and the Church, in the Creed; Scripture and Tradition, in the Canon;
Paternoster and Ave-Maria, in the Litany; Sacrament and Sacrifice, in the
Supper, etc. all so many Riddles in the Mystery of Iniquity! A Religion
consisting of such Trent-Forge-Principles and Practices as these, viz. In point
of Doctrine, Papal Supremacy and Authotity, Church Infallibility, unwritten
Traditions equaled in authority, with the Holy Scriptures; the doctrine of
Man's Free Will in opposition to God's Free Grace; the Doctrine of Perfection,
of Merits, Pardons, and Indulgences, redounding from a surplusage of Works of
super-erogation, and satisfaction (as they are termed) as if any mere Man could
fulfill, in obedience beyond what the Law requires, and satisfy in penance
beyond what Sin deserves! a rare Religion! the doctrine of Purgatory; and Souls
Departed; the doctrine of Mass-service and Transubstantiation, the Consecrating
Priestling turning a petty- Creator (as is supposed) converting sacramental
Forms, into real Substance, and Commemoration into Expiation, celebrating
Christ's Death with his death, as well as with his own, in destroying, instead
of discerning the Lord's Body, yea, both Savior and Sacrament at once! the
doctrine of Ministration in an unknown Tongue, by means whereof they do most
sacrilegiously robb the Children of their Bread in the Scriptures, as they do,
of the Cup in the Supper; and many more such like Doctrines not of men only,
but of Devils, which I list not to dwell upon, the Subject being so Frightful:
In point of Worship, Idolatry and Imagery, Superstition, Saint-Worship, etc. In
point of Polity, absolute Tyranny, (the Keys, turned into a Sword) sufficiently
exercised and dearly experienced throughout the World, upon Princes-Crowns,
their Subjects-Consciences, and Protestant-Blood, in sanguinary Laws, a bloody
Inquisition, direful Anathemaes, execrable Massacres, rageing Persecutions,
etc. the violent Calentures of that Torrid Zone: The Religion, in fine, of that
Church which is in Doctrine, damnably Heretical; in Worship, grossly
Idolatrous; in Polity, and Government, intollerably Tyrannical; in all palpably
Antichristian; opposite to and virtually destructive of Christ's fundamentality
and headship, in his Person or Natures; in his Offices, in all their parts; in
his States; in his virtues, merits and graces, privileges, Institutions and
ordinances, etc. in one or more, or all of those; and consequently, destruction
of the Catholic Faith and Religion, by Himself and his Apostles, and the whole
successive series of Christians throughout the World, professed, and practiced;
and finally of the truth of a Christian Church, his Body; all in effect
nullified thereby; yea, and a false head, other foundation, and another name,
being substituted in opposition to the true; the Religion I say, professed and
practiced in the Church of Rome, and that Church her self, especially since
Trent-Council, being such, as is here, (...), described; it follows by
necessary consequence, that the separation of the Church of England, both
primitive in her first Reformers, and present in their Successors persisting
in that happy divorce from her, and embodyed into a contradistinct, but true
Church, under Christ, the only true Head, in a Joint profession of his Faith,
the true Religion, is so far from being Schismatical (this being ever a
causeless and groundless separation, in or from matter of true Religion, in a
true Church,) that on the contrary, it is righteous and Justifyable, yea,
absolutely necessary by the authority of that Law, whereby we are strictly
commanded to renounce and abjure her society upon peril of sharing in her
Plagues; from which, Good Lord deliver us! Sir, if in this short defense of our
Reformation (which, it is like, may seem a kind of morose Tragedy, to an airy
Mercurius, but that I aim at a further goal) you think I have falsified or
misrepresented any principle of the Romish Church, charge me with it, and spare
not; and if I do not Justify what I have asserted, brand me for as great a
slanderer as your self.

Again, Sir,

True Religion being that, only of which the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of Truth,
is the Author; the Holy Scriptures, the Word of Truth, is the Rule; and the
Holy Church, (whereof our Church of England is part,) the Pillar and Ground of
Truth, is the public Trustee, Keeper, and Conservatory, (as Pillars or Tables
are, of affixed Papers and Proclamations) to wit, modo forensi, non
architectonico) derived and delivered (as is abovesaid) to her from the
Apostles, and to them by Christ, from God himself: And the Reformed Religion,
Faith, Doctrine and substantial Worship professed and practiced in and by the
Church of England, being such; as may appear from her public tests and
monuments, especially, the three Creeds, Apostolic, Nicene, and Athanasian;
and her doctrinal Articles, unanimously agreed upon, in two several
Convocations, viz, An. Dom. 1562 and 1604, etc. compared with the Sacred Canon;
whose test and trial in the Case she is willing to undergo; It follows, that
the Reformed (and only reforming) Religion, professed, and practiced in and by
the Church of England, is the only true Religion; which when you assault with
Argument, as now you undermine by Stratagem, you shall be dealt withal.

Moreover, Sir,

The Church of England is no less satisfied in her Clergy then in her Religion,
that as God has by a Law of as long duration as that of Sun and Moon in the
ordinary course of his Providence, appointed to publish and propagate his
Truth, and instruct his Church, by a constant series and succession of persons
of holy Order and Office authorized and qualified thereunto; so her Clergy is
such, having derived their orders together with their Religion ex traduce
Apostolica, from the original Seminary Founders of Christianity in England, who
are recorded in History the monumental Memory, and best Intelligencer in such
cases, to have been Apostles or Men Apostolical; whether Philip, or Joseph of
Arimathea sent by him, as Tertullian witnesses, lib. verse. Jud. or Simon
Zelotes, as Nicephorus; or St. Peter, as Baronius seems some times to incline;
or the great Doctor of the Gentiles himself, St. Paul, as Theodoret, etc. (not
Monk Austine, as your friends would have it) I here dispute not; being it is
generally agreed amongst ancient Writers, as Origin, and the above named
Tertullian and Theodoret, and others, that England's first Conversion, and
(consequently) Ministerial constitution, was contemporary with the very
primitive Church; and though both Religion and Clergy thus founded, was under a
long and dark Eclipse of interposed Popery in the Nation, much obscured and
suppressed, yet out of the sacred Seed-Plot of those who in that interval,
would afford nor heart, nor tongue, nor knee to Baal, both were happily
afterward Phenix-like revived, rescued out of the Antichristian rubbish, and
successively hitherto propagated: And supposing, Sir, (2.) That the ordination
and deputation of the English Clergy to the sacred Function had its rise not
from Jerusalem, immediately, but from or rather through Rome, Jure devoluto;
where is the inconveniency? or what prejudice accrueth to the Protestant
interest? or particularly to that of the English Clergy, by receiving
ordination from Rome, more then by receiving Baptism from her, (which is as
well as order, interchangeably esteemed valid between Papists and Protestants)?
order! then ordinances? a lineal, then a doctrinal succession? Moreover, being
that Ministerial Ordination, is only matter of Polity, unconcerned with
morals; how corrupt soever the Church, person, or medium of conveyance be; yet
notwithstanding, it can be nothing derogatory to succession, etc. more then the
lineal descent and extraction of our Savior's Humanity from Adam, through the
intervention of an impure Thamar, Rachab, Bathsheba, etc. (Harlots); or the
reception of the doctrine of the New Testament from a treacherous Judas who
betrayed our Savior, or a Judaizing Peter who denied him (the dark-side of
that Pillar) or of that of the Old, from malicious Jews, that crucified him;
or the successive transmition of Priestly orders from the Calf to the Martyr,
from Idolatrous Aaron, through a profane Hophni, and Phinehas, etc. and
Law-nullifying Superstitionaries, Scribes and Pharisees, etc. (who yet, you
know sat in Moses's Chair, as sure as you do in that of the scornful) to
Caiaphas himself, who had a negative vote in our Saviours's death (yet owned
for High Priest after it) more, I say, then such mediums and methods of
reception, are defamatory to that Sacred Humanity, that doctrine, those Orders,
etc. this then considered, I cannot reckon the succession or transmission of
Orders by means of, and through the polluted and adulterated Church of Rome,
more disparagement to the Protestant interest, then the derivation of Order and
Religion (as is pretended) from St. Peter, (who, you know, Sir, denied and
renounced the Head, and in that, the Body), is to the Popish. Yea, Sir,
supposing (3) lastly, (which yet I will not yield you more then the other) that
the Case of our first Reformers had been punctum indivisibile, one of that
extraordinary nature and necessity, that they must either by way of mutual
consent, (the major part with some Sacred Solemnity selecting one or more for
that purpose) mutually ordain each other, or else preach and prosecute the work
unordained; either opportunity of ordination from others not offering, or else
Violence obstructing; etc. doubtless, Sir, God who is so provident a Guardian
to his Church, has not left her destitute of a lawful warrantable expedient
under such an extraordinary case, and extremity as that; which can be no other
then one of those two now mentioned; and justifyable by the like practices in
the like emergent Cases, by a dispensation from above; that of Aedesius and
Frumentius, though private persons, yet instigated and iufluenced by the same
Spirit amongst the Indians (of whom they are said by Preaching of the Gospel to
have converted a great Nation,) as Eldad and Medad amongst the Jews, is by
Ruffinus and Theodoret famed throughout the World; and were it not but that I
fear a Church-Dame and a School-Dame may be treated with the like civility by
you, I would instance in one who you must needs confess employed her ferula to
good purpose, namely, a poor Captive Woman whom Nicephorus affirms to have
converted the Nation of the Iberians, and amongst the rest, their King and
Queen, the Scepter yielding to the Distaff, who became (two Royal
Ecclesiastes's) Preachers to their Subjects; this is a case the more
extraordinary, because the sex is such: there are more examples of this kind,
which I forbear; for, it is a generally confessed matter, that in such cases
both Preaching is warrantable in persons unordained, and also mutual ordination
by joynt-consent amongst Preachers, other opportunity, or remedy failing. And
now, Sir, for Scory's consecration -- but I shall commit a mortal solecisme by
and by, and deserve, at least to be excommunicated, though I should not in all
my Letter besides -- but tush, I am a great way off -- a Jove, a Fulmine! The
story makes such notorious May Game amongst our Neighbors, especially arrayed
in its formalities, that I think they would go near (as you do) to scorn and
jeer us down, ex cathedra, but that (and it is well as it lucks) we can confront
our Scory with their Joanne! consecration with procession; and if we add --
succession too, we are absolute Victors in the brize: but laugh, or frown, Sir,
in hypothesi in such an exigency as that mentioned, ordination and consecration
in the manner above specified equally justifyable in India, and in Jury, or (to
come a little nearer) in London, and in Rome, though bearing no truer mark of
the Beast, than that of the sign of a Nagg's- head, etc. and now it is out, do
your worst: In a word, in all cases extraordinary (as this, which I speak of,
is supposed to be), all Law in the world, of Nature, Nations, Canonical, Civil,
yea, that of God himself, allows a warrantable latitude. -- scope sufficient
for justification of the Orders both of our first and succeeding Clergy;
Englands usual Preachers; -- Now (once more) of their usual preaching, by you
charged both with folly and cruelty, (as hereafter their persons, with
ignorance and poverty) as though both ridiculous-full of follies, and a
hinderance of salvation; (Insomuch, that I cannot but wonder, that instead of
terming your self (or your Parson, making Hercules's twelve labors of his
yearly preachments) to such a Sermon once a month, Let. 1. page 107
you did not rather resolve never to hear, one all your life time) a severe
censure!

Sir, Being that [(...)] Salvation (according to its universally received
notion in the Church) is a recovery of mankind out of a condition of sin and
misery, into a state of grace and glory; it follows, that those Preachers and
Publishers of the Divine Will concerning it; who preach, publish, and declare
to the Church; the nature, the Author and Procurer; the terms and conditions;
and the proper means, methods, helps, etc. conducing hereunto; with due
explication and application of the same, acco^^^ng to the acroamatick rules of
that Divine art; must needs be in foro Ecclesiae, saving Preachers, at
leastwise, no Hinderers of Salvation; As, That the condition of all mankind by
nature, is a state of sin and misery, consisting in the loss of beatifick
friendly union and communion with God, (the sum of all created happiness) and
the incursion of his wrath, curse, and all the accumulative misery attending
his violated Law, both in this world, and that which is to come: That there is
no possible way of escape, or recovery, out of this condition, without a
Mediator or Redeemer, interposing as a third person, between God and the
Delinquent; partly, by reason of that infinite (both) disproportion, and
opposition, distance and repugnance between the two parties; and partly, by
reason of the Sinners own invincible insufficiency hereunto. That this only
Mediator, Redeemer and Savior, is the Christian's Messiah and Immanuel, the
Son of God incarnate in a true Humane Nature, assumed into personal subsistence
with the Godhead; as being of all persons in Heaven and Earth, (and indeed a
kind of compend of both) alone qualified for such a negotiation; his
twofold-Nature, Divine and Humane; his threefold Office, Kingly, Priestly, and
Prophetical; his twofold state of Humiliation, and Exaltation; his manifold
Virtues, especially his Spirit and Merit; his Laws, Ordinances and
Institutions, etc. all co-effectual herein: That true Faith namely, that sacred
principle and habit whereby we not only assent to Christ's Revelation of
himself, but receive and embrace his Person upon his own terms, as therein
offered and revealed; together with true Repentance, (another pious
qualification) in turning from sin to God, out of a due sense of the
hainousness, as well as danger, of the Offense, and Mercy through Christ in the
Offended, with firm resolutions and endeavors of amendment; are the conditions
necessarily required in, and of all, that partake of this Savior, and
Salvation: That Good Works, or the acts of sincere and conscionable Obedience,
performed to the Moral Law, are the necessary and inseparable testificats,
proofs and evidences of that Faith and Repentance; the Decalogue being ever the
best justification of the Creed: That the Word, Sacraments, Prayer, (but your
Heathen's touch of Devotion will not serve turn) and the like; are to be
pursued as the ordinary means and methods instituted and appointed of God, for
the producing of that Faith, Repentance, and Obedience: And, Methinks, I have
waded through great Mysteries in a little time; and if I gain a Proselyte by
the means, my labor is well bestowed; Amen say I; it is pity Wit should
perish: The Publican two I say, of such fundamental truths as these represented
in this Scheam, with due explication and application of the same, must needs, I
think, if there be any such in the world, be an edifying and saving way of
preaching; not a hinderance, but furtherance of Salvation. And, (to apply) That
the usual preaching in the Church of England, is such saving preaching, as well
as her Preachers, both her first Refromers and their Successors (infinitely
emproved, Answ. page 25.
since the High-Sheriff's Sermon in St. Marie's Pulpit at Oxford) in point of
Order and Office, sufficiently authorized; and the Religion by them purged and
preached, and in community with the People, jointly professed and practiced,
truly Catholick-Apostolick; She, Sir, is very well satisfied, and like to be
daily more and more confirmed in it (I hope) unless better Authority be offered
for an innovation in either Creed or Clergy, than what has ever as yet
appeared on this side the Sea, or to some of us beyond it, from the Learned,
either Men or Books: (But I Will assure you, for your comfort, you have little
reason to hope ever to see -- such days of virtue) -- What! and yet our usual
Preaching Folly, and a hinderance of Salvation! God forbid: -- Sir, If I have
failed in the premises, disprove them; if not, pray deny not the conclusion;
but this is antiquated game; it is ordinary with the Old Serpent to act the
Diabolus, where he cannot be Apolyon, accuse what he cannot destroy; when as
after a great expense of Venom and Subtilty, he cannot (thanks be to God)
either Vnminister our Clergy, nor Vn-church our Laity, to the ruin of the
whole; he cunningly plays his after-game, in traducing all; our Church, as
Apostate; our Religion, as Heresy; our Discipline, as Schism; our usual
Preaching, as Folly, and a hinderance of Salvation: and Sir, supposing I grant
part of your charge, that the Preaching of the first Reformers of our Church,
and what is usual in it at present, was, is -- the foolishness of preaching;
what then? such was that of the very Apostles, yet -- saving to them that
believed; and why not ours? theirs, notwithstanding the Folly charged upon it
by the Greeks -- saving! and ours, because of the same charge from a Grecizer
-- damning! destructive, a hinderance of Salvation! Segnior no; but to read
your destiny in theirs, by the same Oracle; if the usual preaching in our
Church be Foolishness, it is -- to them that perish, Foolishness; and between
Convert and Castaway, I know, and you will find no middle Limbo -- (...)! then
who fool twice? or worse! Your own dear Minion (with whom I will conclude this
particular) has told you the same upon the matter, in a more intelligible
language, (plain English instead of Greek) and that in a cornute, and thereby
indeed he pusheth you, (...), but foolhardy takes no warning; Answ. page 80.
either you expect (says he) that your Reader should believe nothing of what
you say (throughout your Letters) and then you play the Fool, and write to no
purpose; or you would have him believe all, and then you do little better than
('twere almost actionable, had I not a precedent for it) play the -- Knave! And
now, Sir, By way of reflection upon the whole, in order to a conclusion of this
general, What Reader, that is not either prepossest with your poisonous
Principles, and prejudiced, or else wholly stupefied and insatuated, when he
shall recollect within himself, and duly weigh the premises: What Reader I
say, thus qualified and considerate, will not readily Join issues with me in
this conclusion, viz. that the scope, project and design of your Letters of
Enquity, can be no other then instead of the pretended redress of the Contempt
of the Reformed Religion and Clergy, to expose, and betray both to it, and by
means thereof propagate (what your Rhapsody abounds withal) most pestilent
and licentious Principles and Practices, Atheism, Libertinisme, preparatives
to Popery, Sensuality, and what not, to the utter subversion of both; though
you have Politician-like for cautelous Guards to the design observable
throughout your Epistles, (which I here note once for all) cunningly interwoven
Sly insinuations, with dextrous retrieves; prologues from Pilate, and Epilogues
from the Harlot, washing your Hands with -- the one, as if you meant no hurt,
and wipeing your Mouth with the other, as if you had done none; but --
praemonitus, praemunitus! And this may suffice for the first part of my
undertaking, viz. the detecting of the Stratagem and design of your Enquiry,
etc. in order to the prepossessing or dispossessing of your Reader.

As touching the Second General, viz.
An Answer to your Process formed against the Clergy and Religion, (the Clergy
expressly, Religion more implicitly.) What that is, Sir, will best appear from
your own Summary. Let. 1. page 3.
-- Whatever has heretofore (say you) or does at present, lessen the value of
our Clergy, or render it in any degree less serviceable to the world, than
might be reasonably hoped, may be easily referred to two very plain things; the
Ignorance of some, and Poverty of others of the Clergy. Where there be three
Observables. The First is, That the Articles of your Charge drawn up against
the English Clergy, as the Grounds and Occasions of their Contempt in the
Laity; and whatever renders them less valuable in the world, and (what
inseparably attends that) less serviceable to it, are summarily these two,
Ignorance and Poverty: The one an Intellectual Defect, the other a Civil; (an
Assault upon both Head and Heel at once; exceeding the Limits of Satan's
Precinct, confined, you know, to the latter, though for Method, you exactly
match his upon the whole kind, in this of yours upon the Sacred Order of it;
Bold Assassinate! who dares to attact his head, whose eternal right it is to
break thine! But to prosecute the Remark;) So that Corruptions in Judgment, and
erroneous Principles, that Head-Leprosie (which in another kind did of all
others, render a Jew unclean and excommunicable) the faulty Morals of Hophni's
and Phinhass's, the Bell without the Pomegranate; Canonieal Doctrine attended
with Apocryphal Manners; Precisian Censoriousness, as though each would rob
other of the benefit of Aetius's Ladder, and climb up to heaven without company
( Constantine's Sarcasme to the Novatian Bishop) mutual Contempt, Animosities,
Rancours, Inveteracies, bitter and railing Invectives toward each other (which
I am sorry that I am enforced to recount) more becoming a Shimei (be Judge)
than a Levite: and tell me if ever the dissenting Sects of Athen's Philosophers
did more fiercely impugn each other; the Stoic, the Epicurean; the
Peripatetick the Stoic; the more refined Platonic, all of them; than have
English Pulpit-sects and Sub-sects one another? Ephraim against Manasseh, and
Manasseh against Ephraim; as you possibly against me, for using the Simile:
Moreover the give-give- Corban of others more studious (to their shame) for
Mammon to themselves, than for Mannah for their Flock; as if the Offices of the
Fourth Commandment, for one day, might expiate their breach of the Tenth all
the week long; whom, it is marvel that Solomon the wise, did not list into his
Quaternion of Insatiables: the nonresidence of others, Vbiquitaries,
(wandring-Stars) but possibly you reckon Abraham's begetting of Isaac,
conviction enough for such: The Laodicean Neutrality, and Lukewarmness of
others (Clergy-Gallio's) negligence and idleness, or remissness in the Sacred
Function; these (I say) and many more of such little-little- Venials (by you,
for Reasons best known to your self, overpassed in silence, as is also, a most
certain ground of Clergy-Contempt, the Vntowardness, Peevishness and Prejudices
of the Vulgar, noted by your Answerer) must either be construed none, or
insufficient Grounds and Occasions of the Contempt of the Clergy; or else by a
necessary Aposiopesis, or such a Mysterious Reserve as you were chastised for
above, understood as included under your Universal Diminutive -- Whatever
lessens the value or serviceableness of the Clergy, etc. that is, according to
your Oracular Tripus, Ignorance and Poverty.

The Second Observable is, that the two Grounds and Occasions of Contempt
charged upon the Clergy, viz. Ignorance and Poverty, are here limited to a
Particularity or small number of persons; The Ignorance of some (say you) and
the Poverty of others; whereas, Sir, both in your Title, and throughout the
whole contexture of your Inquest, not Particulars, but the Clergy indefinitely,
that is (by all usual and allowed Construction, an Indefinite being equivalent
to a General or an Universal) at least the ma^or part and main body of the
Clergy is charged with Contempt; persons of all persuasions, Conformists and
Nonconformists promiscuously, joint-Professors and Propagators of the same
Reformed Religion, (and to my knowledge, several of those, both learned and
rich; and yet contemptible!) now what an Inconsistency is this, which you
confront us with at the very first? The Contempt charged, general; and yet the
Grounds of this Contempt, particular! So that your Argument, if any, must stand
thus; Of the English Clergy, some are ignorant, others poor, and consequently
some or other contemptible; ergo, the English Clergy is indefinitely
contemptible! Now one single Ternion would salve the Antecedent; but the
Generality must make good the Consequent; where then is the Consequence of your
Argument? Of the Laity of England, the Author of the Contempt of the Clergy,
the Friendly Debater, and the little Politist, (all supposed to be Laymen) are
Atheists and Religion-Mockers: Ergo, The Laity of England is such! What State,
Order, Degree, or Profession of men can be secure from your Lash, after this
Illogical licentious rate of Reasoning? The Gentry and Nobility not exempted;
no nor the Heptarchy it self, if you had lived in the days of the seven Kings;
(which had been our better security for your ever being troublesome to us, than
I doubt Devonshire is like to prove.) Of our Nobles, some are as ignorant in
their Sphere, as the Clergy is in theirs; as unfit for Council (with submission
be it spoken) as these are for the Pulpit; others poor enough, their Quality
considered; Ergo, the English Nobility and Gentry are contemptible! If timely
check be not by Authority, or otherwise, given to such daring Insolency, your
Inquisition of Contempt, may, for ought I know, become ambulatory, and in its
Circuit, reach the Gentry, Nobility, Magistracy, yea, at length the Tribe of
Judah it self, as at present, that of Levi; for your strain of Argument here
offered, suits to all those States indifferently; as the bolder exemplification
of it, would to the Original President which you act by; wherein, you know,
Moses as well as Aaron was a Sharer: Sir, I hope better things of you, than
that you have prologued any such Design with your Sarcasme spent in the case of
the Rhetorical Mayor (as you are pleased to Epithet him) when he welcomed His
present Majesty to his Corporation (the next greatest defense to the Reformed
Religion in the world) with a Complement derived from Adam, Let. 2. page 58.
as you say the Ministers Preface is; from whom, it may be, the Mayor learned
to date his Complement: I hope (I say) better things of you; (though I must
tell you, Magistrate here flouted, and Magistracy, as well as Minister and
Ministry, Person and Office, are near Correlates) having a Charity for all,
whom I see to have any for themselves. But to return thither from whence I have
digressed: Must not then your inquisitive Method needs appear to any discerning
Reader, very wild and irrational? For if only some or other of the Clergy be
ignorant or poor, how comes it to pass that the only some or other of the
Clergy, instead of the Generality, is not by you endited and enquired into as
contemptible? Or if upon the slender foundation of such Premises, the Ignorance
of some, and the Poverty of others, you must needs erect an Inquisition of
Contempt; why of all other Orders and Professions, is the Clergy singled out
for the subject matter hereof? why not, for instance, Lawyers and Physicians?
Especially, since you confess, that in both those Professions, there be not
some or other, but many a Contemptible Creature (and it is true; Let. 1. p. 80,
81.
and for ought you know, I am one of those Contemptibles) but if so, how comes
it to pass that they luck to escape your Inquest? Is it because you are afraid
of theirs, if occasion should be? as in case of Over-intimacy with your Hects
in the one, or Cozen Abigail in the other? For he must be an Ignoramus himself,
that knows not, that what you charge upon the Clergy, reigns in both Faculties:
Nor can you be insensible, that in Physic in particular, a Plush Jacquet is of
that authority to Dubb with a Doctorato; as never was Black-Coat in the
Spiritual-ship (though you cannot be a greater stranger to the Mysteries of
Grace, than this Master Doctor is to those of Nature, devoid of all the
Magisterial Accomplishmenns of that Noble Profession) especially if our man in
Plush do but luck upon as good a Knack of unriddling the Neapolitan Mystery
(one of greater iniquity than that of Chestnuts) as your Gentlemen of the Inns
of Court (those Nurseries of Law and Lawyers) have of knowing the four Terms,
the Porter's Name, and eating without a Trencher; yet is your Contempt poured
wholly upon the Clergy!

But, Sir, (to proceed) That notwithstanding your Particularities here, of some
or others Ignorant and Poor, etc. the very Body and Generality of the Clergy is
to be understood as co-involved -- crimine in uno: Besides what has been
already said, it will appear to your Reader from the third and last Observable,
viz. That your Charge is co-extended to Times (both) Past and Present. Whatever
(say you) has heretofore, or does at present lessen the valuableness or
serviceableness of the Clergy, may be referred to Ignorance and Poverty. Now,
Sir, the Extent of Time best proves the Extent of Persons charged; and what
this Extent of Time past and present is, does best appear from your own Comment
(which has been sufficiently scanned) namely, that it is not a Decade or two,
ten, twenty, or thirty years; but a whole Century, the age of our Reformation,
(though not of our Religion, which is as ancient as God himself) viz. the
hundred years last past; Let. 1. p. 59.
the usual Doctrine Preached, yea, and Printed, during which time (and
consequently, the Reformed Religion it self) is by you charged with Folly, Let.
1. p. 38.
and such ridiculous and impertinent Matter, as is apt to bring Contempt upon
the Preacher, and the Religion by him professed; and therefore doomed by you as
a hinderance of Salvation, Let. 1. p. 81.
rather than a Means conducing to it: From all which, Sir, it is abundantly
manifest (your Reader be Judge) that the very first Reformers of the Church of
England, and their Successors, to, and at this day, as touching the Generality
of them, are understood in and by the Clergy in your Letters of Enquiry, which
is charged (how justly, is to be tried) with Ignorance and Poverty.

Which Charge being a kind of complex Theme (but what, does like your Ministers
Text, untwist it self) containing two Articles, Ignorance and Poverty, shall in
my Answer thereunto be distinctly considered.

As touching the Ignorance of the Clergy, I will briefly enquire into these
Particulars, viz.

1. What particular kind of Knowledge is requisite in the Clergy, so as to free
them from the (just) imputation of (its opposite) Ignorance.

2. Whether the Clergy of the Church of England be justly chargeable with the
want of that Knowledge? And lastly,

3. I will give a Formal Answer to your Charge and Allegations in the
Particular; for I have vouched it, though it cost me more Pen, Ink and Paper
than both the other two.

As touching the first:
Knowledge, Sir, is a matter of very large extent, indeed, an Encyclopoedy,
comprehensive of Divine, Angelical, and Humane (Diabolical we excommunicate,
and yours, if such) Humane again, first, Natural-Moral; the Original Habits of
first Principles, and connate Notions; that (...) or universal Seminary, which
Anaxagoras dreamed of, but what every Son of Adam is more or less possessed of.

Secondly, Artificial and acquired; both Mechanic, as inferior Arts,
Mysteries and Manufacture; and Magistral, Mental and Principal; namely,
Natural-Moral parts and principles, advanced, polished and improved by all the
Accessory and Artificial helps and advantages of Education, Experience,
Discourse, Converse with Men or Books, etc. but especially that of Literature,
(or all concurring) famed throughout the world (in case of considerable
proficiency in it) under the notion of Learning, the Lucriferous Profession of
many, the distinguishing Accomplishment of all that are ennobled herewith;
justly valuable amongst men, partly by the excellency of its Ob^ect; partly by
its necessity in point of use and humane exigency; comprehensive of all the
several Acquists of Knowledge, Natural, Moral, Civil, Divine, etc. both of
Philosophy in all its parts, the Liberal Arts and Sciences, Logic, Rhetoric,
Physics, Metaphysics, Mathematics, (Astronomy, Geometry, Optics, etc.)
Ethics, Politics, Oeconomicks, etc. and of the Learned Languages, the
Deferents and V^h^cles of Knowledge, both Western and Oriental, Latin, Greek,
Hebrew, Syriack, Arabic, etc. And of the noble Professions, whereunto all
these are subservient; particularly, Law, Physic and Divinity; Theology or
Divinity again (the only Profession concern d in your Enquiry) Dogmatical,
Polemical, Acroamatical or Concional, Casuistical, etc. that the Man of God may
be an accomplished Artist in Positives, and Raiser of Doctrine, Confounder of
Heresies, Interpreter of Scripture, Resolver of Cases of Conscience, etc. (to
use your own Idiom, as that which happily will like you best.) And what is an
Appendant hereupon, Skill in Jewish Learning, Ecclesiastical History,
Chronology, Heresiology, Martyrology, Practicals, and the like. And Thirdly and
lastly, Knowledge supernatural, immediately infused by God, whether
extraordinary or ordinary, common or special, etc.

Now, Sir, I hope it is not required of the Clergy, that they all, or the
generality of them, by you arraigned, be upon peril of imputation of Ignorance
from you, or Contempt from the Laity, Masters of Solomon's Encyclopoedy (noted
by a little acquaintance of yours, Pineda;) or Justinian's Pandects; or yet
(which has a nearer relation to their Faculty) of Origen's Hexapla, or the
Polyglott Bible (otherwise than to be possessors of them in the little Hole
over the Oven, provided it be large enough to hold it) or that they be able to
preach with Cloven Tongues; or to offer good Hypotheses about the Longitude,
the Quadrature of the Circle, a perpetuum mobile; besides Non-residents, a
Vacuum in Nature, besides what you alledg to be in themselves: or that they be
skilled in the Circulation, Fermentation, and all the various Phenomenon of the
Blood, and in reading of Lectures of Anatomy, besides that of the Heart; and
least of all, that they skill in the Mysteries of your approved-of Cobbler and
Tinker; nor yet, (which comes nearer to Primitive example) in the employ of a
Customehouse-man, or Fisherman, or the like. In a word, that they be absolute
Linguists, Orators, Philosophers, Naturalists, Mathematicians, Astronomers,
Civilians, Canonists, Politicians, etc. qualified for the Academy as well as
for the Church; the Chair, as the Pulpit; and the Bench or Cabal, as for
either; and all this (I say) upon peril of the censure of Ignorance from you,
or of Contempt from the Laity; else, Sir, you might as well have extended your
charge to the whole sixteen hundreds of years last past, as to the last single
Century; and have quarreled the Apostles themselves, for their little skill in
Politics, or Mathematics, and other Parts of Philosophy; and that they were
not as dexterous in Squaring of the Circle, as many of them were in casting of
a Net; and that they have not left us as exact a Description of the World in
the Moon, as of that beyond it; and especially the Fathers of the Church, both
Eastern and Western, in that of the whole Paternity, only one single
Duumvirate, one for each Climate, Origin and Jerome, (those Christian
Masorites) were Masters of the Holy Tongue (the Hebrew) the knowledge whereof
is so necessary to that Holy Profession.

Well then, there is a singular sort of Knowledge requisite in the Clergy, as
such; and what that is, must (as I conceive) be determined, partly by the
respective Exigencies of the Church, whose Lights and Guides, the Clergy are,
or ought to be; partly by those particular Services which the All-wise Founder
of the Society, has appointed and apportioned to each of them therein; and
both the one and the other again, partly, by the respective Constitutions of
the Church, and partly, by the Successive Revolutions and Interchanges, as
corruptions in Doctrine or Life, or both; Apostasy, Captivity, and Persecution,
etc. incident thereunto; though the Quotient, or particular Dimensum, and
definite proportion of Knowledge res ectively necessary in each Minister, for
each piece of Service incumbent upon him; under each Constitution or Condition
of the Church, or each emergent exigency thereof, is hardly, I think,
determinable by any ordinary Mortal, unless he had been with S. Paul in the
third Heavens, or could see beyond the Firmament, and read by that Light, which
I understand, is in accessible.

Now then, the Constitution of the Church being (as has been declared above)
first Domestical, impropriated within the Confines of one Family; (as from Adam
downwards during the Patriarchy;) from thence advanced to National; and at
last, to Oecumenick or Universal (as may appear, if you turn your Bible
backward to the First Adam, and then in a reversed order downward again to the
Second) the great Continent of both Jew and Gentile, founded by Christ and his
Apostles: This Christian Church again, being considerable, both as originally
founded, and as successively propagated; and both the Jewish and Christian
Church being subject to, yea, frequently the Subjects of Heresy, Idolatry,
Captivity, Persecution, Contempt, etc. It is rational to believe, that the wise
God has all along appropriated and apportioned persons furnished with suitable
Knowledge, and necessary Qualifications, to all those respective Constitutions,
Revolutions, and emergent Exigencies of his Church: Yea, in matter of Fact, it
is certain from History, both Sacred and Profane; and very observable amongst
other provisions, was both the Confusion of Languages, preparatory to a
National extent, in the Jewish Church; and the sacred Effusion of them, in
order to an Oecumenick and Universal one, in the Christian, the chief Subject
of this Enquiry. The Architect and chief Founder of the Christian Church, is
Jesus Christ, in whom is the fullness both of the Godhead, and of Godliness,
Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, accumulative measures of the Divine Spirit:
the Apostles, his Associates, and Ministerial Co-operaries with him in the
Plantation, were furnished with an extraordinary share in the same Spirit;
jointly demonstrating the Divinity of the Word in their mouths, by infallible
Signs and Seals of it in their hands; Oracles with Miracles. Again, the Church
being founded, and the chief Founder removed from his Colony, and the rest
ready to follow; the same God who appointed Prophets, Apostles and Evangelists
for the Original Foundation and Gathering of his Church, provides Pastors and
Teachers (a constant and inviolable Order and Series of Ecclesiastical persons)
for the successive edification and perfecting thereof, in propagating and
preserving the received Religion; all Copartners in the same hereditary Spirit;
though with the difference of ordinary and extraordinary, between them and
their Predecessors; and also some considerable diversification amongst
themselves, as touching particular Gifts, or particular set Forms and Degrees
of those Gifts, or their usefulness and serviceableness in the Church; being
all universally suited to her particular emergent States, Conditions and
Exigencies: thus in case of carnal Security, there is a Boanerges; in case of
Persecution and Calamity, a Barnabas; in case of Neutrality and Lukewarmness, a
Zelotes; in case of Heresy or Corruption in Doctrine, Champion-Defenders of
the Faith; Origin against a Celsus; Jerome against a Helvidius, Jovinian,
Vigilantius, etc. Augustine against an Arrius (as also Athanasius) a Donatus, a
Manichean, a Pelagius, etc. Basil against an Eunomius; Cyprian against a
Novatus; Hilary against a Constantius; Arnobius and Lactantius against
obstinate Gentiles; nay whole Councils and Consistories of Orthodox Fathers
against the prevailing Heresies of their Times successively; the Nicene,
Constantinopolitan, Ep^esine, and Chalcedonian, against the same number of
Arch-Hereticks, Arrius, Macedonius, Nestorius, and Eutyches; so that the Church
is never left without a witness of Gods Truth, more than the World is, of his
Power; Moreover, in case of Defamation, Reproach, or Contempt of Religion or
Clergy, still some or other strenuous Apologist; for a Tertullus, a Tertullian,
etc. Briefly, Sir, in this Mystical Body, (like as it is in the Natural; S.
Paul's Simile, else I durst not use it) some of her Official Members are eminent
for one gift, others for another; some for Tongues, others for Interpretation
of Scripture; others for Prophecy or Preaching; some for Positives; others for
Controversy; others for a dexterous resolution of Cases of Conscience; others
again, not all, (for you know, Sir, a double Cap may fit a Head, which a Mitre
will not) for Ecclesiastic Polity and Government, etc. But the whole (as I
said before) universally accommodated to all the respective, States,
Conditions, and emergent Exigencies of the Church, whose Pastors, Teachers,
Guides and Overseers they are by eternal sanction constituted and established.

In fine, Sir, There be two grand Official Acts necessarily incumbent upon the
Clergy, as the public Guides, Teachers and Instructors of the Church; namely,
the propagation, and the preservation, the delivery, and the security of Divine
Truth and Religion; the revelation of it to the Church, and the defense of it
being revealed, against its and her Enemies. Now in order to a laudable
performance of these Offices, there is 1. absolutely prerequired in point of
privilege, the derivation and reception of that Religion from God himself, the
Author of all Truth, as well as being: and 2. ordinarily by way of necessary
antecedent and preparative to all, a competent knowledge of, and skill in the
Latin, Greek and Hebrew Tongues (those, at least, the first being of general
use, as in the pursuit of all manner of knowledge in general, so of Divine in
particular; both the other two being the Original Languages of that only
Authentic Revelation of God and his Will, the Holy Scriptures, co-inspired of
God, together with the Doctrine therein contained, and thereby conveyed, and
the last Test of Sacred Truth in all Appeals;) in Logical Methods of
Ratiocination and Discourse; in Natural and Moral Philosophy; in Metaphysics,
and the other more useful parts of Humane Literature, that Naturals being
polished and somewhat refined by these (the Divine being founded in the Man)
our Ecclesiastic Candidate may be the better prepared for his sacred Province
and Mystery, for Theology in all its parts, Dogmatical, Polemical, Acroamatical
and Concional, etc. for the reception of Sacred Truth from God, ordinarily
conveyed in the use of Means, namely, (as to Ministerial accomplishment)
Learning and Learned Languages, the great deferents of knowledge; (whence is
observable the Divine Providence in the successive circulation of Learning and
Religion together in the world, viz. from its very Aborigines and the
Chaldeans, to the Egyptians; from them, to the Grecians; from them, to the
Romans; till at last arrived in this Island, to the rescuing of it from its
Original Darkness) for the propagating of this Truth being received, whether by
way of sacred Orthotomy in a due explication and application thereof, or a
dextrous resolution of cases of Conscience, or writing, or otherwise; and
lastly for the preserving and securing of it, when published or propagated,
partly by a polemick defense of, and contending for the Faith; partly by a due
regular Pastoral conduct and Church Discipline, etc. Now, Sir, as imperitia
culpae adnumeratur, (as says the Aquilian Law) Ignorance by you charged, is a
great crime in the Clergy, and no less plague to the Laity; for if their very
Light be Darkness, how great must be that Darkness? So on the contrary; the
Qualifications mentioned, concurring with other Supernatural Gifts and
Ecclesiastic Order, and managed with competent wisdom, prudence, and
discretion, I conceive sufficient in foro Ecclesiae, to denominate a person, an
able Minister of the New Testament; and then Ambasciator non protapena; Let. 1.
p. 123.
which very thing is happily confirmed by your own little authority; for though
it be not necessary (say you) for every Guide of a Parish, to understand all
the Oriental Languages, or to make exactly elegant, or profound Discourses for
the Pulpit, (both which, ib. p. 38.
by your own confession, our Clergy do, and therefore instead of defect,
super-erogate) yet most certainly, it is very requisite that he should be so
far learned and udicious, as prudently to advise, direct, inform and satisfy
the people in holy matters. etc. And if the Author of the Contempt of our
Clergy, once prove their incompetency of Qualification, and insufficiency to
these Ministerial Act sand Offices, he is (I must needs say) a most dextrous
Ingenioso! else (which had not his own Minion said, Ans. p. 80
I durst not) Fool or Knave!

As touching the Second Particular.
That the Clergy of the Church of England, Sir, is justly chargeable with the
want of that Ministerial Knowledge, as explained, or with Ignorance and
Insufficiency; I do in their name and behalf, peremptorily deny. That in the
Twilight indeed, and early days of the Reformation, Preaching like the
constitution of the Church it self, was rude and impolite; is confessed: Yea,
nor is it denied, but that there be here and there -- coecus coeco dux, such as
your Booty-Antagonist may be, or some others of his Brother-Levites, whose only
Manna is a Homily, and Incense, Liturgy! Dutiful Sons of the Church, who can
speak as an indulgent Mother has taught them! and here and there a
Sixth-Rate-Non-conformist, a choice Vessel (possibly) but poorly fraughted!
Such, I deny not, but there be, of both Predicaments; who to their own shame
and ignominy (but that is the least) and to the disparagement in tantum of
their Function, Doctrine, and Church wherein they live, are devoid not only of
the Ornamental part of Learning, (we could abate them that) but even of what is
absolutely requisite to render them apt to teach, or workmen that need not to
be ashamed, who may therefore be most justly contemned; for Logic, Rhetoric,
and other necessary parts of Philosophy, those they left behind them in the
University (if they were ever there) from whence they came -- ut canis e Nilo:
For Languages, a little Latin serves turn, (and it were well for Priscian,
that there were none at all) less Greek; and as to the Hebrew, -- that is a
Holy of Holies, unapproachable by ordinary Priests; a Disgrace to themselves,
to the Church, to the Ministry, and Religion! May Authority for ever doom such
to the Desk; but that I bethink my self, it is too near to the Pulpit, etc. You
see, Sir, you cannot be more severe than my self, where there is occasion for
it. But now, Sir, will you draw your Argument from the Day Star to the
Meridian? or because only here and there a dim Light in it, disparage our
Candlestick? What is the rude impolite, yea, impertinent, Ministrations and
Insufficiency of a few, to a polished generality? or indeed, Plurality? Nay
rather, will not the accomplishment and renown of the generality, make abundant
recompense for the defects and disgrace of a few? So that there is greater
reason for publishing the Credit, than the Contempt of the English Clergy: -- a
Clergy that deserves more a Panegyric, than needs my Apology, or fears your
Inquest. Two things I will be bold to assert here:

1. There is no Profession in the world, wherein there have been so many
persons eminent for all the several parts in the whole Encyclopoedy of Learning
as the Clergy, especially the English.

Again, 2. There is no Hierarchy or Clergy in the world, wherein there have
been so many persons eminent for Theological accomplishments, as the Clergy of
the Church of England. What! and yet ignorant? yet contemptible? History may to
all, Memory to many, and impartial observation at present, save the labor of a
List or Catalogue of such Worthies in the British Church, as might have
rivall'd it in competitorship with any Clergy in the world since the
Apostolical it self: But frustra Herculem! For Orthodoxy and practical
Divinity, for a solid and clear Exposition of Scripture, for acute decision of
Controversy, for admirable dexterity in resolving of Cases of Conscience, for
an incomparable faculty in preaching and praying, even to an emulation in
Transmarine Divines (all attended with) a correspondent course of Life, the
Vrim with the Thummim; for these (I say) the British Ministry has been, even
to a wonder, renowned all the world over. -- Stupor mundi Clerus Britannicus!
But to Matter of Fact.

As touching the Third and last Particular, relating to the Ignorance of the
Clergy, viz. your Charge and Allegations in the Case, which I have vouched to
give answer to;

Your Inquisition, Sir, I find to be like a Country-Assize, circular; nimbly
pursued by several Stages; (as if your self in riding the Circuit (not your
Votive Parson) had rid Sun and Moon, both down and up again;) viz. inferior
Schools, the Academy, the Pulpit; for that you may convict the Clergy in the
last, you criminate both the former; undermining (as is plain) the Church in
the School, Religion (in its great defense) Learning. Bold Pursuivant! whom
neither an ungovernable School-Fry, nor Academical Splendor, nor the dread of
an Ecclesiastic Key, no nor the reverence of a Mitre, has deterred from the
Attempt: But I prepare to follow you, Sir, (...), in vindicating the Schools,
the Universities, and the Clergy of England, all by you criminated; submitting
all to the Readers Vmpirage.

Your Process then is commenced and prosecuted ab ovo ad mala; from the very
first Initials and Rudiments of Literature; -- the beginnings of Education,
Let. 1. p. 3, 4.
(in your own phrase) in the first Trivial Schools ((...)) and the first thing
you criminate herein, is the old fashioned Methods and Discipline of Schooling
it self, as undoubtedly chargeable with a great part of our Misfortunes,
alleging very remarkable and mischievous loss of time, and abuse of Youth, by
means thereof: A great Charge! especially if we consider that the loss or abuse
of our tender and more disciplinable time, the Morning of our Age, wherein
knowledge is aptest to incorporate with our very Constitution, is like an
Error in the first concoction, hardly, if ever, rectifiable. But to proof,
Sir, Generalia non pungunt; for my part; I perceive none, but a Magisterial
Adviso of some cheering Alleviative to Lads kept to sixteen or sevemeen years
of age, Let. 1. ib.
in pure slavery to a few Latin and Greek words. Sir, I wonder not, that he
who is an enemy to our Clergy, and Religion, is such to our Literature and
Knowledge likewise; or that he who is an enemy to Knowledge, is such to those
Learned and universally useful Languages; its great Vehicles and means of
Conveyance; which the English Nation, especially the Church (stocked and stored
out of the younger Nurseries, the Schools) is become beyond any in the world,
the greatest Mistress of; and that not out of veneration to Rome or Athens
neither, but from a sense of their universal usefulness and subserviency to
higher Professions in Church and State; to a great emulation and grudge in the
Romish Church, wherein an Vrban-Professor, and here and there a Padro-Latino
(for whom yet a Westminster-Lad, who never saw a second Climacterical, would
serve for a (...)) are believed to influence much further than Newcastle. And
of this your grudge and enmity against those Languages, your scornful
Diminutive, is test sufficient; -- a few Latin and Greek words! say you; and
those ushered in with your debasing term of Vassalage and Drudgery, pure
Slavery! (and followed with usual Sarcasmes;) which yet Scholars usually upon
reflection, account delectable. But it is evident throughout your Letters
(which I advertise the Reader of once for all) that by frightful Mormoes, and
vilifying representations, you study to deter and discourage both Parents from
sending, and Youth from going to either School or University; but (...).

As touching the Latin and Greek, and those other Learned Languages, I assert;
that both in regard those are the Parasceuastick part of Learning, and the
general preparatives to Knowledge; and also that the Acquist of them, in their
respective Orthography, Prosody, Etymology, Syntax, various Idioms, copious
Significancy, due use and Elegancy, etc. is a purchase of long time; it being
so, I say, they must therefore be early attempted, closely pursued, or (believe
it) never perfected.

But to go on; And good Sir, I pray what is that new-Model your Wisdom offers,
instead of the antiquated one, as an alleviative or expedient, under this same
Grammatical Drudgery? -- (...)! You propound it disjunctively, for the greater
choice; one is -- Reading of some innocent English Authors for some part of the
time; English Authors by Latin and Greek Scholars till they can write
themselves sixteen or seventeen! Howbeit your Reader may the less wonder at
this, whenas you do afterward advise the very same to the flourishing
Vniversity-Youth: But remember, Sir, that all this while you are processing of
the Clergy; those you condemn and contemn as ignorant; that you may prove them
such in the Church, you criminate their Education in School and University; in
both those, you reprehend not Want, but Excess of Learning, for ought I see:
Latin and Greek too much; and for English, not enough. Strange Argument! The
Clergy is too much knowing and learned in the School and University; ergo, too
little knowing, and ignorant in the Pulpit: -- Risum tencatis amici!

But what English, what innocent Authors do you mean? Prophets, Apostles and
Evangelists? The Bible is used by them; but that I dare say and swear is not
your Meaning. What then? Historians? Leave that Province to the History-Readers
in the Universities: Besides, the Remedy would prove worse than any Disease you
can apprehend in the case, it being sufficiently known that such Youths as have
bended their early Genius's to charming History; have forestalled all their
future hopes, and perfectly lost the Scholar in the Historian. Moreover, if
English must be the Study, such an emasculated Muse were fitter for your
School-Dames Ferula, than for that of your little mighty Governors of Paul's
School, or Westminster, etc.

You had done well, Sir, to have specified your innocent English Authors, that
we might have known your Meaning, as now we suspect it.

Another Expedient (in case the former do not take) is the teaching Lads, Let.
1. page 5.
the Principles of Arithmetic and Geometry, and such like parts of Learning,
as what they might be much more easily taught (say you) than what is commonly
offered to them. -- A necessary Qualification for a Clergyman, pre-required of
him in the Low-Form-Schools, upon peril of the imputation of Ignorance, and
Contempt to boot, in the Pulpit! (as the latter of them, Geometry, was by
Pythagoras in his Scholars, who lost Justin Martyr by the means.) The Rule of
Three, a special Directory in the Mystery of the Sacred Trinity! and the
Terrestrial Globe, to the Celestial! Though I deny not, but that those are
Ornamental parts of Literature, but what must be learned in their due order, so
as not to interfere with the more useful and necessary. And do you reckon and
recommend the difficult Hypotheses in Mathematics, and no less difficult terms
of a Quantitas continua, Points, Lines, Superfice, Rectilineal, Curvilineal,
Parallel, Perpendicular, and (what are more likely to bring down the Pin of the
Mouth than a Triangle,) Rectangular, Obliquangular, Obtusangular, acutangular,
Parallelograms, Parallelepipeds, and such Broadsides as these (than which (say
what you will) Homer himself never discharged larger) do you (I say) reckon or
recommend these as more easily taught and learned than the early Rudiments
usually offered Lads by their School-Guides, as the introductory and
preparative part of Learning? Are Euclid's Elements the easiest?

Another Expedient in your new Model (choice enough) is the more insensible and
advantageous instilling and infusing of Languages into Youth, Let. 1. p. 8.
by reading of Philosophical Authors, etc. A likely matter, that a Schoolboy
will prove considerable Proficient in reading Philosophers, which the most
sagacious can hardly master ante annum Sacerdotalem, before that age wherein a
Jew was licensed to read Ezeckiel. And why Philosophical Lectures? For the
Language only? Can such a Wiseling as you be ignorant that there is infinitely
better both Greek and Latin, than ever Philosophy was dressd in? For the
Matter only? that every Boy may become a Sophi! then adieu to the Languages.
For both Language and Doctrine? that I doubt me will prove a more difficult
Province to a Novice, than what is usually offered to them. What your universal
Character should be, which you say would be the happiest thing that the world
could wish for (but you have forgot, it is indeed at the further end of the
Book, the virtuous days of refounding King Henry 's Toll, Let. 1. p. 124.
but it may be they are co-incident) what this (I say) should be, I cannot
guess, unless you mean the Language of the Beast, the Romish Sh^bboleth; and
very ordinary Latin, you know, will serve for that. But in fine, Sir, if in
your little House by the Churchyard, Youth may be sufficiently Schooled in
Mathematics, and the other parts of Philosophy, then farewell Universities for
ever!

The second thing you reprehend in common Schools, Let. 1. page 13.
is the promiscuous inconsiderate sending of all kind of Lads to the
University, whatever their Parts, or Purses, or Instructions be, etc. Where
first I remark, that you grudge our Universities their Youth, as you do our
Church their Clergy; well knowing, that it is the Nursery that feeds and
surnisheth the Vineyard. Again, the Reader cannot be ignorant how many choice
and worthy Instruments both in Church and State, have been; whom neither of
them had ever enjoyed, had Infantparts (afterward ripened into a Pregnancy)
and a shortness of Purse (which yet Friends, Founders and Benefactors
administer relief under) barred their admittance into Universities; as
unskilfulness in Geometry did Justine Martyr's into Pythagoras's School: and
yet I am as apprehensive as your self, what Provisions and Preparations are
requisite to the undertaking of the Ministry. As for the Letters commendatory
of the lamentable pitiful construing-Master, as you entitle him, and the short
Instructions given his Pupil, I leave you to the Lash of his own severer
Ferula; though I am as little insensible of the great charge and trust of
School-Guides, as of the concern of the Ministry now mentioned.

As for that great Qualification in Academicks and Churchmen, Let. 1. p. 22,
23.
by very few minded (as you regret) besides your self, namely, a good
constitution and health of Body, an Athletick Crasis, I know none so eminent
for it as your all-damning and illiterate Gentlemen (which we have had occasion
to speak of) for you know, Sir, Hector was the strongest of all the Trojans;
and by this rule, the best Pastoral Staff were Hercules's Club: But if the
Hellish project of resolving all into a Catastrophe of Atheism and Debauchery
prevail, how rare a qualification this may be in the next Pygmaean age, is
easy to foresee. But Sir, why not Sex determined by your inquisitive Wit as
well as Constitution! why a consult of Physicians about the one, more than of
Mother-Midnights about the other? For you know that Prophecy is not permitted
the Feminine; nor are you ignorant that once a Joanne possessed the Chair; and
what cautelous proof, even to a- habet, habet, of Papal-Virility, is made by
your Friends, ever since the days of her Groaning Holiness; -- sero sapiunt
Phryges.

And now I speak of the Female, a word of Cozen Abigail too, and no more of her
for this year: Was it not enough, Sir, that you rebelled against Aaron, but
must you have a fling at Sister Miriam too? Poor Triumph! I would be at expense
of an Apology for her, out of reverence to her Sex, were it not for that regard
I have to the Modesty of a Divinity-man (a Brother of your Cabal, who, I know,
will peruse my Letter) as suspecting how such a tickling Subject might happily
influence a stale Batchelour in the Faculty; whom the Emblem of your salacious
Sparrow would of all others best become: But I am weary of this Pedantry. So
much for common Grammar-Schools; the primus Lapis, and first Stage.

Your next Attempt, Sir, is made upon England's grand Phrontisteries,
Seminaries and Seed-plots of Learning, the two famous flourishing Universities,
Oxford and Cambridge; with whom (not to mention the Palestin Kirjath-sepher,
Persian Forum, etc.) the Grecian Athens it self was no fit Competitress; yet by
you criminated! Sus Minervam! And in them you reprehend two things, as what
more peculiarly concerns the Improvements of the Clergy therein, where, (in the
Talmudical phrase) discendum propter docendum, -- namely, Academick Exercises,
and Academick Wit; two great sins, one of Omission, another of Commission; viz.
The omission of English Exercises, which you offer to consideration, Let. 1. p.
27. L. 1.33.
as highly useful, especially for the English Clergy, etc. The commission of
Delicacies of Wit, as pruning, quibling, Joquing, etc. highly admired in some
of those Exercises: both may be reduced into one; and what a heinous Crime is
that? (yet committed against no more Holies than one) namely, want of English
Language, and abundance of Wit in Academick Exercises. Where first of all -- ad
cribrum dicta! Matter of Fact is confessed, Sir, that is to say, there is in
the Universities, instead of vernacular English, that which better becomes
them, viz. Latin, Greek, etc. Philosophical Exercises: and instead of Aes
Dodonaeum, Asinine Stupidity, or dull, obtuse, emasculate, etc. quick,
Mercurial, brisk, acute, witty, pregnant Spirits, and all Specimens of
Ingenuity and Sagacity, to the honor of the Academy, the Church, the Nation,
and emulation of Foreigners; and I believe the prudent Governors of either
University, will hardly be persuaded by all your flexanimous Rhetoric, (as
your dear Amasio accoasts you) or Logic either, to alter their Method in the
former, or not to cherish the latter. But (to render you more ridiculous, Sir,
than you can the Clergy contemptible) English Exercises in an Academick.
Diatribe! -- pudeat haec opprobria nobis! What though the Clergy preach in
English to their people? Must therefore that choice time, or any considerable
part of it, which should be to the greatest advantage husbanded and improved in
the acquiry of their due Ministerial preparatives and provisions of Literature,
be spent upon their Mother Tongue? Impertinent! The Rules and Methods of
Oratory, the Arts and Arguments of persuasion, are by you confessed to be the
same in all Languages; And surely he has but a very incompetent Dose and use
of Reason, who cannot accommodate the same, to any Scope, Theme or purpose pro
re nata, upon all emergent occasions, in any Language whatsoever he is once
Master of: And as for those Strains, and Delicacies of Wit you speak of, they
are 1. Juvenile Elaes, the laudable products of a Youthful Fancy. 2. The
frequent Preludes of more than ordinary sagacity and pregnancy of Spirit in the
years of maturer consistency; and 3. In case at any time over-luxuriant beyond
the bounds of Modesty, and a Trespass in Ethics; yet easily corrigible by a
riper discretion; and all to the greater experienced advantage in the whole
Trinity of Professions, Law, Physic and Divinity: and what expense and
exhaustion of Academick Spirit must needs ensue upon the draining of this
Cephalic Vein, is easily discernable. For that Axion of yours, that
Rope-Dancers in the Schools, Let. 2. p. 104.
ofttimes prove Jack-puddings in the Pulpit; I suspend a Reply, till I be
better informed from the Doctor of the Stage (to whom you do so often refer me)
and his Puppet: But to go on; what a strange hysteron-proteron, like the rest
of your ribble-rabble, have you committed, in recommending the teaching and
learning of Mathematics and Philosophical Lectures, the prime Delicacies of
Wit, to the lower-Form- Grammar-Schools; and English Exercises (nay a Caput
mortuum and dispirited Muse) to the Universities! Yea, and a Sol^cisme in
Morals to boot, in a petulant criminating of the want of both; ridiculous!
Again, what more obvious than a wicked project of destroying those grand
Seminaries of Learning, and consequentially Religion? the Clergy in the
Academy! the Mother in the Nurse! the Church of England in her Universities!
etc. A compendious way, I confess: For to what purpose (as to the Concern of
the Clergy) are Universities either founded, or resorted to, if English
Exercise must be their great Academick Discipline? and emprovement in their
Native tongue, the highest Acquist? which, the world be Judge, does nothing so
well beseem an Alma Matter Academia, as your little house by the Churchyard! or
the Ferula of your pitiful construing Master! (I am ashamed to say) Nurse,
Mother, or School-dame! So that your Ironick Conjugates, Vniversity-Scholar,
Vniversity-Learning! Academick Youngster, etc. I take to be but verbal tests of
your Weigelian project; whereby you study to drain and exhaust those Fountains,
which your Masters tell you upon experience, you cannot so immediately poison;
till at last, like bemudded low-water-Nilus, they produce nothing but Monsters,
like your self; and Enemies to Learning, Religion, Church and State; who I hope
may be by Sword or Key in due time animadverted upon accordingly; if the
School-Fry, or the Academick Youngsters (as you call them) prevent not that
piece of Justice; and then -- Asinus inter Apes!

Lastly, Sir, ad hominem, as before, one ground of the Contempt of the Clergy,
you allege to be their Ignorance; that you may demonstrate their Ignorance in
the Church, you quarrel their Education in the University; here all that you
criminate, is, want of English Exercises, and Delicacies of Wit; or (which is
all one) too much Wit, Latin and Greek, etc. in Academick Exercises: now your
Argument then; the Clergy is both too much exercised and expert in Latin and
Greek, etc. (or too little in the English;) and also too witty in the
University; ergo, ignorant in the Pulpit! Rare Consequence! There they are
Sophies, but here very Morio's! I promise you, Sir, if by your Logic you can
prove Ignorance, by its opposite, Wit and Learning: I would advise you to
Hackney out your Cerebellum to better advantage, than here you have done; and
so I have passed your second Stage.

We are now arrived at your ultima Thule, Master Inquisitor, the very last and
chief Stage in your whole Circuit; namely, the Pulpit; where I find the poor
Clergy empannell'd in Wainscot, and their supposed Ignorance charged from
Effects, as before from its Causes; especially in the prime Ministerial Act and
Exercise of Preaching, which though (together with that of Prayer) I have
before sufficiently vindicated, yet I will now give brief Answer to your chief
Allegations in matter of Fact.

Your First Exception. Sir is formed against such Preaching as is either
mountingly eloquent, Let. 1. p. 38, etc.
or profoundly learned; where, ad hominem, I must be your Monitor at the very
first, -- Oportet Mendacemesse memorem, Remind your self, Sir. that the grand
design of your Inquest is to detect the Ground, and Occasions of the Contempt
of the Clergy; alias, to betray them to it; the chief ground hereof by you
alleged, is their Ignorance; and thus you attaint them de capite, especially
in the chief Official Act of Preaching; as that which is chiefly apt to bring
Contempt upon the Preacher, and the Religion by him professed: And yet is your
first Exception this dis unctive, -- Preaching either mountingly eloquent, or
profoundly learned! What! the Preaching both eloquent and learned; nay, in
both, superlative; and yet the Preacher ignorant! How inconsistent are you with
your self? Unless you understand St. Paul's Antiperistasis in the case, as if
much Learning and Eloquence had caused a Dotage in the Clergy: but as I said
above, Tongue-trip is Gods Will, your own Speech all along bewraying of you; as
the Ass you know, as well as his Master, spoke against his own Genius: But now
what Reader can so far prostitute or debauch his Reason, as to reckon your
Ishmael-like Tongue any Slander in another Credit, since you all along do so
foully betray your own?

Under this Head you criminate the checkering and besprinkling of Sermons with
Greek Latin and Hebrew; which yet, provided the Citations be pertinent, not
over-numerous, and pro hic and nunc, conducive to the magnifying of the Office
more than of the Person, is justifiable by the same Authority that the Apostle
Paul quoted Heathen-Greek out of Aratus to the Athenians; out of Menander to
the Corinthians; out of Epimenides, to Titus, etc. But I marvel not that you
envy our Clergy Learned Languages in the Pulpit, as well as in the Schools;
though in the mean time you tax them with Ignorance: Thanks be to God, the
world is well amended with us, over what it was in those days, when (as your
Answerer notes) Graece nosse suspectum erat, Hebraice prope Haereticum; the
Holy Languages, more than Holy men escape not the Inquisition elsewhere; I do
the less wonder, that they do not yours at home; as hardly do the very
Masorites and Guardians of it themselves, Ben-Israel, Ben-Manasseh, Ben-Maimon,
etc. though Jewish Learnning be no mean Minisecrial accomplishment; but
possibly the Father may please your better than the Son; Abba Dominicus, Abba
Franciscus, Abba Ignatius, etc. and others of the Paternity, whose Worth and
Merit, may influence to the lower Iambo; else I doubt Jew and Gentile were both
alike with you; for I do very much suspect you, and the rather, because of your
inveteracy expressed against the Sacred Languages, Hebrew and Greek; the
Universal, at leastwise, general Ignorance, whereof in the very Fathers of the
Popish Councils is alleged by Bellarmine himself, Let. 1. p. 42.
as his reason for the Canonization of the Vulgar Latin. What more
intelligible (say you) to all Mankind, than Christ's Sermon upon the Mount? And
what less intelligible (say I) to any man, than his Sermon in the Valley, i. e.
by the Seaside? without (what the Apostles themselves were fain to court him
for) his own Exegetick: And was not the generality of his Sermocinations (for
holy and good Reasons, best known to himself) Mystical, Allegorical,
Parabolical, Similitudinary, etc? which brings me to your next Censure.

Your next Exception, Sir, against Preaching, Let. 1. p. 44, 45. etc.
is formed against the ridiculous, impertinent Materials of the Sermon, as that
which does more immediately cause the Preacher to be scorned and undervalued:
And under this Predicament, you sum up a confused Miscellany, and
Ribble-Rabble, -- Prefaces-Textual Divisions, Method of Doctrine, Intermixture
of harsh Metaphors, Childish Similitudes, misapplied Tales, etc. Where you must
excuse me, if I attend you not in your own preposterous order: It shall suffice
that I defeat, or answer to your chief Cavils and Allegations, under one or
more of these ensuing Paragraphs; very briefly.

First of all then:

As Preaching of the Word of God by persons Called and Qualified thereunto, is
a Divine Institution; so there seems not to be a more exact Art of Ortho^o^ny,
or Method of Preaching more congruous and suited to an Auditory, as Men or as
Christians, than That by way of Doctrine, Reason and Use; Textual Explication,
Rational-Scriptural Demonstration, and Practical Improvement: This is plain,
Sir, for by the first; Scriptural Words and Phrases, Idioms and Sense is
explicated and understood; by the second, from Principles of common Reason,
(your own persuasive Reason) or plain Scriptural Texts, and Collection (and
therefore usefully intermixed with Sermons, whatever you allege from S. Basil
or Chrysostom whose ordinary Sermons were but short Homilies preached as so
many Sacred Journals, every day) the Judgment is convicted; and by the last,
enforced by the former, and closely insinuated with suitable, pertinent, pithy,
lively, zealous, but withal sober and prudent expressions, the Affections are
engaged; and what more can be required or expected from this one Ministerial
Exercise? Which yet thus Methodized, is in your Dialect, idle, Let. 2. p. 131.
empty and insignificant; but -- Asinus in Paleas! It may be a Lecture out of
your Protestant-Homer, or Evangelist-Virgil, or Plutarch or Seneca (as
Scultetus observes of some carowsing Germans, near a kin to your Friend Hect.)
might please you much better than a Sermon from one that is -- Dionysius
Corinthi. But as touching what has been for an hundred years last past, and at
present is the usual Preaching in the Church of England, by you daringly and
wickedly censured, as Folly, and a hinderance of Salvation, rather than the
Means to it; I have sufficiently defeated you before, which will save me a
great deal of Labor here.

Secondly, Sir,

The intermixture of Allegories, Parables, Metaphors and Similitudes, in
Preaching, provided they have a Foundation in Nature, or Scripture, or no way
interfere with either; be apposite and pertinent to the purpose; not
overnumerous; used with due reverence, and managed with prudence as to Use and
Application, are very justifiable, both by the practice of Christ and his
Apostles; and by the Official Scopes and Ends of Preaching: (I might add the
Scriptural Representations of the Divine Excellencies (...), which would do
more authentic execution, than the largest Broad-sides that ever you
discharged from Homer) As for the former, the practice of Christ and his
Apostles, in this Allegorical, Parabolical, Similitudinary, etc. way, is
unquestionable, the admirable Reasons whereof, you tell us you will not insist
upon- ne (...) quidem though I must tell you, this had been the way by your
arguing, to have reproved; but you are wise, Sir, -- Ne Suitor ultra Crepidam?
Now this is a Maxim with me till otherwise informed, that whatever Christ or
his Apostles did as public Doctors of the Church, wherein they are imitable by
their Successors, Pastors and Teachers, etc. therein they may lawfully, nay in
some cases ought necessarily to be imitated. As for the official scope and end
of Preaching, it is the edification of a promiscuous Auditory, which by
Metaphorical and Similitudinary insinuations, (with the Cautions specified)
intermixed with Doctrinals, no despicable knack in the foolishness of
Preaching, is very generally gained upon, and most lastingly influenced;
insomuch that a part Metaphor or Simile, has often proved a Memorial Topic of
such a durable impress upon the Mind and Memory, as that by means thereof the
chief scope, series, and contexture of the whole Discourse, has been
remembered, which else had been irrecoverably lost: Sir, I could tell you of the
chief Fathers of the Church, as Chrysostom, Gregory Nazianzen, and others, nay
(which may be of more authority with you) the best Orators, both Greek and
Latin, that have used this Metaphorical, etc. way, as highly Rhetorical; yea,
and of a Painter and an Orator converted by means of one Simile in a Sermon;
but I forbear till better Acquaintance with you; concluding, that Parabolical
Divinity, though it be not Argumentative, yet proves often Edificative. Sir, I
cannot dismiss this Head, till I have a little rectified yours: You say, that
in Similitudes there ought to be an exact agreement with that which is
compared. Let. 1. p. 48, 49.
This is as good as all the rest; an exact agreement is next degree to
Identity, and yet in omni simili est dissimile, is a Maxim not less notorious
for truth, than you are for Forgery: Let us but instance in one of our
Saviors, by you quoted; Ib. p. 57.
Be wise as Serpents, said he to his Disciples, and harmless as Doves; where he
does equally recommend to them a qualitative resemblance and imitation, both of
Serpent and Dove; now if there be as exact an agreement between the Apostles
and the Serpent, as between your Gang and it, where is the Dove? if between
them and the Dove, where is the Serpent?

Thirdly, Sir;

Your Inquest is extralegal, contrary to all the Rules of Process (which I
could prove both from Civilians and Canonists) The world is plagued with a
pestilent Pamphlet or Libel, fronted with the Specious Title of The Grounds and
Occasions of the Contempt of the Clergy, etc. The Generality of the Clergy is
by you therein accused; but all this while, none de nomine, neither by name,
nor yet with the least offer of proof, though you have the boldness to tell us,
that if there had been need (and was there not need? a Reverend, Pious, Learned
Clergy being impeached by you in their Ministerial Credit and Reputation,
dearer to them than their Lives; that so they might have answered for
themselves, justifying or excusing, etc. Cruel Mockings!) If there had been
need, say you, Bold-face, you could have quoted Book, Page, Persons and
Circumstances of time and place ( when, where, and by whom, etc.) of all that
you have alleged; yea but you have not, Sir; your Allegations are throughout
your Libel, levied and levelled against some or other Individuum Vagum, and
Indefinites, which may be all as well as some, and none as well as any; and all
this without proof. I instanced in several above, of the prophaner sort, of
your own forging there may be more; and I dare say, are: the Latitude you take
is great; non liquet, then; and therefore you must give me leave to read you
with Epicharmus's guard, (...); and for an utter spoiling of your Design, let
the Reader recall to mind that Hellish-Romish Principle above mentioned,
(whereby you are in all probability acted) namely, that the End does specify
(and therefore justify) the Means; as for example, if the End propounded and
resolved upon in the Conclave or Cabal, be that great and sacred one de
propaganda fide, let the Means conducive to the accomplishing of this design be
never so execrable, base, black or bloody, as Contempt of the Clergy,
slandering, maligning, reviling, of the adverse party, lying and dissembling,
Perjuries, Equivccatings, and Mental Reserves; nay, Sword, Fire and Faggot,
Clandestine Murders, Open Massacres, Deposition of Kings and Princes, yea,
Regicide and King-killing it self, the embruing of Hallowed hands in Sacred
Blood, as their Patron- Judge Pilate before them, did his washen ones in that
of our Savior, etc. All this, as horrid as it is, is upon its congruity,
tendency, and correspondence to the propounded End, ipso facto, Canonized for
good and lawful; yea, and meritorious too! And who cannot (Reader be Judge) who
cannot but abhor the Authors and Abettors of that Religion, which can render
such Facts as those are Canonical? whereof your Contempt of the Clergy, Sir, I
have reckoned one.

Fourthly and lastly, Sir,

What though I suppose (which yet till you prove it, I am not obliged to yield)
that all your Allegations were true in matter of Fact; yet shall you never be
able by all this to prove what you have undertook; namely, that the Generality,
no Sir, nor yet that the Plurality of the English Clergy is ignorant, or
insufficient, and therefore contemptible. Do your worst. Therefore for a clear
issue of the matter; after enquiry made into your Enquiry, and examination of
your Charge formed against the Clergy, I find the Particulars therein alleged,
to be all reducible to these three Predicaments, viz. Some of them are, I
confess, indiscreet, irreverent, impertinent, ridiculous, nay, blasphemous; and
consequently just ground and occasion of Contempt: Others again, justifiable;
others, lastly, not only justifiable, but laudable; grounds not of Contempt,
but of Applause: again, those very matters which are condemnationworthy, are
not the constant Practices, but only accidental Lapses of their respective
Authors; and but, I doubt not, few in comparison of their Virtues; though you
cannot more severely doom Irreverence and Impertinencies, but especially
Blasphemies in the Clergy, than my self; and therefore I do with all humility
advise two things: First, That whoever are guilty in the Particulars mentioned,
they may upon recognition take and bear their condign shame for it. Next, That
turning your Accusation into advantage, and being taught caution and
circumspection, by the vigilance of such an Argus as you, who watch for their
halting (as you know who does for devouring) ready upon the least tripp or
occasion, Cham-like, to discover a Reverend Fathers Nakedness; they may for the
future, declare their Message to their people in none but proper (though
Metaphorical) pertinent, significant, duly coherent Expressions, with that
reverence which may become the Divine Majesty whom they personate, that gravity
which may become their Sacred Office and Embassy, and after a way and manner
universally condecent to the Ministerial Profession and publication of Holy
Scriptures, and those sacred Mysteries therein contained, whereof they are the
Stewards; taking your last Salvo and Retreat (for as I preadvertised your
Reader, you begin with Pilate, and end with the Harlot, he may remember in what
sense) for a Warning-piece for ever, viz. that when the Gallants of the world
do observe how the Ministers themselves do jingle, Let. 1. p. 130, 131
quibble and playthe fools with their Texts, no wonder if they who are so
inclinable to Athcism, do not only deride and despise the Priests, but (as you
do) droll upon the Bible, and make a mock of all that is Sober and Sacred.

But now, Sir, to return to your self again, If of three parts of the Clergy,
(by proportion) by you accused, only one part be guilty, (and surely the
Innocence of two parts must in all reason do the Clergy more honor, than the
Guilt of one single Tertia can cause Contempt) again of this one guilty part;
the faults not customary, but few in number, in comparison of Virtues
(Criminals and Crimes both few) and many of those such as are incident to the
best, whilst on this side the Moon, (though I doubt not but you have turn' your
Magnifying-Glass toward thed Crimes, as well as your Multiplying one toward
both them and the Criminals;) If (I say) it be so, of three parts of the
Clergy, only one faulty; and in this faulty part, more Virtues than Faults!
more of what is honorable, than of what is contemptible! with what color of
Morals or Judicials, of good Manners, or Equity, can you charge Ignorance, and
consequently Contempt, upon the Clergy indefinitely; upon the Generality, or
indeed upon the plurality by you accused? The impartial Reader be Judge. Now
for a Criticizing exemplification of what I have asserted, namely, that of the
three parts of your Allegations levied and levelled against the Clergy, only
one part condemnable, the other two justifiable, nay one of them highly
commendation-worthy and laudable: and then at last a summary recapitulation of
the whole.

First then I reckon the Oyster-Litany and the Flounder-Creed; Let. 1. p. 52.
Let. 2. p. 128. Let. 2. p. 59, 60. ib. p. 64.
the likening of of Isaiah's Wine and Milk to a Spiritual Sack-Posset; Christ's
coming into the world to save Sinners, to a Christmass-Feast of three Dishes:
the Son of God, to the Dauphin of Heaven; the Son of God, not the Daughter of
God, etc. (as by you represented, though I am much persuaded that your own
endeared Volupia; is the Authoress of all) abominable Blasphemy! Let. 1. p. 57,
58.
Parson Slip-Stocking, and the spiritual Shopkeeper (such a (...) as
Athanasius complained of in his time) both grossly ridiculous! Let. 1. p. 55, 56.
Your Chemical Divinity of Aquafortis, Sal-armoniack, and Aqua Regia, as also
the Soap of Sorrow, and the Fullers Earth of Contrition; Let. 1. p. 63, 68.
your chyming Divinity of Reason and Revelation; as also of ingress, egress and
regress, number and name, manner and measure, Let. 1. p. 62. Let. 1.66
etc. your harmonious Divinity of the Spears, and Peal of Faith, Hope, and
Charity; your Mechanic Divinity of the stradling Compasses; ib. p. 67.
your Meteorological Divinity of the Text dropping and melting asunder; ib. p.
69.
your Horological Divinity of Spiritual Dialling, etc. All Folly and
Impertinency! Let. 2. p. 72, etc.
The Wedding Ring fit for the Finger, will not, I assure you, fit mine, who by
no means likes -- arctum annulum gestare! a ridiculous, immodest, lascivious
Epithalamium inspired from Hymen, more like than from the Innonocent Dove, and
becoming a Wanton, Let. 2. p. 123. ib. p. 124.
rather than a Pulpiteer! The Butt of spiritual Wine will hold no common Water;
I would it had never been broached. The Chest and Cupboard of Truth, is as
empty as the Butt, unless the Author mean the Ark of the Testimony. Faith
likened to a Foot, a Leg, a Hose, etc. L. 1. p. 59 L. 2. p. 63 L. 1. p, 60 ib.
p. 71. ib. p. 68. Let. 2. p. 124.
The adulterating of the Apostolical Coin; the Milky way to Jupiter's Palace;
the threshing worm Jacob; the Doctors weeping (...); the note of great Sacks,
and many Sacks, etc. sweeping the Walks of the Heart, spiritual Leech, Angle of
Prayer, Fishing for Mercy, L. 1. p. 75 ib. 72, 73.
laying the Soul a whitening, holy girding and trussing up for Heaven, and the
like Discoveries and Expressions, like your Salt-water-Language of Starboard
and Lar-board, etc. all affected Strains of Irreverence, Folly and
Impertinency. Again, Sir, L. 2. p. 64 L. 1. p. 53 ib. p. 56. ib. p. 72. ib. p.
74.
the Sun of Righteousness, not Moon of Righteousness; this Sun passing the
Signs of the Zodiac, etc. your Omnipotent All, etc. the Bulrush-repentance;
Christ's taking the Disciples a Cubit lower, while they were taking thought for
a Cubit; the Scribes following of a Thou rather than a That (that is, ib. p. 75.
Person rather than Mercenary Advantage) Mercy turning Justice into a Rainbow;
Let. 2. p. ^24.
the Rainbow a Bow indeed, but what has no Arrow in it, and the like; though
not like the more solid Divinity, yet very excusable, yea, (being prudentially
managed as to use) justifiable too, as being frequent quickners of Fancy, as
this is of Attention in sacred performances! Let. 1. p. 67.
Moreover, Accusatio vera, Comminatio severa, englished a Charge full of
Verity, and a Discharge as full of Severity; the Textual Dividends by you
criminated; as also miraculum in modo, and miraculum in nodo, and the like, are
all brisk, laudable Notions; much like that strain which is known to have been
very familiar to S. Augustine, Bernard, and other Fathers of the Church
(witness their Works) whom therefore you might as justly in this respect,
traduce and expose to Contempt, as English Clergymen: Of this nature was that
which my self heard but very lately from an eminent Pulpiteer, citing those
words of the Psalmist, I am wonderfully made; his Gloss was, Acupictus sun
(Englishing it) I am a curious piece of Embroidery or Needle Work! and very
laudable; favored I believe (as those who understand the Hebrew better than
your Countrey-Parson or I do, can inform you) by the Original: And certainly
intermixtures of such innocent brisk strictures, and quaint Notions as these
are, do much add to the life of a Discourse. You shall be my debtor for
another, (and then I return to yours) which you will say, is as acute a remark
from the Pulpit, and delicacy of wit, as any that occurrs throughout all your
Narrative; namely this, that S. Paul is a spiritual Hermaphrodite; a rare one
indeed, if true; but how is that proved? By his own testimony, else we had
never known it; thus, he begot the Corinthians, and travailed in birth of the
Galatians; and all this mystically; is he not then a spiritual Hermaphrodite? A
quaint notion indeed; which with many more witty and very laudable Attra^bives
of Fancy and Attention, we should never enjoy from the Pulpit, should you
exhaust that delicate Vein in the University, or render it contemptible to the
Laity. The proving of Monarchy or Kingly Government from Christ's advice, Seek
first the Kingdom of God, etc. and of Episcopacy, yea of Peerage too; from the
Greek (...) in the Jaylors question (as if no better Gentleman had ushered the
Bishops into the House of Lords) and arguing from Abraham's begetting of Isaac,
Let. 1. p. 76, 77, 78.
against Non-residence; I take to be amongst many more, witty Calumnies of your
own contrivance, wherein there is more of Mercury, than of Saturn; and less of
Divinity, than of either: In the mean time, you remind me of one more, which I
can furnish you withal, and no more for me till your first Doomsday (which is
hard by) One Criticizing upon that place of S. Paul, Evil Conversations corrupt
good Manners, because forsooth, there is (...) in the Original, did read,
instead of evil conversations, wretched Homilies! a Phanatick, I warrant him;
but whom shall we blame here? Since the Greek will bear this Translation? him,
or S. Paul? or Heathen-Menander, from whom the Apostle adopted it into the
Sacred Canon? I leave it in medio, and proceed.

Again, Sir, amongst Laudables in the Foolishness of Preaching, and what is
sufficiently pertinent, significant, and commendation-worthy in the Sermons or
Books of those whom you condemn, Let. 1. page 52.
I reckon the likening of the Apple of that Tree which grows upon the Banks of
the River Euphrates, which is to the Eye fair and tempting, but inwardly dust
and rottenness, to the frail corruptible state of man. ib. p. 60.
The likening of Scripture-Doctrines, Precepts, Promises, Threatenings and
Histories, to the five smooth stones, etc. and should highly applaud it, were
the fourth but as smooth as the rest, Ib. p, 65.66.
The likening of Texts to a Picture, Moses's Rod, Eli^ah's Mantle, Solomon's
Throne, Noah's Dove, etc. and the like proemial insinuations, conciliative of
attention in the Hearers, all justifiable by the Rules of Oratory: The likening
of wholesome Instructions for young men and young women, to Apples of Gold, Let.
2. p. 132, etc
as being warranted by Canonical Parable; though you belike disrelish the Works
of the Author, because there is so much of that in them, whereof S. Augustine
found so little, that is, nothing at all, in those of Tully, namely of Jesus or
Christ: ib. p. 134, 135.
The likening of strength, time, parts, gifts, etc. to Males in the Flock, by
the same authority, etc. But it is plain, Sir, whatever you pretend, that not
this Authors Apples of Gold, are the Apples of Strife; not Metaphors in
Preaching, but the very Ordinance of Preaching it self: Now for my part, I
think these very good, sound, savoury and practical Instructions, Young men and
young women, lean upon the Lord Jesus Christ, lean upon Christ's Wisdom, Power,
Righteousness, Merit, etc. -- Your strength, time, parts and gifts are all
Males in the Flock, ib. p. 135, etc,
etc. -- Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven; it is not, blessed is
the Honorable man, the Rich, the Learned, the Politic, the Victorious; ib. p.
137.
but blessed is the Pardoned man! etc. -- O the Experiences that an old
Disciple, or old Christian has of the Ways, Workings, Word and Love of God,
ib. p. 145.
etc. -- Ah! None but Christ! none but Christ! (the dying Bellarmine's Note!
and what will be yours too, unless your case be desperate) Nonc to Christ; no
Works, Services, Prayers, Tears, Righteousness, or Holiness to Christ; lay out
for, make sure of, close with, cleave to, rest, lean and rely upon Christ,
etc. Now, Sir, upon recollection, what do you say to it? where is the
impropriety? What ground of Contempt here? To me, to the Reader, to all Friends
to the Ordidinance it self, this does, and must needs appear to be the close,
lively, pertinent, practical Preaching of some Zelotes, a Workman that needs
not to be ashamed, nor ought (upon peril) to be contemned; amplified in the
Author by some affectionate ingeminations, justifiable in popular Sermons.

Once more, Sir, (I am weary of the Theme) your chief assault relating to
Likenesses, which I would call your Achillean one, but that you are such a
Friend to Hector, whom Achilles slew, is made upon the Christian (as Satan's
last was upon Christ himself) in the Mount; Let. 2. p. 124, 125, etc.
where you contrast two Ordinanc^s at once, Meditation and or (rather) in
Preaching; the Reader may peruse your own words at his leisure: The great
business which you with your witty Sarcasticks criminate and calumniate, is the
Likenesses whereby the Author of the Treatise mentioned, has used in the
matter of Meditation; how justly, I will quickly determine: Meditation, says
the Author, is like a withdrawing-Room; like chewing of the Cud; like climbing
up into a Tree; like a Mount or a Tower; like going into a Bath; like the Palate
by which we feed; like Isreal's eating of Manna; like a Cordial to be drunk
down, etc. And all the several Likenesses by you represented with all the
advantages of Wit that may be, to the Authors discredit; and in fine summed up
in an Anacephalaiosis; so that in a very little compass, say you, Meditation is
climbing, bathing, tasting, eating, drinking, and chewing the Cud -- Ilias in
Nuc^! Compendious Wit! Again ( Meditation is like a Loadstone; like a Cork to a
Net: and soon after, say you) like distilling of Waters, and beating of
Incense; But now we go far and deep; Meditation is like digging of spiritual
Gold out of the Mine of the Promises. But we soon come above ground again for a
little while; and Meditation is like digging about the roots of a Tree; but
down again presently; for Meditation is like digging in the Mine of Ordinances,
etc. I am quite tired with your Likenesses! Now I doubt not of your own at mihi
plaudo here, nor yet of your Humster's Amen! And matter of Fact I have
supposed; the Justice of your Charge is the thing in dispute; where I will use
no such faint Apology as credendum est artifici in sua art, you being an
Invader of another Mystery; nor yet a greater one than that, sometimes
mentioned; namely, that all, even the meanest of such Likenesses, and other
strains (canting Elaes) in a Paroxysme of pious Zeal, are justifiable in the
foolishness of Preaching (for so the Scripture has termed it before me) by the
Official Scopes and Ends of it, in popular edification; Seignior no! I have you
upon the hip again, as I have had you all along, to the rendering of you more
ridiculous and despicable to any discerning, unbyassed Reader, than you, your
Minions, your Masters, or Hell it self (do your worst) can the Clergy: So that
Novacula in cotem! Therefore ad hominem (briefly) Sir, You your self propound
and require that the Clergy would be guided and persuaded by what our Savior
preached himself, and those Directions which he gave to his Disciples for so
doing: Good! But now (to subsume to your own Proposition, Let. 2. p. 141, 142
Sir) our Savior himself preached and gave directions for such Preaching, as
is here by you so critically traduced, namely, by way of Metaphor and Simile,
or (in your own taking Idiom) Likenesses; (and a happiness it is that a wise
and ever-blessed Mester has left such a Precedent behind him for the
vindication of his calumniated and contemned Servants) Do you see then what a
Dilemma, alias, an Oxford-Noose or Bocardo, I am like, nill you, will you, to
entangle you in? namely, that either the Servant must necessarily share in the
Master's (Ministerial) honor; or else the Master himself, in the Servant's
Contempt! Choose you which you will, and stand and fall to your own Master; I,
the Clergy, Preaching, are all secure: Now for proof of my Assumption
concerning Christ's own Preaching, etc. Compare we with the Christian on the
Mount, Christ in the Plain, viz. by the Seaside; that is, Christ's own
Preaching, with that of his derided Minister: In a word, Sir. consult and
peruse the Thirteenth Chapter of S. Matthews Gospel; there you shall find in
one Sermon of our Savior's, just as many Similes of the Kingdom of Heaven,
(and as strange, if an Atheist be Censor) as you reckon up of Likenesses of
Meditation, Let. 2. p. 125.
in a very little compass of the Minister's: First of all, The Kingdom of
Heaven is like unto a man which sowed good Seed in his sield; a little after,
The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a grain of Mustard Seed; as much unlike to a
Man, as the Not is to the Lordstone: By and by, the Kingdom of Heaven is like
unto Leaven, very unlike unto the former: After that, The Kingdom of Heaven is
like unto a Treasure h d in a Field; which you would call a going far and deep,
and add possibly, but we soon come above (...) again; for the Kingdom of Heaven
is like unto a Merchant-man, etc. And again (which has very little or no
resemblance of the former Likenesses) the Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Net,
etc. So that if a Mortal might dare to presume upon facetious disporting with
Sacred Scripture; it were easy to recapitulate, viz. that in a very little
compass, namely, that of one short Sermon, the Kingdom of Heaven is a Sower, a
Grain of Mustard Seed, Leaven, a Treasure, a Merchant-man, a Net! Now, Sir, if
you reckon this matter of Contempt in our Savior, declare your self straight;
be no longer Atheist in disguise; If not, then neither is it such in his
Ministers conforming to such a Pattern, or (in your own Language) guided by his
Preaching and Directions; therefore ab absurdo, if my reason may not convince
you, let your own upon recollection; but if you be neither convicted by
argument, nor confounded otherwise, for my own part, I expect no other, but
that the world, at leastwise, this part of it, England, will experience your
Enquiry into the grounds and occasions of the contempt of Religion, and Clergy
(alias, an exposal of both to it) to have been but a prologue to a higher or
further Province. There are two Books Sir, which in laboris compendium, you
refer your Reader to; the one entitled a Friendly Debate; the other Flames and
Discoveries; your Oracles possibly; but it is all one; what your other Readers
may do herein, I know not; but for my self, I think I shall hardly dare to
meddle with them, I have so much of you: As for the former; I understand there
is a Cerberus in the case, and I list not (...). As for the latter, Flamma fumo
proxima; and sire and smoke are terrible things, especially when more from the
Pit, then from the middle Region; more plague, then meteor. But Sir, if your
ignis fatuus must have sacred fuel to feed it withal; why is it the English
Clergy and their Preaching, rather then the Romish, which is known to abound
with all manner of blasphemy, folly and impertinencies? witness their own
Innocent the third his mysteries of the Mass; Durand's Rational; Tolet and
Titleman, etc: Did ever English or Resormed Divine commit such a ridiculous,
impertinent, blasphemous gloss upon Holy Scripture, as is that (to instance but
in one, for I long to be rid of them and you both) of one of their very
Cardinals, Barronius by name, upon those verses in the eight (...), relating to
the Messiah, Thou made him to have dominion over the works of thine hands,
thou have put all things under his feet, all Sheep and Oxon, y a and the Beasts
of the Field, the Fowls of the Air, and the Fish of the Sea, etc. Now observe
Reader Cardinal Points! -- Thou have put all things under his feet, that is,
under the seet of the Pope of Rome; Sheep, that is, Christians; Oxen, that is,
Jews, and Heretics; Beasts of the Field, that is, Pagaus; Fowls of the Air,
that is, Angels; Fishes of the Sea, that is, Souls in purgatory; Do more
artificial, and ingenious (...) occurr in all your Rh^psody then these? but I
am weary of them and you both.

Therefore Sir, by way of recapitulation (which is the other thing that I
propounded) to sum up the whole; The Clergy of the Church of England, has been
by you charged with Ignorance, as the just ground of Contempt; that you might
prove them ignorant you criminate something in the Grammar Schools; something
in the Universities; something in the Pulpits; in Grammar-Schools, the not
reading of English Authors, and the not reading of Philosophical Authors and
Mathematics etc. the former whereof is fitter for a Domestic nursery, the
latter fitter for an Academy: In Universities, want of English, that is,
nothing but Latin Greek, etc. exercises; and the delicacies of Academick Wit:
In the Pulpit, and Minister's last Edition, either superlatively cloquent, or
profoundly learned Preaching, partly, and partly Preaching by way of ridiculous
impertinent Metaphor, Similies, and such like things as might procure Contempt
to the Preacher, and the Religion by him professed: Of the allegations produced
in matter of fact two parts of three are acquitted, as either at least
justifiable, or highly laudable, and matter of applause rather then of
Contempt; yea and the tertia, third or only one part, that is confessed peccant
and faulty, not customary neither; and besides attended with virtues which may
procure more credit and honor, than the defects can possibly, disparagement or
contempt; all which duly considered, your Reader be judge, what do all your
arguings reprove?

The other part of my Province I will quickly dispatch.

As touching the Poverty of the Clergy.

I will briefly enquire, Sir,

1. Whether Poverty be a ust ground of the contempt of the Clergy?

2. Whether Poverty be an actual occasion of this Contempt? And

3. Whether Poverty and Contempt may admit of any redress?

As for the former

That the Clergy is upon the account of poverty therefore de ^ure Contemptible
is most justly denied; else Christ himself the Antesignan and Head of the
Clergy, and the Apostles his Associates had been de jure contemptible; for the
former, though Lord of all, had not where to lay his head; insomuch that when
he had occasion to pay a little Tribut e he was fain to be at the expense of a
miracle for it; the latter by the very Laws and Terms of Discipleship, nor
Silver nor Brass to buy necessaries for themselves, nor yet Scrip to receive
the charitable benevolence of others; both (briefly) in extraction, relations,
possessions, etc. very poor! What and therefore justly contemptible? nay on the
contrary.

2. It has ever been matter of sacred veneration toward the Christian
Religion, glory to its Author and Promoters, and wonder to a perfect
consternation and amazement in its Adversaries, that it has been founded and
propagated, preserved and maintained by the poorer predicament and order of
mankind: who would ever have thought that a poor Duo-decemvirate, poor in
extraction, relations, possessions, number, power and policy, Twelve
inconsiderable Mechanics, within the space of Forty years would have proved
such absolute conquerours of the greatest part of the known world, in subduing
the same to and by the Christian Faith? Though their opponents were numerous,
potent and politic: Verba leguntur piscatorum and colla subduntur Oratorum,
said St. Augustine, Fishermen, prove Fishers of men! (a canting quibble, but
that it is warranted by a jure Divino) catching Imperial necks in their book;
subduing Scepters to Christ's Standard -- the Cross! I shall not need here to
mention the succeeding Propagators of the same Faith, Primitive nor Modern, the
poor of Lions, Paterius, Humilists, Waldenses, Albigenses, etc. Nor yet our own
si^se^ Reformers, in whom a Divine power was most honorably eminent, as well
as in their Predecessors in that those ^erformed by Miracles, what these (which
the above named Father observes to be the greatest of Miracles) performed
without them, save that of Conversion. But here a vehement Objection is framed
from a Divine Providence; against the Clergy, usual with all A^heists, against
Christians in general.

Though Ministers be called the men of God (say you) yet when it is observed
that God seems to take but little care of them in making them tolerable
provisions for this life, Let. 1. p. 95.
-- the people are presently apt to think that they do no more belong to God,
etc, But what would you infer from hence Sir? You will bewray your self again;
for you speak your self in the people: One of two must necessarily be implied,
either none or (which is the same) an unjust Providence in God; or else no part
or share in that Providence for a poorer Clergy! Improvidence or injustice in
God in that he does not make competent provisions for the Clergy; or else the
misery and unhappiness of the poorer Clergy, in that they have no part in his
Providence; and consequently, their just ground of Contempt: No God! or else,
no poor Clergy! or if poor, contemptible! are you there Sir? Nay even off with
your Mascarado, profess your self downright; for the most desperate Atheist, or
(which is all one) Anti-providentialist, is one in disguise; therefore I assert
(if truth, be you my Proselyte; if not, I promise you upon conviction to own my
self yours) First,

That there is a Divine Providence, by which the whole World, and all its
contents, creatures, actions, states, cases and concerns in every kind, order,
and degree whether Metaphysical, viz. Generals and particulars, things great
and small, or natural, viz. things necessary, free and casual; or moral, viz.
actions good and bad; or civil, viz. conditions prosperous and adverse, etc.
are all preserved, governed and conducted to the respective ends allotted them
by the wise Creator, both particular and peculiar to each, and universal or
common in respect of the whole, and in and by all the supreme and ultimate, the
Creator's own Glory, (he having no end in working beyond, more then motive to
it, without himself) does necessarily and naturally flow and follow from the
Divine perfections and properties, namely his Goodness, Wisdom and power, so
that (to argue with Nemesius above quoted) there is neither will, nor skill,
nor sufficiency wanting in him which is any ways requisite hereunto; and
hence, as a common connate notion indelibly engraffed upon Rational Spirits,
acknowledged by (at least) the generality of very Heathens. Again, That there
is a peculiar kind of Economy, or a special Providence whereby God as he
upholdeth all things in general by the word of his power (to speak with the
Scriptures, and then I am secure) so does in an especial manner uphold,
preserve, govern and administer his Church, more especially the sacred Tribe of
his own Ministry; is confessed by all Christians. Thirdly,

That God is in all the administrations of his Providence (what he is
essentially in himself) glorious, wise, holy, good and righteous (so as that
there is nothing of indecency or incongruity to his Majesty in inspecting the
least things, more then in the greatest; no blemish to his holiness, in
governing the bad and worst of actions, more then of the good; no tyranny or
violence offered to the liberty of second causes, from the infallibility of the
first, more then to the liberty of the first, from the natural necessity, which
is in many of the second; no violation (lastly) of his justice, in the
dissimilary and widely different, how seemingly soever unrighteous,
administrations of prosperity and adversity to and in the world) is (as the
first by very Pagans, and the second by all Christians,) acknowledged by all
Orthodox, sober, learned; what then to make of you in such an arraignment of
this Providence, the Reader be judge. As for the seeming inequality of Divine
administrations of adversity to the righteous, and prosperity to the wicked in
so much that it is their canonical definition -- these are the ungodly that
prosper in the world (to the vehement perplexity of many;) God's very autocrasy
or absolute power and prerogative by virtue whereof he being the Omnipotentiary
and sovereign Proprietary of the whole world, Jure potest quicquid potest, may
do by right, whatever he can do by power, (accountable to none for his actions)
may suffice to vindicate his Justice: But (as for you) the very Heathens have
offered satisfaction in this case, amongst whom I recommend to you, Socrates,
Plato Seneca, but especially Plutarch, sufficient to school you not only in the
doctrine of a Divine Providence in general, but ineven that of a holy, just,
and righteous one, and that in the very present difficulty: But as for others,
in case the Academy fail, I am sure the Sancturry will not; David's Oracle, will
afford David's resolution, (in this very case) if consulted with suitable
devotion. Besides, one very material consideration in this case is this,
namely, that there is a kind of miscellany of good and bad in the best and
worst of all, whilst on this side another world; good, natural, moral, or
spiritual, as well as evil; now the righteous God, whose pure and holy nature
inclines and obliges him to an equal love to the good and abhorrency of the
bad; on the one hand often owns and crowns that natural, moral good in the
wicked with a temporary reward as his portion in this life; and on the other,
frequently chastises the evil that is in the righteous with a temporary
punishment; reserving the eternal full and plenary recompense of both, viz.
misery in the former, and glory and happiness in the latter, to another world:
so that external states and occurrences are but a very sallible Index of that
interest in God by you mentioned. I might add several other considerations for
satisfaction herein, as that the very afflictions of the righteous, poverty
(for instance) in the Clergy, are by a wise God intended, and by themselves
improved for real advantages, the Cherem turned into Rachem (as the Jews use to
say) (...), etc. and others; but I hasten toward a conclusion.

Lastly, Sir, what is by you insinuated as an argument against a Providence, is
a considerable argument for one; namely the Poverty of that Clergy which yet
maugre all opposition, slanders, reproaches, prejudice and contempt, is
preserved and maintained as the more immediate Eleemosynary Dependants upon
Divine Providence, herein most observable; which I conceive to have been one
reason why Christ (as I noted before) interdicted his Disciples the Scrip as
well as the Purse; but I proceed; having declared enough for the conviction of
any sober or rational; namely, that there is a Divine Providence, general in
the World, and special in the Church; that this Providence is universally holy,
just, and righteous; that it is so far from being inconsistent with, that it is
most observable in the support, preservation and maintenance of a poorer
Clergy; and that a poor Clergy is no just object of Contempt in the Laity; else
Christ himself and his Apostles, and both Primitive and Modern most eminent
propagators of the Christian Faith, might pari jure share therein.

As touching the second, Sir,

It is soon resolved that the poorer sort of the Reformed Clergy is partly
through the corruption of Man's heart, partly through instigation from Satan;
and Hell-inspired Atheists, Socinians, Jesuits and Jesuited persons and all
such Cinifloes using ostentative braggs and insinuations about the full
Coffers, spread Tables, costly Apparel, Honorary Titles, Grandeur and
Magnificence not only of the Primates and Optimates of Church and State, but of
most orders of men (but especially amongst their Simiae in purpura beyond the
Channel) over and above what the inferior Clergy has, de facto (which is
matter of grief and condolency) exposed to contempt in the Laity; but quid ad
Rhombum Sir? Does matter of fact prove right, in either Law or Logic? or are
they therefore to yours? or suppose they were blessed with the splendor and
magnificence here mentioned; would this secure them from yours or a Laics
lash? no! phlegm would then ferment into choler; contempt, into grudge, and
emulation; and your Inquisition re-authorised for inspection into the grounds
and occasions of the envy (as now of the contempt) of the Clergy: there is a
remarkable instance of this amongst our Neighbors; where a Franciscan Hackney,
(that is, in plain English, Sir, good bare Ten-Toes) was once a Proverb; but
now forsooth, the Gentlemen of that order instead of vowed bare footing of it
as heretofore, in journying are mounted upon the best Horses (...) with
attendance better befitting their Nobless than a Monkish Tenebrio, to a most
rancide grudge and inveteracy both in the Laity and other Religious orders. But
since, you can only understand matter of fact here, not matter of right, that
as ignorance is a just ground of Contempt of the Clergy, so poverty is a
tempting occasion to it; I proceed,

As touching the last particular Sir,

The poverty of the Clergy, and upon this occasion, actual (but wicked and
unjust) contempt in the Laity, being both supposed; the next thing to be
enquired into is, whether this same Poverty and Contempt (the disease and
symptom) be capable of a remedy? now,

That it is most congruous to the Law of God, Nature, and Nations, that some
competent provisions be made for the Ministers of the Gospel, is I think, a
generally confessed case; though I will not dispute the mortality of a decimal
provision, or tithe; yet I assert the natural equity of a competent one, as the
holy Scripture has before me, in that very natural principle -- The Labourer
is worthy of his hire: And what ample provisions were made by God for the
Priests and Levites of old, is sufficiently attested in holy Writ, and by you
well asserted (utinam sic semper errasset Bellarminus!) together with the
reasons thereof, which I am sure are moral, however the particular definite way
of raising of those provisions, be ceremonial and antiquated; viz. that they
might closely and composedly attend the Service of God and his Church, and
studies relating thereunto, without distracting cares and solicitude about the
urgent concerns of back and belly, and necessary supports of humane life; and
you may guess Sir, what a miserable pinching thing that is -- res angusta domi
-- and also that they might be capable of administering to the necessities of
others, in charitable offices, (as occasion should offer or require) a great
both encouragement and ornament of piety: I add a third reason, peculiarly
suited to the Horizon of our Church, namely, that after domestic exigencies,
and charitable offices satisfied, some little surplusage might accrue for a
petite subsistence to a surviving Consort: Sir, my Muse flaggs, my heart aches,
when I consider, that in England, England a Land of plenty, a poor Ministers
Widow, is become a very Proverb, b^^ what will no lesssuit Jeremiahs
Lamentations then Solomon's Parables; now what a sad thing is it that he who
devotes himself to spend and be spent in the service of God, his Church, and
the Souls of others, should be able to entitle the companion of his own life,
that ended, to no more than an Ecclesiastic plea for an Alms, -- a poor
Ministers Widow! and that the surviver of him who serves at the Altar, should
be enforced to beg at the Door! a Lamentation! and let it be for a lamentation!
Now for a remedy and redress of the whole, the Poverty of the Clergy (male and
female) and contempt of them (hereby too truly, though unjustly occasioned) in
the Laity; whom can or ought we to make applications to, but our
State-Physicians; namely, his Majesty, in conjunction with a wise, prudent,
considerate Parliament, all jointly spirited hereunto from a generous zeal for
the glory honor and renown (here endangered) of their Clergy and Religion;
that Church of whom they own themselves Sons, and that Faith of which they
profess themselves Defenders: what the method of redress or expedient in the
case should be, must (as reason good) be left to their own prudential
contrivance; but I presume I may use the same liberty, so I do the modesty,
that your self. Well then, The Lucrative Arts and Stratagems of the Church of
Rome, as the Ghostly authority and infallibility of the Pope (their fundament
al cheat) their monopoly of merits and indulgences, miracles, auricular
confession, absolutions, pardons, penance, purgatory, canonization of Saints,
the Wafer-God, (for there they can make not only Saints, but a God, Let. 1. p.
98, 99 100. etc.
at pleasure) vowed Celibacy, the denial of marriage to their Clergy, and such
like artifices, (some whereof are by you recounted) all sacrificed to Mammon or
the Money-God; those and the like (I say) are, and I hope will be by both
Church and State of England eternally adjudged, antichristian; which if you or
any advocate in your behalf will undertake to disprove me in, so it be with
more argument and less flashy Theatrical wit, then you use in your Letters, it
is like, I may procure some who pro tenui(tate your Academick Youngster's
conge) will try it out with you at the two-edged Sword. Again, the method of
reducing and levelling Episcopal, and Cathedral, or Collegiate Revenues, and
all other Ecclesiastical preferments and possessions to a commonmage, were such
a motion as nothing less then the Acts of the Apostles could render
unpardonable; besides the danger of an Ignis sacer, in the case, and I am
terribly afraid of St Anthony. Once more; your Astraea's return, or
restitution, of such Tithes and Church-Rents as former Kings and Parliaments,
especially (the great Church-Publican) King Henry the Eight, thought good (upon
what prudential considerations, it is not meet that you or I should dispute) to
impropriate to the Crown or State; (which might happily prove as offensive to
the State, as the former would to the richer Clergy) I should not have the
confidence once to offer at, unless you will promise to secure me -- Antidotum
adversus Caesarem: But Sir, I will presume to offer what (with submission to
the wiser, especially my Governors) I am strongly persuaded might be a
considerable expedient in the case, estimated by a threefold inconveniency
observable in the rich-poor Church of England, namely,

1. A great inequality of Parochial distributions;

2. A great disproportion of Pastoral provisions in those Parishes; and

3. An incommodious way of collecting and receiving of those provisions. Now
those inequalities are several ways determinable, as in respect of extent of
Parishes, number or quality of Inhabitants, etc. and accordingly the value of
Livings and Benefices; thus you shall observe, some Livings of double and
tripple the value of what others are of, in Parishes of double and tripple the
extent of bounds, number and quality of Inhabitants; again nearness to or
distance from the Metropolis is considerable; it being certain that an hundred
pound per an. will go farther in York shire, Lancashire, etc. (where yet
generally the greatest Livings are, viz. of 200. 300. 400. 500. etc. l. per
annum) then two or three in or about London, where yet one is reckoned a
tolerable competency; a great odds! Again the Incumbent's or Beneficiary's own
collecting and receiving of the benefits, is greatly inconvenient; for first it
involves him in worldly encumbrances and distractions, which we desire to have
remedied; next it renders him liable either to be defrauded in his right, or
else to litigious Law-suites and contests with the inhabitants, in pursuit of
it enkindling of such mutual grudges and animosities between Pastor and People,
as will most certainly obstruct all proficiency under, and success of his
Ministry: Now Sir, I have a great temptation within my self to believe, that
if the Parliament pleased to contrive some more equal and proportionable
distributions of those Livings and Benefices, (J meddle not here with
Collegiacies) both as to extent of parochial bounds and number and quality of
Inhabitants; and (which is the chief) of Pastoral provisions therein, with
regard had to their respective nearness to, or distance from the City of
London; (the greater reduced, the lesser augmented) this might prove some
considerable expedient in the case, and remedy to the poverty of the Clergy; a
respective competency being all England over by this means and method
apportioned to them. But the incorporating of the whole in the State, and the
Cl^rgy made State-Pensioners; a certain number being constituted Tribuni
cleritatus, Fide-commissaries, Church-Tribunes and Trustees for a faithful
management of the affair; seems to many to be a very compendious way both for
securing of competent provisions to the Clergy, and additional peace, and quiet
withal; and possibly besides this some redounding emolument and subsistence to
their surviving Consorts, as in other reformed Churches beyond the Seas; which
far be it from me to propound as other than motive, not pattern; not for
imitation, but generous emulation, worthy of an English Parliament; but I doubt
I have been too bold; if I have, my Betters I hope will pardon me; and as for
others, the equity of the interest which I plead, may excuse me; and if it do
not, I rest unconcerned. Thus Sir, I have showed that though Poverty in the
Clergy be partly through inbred corruption, partly through Satan's and your
co-instigation, an occasion of contempt in the Laity; yet the same is no just
ground of Contempt in it self, and besides that both poverty and contempt are
capable of a remedy; which I hope, our prudent State-Physicians may in due time
administer; therefore once more, What does your arguing reprove? But Doomsday
is a coming.

Sir you have here erected an Inquisition, wherein you have charged the Clergy
with ignorance and poverty, as the just grounds and occasions of Contempt of
them and their Religion in the Laity; but now your Charge and both Articles of
indictment have been utterly defeated; the Clergy of the Church of England has
appeared to be a wise, able, learned Clergy as any in the World; and therefore
most unjustly and unworthily by you charged and traduced as ignorant, and as
such betrayed to Contempt; the same Clergy though supposed to be poor; yet not
Contemptible: In fine, the Religion, Clergy, and Church of England, such as
that nor Sophister, nor Ingenioso, nor Fashion-monger, nor Hobbist, (a
catalogue of your own) nor Hector, nor Clergy-Contemner, no nor the gates of
Hell it self shall ever prevail against them. In the mean time what have you
done Sir? Read fact and demerit in a Cardinal's own words, Cum Mose pugnant,
cum Prophetis, cum Apostolis, cum Christo ipso, ac Deo Patre and Spiritu
sancto, qui Sacras Literas and Oracula Divina contemnunt, said Bellarmine
himself; I Will English it to you, for I do not know how you should do it your
self, if in Schools and Universities bred up to English only; Contemners of
the Holy Scriptures and Divine Oracles (such as you have fowly bewrayed your
self to be; the Reader be judge) are Enemies to Moses, to the Prophets, to the
Apostles, to Christ himself, and God the Father and the Holy Ghost; what a
formidable party have you encountered then? If these be your Enemies, who will
be your Friends? I must tell you I have vouched to be your Doomster, as well as
the Clergy's Advocate (a small office which I was but very lately overperswaded
to execute, wherein I had done my severer Muse some right, had I found you as
great a Master of Reason, as of Fancy) and here I will not frighten you with
School-Boyes, nor School-Dames, though you know both are unlucky enough in
their kind; but methinks a Grammarian-Ferula, an Academick-Expulsion, an
Ecclesiastic Key, and Caesar's Sword! etc. should all-arm you to purpose, in
the sense of your own guilt as being an enemy to Schools! Universities! Clergy!
Religion! Church and State! I hope the next Gazette, after publication of my
Letter, will inform us of justice done upon you; and Ill be sure to observe
what news from Cambridge or Devonshire; and suppose you escape all humane
vengeance, do you think you shall Divine too? Sir? be not deceived; the quarrel
of a contemned Clergy and Religion attends you: the quarrel of abused
Scriptures and Scripture-Institutions etc, and therefore for your Doom I
denounce to you St John's anathema-maranatha, that facred Thunderbolt
dispatched against all Detractors and depravers of Holy Record; which assure
your self it must be another sort of prayers and tears, then those of your
weeping Hect, that can prevent the execution of; but in regard you have
pattern'd a Rebel-Triumvirate, in their daring insurrection against Aaron, yea
and (as much as ever you durst) in that against Moses too; I cannot sentence
you with a more proportionable talio, or temporal doom, then that of -- Corah!
whose Grave would be our much better security then Devonshire (unless that
prove the place) for your never being troublesome more; and thither do I doom
you; and what though you shun his Sepulcher? You shall not your own Fate: Shall
Contempt of the Clergy and Religion go unpunished? Surely no: Consider what
has been said already; and remember further, (who knows but that I may rate
you into a conviction at last?) we read of Hell opening of her mouth, as well
as of the Earth opening of hers; (and Esay's authority I take to be as good as
Moses's) and I am sure both, you cannot avoid, without a serious --
recantation, which as before, so now before we part, I earnestly re-advise to
you, as being in charity (almost to a super-erogation) a wellwisher to your
better part:

D. T.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Which together with some smaller literal faults; and the miss-accenting of
some Greek words, the Reader is desired to excute.

PAge 12. Line 17. Read (...). p 38. l. 5 r. Encyclopoe^y. p 67 l. 6. r hear.
p. 68. l. 13. r. (...). Jesus. p. 81 l. 6. ^^prem^sses. p. 90. l. 8 r. one
Fath. p 93 l 20 r. destructive. p. 95. l. ^8 r principle or practice. p. 98. l.
^6. r. t^ansmission. p. 102. l. 3. r. is equally. p. 105. l. 24. r. mary and
deep. p. 105. l. 27. r. publication. p. 100. l. 13 r influenced p. 106. l. 9 r.
Reformers. p 99 l 4, 5. r. M^^asseh against Ephraim, and Ephraim against
Ma^ess^h, and both against Jud. h. p. 99. l. 1^. r. might well serve. p. 101. l
14 r. indefinitely (...) p 102. l. 6. r. Noblesse. p. 102. l 23. r. precedent.
p. 103. l 22. r. that only some or others. p. 104. l. 1 r. why of all orders.
p. 104. l. 4. r. Lawyers or Physicians. p. 146. l. 21. r. For Sir, by the
first. p. 15^. l. 28. r. retrieve. p 175. l. 25, 26. r. could within the space
of Forty years have proved. p. 176 l 24 25. r. the Clergy by name. p 181 l. 10.
r. even in p 181. l 14 r. Sanctuary. p. 186. r. morality p 1^9. l. 18, 19. r.
pro^^enuitate p. 189. l. 24. r. commonage.


