THE OPINION OF WITCHCRAFT Vindicated.

In an Answer to a Book Entitled the Question of WITCHCRAFT Debated.

Being a Letter to a Friend.

By R. T.

Licensed

November 20. 1669. Roger L' Estrange.



LONDON, Printed by E. O. for Francis Haley, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the corner of Chancery Lane in Holborn, 1670.

THE Opinion of Witchcraft VINDICATED.
SIR,
I Received yours, and with it that little treatise of Witchcraft, which you
were pleased to send me: which when I had opened, I found the Author in his
Preface, laying about him like a Hercules furens, or an Ajax mastigophorus, and
charging his opposers with no less than Paganism, acknowledging a plurality of
Gods, and ascribing omnipotency to the Devil. This he doubts not but he shall
make good with the same ease as he asserts it, and promises himself and his
Reader, to force a surrender at the first assault. But his batteries are not of
force enough to effect it, his strongest arguments being little better than an
(...). and his whole Book standing upon no firmer ground than his own
Supposals. The vast confidence which he seems to have in the strength of his
Arguments, had made me arm my self with a more than ordinary care and
circumspection for the sharp encounter I was like to receive from this great
Goliath, but I have since found that I may lay aside those heavy Arms, and that
a stone and a sling will serve the turn.

At the entrance of his Book he lays before you the necessity, in which the
Eastern Empire stood, of Juggling tricks and Impostures, to uphold it is
greatness; and that the heathen Priests were by continual practice arrived to
that perfection in cheating, that they stood not in need of the Devils
assistance: from hence he would infer that the answers given at Oracles, were
no other than cheats put upon the people, and the Priests inventions. But it is
very improbable that the Devil, who had the liberty of possessing so many
Bodies (as we find he had by several undeniable instances of the New Testament)
should be debarred that of a wicked Idolatrous Priest, or the shrines of the
heathen Gods, or, that if he had that freedom, he would not make use of it, for
the establishing of his own Kingdom. After this he tells you of the great
variety of Impostures used by them, all which he reduces to four heads, viz.
Juggling, Enchanting, Conjecturing, and Divining. Of these he gives you
definitions, ad arbitrium, and you must take them on his word, as if that were
as uncontrollable as the Laws of the Medes and Persians, he says that a
Familiar was no Devil, but a confederated person, privy to the plot, and
assistant to the performance. I do not deny but some cheats of this Nature have
been, and yet are in the World, but he that from hence concludes that all are
so, is but a bad Logician. For my part, I cannot be convinced by such an
Argument, when I find (as I shall endeavor to prove) both the testimonies of
Scripture and History against it. Nor indeed, is there any probability, that
the Heathen Priests could so readily give answers to all questions (put to them
or the sudden, and ex improvise) as to keep up the credit of their Oracles to
that height they were at for many Ages together: neither may we easily suppose
that this miraculous Art of cheating could be conveyed from one Priest to
another, and not one of so many thousands discover the deceit to the World; and
that of so great a number, all should be so ready witted, as to give their
answers at a venture, and yet with so much cunning, as that whatever happened,
the Oracles should not be taxed with falsehood, which I believe our Author, if
he were put to it, would find something harder to perform than he seems to
think it. Yet all this he easily believes they did, and by such tricks
magnified their Idols, and seduced the common people, for which cause they were
so great an abomination before God, as that in the Law given by Moses, he so
strictly gave in charge to the Israelites, the rooting them out from among
them. To this purpose he quotes the eighteenth Chapter of Deuteronomy, the
ninth, tenth, eleventh, and twelfth verses. And this he thinks to be as
considerable a place as any can be brought from the whole Bible for the proof
of Witches. Here therefore he takes occasion to fall foul with our Translatours
of the Bible, for that, says he, they have falsely Translated the tenth and
eleventh verses, making them more significant to that purpose than they are in
the Original. Wherefore I think it will not be much amiss to compare the
Authors Translation of those two Verses and ours with the Hebrew so far as they
differ one from the other: ours runs thus.

There shall not be found among you any that makes his Son, or his Daughter to
pass through the fire, or that uses Divinations, or an observer of times, or
an Inchanter, or a Witch.

Or a Charmer, or a Consulter with familiar Spirits, or Wizards, or a
Necromancer.

Now the main difference (for I pass by those of less concernment) is that
instead of a Witch, in the tenth verse this Author has put the word
miracle-monger; and for a Consulter with familiar Spirits, a seeker of an
Oracle. Now in these places he seems much to blame, for having so peremptorily
charged the learned Translatours of the Bible with a false interpretation,
making himself the only Judge in the sense of the original, and refusing any
translation that suites not with his fancy, merely for that reason. Now the
original being rightly considered, we shall find but little difference between
it and our translation, as in that of a Witch, the Hebrew word is (...), coming
from the word (...), which word, if we may believe the best Hebricians,
signifies Witchcraft, or fascination: for so Buxtorfe, and Xantes Pagninus
understand it, expounding it by these words, fascinum, maleficium, and
Praestigium: and so Pagninus in his translation of the Bible, in which he
endeavored to come as near the sense of the original, as was possible for him,
has in this very place expounded the Hebrew (...), Maleficus, which is the same
with our word Witch; Iunius and Tremellius render it, Praestigiator, which has
the same signification with the other, though our Author takes it for no more
than a mere Juggler, or to use his word, a miracle-monger. But the word has
more in it than so, for though it be true, that every Praestigiator is a
miracle-monger, a Juggler, or a Coozner, yet as we find it always used in
Authors, it implies a doing of those deceits by Witchcraft. As for what he
says of the word (...) in the Septuagint, that it signifies an Impostor, I
cannot at all conceive why he should so positively assert it, or at least why I
should believe it, except he could prove from good Authors, that the genuine
signification of the word is so; for I do not at all find it any otherwise than
our word Witch has that signification, for it is certain that Witches are the
greatest Impostors of the World: and he were extremely irrational, that would
believe that the Devil does really those things which many times he seems to
do, and that it is in his power to transform the bodies of men and women into
those of Dogs, or Cats, or any other Creatures. Yet as we cannot deny but the
Devil, having a greater insight into natural Philosophy than ever yet any man
has attained to, may perform those things by natural means, which will yet be
beyond the reach of those who are in the highest rank among us, and have gone
farthest in the ways of nature, so we may easily believe, that he is more
cunning in his tricks, whereby he deceives the senses, and that many times he
seems to change the outward forms of bodies, when he only deceives the sight by
the interposition of colors, and condensation of air, between the eyes of the
beholders and the object, or many other ways which to us are altogether
unknown: But for us to deny that the Devil can do such things, only because we
cannot tell how they are done, or to say that he must be omnipotent, to deceive
our weak senses, is so far from a rational argument, that nothing but the want
of reason can produce such ridiculous fancies. But to proceed, the Greek word
(...), says he, in this place signifies an Impostour, not a poysoner, for it
is ridiculous to think that King Manasseth, and Queen Iezabel, exercised the
Art of poisoning. Now I find it not at all necessary to say that they used the
Art of poisoning, though we deny that they were mere Jugglers: yet I see
nothing so ridiculous in that assertion as he does; for it may with reason
enough be supposed, that Witches do, by their confederated Devils, infuse
poisonous and noxious humors into those bodies which they desire to hurt: and
it is likely that Manasseth and Iezabel, being practitioners in that Art, were
not wanting in any thing that belonged to their profession. Now where he says
that these miracle-mongers (as he calls them) were so severely prohibited in
the Law of Moses, because they acted strange things in the sight of the people,
to confirm them in a false Religion, I can easily grant him that this was one
cause, but that it was the only cause I cannot readily believe, since the Art
was in it self wicked, and most detestable; and by consequence so displeasing
to God, that he would not suffer it among his people: and besides, I do not
think that it was the design of all those that professed this Art, to establish
a false Religion, but rather that they did it for gain, by foretelling things
to come, as it is likely the Witch of Endor did. As for what he objects of their
being coupled together with Soothsayers, many times in those places of
Scripture, where mention is made of Idolatry, it is not at all strange, for
where should we so reasonable expect to find those wicked Artists, as with an
Idolatrous and ungodly people. And we may easily think, that the Devil when he
finds a people inclined to Idolatry will not be wanting to the farther
deceiving of them, so far as his false miracles and lying wonders can conduce
to it: But to conclude from hence, he seems to do, that they were prohibited
merely for upholding it, I see no color of reason.

But here I find my Author endeavoring to persuade the World that Pharaoh's
Magicians were nothing else but Jugglers, and brought Serpents in their sleeves
or pockets to make a fool of Pharaoh, by conveying them into the place of their
sticks by some slye trick of Legerdemain. But I find much difficulty in this
cheat; for first, I cannot possibly believe, that Moses and Aaron told the
Magcians before hand what it was they intended to do, and if not, how it came
to pass that they were provided of necessaries for such a cheat; and were so
ready at Pharaoh's call, without so much as desiring time to catch the
Serpents, and to pull out their stings, for fear of the worst (for otherwise it
had been a kind of jeasting with edged tools.) But to be so quick at it, was I
believe an Art beyond the reach of modern Jugglers, But suppose they were
furnished with all things requisite, I cannot see how that could serve their
turns, for we read in the Text, they did as Aaron had done, for they cast down
every man his Rod, and it became a Serpent; and in the Hebrew it is the same,
(...) et projacerunt unusquisque, virgam suam, and the Septuagint (...) By
these I think it plainly appears that the Magicians cast down Rods, which
afterward became, or at least seemed to be turned into Serpents. Now I
believe, our Author will have enough to do, to show by what means those
miracle-mongers could make their Rods seem to the eyes of Pharaoh, and the
other Spectators, after they had thrown them down, to be changed into Serpents,
and to think that when they had once cast them out of their hands, they could
recover them again, and lay Serpents in their places (except they could have
shown Pharaoh and his attendants, some pretty thing upon the Wall, to employ
their eyes in the mean time) is a whimsey beyond the reach of imagination. And
though we suppose, that Pharaoh and his Nobles were such fools, yet Moses and
Aaron were wise men, and one would think, being concerned themselves, might
have so carefully observed them as to discover it. But if we could possibly
conceive, that notwithstanding all those difficulties, it might be a mere
Juggle, the Gordian knot is yet behind, which I will present to our Author to
unty (if he can) which is that he would be pleased to tell me by what kind of
Legerdemain these men could turn the waters of the Rivers into blood, or if by
any pretty slight of hand they could make the Frogs come up from the Waters
upon the Land of Egypt: and if they could, why they were to seek at the
bringing of Lice, for to humane reason this seems as easy as either of the
other two. Here methinks I find mine Author at a stand; and because he has not
his answer ready, I would advise him in the mean time to say; that certainly
that these Magicians dealt with the Devil, by whose assistance they (...) thus
far in opposition to Moses and Aaron, but that here God (without whose
permission the Devil can do nothing) thought good to set his bounds that he
might go no farther. And this, it is probable, made them say that the finger of
God was in it, because they found that power by which they acted, restrained by
a greater: for if they had done these things by slight of hand, they would only
have thought that Moses and Aaron were more cunning Jugglers than themselves,
without acknowledging that it was the finger of God that did it. But I find him
yet very unwilling to yield, because, says he, whosoever believes that the
Devil could turn these staves into Serpents, ascribes to him an omnipotent
creating power: But if this be all he sticks at, I shall quickly remove that
obstacle, by showing upon how little reason it is founded; for first let him
consider the vast difference which is between creating all things of nothing,
and changing one thing into another: for by creating we understand the giving
of the first being, and making not only the thing, but the matter also, of
which it is composed. Now I see nothing of this ascribed to the Devil by that
opinion. Secondly, let him observe that many times such changes are seen in
nature, Serpents being bred of the corruption of other bodies, even of rotten
Trees and sticks: and the Devil having had time enough to search into the ways
of Nature, might probably follow the same steps which she treads in changes of
this kind, though he might go faster, and be sooner at his journeys end: and
seeing no man has yet attained to that perfection in Natural Philosophy, as to
know the thousandth part of what may be done by natural means, it is but vanity
in any one to measure the time which is requisite, for such a production being
wrought by Supernatural Agents, especially seeing no man knows the means by
which it is done (for would not that man make himself extremely ridiculous,
that should with an ignorant confidence affirm that it is impossible to take the
Copy of a Book by any means sooner than by writing, because he never knew the
Art of Printing?) Now if he grants that the seed of a Serpent is in a stick,
and that the Devil of this seed may produce a Serpent (as he seems to do) and
that sooner than they are formed by Nature, for he confesses that Devils may
strangely promote the generation of several Creatures, if I say this be
granted, I may as well say that he can do it in a minute. For if by his great
skill he can find out ways of accelerating generation, why may not he improve
those ways, by the greatness of his skill so far as to do that in an hour,
which nature does in a year: for to say, that in regard the Devils do these
things by application of matter to matter, they cannot produce a Creature of
it is seed without such a space of time as to us seems convenient, is to measure
the Devils knowledge by our own, and to fathom the depth of Nature by the short
line of our understandings. But I see no necessity of believing that the Devil
changed those Rods into Serpents, neither do I believe it, but rather think
that it was a mere illusion and deceit of the Devils, who might either deceive
the lookers on with an appearance of what was not really there, or by placing
true Serpents instead of the staves. And now I would not have this Author take
me up, and say that if I once recede from the letter of the Text, he may as
well say it is a Juggle of the Magicians, for I have already said that it is not
at all conceivable, that it was possible for the Magicians to do it by mere
humane Art, in regard that when they threw them down, they were yet staves; but
though we deny that it could be done by them, we may yet believe that the Devil
has both agility, and subtilty enough to effect it. But if he will, after all
this, believe that the Magicians might, by slight of hand, conveigh away the
staves, and lay Serpents in their places, certainly he cannot think that they
turned the waters into blood, and brought up Frogs by slight; for I cannot see
how they could carry Frogs enough about them to strew the Land with, neither do
I believe the Author himself can guess how it might be done, because he
silently passed by this place of Scripture. As for the interpretation which he
has given to the Hebrew (...), by their tricks, (thinking from thence to infer
that they were no other that the tricks of the Magicians, though such an
inference is of small force, it properly signifies by their Enchantments; and
so Iunius and Tremellius, Arias Montanus, and Pagninus expound it, all three in
the same words, Incantationibus suis, and in this his exposition of it he
differs from most, if not all Translatours. I am of the same opinion with him
where he says the Scripture speaks oftentimes according to the deceived
apprehensions of men, and I cannot deny but it may be so in this expression of
the slaves being turned into Serpents; but that it is so, as he affirms, in
that of Samuels being raised when Saul came to consult the Witch of Endor, I
cannot say, for the Scripture says not that the Witch raised Samuel, and that
he was sent by God, is not so very improbable as he would make it: for though
God to show his displeasure against Saul, had refused to answer when he
enquired of him, there is no reason from thence to conclude that he did not at
this time send Samuel to him, seeing God might do it for many reasons unknown
to us: And it is probable that if he had at first answered Saul (though he had
received the same answer as he did now from the mouth of Samuel) he had not
been stricken with so great a sense of his sin, and of Gods anger against him,
as by being first reduced to the extremity of not knowing what to do, or
whither to go for counsel, because God had refused to answer him. And to say
that it is unlikely that God would answer him when he sought in a forbidden way,
is vain, for we see that he did the same, in sending Elijah to meet the
Messengers of Ahaziah, when they were going to enquire of Beelzebub, in the
first Chapter of the second book of the Kings. But we must not look for a
reason of all Gods actions; we find that many times his great wisdom sees good
to do those things which to us seem very strange, and unaccountable. Besides
it is no small motive to persuade us that it was Samuel, that the Witch cried
out, as at some unexpected accident, being, it may be, frightened at the sight
of one whom she so little expected: and this, it is probable, made her say that
she had seen a God coming up from the Earth, meaning a blessed Spirit. As for
his Argument drawn from Samuels words, Why have thou disquieted me? That he was
not sent by God, seeing that could have been no trouble to him, it is of no
force at all, for those words were spoken to Readiness capacity, and as being
words of course, importing no more than if he had said, why have thou not
suffered my Body to rest? that is, lie still in the grave: and the Hebrew word
in this place implies no more than, why have thou moved me to come up: So this
phrase of dead bodies, resting, and being disturbed, is usual with us, though
we know that they are not at all sensible of repose, or disquiet. But if it
were not Samuel, it is very irrational to believe that it was either the Witch,
or any confederated person, for two reasons; first, because it is said in the
Scripture, that Saul knew that it was Samuel, and he bowed himself; for it is
not imaginable that any man could so change his face, as that Saul, (who
questionless was well enough acquainted with Samuels countenance) could be
deceived by it: and to think that Saul saw him not is as ridiculous, for then
why did he bow himself? Secondly, because he foretold Readiness Death; for if, as
this Author supposes, it had been said by the Woman at a venture, the more
cunning way had been to have told him that he should live, for then if he had
died, who could have accused her of falsehood? If he had lived she had told the
truth: But to tell him positively that he should dye, and not only himself, but
his Sons too, and this with a limitation of time, to morrow, was something too
much to be spoken at a venture.

The second difference between our Translation and the Authors is, where he
puts a seeker of an Oracle, for a Consulter with familiar Spirits. Here he
tells you that the word (...) is taken in Scripture sometimes for the gift of
Oracling, sometimes for the person that has such a gift: this is as much, and
no more, than if he had told you that he is pleased to understand it so; I
confess as an Oracler may be understood, that is, for one that takes and gives
answers from the Devil, (...), may have that signification; for ob properly
signifies a Demon, or an evil Spirit, and so the best Hebricians expound it:
now this being the true sense of the word ob, I see no reason for blaming our
Translatours, who have not at all erred from the Original in this place. But he
understands an Oracler otherwise, to wit, for one that gave answers at a
venture, and only followed the dictates of his own fancy, counterfeiting
strange voices, thereby to deceive the people, etc. And so he interprets the
Greek (...) and (...), but how they came by that signification I cannot tell,
for I find it no where but in his Book. And from the Scripture I think the
contrary may be gathered, viz. That ob and Python, are taken for an evil Spirit
that possessed the person Divining, and not for the person himself; we read in
Leviticus, the twentieth Chapter, and the twenty seventh verse, and a Man or a
Woman (...) when there is in them a Python; which words [in them] seem to imply
something of this Nature, and that the ob was some distinct being from the
person in whom it was, for he could not be in himself. And we find in some old
Translations, where mention is made of Readiness turning the Witches out of
Israel, it is said, Et qui Pythones habebant in ventre. But whosoever reads the
sixteenth Chapter of the Acts of the Holy Apostles, will be fully confirmed
that this is the meaning of (...), except he himself be possessed with a spirit
of contradiction, for he there shall find that as St. Paul was walking he met a
Maid, (...) having a Spirit of Divination (as our Translation renders it) and
in the eighteenth verse, Paul turning himself (...), he said to the Spirit, I
command thee in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her, and it came out
that same hour. This methinks shows plainly to any body but our Author, that
this kind of Divining was done by the help of the Devil. But it may be he will
say (for I know no other way that he can answer it) that she did but deceive
the people by counterfeiting strange voices, and speaking in a bottle, or some
such Juggle, and that where St. Paul bid the Spirit come out of her, it is to
be understood, that he bid her Juggling tricks come out of her.

But to those that rightly consider this place, it will plainly appear that
this (...) was no other than a Devil; and this being true, I see no reason to
deny that the Witch of Endor was possessed with the same Spirit; or that the
Pythons of Manasses were Familiar Spirits. Thus I have almost done with his
first Chapter. But I cannot pass by one argument which he uses, without taking
notice of it; for I cannot tell, says he, how Witches come in here, no, not
how Devils neither, except you believe that the Devils made answer at Heathen
Oracles, which if you do, I must crave leave to dissent: truly no man can deny
him this leave, and he may dissent when he pleases, but I do not conceive my
self obliged to follow his example; for if they were, as he supposes, only
Juggling tricks of the Priests, I cannot imagine how it came to pass that they
ceased so suddenly after our Saviors time: beginning sensibly to fall away at
the time of his Birth, and since his Death being wholly extinguished. For the
first, we find something considerable in Suidas, who writes that Augustus, who
lived at the time of our Saviors Birth, as he enquired of an Oracle concerning
his Successor, had this answer given him.

-- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
In English

-- A Boy
Of Hebrew race, whom the blessed Gods obey,
Bids me go hence to Hell without delay,
In silence from our Altars go thy way.
Hereupon Augustus at his return commanded that an Altar should be built in the
Capitol, with this inscription. HAEC EST ara primogeniti Dei. Now if this story
may be credited, it makes very much for the opinion of the Devils answering at
the heathen Oracles, and this answer is not at all like the fancy of a Juggling
Priest, it being neither for the Priests Interest, nor the credit of the
Oracle. Thus we see how soon they began to decay upon our Saviors coming: and
we find another story to this purpose, which happened at the time of his
Crucifixion, in Plutarchs Morals, that part which is entitled (...), why
Oracles are ceased, where he says, that a certain company sailing from Greece
toward Italy, were suddenly becalmed, and heard a voice calling one Thamus,
who was an Egyptian, and at that time in the Ship; but he being called twice
gave no answer, but at the third time he said here am I; whereupon the voice
bid him, when he came at the ( Shelves in the Ionian Seas which are called)
Palodes, to publish that the great God Pan was dead; then the Ship going
forward, he did as he was commanded; for coming to the Palodes, he published it
from the poop of the Ship; after which immediately followed a great noise of
many shreeking and lamenting together. This being told to Tiberius the
Emperor, he enquired of the wise men of his Empire, who this great God Pan
should be, but they could give him no better answer, than that he was the Son
of Mercury and Penelope. But the circumstances being considered, it was thought
by the wiser sort to be our blessed Savior, this happening just at that time
when he dyed upon the Cross; the Devils making this great lamentation, for that
they were from that time to quit those Oracles by which they had so long
deceived the World. But however it was, we are certain that from that time they
began to decay extremely, and in a short time came to nothing; and the famous
Oracle of Delphos was silent in Iuvenal's time, as we may see by that
expression of his, Delphi Oracula cessant: This their general silence is no
small Argument that there was something more in them than our Author supposes;
for if they had been no more than such deceits as he speaks of, I see no reason
why they might not have been acted as well since our Saviors time as before,
for we do not find that men are debarred the liberty of cheating, or that they
are less cunning now than they were then. But it is probable that God would not
suffer the Devil to stand in such open opposition to his Sons Kingdom, and to
carry on the interest of the Kingdom of darkness, where the Sun of
Righteousness was risen, and the light of the Gospel was made manifest.

Now by the Title of his second Chapter he would make you believe that he there
proves, that the Opinion of Witches had it is beginning from the Heathen fables,
but when you come to the Chapter it self, there is no such thing; indeed he
tells you a story of one Lamia, whose Children were killed by Juno, and that
she out of spite used to kill those of other Women, and that from thence
Witches (being called Lamiae) had their Original: thus, a man who had never
seen a Swan, might dispute against their being, and say that the fancy of Swans
had it is first rise from Ovid's Metamorphosis, because he there speaks of one
Cyenus, who was changed into the first Bird of that name. But the weakness of
this Argument is so obvious, that it stands not in need of a confutation: then
he tells you how far the folly of men (as he calls it) has proceeded in their
belief concerning the Actions of Witches, as if, says he, they could transform
Men and Women into Beasts, as if they could destroy the fruits of the Earth,
and the fruit of the Womb, etc. I am of opinion that the most rational
assertors of Witchcraft are as far from believing that the practisers of it can
change the bodies of Men and Women into those of Beasts, as he is, though the
common people that search no farther than the outward senses can discover, may
believe it. But I see no reason why we should not allow the Devil a little more
cunning than Pharaoh's Magicians, for he grants that they by mere humane Art
could so far deceive the Spectatours, as to make them believe that their Staves
were turned into Serpents; and I think the Devil may go far beyond them in the
Art of Juggling, as to do the same with the bodies of Men and Women: Besides,
the Devil has those advantages which they had not, for being a Spirit, he can
take to himself a body of what form he pleases, which he may afterward
transform to any other shape; so that when we think we see the body of a Witch
transformed, it may be only the Vehicle of the Devil in her likeness. And that
he can destroy the fruits of the Earth, or of the Womb, and enable or disenable
in matters venerial, seems not at all hard to be believed, seeing humane Art
can reach so far: as for his raising of Winds and Tempests, we need no other
Argument than that example we have in the first Chapter of Job, to convinee us
of it: Besides, that he is called in Scripture the Prince of the Air, is
something considerable to this purpose; and it is probable that he may as easily
cause Lightnings and Thunder, as he could bring down fire in such abundance
upon Job's Servants and Cattle, as to consume them: now when we find in
Scripture, that Winds and Tempests have been raised by him, I think it is a
sufficient warrant for us to believe that he can do it. Then he tells you that
examples of this prodigious power are scattered up and down the Roman Poets,
and quotes you two whole sides out of Ovid, Virgil, Horace, Tibullus,
Propertius, and Lucan, and alas, all this stir to very little (or to speak more
truly, to no) purpose; but only to show that these Poets did speak of those
things, and that indeed he has very clearly demonstrated: But I will not so
much as suppose that he meant from hence to conclude that nothing of this
Nature is true, for then I might think that he would say, the World had no
beginning, because Ovid writes of it. But says he, the ingenious Poets
themselves, nor the wiser sort of Heathens, did not believe these things; and
what then? I hope he will not say that we must believe no more than the wiser
sort of Heathens did; for if he does (to use his own words) I must crave leave
to dissent. He says he could instance in many more of the Ancients (and all, I
believe, to as much purpose as these.) But he will conclude with Nero the
Emperor, who having studied the Art of Magic, did at last despise it as vain,
and promising more than it can perform. But what is this to the purpose, for it
is no Argument to say, Nero could not be a Witch, Ergo, there are no Witches;
it may be the Devil thought Nero sure enough without a contract, and it is
likely that he will not engage himself in such bargains when it is no advantage
to him. Besides, the Devil will not appear to Atheists, for fear of undeceiving
them, and it may be he took this course to confirm Nero in the belief that
there was neither God nor Devils; and it may be that if he had made a contract
with Nero, he would have required more at his hands than our Witches do, or
then he was able to perform; for his ambitious mind could not have contented it
self with such petty practices as theirs are; for he had already wherewithal
to satisfy himself in the enjoyment of Worldly pleasures, and he stood not in
need of the Devils help or any tricks of Witchcraft to wreak his fury upon
those that had offended him: But the Devil usually takes advantage of poor
silly wretches, overruled by malice and desire of revenge, and wanting means
to execute their malicious designs, whom if he can satisfy in this particular,
and in the accomplishing of their inordinate lusts and pleasures, they aim no
farther. But I need not insist upon this; it is enough to say, that his not
being a Witch, is no Argument against the being of Witches in general.

His third Chapter is nothing but the story of the first setting up of the
inquisition, and of their proceedings; where he tells you what a great number
of Witches were then discovered, and supposes them to have been all innocent,
having their confessions extorted from them by extremity of torment: truly I
cannot say any thing to the contrary, but weak spirits may by torture be
brought to confess any thing; and I verily believe that many innocent persons
suffered by this cruel way of proceeding, as well as those which were guilty;
but I cannot from thence conclude that none were guilty, either there or any
where else, no more than I can say that because many at Amboyna were forced by
torture to confess that they had conspired against the Governor, there are no
Traitors in the World; so that I think I may pass by this Chapter, and come to
the fourth, which by the Title seems more considerable; for that tells you that
there are Arguments to prove that there is no such thing as a Witch in
Scripture, as also to prove that there is no such thing as a Witch at all.

Now because he has yet said nothing toward it, I suppose he has reserved his
greatest strength for this Chapter; so that if I can come off here without
harm, I shall think my business done; wherefore it will not be amiss to take
these Arguments into consideration.

The first, says he, shall be taken from the difference which is between our
vulgarly reputed Witches, and those which our Translatours of the Bible call
so; for who be they, but the Kings, Queens, and Princes of this World? Whereas
now adays, they are poor, silly, and contemptible persons. Now let any
rational person judge if there be any force in this Argument: for supposing
this to be true, there will follow nothing from hence to his purpose; for his
Argument rightly considered sounds thus, Our Translatours of the Bible call
none but Kings, Queens, and Princes, Witches. Ergo, there is no such thing as a
Witch in Scripture.

This is a strange sort of Argument to be brought by a rational man, and stands
rather in need of pity than an answer: yet to satisfy him I will say thus
much; that he ought to consider that the Scripture mentions the Witchcrafts of
Kings and Queens, as being the more considerable, and such as concerned all
Israel in general; and also, that in writing their lives, these practices of
theirs could not be omitted: Now it was not at all requisite that the Scripture
should speak of every old Woman in Israel, that was a Witch, since it was
nothing pertinent to the story: this I say might serve to answer him, supposing
his assertion to be true, that the Scripture makes mention of no other Witches
but Kings and Queens; but that is not apparent; for where the story required
it, we find that the Scripture does take notice of meaner persons that
practiced this Art, as in that passage of the Witch of Endor; as also where it
is said that Saul turned them all out of Israel, for we cannot suppose that he
turned out so many Kings and Queens; but we may easily think that many of them
were poor contemptible persons, as well as some of ours.

But seeing there is nothing in this Argument to stop me, I will pass to the
second, which is drawn from the Sadduces, who denied Spirits, and the
Resurrection of the Dead, yet had the five Books of Moses in great esteem among
them; wherefore, says he, either they did not understand Hebrew, or the notion
of a Witch does not appear in Scripture. This Argument is as weak as the other,
for if he means that there is no mention of Spirits in Scripture, the contrary
is easily proved, what ever the Sadduces thought; and it is very manifest from
many places of Scripture that there were both good and evil Spirits: in the
nineteenth Chapter of Genesis, and the first verse, it is said that two Angels
came to Sodom; so in the thirty second Chapter, and the first verse, Jacob went
on his way, and the Angels of God met him; so we read that Jacob, in his dream,
saw a Ladder that reached from Earth to Heaven, and the Angels of God ascending
and descending on it: many other places there are where mention is made of the
Angels of God: Now in the seventeenth of Leviticus, and the seventh verse, it
is said, and they shall no more offer their Sacrifices unto Devils; and in the
thirty second of Deuteronomy, and the seventeenth, they Sacrificed to Devils,
not unto God; and other examples of this kind might be produced; yet by his
Argument nothing of all this should be found in Scripture. Now if he once
yields (as he must do) that the notion of a Devil appears in Scripture, for
what end serves his Argument drawn from the Sadduces, but to show that they
were in an error, and mis-understood the Bible: But I cannot be convinced that
the Sadduces denied the being of Spirits in general, though we read that they
denied the Resurrection, or that there was either Angel or Spirit, for that has
reference only to the Spirits of Dead men; for if they had denied all Spirits
and Angels, it is not likely that our Savior would have told them, as he did,
that men in the Resurrection should be as the Angels of God, for what would
such a comparison have signified to those who denied that there were such
things as Angels. Now if we believe that they acknowledged any Spirits, whence
can we draw an Argument to prove that they denied the being of Devils. But
whatever the opinion of the Sadduces was, we are not to be governed by their
Judgment, in deciding whether or no the notion of a Witch appears in Scripture,
but by our own; neither have we any great reason to rely upon their
understanding of the Scriptures, though this Author says much for it; seeing
our Savior tells them that they erred, not knowing the Scriptures. Now for his
third and last Argument, which is taken from the different practices of those
whom our Translatours call Witches, and those which are vulgarly supposed to be
so; for says he, our modern Witches practice an occult and secret Art, and
it is great Art to discover them, by several strange signs and horrid tortures;
but the others practiced what they did openly and in the face of the World: I
have this to answer, that he is extremely deceived in this point, for that the
Witch of Endor practiced openly, is not to be imagined, seeing she was so
cautious when Saul came to her, that she durst not do any thing till he had
sworn to her that she should have no harm, but asked him why he laid a snare
for her Life. And since the Law was so strict against them, as it is in the
twentieth of Leviticus, and the twenty seventh verse, where it is said, A Man
or a Woman that has a Familiar Spirit thou shall not suffer to live, but shall
stone him with stones, his blood shall be upon him (I say where such a Law was
in force) it is not likely that this Art was practiced openly, and in the face
of the World, as he says, but that they were as private as ours are* but,
says he, if they were so, how impossible was it for Saul to turn them all out
of Israel? It Is true indeed, it was impossible for him, neither did he, for the
Witch of Endor was yet there; and if one remained, there might be as well a
hundred, or a thousand, notwithstanding his objection of the first of Samuel,
and twenty eighth Chapter, where we read that Saul had put away those that had
Familiar Spirits out of the Land, which must of necessity be understood, that
he put the Law in Execution against them, putting all those to death which were
discovered, so that they durst not practice openly; and so he might well be
said to put them out of the Land, though there were hundreds yet remaining,
which practiced secretly and by stealth, because he used all possible means for
the rooting them out of Israel; neither can he certainly say that Manasses
practiced this Art openly, for the Scripture only says that he used
Enchantments, and Divinations, and dealt with Familiar Spirits, which he might
do privately, though he was a King: yet I can easily grant that when both King
and people were wholly given up to Idolatry, and all other wickedness, any
thing might be practiced openly; wherefore that hinders not but it might be the
same Art which our Witches use now adays, though practiced in a different
manner. Thus I have done with his Arguments, by which he endeavored to prove
that there is no such thing as a Witch in Scripture, and am now come to those
by which he undertakes to prove that there is no such thing as a Witch at all.

To his first I perceive I shall not need to say much, it being only this;
that seeing there is no such thing in Scripture, it follows there is no such
thing at all: therefore I shall only say, that seeing the force of this
Argument depends wholly upon those which went before, they being already
answered, this may keep them company. Now he objects, that the Law of Moses
being so strict against bestial and incestuous Concubinage, it would seem very
strange, the Opinion of Witches being true, that it should not so much as
mention Diabolical. To this I answer, that it is not at all strange that it
should not mention particularities, when the whole Art is forbidden upon pain
of Death; for in that Law [thou shall not suffer a Witch to live;] this and all
other their wicked Actions, were included. So that, whether it was Diabolical
Copulation, or killing of Men or Beasts by Witchcrafts, or any other Action of
this Nature, all was punished when the Witch was stoned to death. His second
Argument is taken from the miserable poverty of our vulgarly reputed Witches;
for, says he, I am not willing to believe that they have such a power with the
Devil, as to make him do wonderful things at their command, when they cannot
command him to fetch them money, etc. To this I answer, that certainly the
Devil deludes these people with the enjoyment of all sorts of pleasures which
they desire, if not in reality, at least in the imagination, which is all one
to them, as if they were real. Now riches not being desirable for themselves
alone, but only as they conduce to a pleasant life, if they can obtain this
without them, I see no reason why they should command the Devil to fetch them
money: Besides, as they are people of a base and degenerate spirit, having no
aim but malice and revenge, and the satisfying of their beastly lusts, and
coming as near as is possible to the Nature of the Devils themselves, such a
sordid way of living may be more suitable to their temper; as also they may out
of policy choose such an obscure and contemptible life to avoid suspicion, and
that they might have the greater freedom to practice their wicked Arts, their
Actions not being so much pryed into, as those of more considerable persons.
These reasons may suffice, though many more might be given for the removing of
this objection. In the third place he says, that the opinion of Witchcraft is
attended either with irrationality or impiety, for that it is irrational to
think that the Devil being so full of malice, and breathing nothing but
mischief against men, should suffer any man to live, when he can so easily kill
us at the command of a Witch: To this I say, that the Devil cannot go beyond
his Commission, and that it is in Gods power to stop the course of the Devils
malice, when, and where he pleases. Besides, it is very probable, that the Laws
by which the Devils are governed, do not allow them that freedom; for by that
means the interest of the dark Kingdom would not be carried on, seeing it is
the ruin of the Souls of men, not the destruction of their Bodies, by which it
is established. So that cunning and slye temptations are more advantageous to
this end, than open violence; for if the Devil should take this course to wreak
his malice upon men, they would be more sensible of his mischievous practices;
and finding themselves too weak to make resistance, it might be a means to draw
them from their evil courses, and make them run to God for succor. This I say
may be supposed, and it is enough to clear this opinion of irrationality, if we
can guess at a reason why the Devil would not take this course, though he had
his liberty of hurting whom he pleased; but it is certain that neither Devils
nor Witches can hurt us without Gods permission. But I see no such impiety in
saying that God does many times permit such Actions (as the Author seems to
think there is,) for then it were as impious to say that God suffers us to be
tempted to sin; yet we are certain that the Devil cannot do it without his
permission; as appears by that expression of St. Paul, He will not suffer you
to be tempted above what you are able, etc. So if we acknowledge that God is
omnipotent, we must confess that no wickedness could be done in the World
without his permission, seeing it is in his power to prevent it; and there is
no impiety in affirming that though God of his great mercy may preserve any man
from falling into sin, yet he is not bound to do it, neither does he, as we see
by daily experience; and if we once grant that he suffers men to sin, where
lies the impiety of saying that he permits Witchcraft? If we do not deny that
God suffers one man to murder another, why should we not, without impiety,
confess that he suffers Witches to do the same thing? Certainly no reason can
be given why it should be more impious to say that he permits one sin, then
another; and if not, I see none, why this opinion should be charged with either
irrationality or impiety.

His last objection is as malicious as it is frivolous; for, says he, the
opinion of Witchcraft being true, no man can be able by the light of reason to
know if Christ were a Witch or no. But if he had considered the difference
between the miracles wrought by the Holy Jesus, and the Impostures of Witches;
if he had considered the different ends to which they tend, if he had had any
regard to the life and conversation of our Blessed Savior, and that of an
Impostor, the holiness of the one, and the wickedness of the other, if he had
weighed the words of our Savior, You shall know the Tree by it is fruit; can
one gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figgs of Thistles? he might have spared this
Objection.

Who ever believed, of all the rational assertors of VVitchcraft, that an
Impostor could infallibly cure all diseases by a word of his mouth, or a touch
of his hand? That he could raise the dead to life, after they had been so long
buried as to stink in their Graves? That he could feed five thousand with five
loaves and two fishes; that he could cause the Earth to tremble, and the Sun to
be darkened at his death? The graves of dead men to be opened, and their Bodies
to arise to accompany him at his Resurrection; finally, that he could raise
himself after three days burial, and converse for some days with men, and at
last gloriously to ascend up to Heaven in the sight of several witnesses.

Methinks the manner of our Saviors Birth is enough to satisfy us in this
particular, that he was born of a Virgin, that a glorious Star appeared over
the place of his birth, that a company of Heavenly Angels were sent to proclaim
it, as tidings of joy to the whole World; and that the wise men being led by
his Star, which they had seen in the East, came so far to worship him, and
bring him presents. Much more might be said to show the great difference
between them; but I think it is so visible to those who have read the life of
our Savior in the four Evangelists, that I shall not need to insist upon it; I
will only add, that the sweetness of his disposition, the sincerity of his
Doctrine, the holiness of his life and conversation, his transcendent
knowledge, his zeal for the glory of God, and the Salvation of men, are
infallible Testimonies to prove that he was no Imposter: So that, if whatever
has been by the common people ascribed to Witches, which seems miraculous, were
really true, and that they had done all, or more than has ever been believed of
them; yet should we have no reason to doubt of our Blessed Saviors Divinity;
and his faith that thinks so, is but weakly grounded, and in danger of being
shaken by every strange Action, which is beyond the reach of his understanding.
Our Savior himself has told us that false Christ's shall come, with signs and
wonders able to deceive, if it were possible, the very Elect, which is enough
to convince us, notwithstanding this Authors objection, that such miraculous
Actions may be performed without a Divine commission, as may carry with them a
great show of Divine power; but he is in a deplorable condition that from
thence concludes that Christ Jesus might be an Impostor. Thus I have done with
his objections; after which he tells you his opinion of the Nature and power of
Devils; I believe, says he, that the Devils are aerial Creatures, and though
they have more skill, strength, and agility than men, yet they act as men do by
applying Natural Agents and Patients, one to the other, in this sublunary
World; but as for the World aetherial, or celestial, I suppose they have no
power there, but consequently that the wind blows when and where it lists;
and that the seasons of the year are neither promoted nor hindered by them, or
the fruits of the Earth: To this I answer, that I think it is apparent out of
the first Chapter of Job, that the Devil may raise winds and Tempests; but I am
of his opinion, that he cannot promote or hinder the seasons of the year, or
alter the course of the Stars and Planets; as for the last, touching the fruits
of the Earth, he himself has said enough against it, in the eleventh page of
his Book, where he says that men by their well ordering the seeds of Plants
may strangely promote the generation of such Plants, and the ripening of their
Fruits; therefore he adds, the Devils being more skilful than men may strangely
promote the generation of several Creatures. Thus having answered himself, he
has saved me the labor; and I see very little, or no reason that he has, to
tax the affirmers of Witchcraft, with approaching to the opinion of the
Persians, of two great principles of good and evil, both Almighty; for by the
opinion of Witchcraft, nothing of omnipotency is ascribed to the Devil, as he
supposes; and by this saying, he seems not to understand what is meant by
omnipotency; for any one Action, how strange soever it seems to us, cannot be
an Argument to prove an omnipotency in the doer; so to say, if the Devil can
raise a wind, he must be omnipotent, is ridiculous, as much as if he said, I
can blow with a pair of Bellows, Ergo, I am omnipotent; I can do one thing,
Ergo, I can do all things: if the Devil raises a wind, he does but Act upon
natural Bodies, and by natural means, which requires nothing of omnipotency. So
if he causes Thunders, or Lightnings, or if he changes one Body i^to another,
he has still matter to work upon, and so long we may suppose any thing to be
done without omnipotency, because we know not how far the Laws of Nature are
intended.

Now for what he quotes out of the Ancyran council, it is not much to be
regarded, for it seems not to have been intended against the opinion of Witches
in general; but to show the folly of those Witches which believed the illusions
of the Devil to be realities, and professed that in the night time they
conversed with Diana, or some other heathen god, or goddess: for they feared
lest by this their folly the common people might be led to the old error of
the heathens, in believing a plurality of gods: this seems very plain from the
words of the Council; -- Quod quaedam sceleratae mulieres retro post sathanam
conversae, daemonum illusionibus, and phantasmatibus seductae, se nocturnis
horis cum Diana Paganorum Dea, etc. super quasdam bestias equitare; and a
little after, nam innumera multitudo hac falsa opinione decepta, haec vera esse
credit, and credendo, a recta fide deviat, and in errorem paganorum devolvitur,
cum aliquid numinis, ant divinitatis extra unum Deum arbitratur.

Now that Witches are deluded by the Devil, and made to believe those things
which are many times false, is not to be questioned; but it does not follow,
because they are deluded, that they are no Witches; neither can I find o^e
sentence in all this decree to prove it: it is true, they have endeavored to
show that these nocturnal pleasures and recreations are only imaginary, and
delusions of the Devil, and this seems to be the scope of the whole decree: and
the other decree, -- Siquis credit quod Diabolus aliquando creaturas in Mundo
facerit, et tonitrua, et fulgura, etc. sua authoritate fecerit, sicut dixit
Priscillianus, anathema sit; It was made against that error of Priscillian,
that the Devil has a power in the things of this World, equal to that of God,
and can do these things at his own will and pleasure; wherefore these words,
Sua authoritate, are put in; but it does not at all deny that he can do those
things with Gods permission; and if it had, I think the authority is not so
great, but that of the Scripture is to be preferred before it. As for that
which he objects that the Devil did no more in the case of Job, than Elijah, or
any mortal man may do when he receives a commission from God, I think the
contrary may be gathered from the Scripture, I mean, that it was wholly Satan's
doing, having only obtained leave from God, for, God said to him, all that he
has is in thy power; and the same expression is again used in the second
Chapter, and the sixth verse; Behold, he is in thy power; by which expressions
we may gather, that God left it to him, and acted nothing of it himself; and it
immediately follows, Satan went out from the pr^sence of the Lord, and smote
Job with sore boyls from the head to the foot; it is not said, the Lord smote
him; now if this last was done by the Devil, why not all the rest? Besides, if
God had been the Actor, the limitation, only upon himself stre^ch not forth
thine hand, had been altogether needless. Thus I have done with his fourth
Chapter, and am come to his fifth, which he intitles, An answer to their
Arguments which endeavor to prove, that there are Witches, where I find the
Arguments which he produces against himself, to be these: first, that Drums and
Trumpets have been heard when neither Drummer nor Trumpeter was near. Secondly,
that the persons tormented have fallen into their fits upon the sight of the
suspected Witches. Thirdly, that immediately upon the threatening, or cursing
of this or that person, such an accident has happened to the party threatened or
cursed. And lastly, that the Witches themselves have confessed it. The first
he yields to be true, being unwilling (as he says) to gainsay the authority of
so many in the world, who affirm it to be so, but he denis that from hence the
being of Witches may be proved: it is easily thought this Author would not
raise a Devil which he could not lay again; and that of so many Arguments as
may be brought too for the proof of Witches, he would only make choice of such
as he could answer, or at least would so order the matter, as to leave out the
most material circumstances, thereby to render the Argument invalid; for it is
true (as he says) that only to hear Drums and Trumpets, and to see Chairs and
Stools move about a Room, and no body touching the one or the other, proves no
more than the being of Spirits; but (because he seems to allude to that story
of Mr. Mompesson's house in Wiltshire) I will thus answer him; that if these
things shall happen in a Gentleman's house, which was formerly undisturbed,
merely upon the taking away of an idle fellows Drum; if the Devil by such and
such signs being demanded, shall declare that the Drummer employed him; if upon
the Drummers being condemned, and sent to the Islands, shall be quiet, and upon
his return these disturbances shall be renewed, these circumstances will render
the Argument of no small force to prove contracts with the Devil. Now if he has
ever heard the true Relation of the forementioned story, he will find in it all
this that I have said. The second Argument, that upon the sight of the Witch
the party has fallen into his fit, etc. he answers thus: first, he objects that
these stories are different from the former, in this, that those are attested
by several persons of Credit, and these are grounded only in the Juggling
delusions of Impostors, and the foolish mistakes of the vulgar: to which I
answer, that he speaks with too much haste, and considers not that these things
have been sworn by innumerable, and many of them persons of credit, before
Judges of Assize, and in the face of the Country; and that Judges are not
generally so careless of what they do, as to take away the lives of so many
hundreds, upon no better ground than the foolish mistakes of the Vulgar.
Secondly, he says, that if he grants these things to be true, he yet sees no
reason to grant that there are Witches, but rather to conclude that these
Spirits, which are so gamesome, in doing us mischiefs, when they perceive that
any are suspected to have set them on work, use these tricks to confirm the
suspicion, making it their sport to see poor innocent people hanged. Here I
will make him the same objection as he made against the being of Witches,
which is, that if the Devil could by such tricks as these so easily deprive
innocent people of their lives, it is irrational to think that he would suffer
any body to live, considering his great malice; and if he answers, that he
cannot do it without Gods permission, I will say, in his own words, that it is
impious to concern the great God with these designs of the Devil to take away
innocent persons lives: thus by denying of VVitchcraft, he is fallen himself
into the same irrationality, or impiety, of which he accused the assertors of
it. But if, as he says, the Devil should by such tricks endeavor the ruin of
poor innocent people, it is not probable, that he could make those persons
Actors in their own ruin, so that all their words and actions should
contribute to it; as it happens for the most part, for it is seldom known that
people are hanged, because others fell into their fits at the sight of them,
without any other evidence against them, but some suspicious actions of their
own concurring. To the third, which is, that upon their threatening or cursing
such things have happened to the party cursed, he answers, that it is not to be
wondered at, if in the World there has often happened a notable concurrence of
Events, etc. this I suppose he said, merely for want of something else to say;
for it is not at all conceivable (though once in a hundred years such a thing
may come to pass, as that upon an Old VVomans cursing a man may immediately
fall sick, or dye) that it should be so frequently done, and that such events
should constantly attend the curses of some particular persons, more than
others. The last Argument is from the confession of the VVitch; and he answers
it thus; that the wisest man in the world may by torture be brought to confess
any thing, whether it be true or false: this answer seems very weak, when we
consider, that this way of forcing confessions by torture is not in use with
us, and by consequence, that can be no reason why our Witches should confess
themselves to be so, except it were really true. But that answer not sufficing,
he has another, which is, that he believes, that some silly Old Women overgrown
with melancholy and dotage, have really believed themselves to be Witches, and
to have done those things which not only their foolish Neighbors, but
worshipful men in the World, have charged them with. But suppose some one, or
two, have been so extremely foolish, as to be persuaded into that belief
against their own knowledge, can it be thought that all were so? Or if we could
conceive that any persons by being accused could be made to believe that they
were Witches, what is that to those who have freely accused themselves without
so much as being suspected by others? Or what to those, who after they had past
the danger of being persuaded into this folly, and had stood it out to the last
with a stiff denial, notwithstanding the clear evidences brought in, and sworn
against them, after, I say, that they had past all this, without confession,
have afterward penitently acknowledged all upon the Ladder? To such as these
his answer reaches not; yet, that many such have been, is evident to any but
those who believe no more than they have seen themselves. Now, to suppose that
an Old Man or Woman, sunk in melancholy, may be persuaded to think themselves
Witches, is excusable, if that were all; but to believe, that not only the
Old man or woman, but the Judge, the Jury, and the whole Assize, should be thus
abused, the witnesses forswearing themselves, only to hang poor innocent people
that have done them no harm; and that not only one Judge, one Jury, and one
Assize, should be so fooled, but thousands of each, and all with nothing; and
to imagine that whole Countries, nay, all the Christian world, should be so
overspread with folly, as to establish Laws against a sort of people which
never were in being, is a madness of which whosoever is guilty, wants but one
step more to become a Sceptick, and reject the Testimony of his own senses.

Thus, Sir, I have answered, I think, what is most considerable in this Book; I
will pass by the sixth Chapter, as having nothing in it which requires an
answer, it being little more than what has been said before, and only to show
his fancy touching the first entrance of this Opinion of VVitchcraft into the
world; so that the truth of this assertion being once proved, the ground upon
which that Chapter stands is taken away. And now Sir, it is time that I free
you from this trouble (if you have had the patience to suffer it thus ^ar) and
that I beg your pardon for those many errors, of which either haste or
ignorance have made me guilty; which if you grant me, you will abundantly
obliedge,

SIR, Your most faithful Servant.


