THE DISEASES OF THE TIMES OR, THE DISTEMPERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH.

Succinctly describing each particular Disease wherein the Kingdom is troubled.

Contracted into these Heads. viz. 1. The Immedicable tumor of Faction. 2. The
strange diffusion of Brownianisme. 3. The stupendeous inundaton of Heresy. 4.
The desperate swellng of obstinacy. 5. The dangerous disease of Feminine
divinity. 6. The aspiring ambition of presumption. 7. The audacious height of
disobedience. 8. The painted deceitfulness of hypocrisy.


London, printed for R. T.

The Diseases of the Times.
WHen with mature deliberation I seriously ponder and consider the promiscuous
multiplicity of Distempers, wherein this Kingdom is dangerously involved, I
conceive it to be reduced into such a miscellaneous laborynth of Faction and
schism that I may without any scrupulous dubitation freely confess with
Seneca, Nunc vere vivimus in inquinatis temporum faecibus: we now truly live
in the polluted dregs of time: Yet there was not long since a Pamphlet (for I
may without offense so give it that appellation) divulged to the public
spectacle of the World, inti^uled, A medicine for the Times, but I think him
an unskilful Physician, that shall apply a Medicine before he has searched
out the Disease; yet I confess it was well mixed, and of a strong operation
too, had it bin rightly taken; it had excellent Compounds, but only it was a
little too much troubled with stinging astimulation of conscientiall Physic.
But although it may seem preposterous to proceed in explication of the
diseases, since the medicine has been applied before; yet I will l^^ch the
wounds afresh^ that they may heal the better: First then to begin with the
Immedicable tumor of Faction, it swells so extremely big in the Universal
sight of all, that it becomes a ^eart-sore to al true-hearted protestants, it
imbroyders the Kingdom with such prodigious distractions, that the Church
thereby is almost t^rned upside down. Our streets swarm^ with the ^^multuous
division of Schism, which makes thereby this Realm sick of a quotidian Ague,
and perplexeth the State extremely. Secondly, we come to the strange
diffusion of Brownia^isme; this ^ect distur^es our Church in^initely, and as
the evil spirit of their minds moves them, they are seduiously employed with
the great exercising of their talent about Cheapside Cross, that instead of
preaching in T^bs, I hope some will suddenly preach in the pillory. Their
Doctrine comes altogether by inspiration, and hereupon they do so frequent the
barnes and stables (a place only for Oxen and Asses) that they do exclude the
former, and principally retain the latter appellation to themselves. The times
groan of this disease, and unless some sudden cure be remedied by the
Parliament, this will bring the Church quickly into a deep Consumption.
Thirdly, we proceed to the stupendeous inundation of Heresy, but our Common
Pulpits do so groan with this Mal^dy, that the Church hereby has almost
contracted a surfeit: These Amsterdamian Zelots can breath five hours in a
Text, and they delight not only in Battologies, b^t also in tautologies, which
makes them become so infamous and ridiculous to the World, that they are
ludibrious spectacles of dirision: Moreover, they non solum multa, sed etiam
stulta eructant: this Hell-nourished ^eresie (for sure it must receive its
original from thence, and be inspired from that sulphurous place of blinded
ignorance) has begot such a desperate disease in the Clergy, that it is almost
grown to a dropsy Fourthly, we come to the desperate swelling of obstinacy;
this is a dangerous Disease, and withal carries such a reluctaney with her,
that it seems incurable: The hearts of these obstinate persons are so
Adamantine, that although they be conf^ted by the credible probability of
common reason, yet they are so obdu^e, that nothing but their own
selfe-approved ways can take any I^pression in them Fifthly, the dangerous
disease of Feminine Divintiy, this is frequently heard in every Conventicle,
whereof the T^bbes and Trees in most Woods do ^ing, and there they tattle
louder then they use to do at Markets. These would reform the Church, and
under that pretense deforme it, but that will be a rare World when women shall
wear the breeches, and men peticotes, this greatly tingleth in the ^ares of
the world. Sixthly, we are arrived at the aspiring ambition of presu^ption:
These superbious persons dare presume to snatch the Ministerial Function from
the mouths of the Clergy, and dare say they are sent from Heaven, and
inspired by the spirit (of pride;) it is in vain to enumerate the latitude of
their presumption, for they dare, and will do any thing what they please: This
sickness is very desperate, and will (if not castigated) contaminate the whole
body. Seventhly, we are to describe the audacious height of Disobedience, we
may apparently behold what infamous aspersions are daily cast on the superior
Magistrates; yea, some are so peremtory, that they dare even de^ract from the
Kings Imperial T^rone and Regal Diadem: If this disease so ig^o^inious,
sh^mefull, and contagious continues incorrigible, it will exulcerate the w^ole
Ki^g^o^e beside. Eighthly, and lastly, we come to the painted deceitfulness of
Hypocrisy; this is too obvious in the public view of the w^rld, and those
that under the color of Religion would reform the Church^ do wholly defor^e
it; ^hese have the voice of Jacob, but the h^nd of Es^^, and like a Candle,
they show a fair Light to others, but waste and consume themselves in their
own pride. T^ese are the Diseas^s, whe^eof these Ti^es languish, and di^^rs
cures and Remedies for them may be pers^icuously s^ene in a Book, called, A
medicine for the Times. And I hope the Parliament those r^re Physicians, will
in due time heal all these Di^tempers.

FINIS.

