A SERMON PREACHED At the opening of the Parliament of IRELAND, May 8. 1661.
Before the right Honorable the Lords Justices, and the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal and the Commons.

By JEREMY Lord Bishop of Down and Connor.

Salus in multitudine consulentium. LONDON, Printed by I. F. for R. Royston,
Bookseller to his most Sacred MAJESTY, 1661.

To the Right Honorable, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons of
Ireland Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
My Lords and Gentlemen;
I Ought not to dispute your commands for the printing my Sermon of Obedience;
lest my Sermon should be protestatio contra factum: here I know my Example
would be the best Use to this Doctrine, and I am sure to find no inconveniency
so great as that of Disobedience; neither can I be confident that I am wise in
any thing but when I obey; for then I have the wisdom of my Superior for my
warrant, or my excuse. I remember the saying of Aurelius the Emperor, AEquius
est me tot and talium amicorum consilium, quam tot tales meam unius voluntatem
sequi. I could easily have pretended excuses, but that day I had taught others
the contrary; and I would not shed that Chalice which my own hands had newly
filled with waters issuing from the fountains of Salvation.

My eyes are almost grown old with seeing the horrid mischiefs which came from
Rebellion and Disobedience; and I would willingly now be blessed with
observation of Peace and Righteousness, Plenty and Religion, which do already,
and I hope shall for ever, attend upon Obedience to the best KING and the best
CHURCH in the world. I see no objection against my hopes, but that which ought
least of all in this case to be pretended. Men pretend Conscience against
Obedience; expressly against Saint Paul's Doctrine, teaching us to obey for
conscience sake; but to disobey for Conscience in a thing indifferent, is never
to be found in the books of our Religion.

It is very hard when the Prince is forced to say to his rebellious Subject, as
God did to his stubborn people, Quid faciam tibi? I have tried all the ways I
can to bring thee home, and what shall I now do unto thee? The Subject should
rather say, Quid me vis facere? What will thou have me to do? This Question is
the best end of disputations. Corrumpitur atque dissolvitur Imperantis
officium, si quis ad id quod facere jussus est, non obsequio debito, sed
consilio non considerato respondeat, said one in A. Gellius. When a Subject is
commanded to obey, and he disputes, and says, Nay, but the other is better, he
is like a servant that gives his Master necessary counsel, when he requires of
him a necessary obedience. Utilius parere edicto quam efferre consilium, he had
better obey then give counsel: by how much it is better to be profitable then
to be witty, to be full of goodness rather then full of talk and argument.

But all this is acknowledged true in strong men, but not in the weak; in
vigorous, but not in tender Consciences: for Obedience is strong meat, and will
not down with weak stomachs. As if in the world any thing were easier then to
obey: for we see that the food of Children is milk and laws; the breast-milk
of their Nurses and the commands of their Parents is all that food and
Government by which they are kept from harm and hunger, and conducted to life
and wisdom. And therefore they that are weak brethren, of all things in the
world have the least reason to pretend an excuse for disobedience, for nothing
can secure them but the wisdom of the Laws: for they are like Children in
minority; they cannot be trusted to their own conduct, and therefore must live
at the public charge, and the wisdom of their Superiors is their guide and
their security. And this was wisely advised by S. Paul, Him that is weak in the
faith receive, but not to doubtful disputations: that is not the way for him;
Children must not dispute with their Fathers and their Masters. If old men will
dispute, let them look to it; that is meat for the strong indeed, though it be
not very nutritive: but the Laws and the Counsels, the Exhortations and the
Doctrines of our Spiritual Rulers, are the measures by which God has appointed
Babes in Christ to become Men, and the weak to become strong; and they that are
not to be received to doubtful disputations, are to be received with the arms
of love into the embraces of a certain and regular Obedience.

But it would be considered, that Tenderness of Conscience is an equivocal
term, and does not always signify in a good sense. For a Child is of a
tender flesh; but he whose foot is out of joint, or has a bile in his arm, or
has strained a sinew, is much more tender. The tenderness of age is that
weakness that is in the ignorant and the new beginners: the tenderness of a
bile, that is soreness indeed rather then tenderness, is of the diseased, the
abused, and the mis-perswaded. The first indeed are to be tenderly dealt with,
and have usages accordingly: but that is the same I have already told; you must
teach them, you must command them, you must guide them, you must choose for
them, you must be their guardians, and they must comport themselves
accordingly. But for that tenderness of Conscience which is the disease and
soreness of Conscience, it must be cured by anodynes and soft usages, unless
they prove ineffective, and that the Launcet be necessary. But there are
amongst us such tender stomachs, that cannot endure Milk, but can very well
digest Iron; Consciences so tender, that a Ceremony is greatly offensive, but
Rebellion is not; a Surplice drives them away as a bird affrighted with a man
of clouts, but their Consciences can suffer them to despise Government, and
speak evil of Dignities, and curse all that are not of their Opinion, and
disturb the peace of Kingdoms, and commit Sacrilege, and account Schism the
character of Saints. The true Tenderness of Conscience is 1. that which is
impatient of a sin; 2ly, it will not endure any thing that looks like it; and
3ly, it will not give offense. Now since all Sin is Disobedience, 1. it will be
rarely contingent that a man in a Christian Commonwealth shall be tied to
disobey, to avoid sin: and certain it is, if such a case could happen, yet 2ly,
nothing of our present questions is so like a sin, as when we refuse to obey
the Laws; to stand in a clean Vestment is not so ill a sight as to see men
stand in separation, and to kneel at the Communion is not so like Idolatry as
Rebellion is to Witchcraft: and then 3ly, for the matter of giving offenses,
what scandal is greater then that which scandalizes the Laws? and who is so
carefully to be observed, lest he be offended, as the KING? And if that which
offends the weak brother is to be avoided, much more that which offends the
strong; for this is certainly really criminal, but for the other it is much
odds but it is mistaken. And when the case is so put, between the obedient and
the disobedient, which shall be offended, and one will, I suppose there is no
question but the Laws will take more care of Subjects then of Rebels, and not
weaken them in their duty in compliance with those that hate the Laws, and will
not endure the Government.

And after all this, in the conduct of Government what remedy can there be to
those that call themselves Tender Consciences? I shall not need say that every
man can easily pretend it; for we have seen the vilest part of mankind, men
that have done things so horrid, worse then which the Sun never saw, yet
pretend tender Consciences against Ecclesiastical Laws: but I will suppose that
they are really such, that they in the simplicity of their hearts follow
Absalom, and in weakness hide their heads in little Conventicles and places of
separation for a trifle; what would they have done for themselves?

If you make a Law of Order, and in the sanction put a clause of favor for
tender Consciences, do not you invite every Subject to Disobedience by
impunity, and teach him how to make his own excuse? is not such a Law, a Law
without an obligation? may not every man choose whether he will obey or no? and
if he pretends to disobey out of Conscience, is not he that disobeyes equally
innocent with the obedient; altogether as just, as not having done any thing
without leave, and yet much more Religious and conscientious? Quicunque vult is
but an ill preface to a Law; and it is a strange obligation that makes no
difference between him that obeyes and him that refuses to obey.

But what course must be taken with tender Consciences? Shall the execution of
the Law be suspended as to all such persons? that will be all one with the
former: for if the execution be commanded to be suspended, then the obligation
of the Law by command is taken away, and then it were better there were no Law
made. And indeed that is the pretension, that is the secret of the business;
they suppose the best way to prevent Disobedience is to take away all Laws. It
is a short way indeed; there shall then be no Disobedience, but at the same
time there shall be no Government: but the Remedy is worse then the Disease;
and to take away all Wine and strong drink to prevent Drunkenness would not be
half so great a folly.

I cannot therefore tell what to advise in this particular, but that every
Spiritual guide should consider who are tender Consciences and who are weak
brethren, and use all the ways of piety and prudence to instruct and to inform
them, that they may increase in knowledge and spiritual understanding. But they
that will be always learning and never come to the knowledge of the truth,
they that will be children of a hundred years old and never come to years of
discretion, they are very unfit to guide others, and to be Curates of Souls:
but they are most unfit to reprove the Laws, and speak against the wisdom of a
Nation, when it is confessed that they are so weak, that they understand not
the fundamental Liberty which Christ has purchased for them, but are servants
to a scruple, and affrighted at a circumstance, and in bondage under an
indifferent thing, and so much Idolaters of their Sect or Opinion as to prefer
it before all their own nobler Interests, and the Charity of their brother, and
the Peace of a whole Church and Nation.

To you, my Lords and Gentlemen, I hope I may say as Marcus Curious said to a
stubborn young man, Non opus Vos habere cive qui parere nesciret; the Kingdom
has no need of those that know not how to obey. But as for them who have weak
and tender Consciences, they are in the state of Childhood and minority: but
then you know that a Child is never happy by having his own humor: if you choose
for him, and make him to use it, he has but one thing to do; but if you put
him to please himself, he is troubled with every thing, and satisfied with
nothing. We find that all Christian Churches kept this Rule. They kept
themselves and others close to the rule of Faith, and peaceably suffered one
another to differ in Ceremonies, but suffered no difference amongst their own:
they gave Liberty to other Churches, and gave Laws, and no Liberty, to their
own Subjects. And at this day the Churches of Geneva, France, Switzerland,
Germany, Low Countries, tie all their people to their own Laws, but tie up no
man's Conscience; if he be not persuaded as they are, let him charitably
dissent, and leave that Government, and adhere to his own Communion. If you be
not of their mind, they will be served by them that are: they will not trouble
your Conscience, and you shall not disturb their Government. But when men think
they cannot enjoy their Conscience unless you give them good Livings, and if
you prefer them not, you afflict their Consciences, they do but too evidently
declare that it is not their Consciences but their Profits they would have
secured. Now to these I have only this to say, That their Conscience is to be
enjoyed by the measures of God's Word, but the Rule for their Estates is the
Laws of the Kingdom: and I show you yet a more excellent way; Obedience is the
best security for both; because this is the best conservatory of Charity and
Truth and Peace. Si vis brevi perfectus esse, esto obediens etiam in minimis,
was the saying of a Saint; and the world uses to look for Miracles from them
whom they shall esteem Saints: but I had rather see a man truly humble and
obedient, then to see him raise a man from the dead, said old Pachomius.

But to conclude: if weak brethren shall still plead for Toleration and
Compliance, I hope my Lords the Bishops will consider where it can do good and
do no harm, where they are permitted, and where themselves are bound up by the
Laws, and in all things where it is safe and holy to labor to bring them ease
and to give them remedy: but to think of removing the Disease by feeding the
Humor, I confess it is a strange cure to our present Distempers. He that took
clay and spittle to open the blind eyes can make any thing be collyrium; but he
alone can do it. But whether any humane power can bring good from so unlikely
an instrument, if any man desires yet to be better informed, I desire him,
besides the calling to mind the late sad effects of Schism, to remember that
no Church in Christendom ever did it. It is neither the way of Peace nor
Government, nor yet a proper remedy for the cure of a weak Conscience.

I shall therefore pray to God that these men who separate in simplicity may by
God's mercy be brought to understand their own Liberty, and that they may not
for ever be babes and Neophytes, and wax old in trifles, and for ever stay at
entrances and outsides of Religion; but that they would pass in interiora
domus, and seek after Peace and Righteousness, Holiness and Justice, the love
of God and Evangelical perfections; and then they will understand how
ill-advised they are who think Religion consists in zeal against Ceremonies and
speaking evil of the Laws.

My Lords and Gentlemen, what I said in pursuance of public Peace and private
Duty, and some little incidences to both, I now humbly present to you, more to
show my own Obedience then to re-mind you of your Duty, which hitherto you have
so well observed in your amicable and sweet concord of counsels and affections,
during this present Session. I owe many thanks to you who heard me patiently,
willingly and kindly; I endeavored to please God, and I find I did not
displease you: but he is the best hearer of a Sermon who first loves the
Doctrine, and then practices it; and that you have hitherto done, very piously
and very prosperously. I pray God continue to direct your Counsels so that you
in all things may please him, and in all things be blessed by him, that all
generations may call you blessed Instruments of a lasting Peace, the restorers
of the old paths, the Patrons of the Church, friends of Religion, and Subjects
fitted for your Prince, who is Just up to the greatest example, and Merciful
beyond all examples, a Prince who has been nourished, and preserved, and
restored, and blessed by Miracles; a Prince whose Virtues and Fortunes are
equally the greatest.

1 SAMUEL 15. latter part of the 22th verse. Behold to obey is better then
sacrifice, and to hearken then the fat of rams.
First part of the 23th. For Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and
stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry.
IN the world nothing is more easy then to say our Prayers, and to obey our
Superiors; and yet in the world there is nothing to which we are so unwilling
as to Prayer, and nothing seems so intolerable as Obedience: for men esteem all
Laws to be fetters, and their Superiors are their enemies: and when a command
is given, we turn into all shapes of excuse to escape from the imposition: For
either the authority is incompetent, or the law it self is Statutum non bonum,
or it is impossible to be kept, or at least very inconvenient, and we are to be
relieved in equity, or there is a secret dispensation, and it does not bind in
my particular case, or not now; or it is but the law of a man, and was made for
a certain end; or it does not bind the conscience, but 'twas only for Political
regards; or, if the worst happen, I will obey passively, and then I am
innocent. Thus every man snuffes up the wind, like the wild asses in the
wilderness, and thinks that Authority is an incroachment upon a man's
birthright; and in the mean time never considers that Christ took upon him our
Nature that he might learn us Obedience, and in that also make us become like
unto God. In his Justice and his Mercy he was imitable before; but before the
Incarnation of Christ we could not in passive graces imitate God who was
impassible. But he was pleased at a great rate to set forward this duty; and
when himself became obedient in the hardest point, obediens usque ad mortem,
and is now become to us the author and finisher of our Obedience, as well as of
our Faith, admonetur omnis aetas fieri posse quod aliquando factum est. We must
needs confess it very possible to obey the severest of the divine laws, even to
dye if God commands, because it was already done by a man; and we must needs
confess it excellent, because it was done by God himself.

But this great Example is of universal influence in the whole matter of
Obedience. For that I may speak of that part of this Duty which can be useful,
and concerns us; Men do not deny but they must obey in all Civil things, but in
Religion they have a Supreme, God only, and Conscience is his interpreter; and
in effect every man must be the Judge whether he shall obey or no. Therefore it
is that I say, the Example of our Lord is the great determination of this
inquiry: for he did obey and suffer, according to the commands of his Superiors
under whose Government he was placed; he gave his back to the smiters, and his
cheeks to the nippers; he kept the orders of the Rulers, and the customs of
the Synagogues, the Law of Moses and the rights of the Temple; and by so doing
he fulfilled all righteousness. Christ made no distinctions in his Obedience,
but obeyed God in all things, and those that God set over him in all things
according to God, and in things of Religion most of all; because to obey was of
it self a great instance of Religion, and if ever Religion comes to be
pretended against Obedience in any thing where our Superior can command, it is
imposture: For that is the purpose of my text, Obedience is better then
Sacrifice. Our own judgment, our own opinion is the sacrifice, seldom fit to
be offered to God, but most commonly deserving to be consumed by fire: but take
it at the best, it is not half so good as Obedience; for that was indeed
Christ's Sacrifice, and (as David said of Goliah's sword, non est alter talis)
there is no other sacrifice that can be half so good: and when Abraham had
lifted up his sacrificing knife to slay his Son, and so expressed his
obedience, God would have no more; he had the Obedience, and he cared not for
the Sacrifice.

By Sacrifice here then is meant the external and contingent actions of
Religion; by Obedience is meant submission to Authority, and observing the
command. Obedience is a not choosing our Duty, a not disputing with our Betters,
not to argue, not to delay, not to murmr; it is not this, but it is much
better; for it is Love, and Simplicity, and Humility, and Usefulness, and I
think these do reductively contain all that is excellent in the whole
conjugation of Christian Graces.

My Text is a perfect Proposition, and has no special remark in the words of
it; but is only a great representation of the most useful Truth to all
Kingdoms and Parliaments and Councels and Authorities in the whole world: It
is your Charter, and the Sanction of your authority, and the stabiliment of
your Peace, and the honor of your Laws, and the great defense of your
Religion, and the building up and the guarding of the King's Throne. It is that
by which all the Societies in heaven and earth are firm: without this you
cannot have a Village prosperous, or a Ship arrive in harbor. It is that which
God has bound upon us by hope and fear, by wrath and conscience, by duty and
necessity. Obedience is the formality of all Virtues, and every Sin is
Disobedience. There can no greater thing be said, unless you please to add,
that we never read that the earth opened and swallowed up any man alive, but a
company of rebellious disobedient people, who rose up against Moses and Aaron,
the Prince of the People, and the Priest of God. For Obedience is the most
necessary thing in the world, and corruption optimi est pessima: Nullum malum
majus aut infeliciter feracius quam inobedientia.
Disobedience is the greatest evil in the world, and that alone which can
destroy it.

Seneca.
My text is instanced in the matter of Obedience to God; but yet the case is so,
that though I shall in the first place discourse of our Obedience to man, I
shall not set one foot aside from the main intention of it; because Obedience
to our Superiors is really and is accounted to be Obedience to God, for they
are sent by God, they are his vicegerents, his Ministers, and his Ambassadors.
Apostolus cujusque est quisque say the Jews, Every man's Apostle is himself;
and he that hears or despises you, said Christ, hears or despises me: And
the reason is very evident, because it is not to be expected that God should
speak to us by himself, but sometimes by Angels, sometimes by Prophets, once by
his Son, and always by his Servants.

Now I desire two things to be observed.

First, We may as well perceive that God speaks to us when he uses the ministry
of men as when he uses the ministry of Angels: one is as much declared and as
certain as the other. And if it be said, a man may pretend to come from God,
and yet deliver nothing but his own errand; that is no strange thing: but
remember also that S. Paul puts this supposition in the case of an Angel, [ If
an Angel preach any other Gospel;] and we know that many Angels come like
Angels of light, who yet teach nothing but the ways of Darkness. So that we
are still as much bound to obey our Superior as to obey an Angel: a man is
paulo minor angelis, a little lower then the Angels; but we are much lower then
the King. Consider then with what fear and love we should receive an Angel, and
so let us receive all those whom God has sent to us, and set over us; for they
are no less: less indeed in their Persons, but not in their Authorities. Nay
the case is nearer yet; for we are not only bound to receive God's Deputies as
God's Angel, but as God himself. For it is the power of God in the hand of a
man, and he that resists, resists God's ordinance. And I pray remember that
there is not only no power greater then God's, but there is no other; for all
Power is his. The consequent of this is plain enough; I need say no more of it:
It is all one to us who commands, God, or God's Vicegerent. This was the first
thing to be observed.

Secondly, there can be but two things in the world required to make Obedience
necessary, the greatness of the Authority, and the worthiness of the Thing. In
the first you see the case can have no difference, because the thing it self is
but one. There is but one Authority in the world, and that is God's: as there
is but one Sun whose light is diffused into all Kingdoms. But is there not
great difference in the Thing commanded? Yes certainly, there is some; but
nothing to warrant disobedience: for whatever the thing be, it may be commanded
by man, if it be not countermanded by God. For

1. It is not required that every thing commanded should of it self be
necessary; for God himself oftentimes commands things which have in them no
other excellency then that of Obedience. What made Abraham the friend of God?
and what made his offer to kill his Son to be so pleasing to God? It had been
naturally no very great good to cut the throat of a little child; but only that
it was Obedience. What excellency was there in the journeys of the Patriarchs
from Mesopotamia to Syria, from the land of Canaan into Egypt? and what thanks
could the sons of Israel deserve that they sat still upon the seventh day of
the week? and how can man be dearer unto God by keeping of a Feast, or building
of a Booth, or going to Jerusalem, or cutting off the foreskin of a boy, or
washing their hands and garments in fair water? There was nothing in these
things but the Obedience. And when our blessed Lord himself came to his Servant
to take of him the Baptism of Repentance, alas, he could take nothing but the
water and the ceremony: for, as Tertullian observes, he was nullius
poenitentiae debtor, he was indeed a just person and needed no repentance; but
even so it became him to fulfill all righteousness: but yet even then it was
that the Holy Spirit did descend upon his holy head, and crowned that
Obedience, though it were but to a ceremony. Obedience, you see, may be
necessary when the law is not so. For in these cases, God's Son and God's
Servants did obey in things which were made good only by the commandment: and
if we do so in the Instances of humane Laws, there is nothing to be said
against it, but that what was not of it self necessary, is made so by the
authority of the Commander and the force of the Commandment. But there is more
in it then so. For,

2ly, We pretend to be willing to obey even in things naturally not necessary,
if a divine command does interpose; but if it be only a commandment of man,
and the thing be not necessary of it self, then we desire to be excused. But
will we do nothing else? We our selves will do many things that God has not
commanded, and may not our Superiors command us in many cases to do what we
may lawfully do without a commandment? Can we become a law unto our selves,
and cannot the word and power of our Superiors also become a law unto us? has
God given more to a private then to a public hand? But consider the ill
consequents of this fond opinion. Are all the practices of Geneva or Scotland
recorded in the Word of God? are the trifling Ceremonies of their public
Penance recorded in the four Gospels? are all the rules of decency, and all
things that are of good report, and all the measures of prudence, and the laws
of peace and war, and the customs of the Churches of God, and the lines of
public honesty, are all these described to us by the laws of God? If they be,
let us see and read them, that we may have an end to all questions and minute
cases of Conscience: but if they be not, and yet by the Word of God these are
bound upon us in the general, and no otherwise; then it follows that the
particulars of all these, which may be infinite, and are innumerable, yet may
be the matter of humane Laws; and then are bound upon us by the power of God
put into the hands of man. The consequent is this, that whatsoever is commanded
by our Superior according to the will of God, or whatsoever is not against it,
is of necessity to be obeyed.

3ly, But what if our Princes or our Prelates command things against the Word
of God? what then? Why nothing then, but that we must obey God and not man;
there is no dispute of that. But what then again? Why therefore says the Papist
I will not obey the Protestant Kings, because against the Word of God they
command me to come to Church where Heresy is preached; and I will not
acknowledge the Bishops, says the Presbyterian, because they are against the
discipline and scepter of Jesus Christ; and the Independent hates Parochial
meetings, and is wholly for a gathered Church, and supposes this to be the
practice Apostolical; and I will not bring my Child to Baptism, (says the
Anabaptist) because God calls none but believers to that Sacrament; and I will
acknowledge no Clergy, no Lord, no Master, says the Quaker, because Christ
commands us to call no man master on the earth, and be not called of men Rabbi.
And if you call upon these men to obey the Authority God has set over them,
they tell you with one voice, with all their hearts, as far as the Word of God
will give them leave; but God is to be obeyed, and not man: and therefore if
you put the Laws in execution against them, they will obey you passively,
because you are stronger, and so long as they know it they will not stir
against you; but they in the mean time are little less then Martyrs, and you no
better then Persecutors.

What shall we do now? for here is evidently a great heap of disorder: they
all confess that authority must be obeyed; but when you come to the trial, none
of them all will do it, and they think they are not bound: but because their
Opinions being contrary cannot all be right, and it may be none of them are, it
is certain that all this while Authority is infinitely wronged and prejudiced
amongst them, when all fantastic Opinions shall be accounted a sufficient
reason to despise it. I hope the Presbyterian will join with the Protestant,
and say that the Papist, and the Socinian, and the Independent, and the
Anabaptist, and the Quaker are guilty of Rebellion and Disobedience for all
their pretense of the Word of God to be on their side: and I am more sure that
all these will join with the Protestant, and say that the Presbyterian has no
reason to disobey Authority upon pretense of their new Government concerning
which they do but dream dreams, when they think they see visions. Certain it is
that the biggest part of dissenters in the whole world are criminally
disobedient; and it is a thousand to one but that Authority is in the right
against them, and ought to be obeyed. It remains now in the next place, that we
inquire what Authority is to do in this case, and what these Sectaries and
Recusants are to do; for these are two things worth inquiry.

1. Concerning Authority. All disagreeing persons, to cover their foul shame of
Rebellion or Disobedience, pretend Conscience for their Judge, and the
Scripture for their Law. Now if these men think that by this means they proceed
safely, upon the same ground the Superior may do what he thinks to be his
duty, and be at least as safe as they. If the Rebellious Subject can think that
by God's Law he ought not to obey; the Prince may at the same time think that
by God's Law he ought to punish him: and it is as certain that he is justly
punished, as he thinks it certain he reasonably disobeys. Or is the Conscience
of the Superior bound to relaxe his laws, if the inferior tells him so? Can
the Prince give Laws to the peoples will; and can the people give measures to
the Princes understanding? If any one of the people can prescribe or make it
necessary to change the Law, then every one can; and by this time every new
Opinion will introduce a new Law, and that Law shall be obeyed by him only that
has a mind to it, and that will be a strange Law that binds a man only to do
his own pleasure. But because the King's Conscience is to him as sure a Rule as
the Conscience of any disobedient Subject can be to himself, the Prince is as
much bound to do his duty in Government, as the other can be to follow his
Conscience in disagreeing; and the consequent will be, that whether the Subject
be right or wrong in the disputation, it is certain he has the just reward of
Disobedience in the conclusion. If one man's Conscience can be the measure of
another man's action, why shall not the Princes Conscience be the Subject's
measure? but if it cannot, then the Prince is not to depart from his own
Conscience, but proceed according to the Laws which he judges just and
reasonable.

2. The Superior is tied by the laws of Christian Charity so far to bend in the
ministration of his Laws, as to pity the invincible Ignorance and Weakness of
his abused people, qui devoratur a malis Pastoribus (as S. Hierom's expression
is) that are devoured by their evil Shepherds: but this is to last no longer
then till the Ignorance can be cured, and the man be taught his duty; for
whatsoever comes after this looks so like Obstinacy, that no Laws in the world
judge it to be any thing else. And then secondly, this also is to be understood
to be the duty of Superiors only in matters of mere Opinion, not relating to
Practice. For no man's Opinion must be suffered to do mischief, to disturb the
Peace, to dishonor the Government: not only because every disagreeing person
can to serve his end pretend his Conscience, and so claim impunity for his
Villainy; but also because those things which concern the good of mankind and
the Peace of Kingdoms are so plainly taught, that no man who thinks himself so
wise as to be fit to oppose Authority, can be so foolish as in these things not
to know his Duty. In other things, if the Opinion does neither bite nor
scratch, if it dwells at home in the house of understanding, and wanders not
into the outhouses of Passion and popular orations, the Superior imposes no
laws, and exacts no obedience, and destroies no liberty, and gives no
restraint. This is the part of Authority.

2. The next enquiry is, What must the disagreeing Subject do when he supposes
the Superiors command is against the Law of God? I answer that if he thinks so,
and thinks true, he must not obey his Superior in that: but because most men
that think so think amiss, there are many particulars fit by such persons to be
considered.

1. Let such men think charitably of others, and that all are not fools or
madmen who are not of the same Opinion with themselves or their own little
party. 2. Let him think himself as fallible and subject to mistake as other men
are. 3. But let him by no means think that every Opinion of his is an
Inspiration from God; for that is the pride and madness of a pretended
Religion: such a man is to be cured by Physic; for he could not enter into
that persuasion by Reason or Experience, and therefore it must enter into him
by folly or the anger of God. 4. From hence it will naturally follow, that he
ought to think his Opinion to be uncertain, and that he ought not to behave
himself like the man that is too confident; but because his Obedience is Duty,
and his Duty certain, he will find it more wise and safe and holy to leave that
which is disputable, and pursue that which is demonstrable; to change his
uncertain Opinion for his certain Duty. For it is twenty to one but he is
deceived in his Opinion; but if he be, it is certain that whatsoever his
Conscience be, yet in his separation from Authority he is a sinner.

2. Every man who by his Opinion is engaged against Authority, should do well
to study his doubtful Opinion less, and Humility and Obedience more. But you
say, that this concerns not me, for my disagreeing is not in a doubtful matter,
but I am sure I am in the right; there is no ifs and ands in my case. Well, it
may be so: but were it not better that you did doubt? A wise man fears (says
Solomon) and departs from evil; but a fool rages and is confident: and the
difference between a Learned man and a Novice is this, that the young fellow
cries out, I am sure it is so; the better learned answers, (...), possibly it
may, and peradventure it is so, but I pray enquire: and he is the best Diviner,
(...), he is the best Judge that conjectures best, not he that is most
confident; for, as Xenophanes said wisely, Man does but conjecture, but God
only knows; and it is no disparagement to a wise man to learn, and by
suspecting the fallibility of things and his own aptness to mistake, to walk
prudently and safely, with an eye to God, and an ear open to his Superior.
Some men are drunk with fancy, and mad with Opinion. Who believe more strongly
then boys and women? who are so hard to be persuaded as fools? and who so
readily suspect their teachers as they who are governed by chance, and know not
the intrinsic measures of good and evil? Qui pauca considerat de facili
pronunciat; it is a little learning and not enough that makes men conclude
hastily, and clap fast hold on the Conclusion before they have well weighed the
Premises: but Experience and Humility would teach us Modesty and Fear.

3. In all disputes he that obeys his Superior can never be a Heretic in the
estimate of Law, and he can never be a Schismatic in the point of Conscience;
so that he certainly avoids one great death, and very probably the other. Res
judicata pro veritate accipitur, says the Law; If the Judge have given
sentence, that sentence is supposed a truth: and Cassiodor said according to
the sentence of the Law, Nimis iniquum est ut ille patiatur dispendium, qui
imperium fecit alienum. Our Obedience secures us from the imputation of evil,
and Error does but seldom go in company with Obedience. But however there is
this advantage to be gotten by Obedience; that he who prefers the sentence of
the Law before his own Opinion does do an act of great Humility, and exercises
the grace of Modesty, and takes the best way to secure his Conscience and the
public Peace, and pleases the Government which he is bound to please, and
pursues the excellencies of Unity, and promotes Charity and Godly Love: whereas
on the other side, he that goes by himself apart from his Superior is always
materially a Schismatic, and is more likely to be deceived by his own
Singularity and Prejudice and Weakness, then by following the guides God has
set over him. And if he loses Truth, certainly he will get nothing else: for by
so doing we lose our Peace too, and give public offense, and arm Authority
against us, and are scandalous in Law, and pull evil upon our heads; and all
this for a proud Singularity, or a trifling Opinion, in which we are not so
likely to be deceived, if we trust our selves less, and the public more. In
omnibus falli possum, in obedientia non possum, said S. Teresa, I can in every
thing else, but in Obedience I can never be deceived. And it is very remarkable
in my Text, that Rebellion or Disobedience is compared to the sin of
witchcraft. Indeed it seems strange, for the meaning of it is not only that a
Rebel is as much hated by God as a Witch, but it means that the sins are
alike in their very natures: quasi peccatum divinationis (says the Vulgar
Latin) they that disobey Authority, trusting in their own opinions, are but
like Witches or Diviners; that is, they are led by an evil spirit; pride and a
lying and deceiving spirit is their teacher, and their answers are seldom
true; for though they pretend the Truth of God for their Disobedience, yet they
fall into the deception of the devil, and that is the end of their soothsaying.
And let me add this, that when a man distrusts his Superior and trusts
himself, if he misses Truth, it will be greatly imputed to him; he shall feel
the evil of his error and the shame of his pride, the reproach of his folly and
the punishment of his disobedience, the dishonor of singularity, and the
restlesness of Schism, and the scorn of the multitude: but on the other side,
if he obey Authority, and yet be deceived, he is greatly excused, he erred on
the safer side, he is defended by the hands of many virtues, and gets peace and
love of the Congregation.

You see the Blessings of Obedience, even in the questions and matters of
Religion: but I have something more to say, and it is not only of great use to
appease the tumultuary disputations and arguings of Religion which have lately
disturbed these Nations, but is proper to be spoken to, and to be reduced to
practice by this Honorable and High Court of Parliament.

That which I am to say is this; You have no other way of Peace, no better way
to appease and quiet the Quarrels in Religion which have been too long among
us, but by reducing all men to Obedience, and all questions to the measures of
the Laws. For they on both sides pretend Scripture, but one side only can
pretend to the Laws: and they that do admit no authority above their own to
expound Scripture, cannot deny but Kings and Parliaments are the makers and
proper expounders of our Laws; and if ever you mean to have Truth and Peace
kiss each other, let no man dispute against your Laws. For did not our Blessed
Savior say, that an Oath is the end of all questions, and after depositions
are taken, all Judges go to sentence? What Oaths are to private questions,
that Laws are to public. And if it be said that Laws may be mistaken; it is
true, but may not an Oath also be a Perjury? and yet because in humane affairs
we have no greater certainty, and greater then God gives we may not look for,
let the Laws be the last determination; and in wise and religious Governments
no disputation is to go beyond them.

2. But this is not only true in religious prudence and plain necessity, but
this is the way that God has appointed, and that he has blessed, and that he
has intended to be the means of ending all questions. This we learn from S.
Paul, 1. Tim. 2.1^.
I exhort that first of all prayers, and supplications, and intercessions, and
giving of thanks be made for all men: for Kings and for all that are in
Authority. For all; for Parliaments and for Councils, for Bishops and for
Magistrates: it is for all, and for Kings above all. Well, to what purpose is
all this? that we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty. Mark that: Kings and all that are in Authority are by God appointed to
be the means of obtaining unity and peace in Godliness, (...), in all the true
and Godly worshippings of God; no Unity in Religion without Kings and Bishops
and those that are in Authority.

3. And indeed because this is God's way of ending our Controversies, the
matter of Authority is highly to be regarded. If you suffer the Authority of
the King to be lessened, to be scrupled, to be denied in Ecclesiastical
affairs, you have no way left to silence the tongues and hands of gainsaying
people. But so it is, the Kings Authority is appointed and enabled by God to
end our questions of Religion: Divinatio in labiis Regis (says Solomon) in
judicio non errabit os ejus, Prove. 16. 10.
Divination and a wise sentence is in the lips of the King, and his mouth shall
not err in judgment. In all Scripture there is not so much for the Popes
infallibility, but by this it appears there is divinity in the Kings sentence:
for God gives to Kings, who are his Vicegerents, a peculiar spirit. L. 8. cod.
de veteri jure enucleando.
And when Justinian had out of the sense of Julian the Lawyer observed that
there were many cases for which Law made no provision, he adds, If any such
shall happen, Augustum imploretur remedium, run to the King for remedy; for
therefore God has set the Imperial fortune over humane affairs, ut possit
omnia quae noviter contingunt and emendare and componere, and modis ac regulis
competentibus tradere, that the King may amend and rule and compose every
new-arising question. And it is not to be despised, but is a great indication
of this Truth, that the Answers of the Roman Princes and Judges recorded in the
Civil Law are such that all Nations of the world do approve them, and are a
great testimony how the sentences of Kings ought to be valued, even in matters
of Religion, and questions of greatest doubt. Bona conscientia Scyphus est
Iosephi, Petrus Cellensis lib. de Conscientia.
said the old Abbot of Kells; a good Conscience is like Iosephs's Cup, in which
our Lord the King divines. And since God has blessed us with so good, so just,
so religious and so wise a Prince, let the sentence of his Laws be our last
resort, and no questions be permitted after his judgment and legal
determination. For Wisdom says, By me Princes rule, by me they decree
justice: and therefore the spirit of the King is a divine eminency, and is as
the spirit of the most High God.

4. Let no man be too busy in disputing the laws of his Superiors, for a man by
that seldom gets good to himself, but seldom misses to do mischief unto
others. (...), said one in Laertius. Will a son contend with his father? that is
not decent, though the son speak that which is right: he may possibly say well
enough, but he does do very ill; not only because he does not pay his duty and
reverential fear, but because it is in it self very often unreasonable to
dispute concerning the command of our Superior, whether it be good or no; for
the very commandment can make it not only good, but a necessary good. It
seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us to lay on you no greater burden then
these necessary things, said the Council of Jerusalem: and yet these things
were not necessary, but as they were commanded: to abstain from a strangled hen
or a bloody pudding could not of themselves be necessary; but the commandment
came, authority did interpose, and then they were made so.

5. But then besides the advantages both of the spirit, and the authority of
Kings in matters of question, the laws and decrees of a National Church ought
upon the account of their own advantages be esteemed as a final sentence in all
things disputed. The thing is a plain command Hebrews 13. 7. Remember them
which have the rule over you, who have spoken unto you the word of God: this
tells what Rulers he means; Rulers Ecclesiastical: and what of them? whose faith
follow; they must praeire in articulis; they are not masters of your faith, but
guides of it: and they that sit in Moses chair must be heard and obeyed, said
our blessed Savior. These words were not said for nothing; and they were
nothing if their authority were nothing.

For between the laws of a Church and the opinion of a Subject the comparison
is the same as between a public spirit and a private. The public is far the
better, the daughter of God, and the mother of a blessing, and always dwells in
light. The public spirit has already passed the trial, it has been subjected
to the Prophets, tried and searched and approved; the private is yet to be
examined. The public spirit is uniform and apt to be followed; the private is
various and multiform as chance, and no man can follow him that has it. For if
he follows one, he is reproved by a thousand; and if he changes, he may get a
shame, but no truth: and he can never rest but in the arms and conduct of his
Superior. When Aaron and Miriam murmured against Moses, God told them that they
were Prophets of an inferior rank then Moses was. God communicated himself to
them in dreams and visions; but the Ruach hakkodesh, (...)
the public spirit of Moses their Prince, that was higher: Number. 12. 6, 7, 8.
and what then? wherefore then (God said) were ye not afraid to speak against
my servant Moses? plainly teaching us, that where there is a more excellent
spirit, they that have a spirit less excellent ought to be afraid to speak
against it. And this is the full case of the private and public spirit; that
is, of a Subject speaking against the spirit and the laws of the Church. In
heaven, and in the air, and in all the regions of spirits, the spirit of a
lower order dares not speak against the spirit of an higher; and therefore for
a private spirit to oppose the public, is a disorder greater then is in hell
it self.

To conclude this point; Let us consider whether it were not an intolerable
mischief if the Judges should give sentence in causes of instance by the
measures of their own fancy, and not by the Laws; who would endure them? and
yet why may they not do that as well as any Ecclesiastic person preach
Religion, not which the Laws allow, but what is taught him by his own private
Opinion? but he that has the Laws on his side, has ever something of true
Religion to warrant him, and can never want a great measure of justification.
(...), the Laws and the customs of the country are the results of wise
counsels or long experience; they ever comply with Peace and public benefit:
and nothing of this can be said of private Religions; for they break the Peace,
and trouble the Conscience, and undo Government, and despise the Laws, and
offend Princes, and dishonor the wisdom of Parliaments, and destroy Obedience.

Well, but in the last place, if we cannot do what the Laws command, we will
suffer what they impose; and then all is well again. But first, who ever did so
that could help it? And secondly, this talking of passive Obedience is but a
mockery; for what man did ever say the Laws were not good, but he also said the
Punishment was unjust? And thirdly, which of all the Recusants did not
endeavor to get ground upon the Laws, and secretly or openly asperse the
Authority that put him to pain for doing that which he calls his duty? and can
any man boast of his passive Obedience that calls it Persecution? he may think
to please himself, but he neither does or says any thing that is for the
reputation of the Laws. Such men are like them that sail in a storm; they may
possibly be thrown into a harbor, but they are very sick all the way.

But after all this I have one thing to observe to such persons, That such a
passive Obedience as this does not acquit a man before God; and he that suffers
what the Law inflicts is not discharged in the Court of Conscience, but there
he is still a sinner and a debtor. For the law is not made for the righteous,
but for sinners; that is, the punishment appointed by the Law falls on him only
that has sinned: but an offending subject cannot with the fruit of his body
pay for the sin of his Soul: when he does evil he must suffer evil; but if he
does not repent besides, a worse thing will happen to him; for we are not tied
to obey only for wrath, but also for Conscience. Passive obedience is only the
correspondent of wrath, but it is the active obedience that is required by
Conscience; and whatever the Subject suffers for his own fault, it matters
nothing as to his Duty, but this also God will exact at the hands of every man
that is placed under Authority.

I have now told you the sum of what I had to say concerning Obedience to
Laws and to your own Government, and it will be to little purpose to make laws
in matter of Religion, or in any thing else, if the end of it be, that every
man shall choose whether he will obey or no: and if it be questioned whether you
be deceived or no, though the suffering such a question is a great diminution
to your authority, yet it is infinitely more probable that you are in the right
then that the disobedient Subject is; because you are conducted with a public
spirit, you have a special title and peculiar portions of the promise of God's
assistance, you have all the helps of Counsel and the advantages of
deliberation, you have the Scriptures and the Laws, you are as much concerned
to judge according to truth as any man, you have the principal of all
capacities and states of men to assist your consultations, you are the most
concerned for Peace, and to please God also is your biggest interest: and
therefore it cannot be denied to be the most reasonable thing in the world
which is set down in the Law: Praesumptio est pro authoritate imponentis, the
presumption of truth ought to be on your side; and since this is the most
likely way for Truth, and the most certain way for Peace, you are to insist in
this, and it is not possible to find a better.

I have another part or sense of my Text yet to handle; but because I have no
more time of mine own, and I will not take any of yours, I shall only do it in
a short Exhortation to this most Honorable Auditory, and so conclude.

God has put a Royal Mantle, and fastened it with a Golden Clasp, upon the
shoulder of the KING, and he has given you the Judges Robe; the King holds the
Scepter, and he has now permitted you to touch the golden Ball, and to take it
a while into your handling, and made obedience to your Laws to be Duty and
Religion: but then remember that the first in every kind is to be the measure
of the rest; you cannot reasonably expect that the Subjects should obey you,
unless you obey God. I do not speak this only in relation to your personal
duty; though in that also it would be considered, that all the Bishops and
Ministers of Religion are bound to teach the same Doctrines by their Lives as
they do by their Sermons; and what we are to do in the matters of Doctrine,
you are also to do in matter of Laws; what is reasonable for the advantages of
Religion, is also the best Method for the advantages of Government; we must
preach by our good Example, and you must govern by it; and your good example in
observing the laws of Religion will strangely endear them to the affections of
the people. But I shall rather speak to you as you are in a capacity of union
and of Government; for as now you have a new Power, so there is incumbent upon
you a special Duty.

1. Take care that all your power and your counsels be employed in doing honor
and advantages to Piety and Holiness. Then you obey God in your public
capacity, when by holy Laws and wise administrations you take care that all the
Land be an obedient and a religious People. For then you are princely Rulers
indeed when you take care of the Salvation of a whole Nation. Nihil aliud est
imperium nisi cura salutis alienae, said Ammianus; Government is nothing but a
care that all men be saved. And therefore take care that men do not destroy
their Souls by the abominations of an evil life: see that God be obeyed, take
care that the breach of the laws of God may not be unpunished. The best way to
make men to be good Subjects to the King is to make them good servants of God.
Suffer not Drunkenness to pass with impunity, let Lust find a public shame.
Let the sons of the Nobility and Gentry no more dare to dishonor God then
the meanest of the people shall: let baseness be basely esteemed; that is, put
such characters of Shame upon dishonorable Crimes, that it be esteemed more
against the honor of a Gentleman to be drunk then to be kicked, more shame to
fornicate then to be can'd: and for honors sake and the reputation of
Christianity, take some course that the most unworthy sins of the world have
not reputation added to them by being the practice of Gentlemen and persons of
good birth and fortunes. Let not them who should be examples of Holiness have
an impunity and a license to provoke God to anger; lest it be said that in
Ireland it is not lawful for any man to sin, unless he be a person of quality.
Optimus est reipublicae status, ubi nihil deest nisi licentia pereundi; Seneca.
In a commonwealth that is the best state of things, where every thing can be
had but a leave to sin, a license to be undone.

2. As God is thus to be obeyed, and you are to take care that he be, so God
also must be honnourd, by paying that reverence and religious obedience which
is due to those persons whom he has been pleased to honor by admitting them
to the dispensation of his blessings, and the ministeries of your Religion. For
certain it is, this is a right way of giving honor and obedience to God. The
Church is in some very peculiar manner the portion and the called and the care
of God; and it will concern you in pursuance of your obedience to God, to take
care that they in whose hands Religion is to be ministered and conducted, be not
discouraged. For what your Judges are to the ministry of Laws, that your
Bishops are in the ministeries of Religion; and it concerns you that the hands
of neither of them be made weak: and so long as you make Religion your care,
and Holiness your measure, you will not think that Authority is the more to be
despised because it is in the hands of the Church, or that it is a sin to speak
evil of dignities, unless they be Ecclesiastical; but that they may be reviled,
and that though nothing is baser then for a man to be a Thief, yet Sacrilege is
no dishonor; and indeed to be an Oppressor is a great and crying sin, yet to
oppress the Church, to diminish her rents, to make her beggarly and
contemptible, that is no offense; and that though it is not lawful to despise
Government, yet if it be Church Government, that then the case is altered. Take
heed of that, for then God is dishonored, when any thing is the more despised
by how much it relates nearer unto God. No Religion ever did despise their
chiefest Ministers; and the Christian Religion gives them the greatest honor.
For honorable Priesthood is like a shower from heaven, it causes blessings
every where: but a pitiful, a disheartened, a discouraged Clergy, waters the
ground with a water-pot, here and there a little good, and for a little while;
but every evil man can destroy all that work whenever he pleases. Take heed; in
the world there is not a greater misery can happen to any man, then to be an
enemy to God's Church. All Histories of Christendom and the whole Book of God
have sad records, and sad threatenings, and sad stories of Corah, and Doeg, and
Balaam, and Jeroboam, and Uzzah, and Ananias, and Sapphira, and Julian, and of
Heretics and Schismatics, and sacrilegious; and after all, these men could
not prevail finally, but pai'd for the mischief they did, and ended their days
in dishonor, and left nothing behind them but the memory of their sin, and the
record of their curse.

3. In the same proportion you are to take care of all inferior Relatives of
God and of Religion. Find out methods to relieve the Poor, to accommodate and
well dispose of the cures of Souls; let not the Churches lie wast and in
ruinous heaps, to the diminution of Religion, and the reproach of the Nation,
lest the nations abroad say, that the Britans are a kind of Christians that
have no Churches: for Churches, and Courts of Judicature, and the public
defenses of an Imperial City, are res sacrae; they are venerable in Law, and
honorable in Religion.

But that which concerns us most is, that we all keep close to our Religion. Ad
magnas reipublicae utilitates retinetur Religio in civitatibus, said Cicero; by
Religion and the strict preserving of it, ye shall best preserve the Interests
of the Nation: and according to the precept of the Apostle, Mark them which
cause divisions amongst us, contrary to the doctrine that ye have received, and
avoid them. Romans 16. 17.
For I beseech you to consider, all you that are true Protestants; do you not
think that your Religion is holy, and Apostolical, and taught by Christ, and
pleasing unto God? If you do not think so, why do you not leave it? but if you
do think so, why are ye not zealous for it? Is not the Government a part of? it
is that which immures, and adorns, and conducts all the rest, and is established
in the 36. Article of the Church, in the public Service Book, and in the book
of consecration: it is therefore a part of our Religion, and is not all of it
worth preserving? If it be, then they which make Schisms against this Doctrine,
by the rule of the Apostle are to be avoided. Beatus qui praedicat verbum
inauditum, Blessed is he that preaches a word that was never heard before, so
said the Spanish Jesuit: but Christ said otherwise, No man having drunk old
wine straight desires new, for he says the old is better. And so it is in
Religion, Quod primum verum, Truth is always first: and since Episcopacy has
been of so lasting an abode, of so long a blessing, since it has ever combined
with Government, and has been taught by that spirit that has so long dwelt in
God's Church, and has now according to the promise of Jesus, that says the
gates of hell shall not prevail against the Church, been restored amongst us by
a heap of miracles, and as it went away, so it returned again in the hand of
Monarchy, and in the bosom of our Fundamental Laws; suffer no evil tongue to
speak against this Truth, which has had so long a testimony from God, and from
Experience, and from the wisdom of so many Ages, of all your Ancestors and
all your Laws, lest ye be found to speak against God, and neglect the things
that belong unto your Peace, and get nothing by it but news and danger, and
what other effects ye know not. But Leontinus Bishop of Antioch stroak'd his
old white beard and said, When this snow is dissolved, a great deal of dirty
weather will follow; meaning, that when the old Religion should be questioned
and discountenanced, the new Religion would bring nothing but trouble and
unquietness: and we have found it so by a sad experience.

4. Ye cannot obey God unless ye do Justice: for this also is better then
sacrifice, said Solomon, Prove. 21. 3. For Christ, who is the Sun of
righteousness, is a Sun and a Shield to them that do righteously. The Indian
was not immured sufficiently by the Atlantic sea, nor the Bosphoran by the
walls of Ice, nor the Arabian by his meridian Sun; the Christian Justice of the
Roman Princes brake through all enclosures, and by Justice set up Christ's
standard, and gave to all the world a testimony how much could be done by
Prudence and Valor, when they were conducted by the hands of Justice. And now
you will have a great trial of this part of your Obedience to God.

For you are to give sentence in the causes of half a Nation: and he had need
be a wise and a good man that divides the inheritance amongst Brethren; that he
may not be abused by contrary pretenses, nor biassed by the Interest of
friends, nor transported with the unjust thoughts even of a just Revenge, nor
allured by the opportunities of Spoil, nor turned aside by Partiality in his
own concerns, nor blinded by Gold, which puts out the eyes of wise men, nor
couzened by pretended Zeal, nor wearied with the difficulty of questions, nor
directed by a general measure in cases not measurable by it, nor born down by
Prejudice, nor abused by resolutions taken before the cause be heard, nor
overruled by National Interests. For Justice ought to be the simplest thing in
the world, and is to be measured by nothing but by Truth and by Laws and by the
decrees of Princes. But whatever you do, let not the pretense of a different
Religion make you think it lawful to oppress any man in his just rights. For
Opinions are not, but Laws only, and doing as we would be done to, are the
measures of Justice: and though Justice does alike to all men, Jew and
Christian, Lutheran and Calvinist; yet to do right to them that are of another
Opinion is the way to win them; but if you for Conscience sake do them wrong,
they will hate you and your Religion.

Lastly, as obedience is better then sacrifice, so God also said, I will have
mercy and not sacrifice; meaning that Mercy is the best Obedience. Perierat
totum quod Deus fecerat, nisi misericordia subvenisset, said Chrysologus; all
the creatures both of heaven and earth would perish, if Mercy did not relieve
us all. Other good things, more or less, every man expects according to the
portion of his fortune: Ex clementia omnes idem sperant, Seneca.
but from Mercy and Clemency all the world alike do expect advantages. And
which of us all stands here this day, that does not need God's pardon and the
King's? Surely no man is so much pleased with his own innocence, as that he
will be willing to quit his claim to Mercy: and if we all need it, let us all
show it. Naturae imperio gemimus, cum funus adultae
Virginis occurrit, vel terra clauditur infans,
Et minor igne rogi --
If you do but see a Maiden carried to her grave a little before her intended
marriage, or an Infant dye before the birth of Reason, Nature has taught us to
pay a tributary tear: Alas! your eyes will behold the ruin of many Families,
which though they sadly have deserved, yet Mercy is not delighted with the
spectacle; and therefore God places a watery cloud in the eye, that when the
light of heaven shines upon it, it may produce a rainbow to be a Sacrament and
a memorial that God and the sons of God do not love to see a man perish. God
never rejoices in the death of him that dies; and we also esteem it undecent to
have Music at a Funeral. And as Religion teaches us to pity a condemned
Criminal, so Mercy intercedes for the most benign interpretation of the Laws.
You must indeed be as just as the Laws, and you must be as merciful as your
Religion: and you have no way to tie these together, but to follow the pattern
in the Mount; do as God does, who in judgment remembers mercy.

To conclude; If every one in this Honorable Assembly would join together to
promote Christian Religion in it is true notion, that is, Peace and Holiness,
the Love of God and the Love of our Brother, Christianity in all its proper
usefulness, and would not endure in the Nation any thing against the laws of
the Holy Jesus; if they were all zealous for the doctrines of Righteousness,
and impatient of Sin in your selves and in the people, it is not to be imagined
what a happy Nation we should be. But if ye divide into parties, and keep up
useless differences of names or interests; if ye do not join in the bands of
Peace, that is, the King, and the Church, Religion, and the good of the Nation,
you can never hope to see a blessing to be the end of your labors. Prove. ^4.
34.
Remember the words of Solomon, Righteousness exalts a Nation, but sin is a
reproach to any people: but when Righteousness is advanced in the hearts and
lives of the Nation, who shall dare to reprove your Faith? who can find fault
with your Religion?

God of his mercy grant that in all your Consultations the Word of God may be
your measure, the Spirit of God may be your guide, and the glory of God may be
your end: He of his mercy grant that Moderation may be your limit, and Peace
may be within your walls as long as you are there, and in all the Land for ever
after. But remember, that since the honor and service of his Majesty, and the
peace and prosperity of the Church, the perpetuity of our fundamental Laws,
public Justice, and the honor of all legal Authority, the advancement of
Trade and the wealth of the Nation is your design, remember, I pray, what
warranty you have to expect all this; no less then the words of our Blessed
Savior, but it is upon these terms, Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and the
righteousness thereof, and all these things shall be added to you. Amen.

FINIS.

