The ART of Good Husbandry, Or, the Improvement of TIME: Being a sure way to
get and keep MONEY.

WHEREIN Is prescribed several RULS for Merchants, Shopkeepers, and Mechanic
Tradesmen, (as well Servants as Masters) how they may Husband their TIME to the
best advantage; the Loss whereof is the sole Cause of Poverty in this City and
Nation.

LIKEWISE The loss of a Man's TIME spent in a Tavern, Coffee-house, or
Alehouse, Computed. Also Instructions to all sorts of People, how to order
their Business for the future, both to the enriching of Themselves and their
Families.

In a Letter to Mr. R. A. By R. T.

With Permission, August 7th 1675. Roger L'Estrange.

London, Printed for J. G. in the Year, 1675.

The Art of Good Husbandry, or the improvement of TIME; being a sure way to get
and keep MONEY: In a Letter to a Friend.
SIR,
IN Compliance to your late Requests, obliging me to write to you as soon as I
came to London, I have sent you the result of a few serious Minutes concerning
the great decay of Trade and want of Money; which is now the general Cry of all
people both in City and Country; the Grounds and Reasons of which, many have
attempted to find out, by curious Inquiries into the several Laws and Statutes
made for the promoting of TRADE, supposing the non-execution of those Laws to
be the occasion of it, To this end large discourses have been made concerning
the Decay of the Fishing-Trade, several Proposals offered by ingenious persons
for the restoration of it; and the great Advantages that would ensue thereupon;
with the many Damages destructive to Trade in general, that arise from the
Inquiries into the Wooll-Trade, alleging the Exporation of Wool, the
Importation of Foreign Manufactory, and the permission of Forrainers to work
here, to be the chief cause of that decay of TRADE and want of MONEY which
every person complains of.

Now though the Grounds and Reasons before mentioned are guarded with so many
Probabilities, and seeming rational Demonstrations, that every understanding
person will be ready at the first view, to hold up her finger and give his
Assent to them; yet upon critical Inspection, or more curious Survey, we shall
find them to be only Circumstantial.

There is something more material which is near us, that we overlook by looking
so far off; that is, The little Value or Price we set upon that inestimable
Jewel TIME, which most people slight like the Cock in the Fable, if they cannot
make use of it to satisfy their Lascivious Appetites. It is the industrious
Hand that enricheth the Land, and not the contriving Pate. The Wasps and
Hornets, by their Rapine, bring to their Nests more Honey at once, then the
industrious Bees can at many times; and yet ^or all this, they usually dye for
want in the Winter; whilst the industrious Bees by continual Labor and
improvement of TIME, gather sufficient to serve themselves in the Winter, and
can afford their Masters a liberal Share o^t of their plentiful Stock.

I shall first begin with the Inferior Rank of People, for those are the
persons most concerned in this general Complaint, and show them how they may
remedy what they complain of.

First, Let them be diligent and industrious in their several Trades and
Callings.

Secondly, Let them avoid all such idle Society that squander away a great deal
of TIME at a cheap rate.

I shall instance in those Sober and Civil Conventions, as at Coffee-Houses and
Clubs, where little Money is pretended to be spent, but a great deal of
precious Time lost, which the person never thinks of, but measures his Expenses
by what goes out of his Pocket; Nor considers what he might have put in by his
Labor, and what he might have saved, being employed in his Shop. As for
Example:

A Mechanic Tradesman, it may be; goes to the Coffee-House or Alehouse in the
Morning, to drink his Mornings Draught, where he spends Twopence, and in
Smoking and Talking, consumes at least an Hour: In the Evening, about Six a
Clock, he goes to his Two-penny Club, and there stays for his Twopence till
Nine or Ten: here is Four Pence spend, and Four Hours at least lost, which in
most Mechanic Trades, cannot be reckoned less then a Shilling; and if he keep
Servants, they may lose him near as much by idling, or spoiling his Goods,
which his presence might have prevented. So that upon these Considerations, for
this his supposed Groat, (a Days expense) he cannot reckon less then Seven
Groats; which comes to Fourteen Shillings a Week (Sundays excepted,) which is
Thirty six pound ten shillings a year. A great deal of Money in a poor
Tradesmans Pocket,

Now the same may be applied to the higher Trades and Professions, whose loss
of TIME is according to the Degrees or Spheres they move in; and yet this is
the least thing thought of. We are apt to favor and excuse our selves, and
impute a general Calamity to things afar off, when we our selves are the
occasion of it at home.

It will be necessary before I proceed, to take notice of one Objection, which
seems to be most material, v^z. That some men's business lies Abroad, and cannot
be so well managed at Home, and that these Meetings or Societies are
advantageous to them. As first, Merchants by these Clubs or Meetings have
Intelligence of Ships going out and coming in; and also of the Rate and Prices
of Commodities, and meet with Customers by accident, which possibly might never
make inquiry at their Houses or Warehouses. The like Excuses all men of
Business and Trade pretend.

To this I answer: That indulging this Custom, has made it, seemingly
Necessary; but yet there is no absolute necessity for it: for the Exchange is
appointed for the Merchants Intelligence, and his Warehouse is his Shop. And
to other Tradesmen, their Shops are their Markets; to which, if they would be
reserved, they might better themselves, and improve that TIME they spend in
Taverns and Coffee-Houses, to a greater advantage: For by these idle Meetings
they lose not only what they spend, but what might be improved by the
overseeing their Goods, and examining their Accounts, which they now wholly
trust to the Fidelity of a Servant or Servants; who being led by their Masters
Examples, grow idle and extravagant; and knowing their Masters sure, make sure
for themselves; furnishing themselves for their debauched Assignations, and now
plot and invent the means and ways for their extravagant Meetings, which are
the occasion and ruin of many Masters, and hopeful Servants; all which might
be prevented by the diligent eye of the Master; the want of which, is the
occasion of all the Debauchery, Poverty and Misery which every place cries out
of. From this negligence and loss of TIME comes many more inconveniences, that
heaps on Poverty, and entailes it upon themselves and Generations.

From these Clubs and Societies (how Civil soever they appear to be) it is
impossible in any such Meeting, but some of them are given to Vice; and it is
probable, the greatest part: by this means is introduced Gaming, Foolish
Wagers, Wenching, Swearing, and other Debaucheries. And usually at parting, or
breaking up of these Clubs, they divide themselves according to their several
Inclinations or Dispositions; some go to a Tavern, some to a convenient place
for Gaming, others to a Bawdy House, by which means the Family is neglected,
and not governed as it ought to be; the Wife (though possibly a very virtuous
and careful Housewife) exasperated by the extravagancies of h^s Husband, and
foreseeing Poverty and Want attending her and her Children, grows desperate;
and, it may be, yields to some Temptations that are too too common in these
days; by which means, oftentimes an Estate that was gathered by Grains, is
scattered abroad by Bushels.

The Servants too, by these Examples, fall into the same Vices, and many times
ruin both themselves and their Friends, who have strained their Estates to the
utmost, to get them into those places, and engaged their Friends for their
Fidelity, hoping that their Industry might afterward make them some
retalliation; all which is frustrated, and they become Vagrants and
Extravagants, by which means City and Country are filled with so many idle
persons, that live only by Spoil and Rapine; or like Droans, feeding upon
others Labors; the greatest part of their business being to undo what others
do; and to devise or contrive ways to cosen, supplant or cheat each other;
accounting it as lawful to get Twenty Shillings by Cheating or Playing, as by
the most honest and industrious labor; so that by this means our Commodities,
which might be employed by industrious Manufactory, lie waste; and no wonder
that we complain for want of TRADE, when the hands that should be employed
about it, are idle; for if a strict inquiry were made into the City and
Suburbs, of all the persons that are capable of work, either in the Wool or
Fishing-Trade, as Men, Women, and Children from seven years upwards, that are
now all together idle, or nor employed to any purpose in Trade, there would not
be found less than an Hundred and fifty thousand, that live like Droans,
feeding upon the Stock of others Labors.

Now, it is our own negligence and idleness that brings Poverty upon us; for if
these idle persons were employed, we need not cry out of the Exportation of
Wool, neither would industrious Forrainers have that encouragement to work
here, if we would mind it our selves; but, if we will not improve our
Manufactory, we cannot blame others for doing of it.

Now it will be supposed, that if those Laws for setting idle people to work,
punishing Vagrants, rectifying disorders in public Houses, all this might be
prevented: This commonly is our Last Shift, and thus are we apt to excuse our
selves, and lay the burden of our own faults upon the shoulders of our
Governors; we may be very sensible, that we have in this Kingdom as good Laws
as in any place in the World; we live under such a King, that for Prudence and
Wisdom, no Empire or Kingdom can make comparison withus; nor can Laws be better
executed than in this Kingdom: But it is impossible that the eye of Magistracy
can see into every Corner; every single person has a Corporation within
himself, every Family is a petty Principality, of which the Master or Mistress
is Vicegerent; it lies upon every Private Person to put in execution those Laws
of Nature within himself, that will inform him what he ought to do, and what he
ought not to do. Every Governor or Governess of a Family, should take care by
their good examples, to instruct their Families; and severely to punish such
Disorders as shall be committed in their House or Houses, as far as their power
does extend; the remainder they may leave to the Magistrates, who will not be
wanting on their parts.

Now since every one is guilty, let us endeavor to mend, and no longer
complain of Want, since it is in our power to enrich our selves and our
Country. The industrious Hand needs not make a Leg to Fortune for Wealth; Nor
the honest Heart bend his knee to Fla^^^ry, to gain him a Reputation. These are
the Heads of what afterward I shall present you with, methodically handled in
a Treatise, which as this finds acceptance, will ere long see the light.

In the mean time I am Yours to command, R. T.

FINIS.

