A PRESERVATIVE AGAINST DEISM. SHOWING The great Advantage of Revelation above
Reason, in the Two Great Points, Pardon of Sin, and a Future State of Happiness.

With an APPENDIX in Answer to a Letter of A.W. against Revealed Religion, in
the Oracles of Reason.

By NATHANAEL TAILOR.

LONDON: Printed for John Lawrence at the Angel in the Poultrey: And Tho.
Cockerill at the Corner of Warwick Lane, in Paternoster Row. School.

^V^IFUT^TIA ^^^IA. 1715. ^EO^^^V^ D.^. MAN. (...) V.D.


THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
THE Growth of Deism, and Shelter of the Night, but in the open Day endeavor
to blow up the Foundations of our Faith. I have little Hopes of the Recovery of
those who are so very far gone in Infidelity, that they have nothing of the
Christian left them, but what is in one of their Names; However somewhat may
and ought to be done, to preserve those who are not yet infected, and restore
them who are not too deeply tainted.

The Poison has been recommended to the World by the alluring Name of the
Oracles of Reason; And there can be no doubt, unless it be, because of the
Weakness and Folly of them, by whom, they who have vented them, were inspired:
But the Devil cannot always speak through the Serpent; sometimes he must make
use of a duller Animal, the best he can get. Thin Cobwebs indeed they are,
which these venomous Creatures do weave; but yet they have been strong enough
to hold some little Insects, corrupting first the Minds, and then the Manners,
of them that are raw, unskilful, and unsettled. Too many Proselytes they have
gotten, such as they are; And though some of them evidently do not understand the
Infidel Cavils and Objections they have read; yet they will in Discourse be
hammering at them, and repeat somewhat of them, like an Echo in an empty and a
hollow Place, which reverberates the last Words that were spoken; though in such
a broken imperfect manner, that there is no Sense to be made of them.

It Is true indeed, Piety is the best Defense against these Hellish Doctrines.
Wicked Men do greedily catch at every little Cavil against the Scriptures,
because it is their Interest to have them run down; The Word of God is against
them, and therefore they are against it: If the Bible be true, they must either
forsake their Lusts, or be Eternally damned for them; and they cannot bear the
Thoughts either of the one or the other. But a Pious Man is freed from this
Snare and Temptation; and besides that, he has the Witness within himself; 1 John 5.10.
he need but consult the blessed Change that has been made by the Holy
Scriptures, in order to his Establishment in Christianity. When the Jews
reviled Christ as an Impostor, he who had been Blind, answered like one, the
Eyes of whose Understanding were opened, as well as those of his Body: Why,
Joh. 9.30.
herein is a mavelous thing, that ye know not from whence he is, and yet he
has opened mine Eyes. It Is altogether Unaccountable for a Man to give way to
Doubts and Fears, whether that Doctrine be from Heaven, which he finds has
fitted his Soul for it.

Many Good Mien indeed do unwarily suck in some untoward Principles, when a
little gilded over, which in their Nature tend to ungodly Practices. But
through the Weakness of their Heads they don't discern the Evil Nature, or
Direct Tendency of them: and through the Honesty of their Hearts they do not
follow whither they would naturally lead 'em. The Grace of God within serves
instead of the Gift of Miracles: And what our Savior promised his Disciples as
an Extraordinary Favor in the Primitive Times, Mar. 16.8.
they shall take up Serpents; and if they drink any Deadly thing, it shall not
hurt them, has been in some measure daily verified in all succeeding Ages. The
Excellency of their Constitution throws off the Poison they have heedlessly
taken down; and though they receive some Mischief, yet the killing Influence of
it is strangely prevented by that Sovereign Antidote which they have within 'em.

And the same Good Principle produces a rooted Antipathy in them against
Fundamental Errors and Damnable Heresies. All Creatures, Plants as well as
Animals, have a natural Instinct, whereby they draw to them what is proper for
their Preservation, Growth, and Nourishment; but avoid that which is
destructive to them. The New Creature, the most Excellent of all, is not worse
provided for, than every inferior Being. An enlightened Christian has a
supernatural Instinct, which makes him turn aside from Damnable Errors, and
unmovably retain the great Truths of the Gospel, with a mighty Relish and
Savor. And this is that which holds the Generality of Christians close to, and
keeps them fast in the Faith, when Deceivers do abound, more than mere dry
Reason and Strength of Argument can possibly do. It cannot reasonably be
supposed, that all Holy Men should be able to Answer all those Cavils, that may
be started by subtle Heretics, or learned Infidels, against our Holy
Religion; especially considering, there are not among them many Learned, many
of the Disputers of this World: Luke 10.21.
But God hides these things from the Wise and Prudent, and reveals them unto
Babes; even so, O Father, for so it seems good in thy Sight. They went out
from us, 1 John 2.19.
says the Apostle, but they were not of us: for if they had been of us, no
doubt but they would have continued with us. But will sincere Christians follow
them? No, that cannot be: For the Apostle adds, v. 20.
Ye have an Unction from the Holy One, and ye know all things; and the same
anointing teaches you of all things, and is truth, and is no lie: And even as
it has taught you, And therefore Anointing and Establishing go both together,
2 Cor. 1.11.
He that establishes us with you in Christ, and has anointed us, is God. And

As the whole System of Divine Graces is an excellent Preservative, Humility in
an eminent Manner. They who are humble (and he who knows himself, will be so)
will never offer at setting up their own short Understandings as the Measure
and Standard of Truth. There are Mysteries in Art, in Nature, in Philosophy, in
Natural Religion; no wonder then there are so in Revealed Religion, and the
Holy Scriptures. Two things there are, that make it necessary that there should
be deep things in them, to us unsearchable and past our finding out. They treat
of the Nature, Counsels, and Acts of God, which are laid down as the necessary
Foundations of Practical Holiness; and We are poor shortsighted Creatures; as
soon may a Man contain the whole Ocean in the Hollow of his Hand, as We
comprehend an Infinite Being, and his Wise Counsels and Decrees. That there are
Mysteries in Christianity, instead of being a Stone of Stumbling, and a
Prejudice against our Faith, should rather be a Confirmation of it to us, and
an Argument for it; it looks more like a Divine Revelation, when some Parts of
it are very Profound and Abstruse. Revealed Religion, like a Picture, must have
its dark Shades, as well as its brighter Colors. As to its Practical Part, it
is, and ought to be, clear: But the Articles that are to be believed, must of
necessity be Obscure; I should expect that the Foundation of so great a
Building should be laid under Ground, and out of Sight. And a humble Person
will quickly be convinced, that it is his Duty to bow down his Head before
Divine Revelation, as well as submit his Will to the Divine Command; and that a
Creature must yield Subjection to his Maker with his whole Man, and every Part
thereof. But yet

It is a good thing, Knowledge, that we may be able to give a Reasonable Answer
to them who do ask an Account of our Faith and Hope. And in a time when the
Road is full of Thieves, whose Design it is to Rob and Murder us, no Man should
Travel without a Sword by his Side; and every Man should get some skill to
manage his Weapon, that he may at least defend himself, and that Sacred
Treasure which is, or ought to be, dearer to him than his Life. I will
therefore briefly mention some of those Rational Grounds, upon which our Assent
to the Christian Doctrine ought to be built, and then it will remain firm and
unshaken. They may be reduced to these two Heads; The Nature of Christianity;
And the Divine Proof of it.

I. For the Nature of Christianity, it is a Religion every way Worthy of God.
For it gives us such an Account of the Nature and Will of God, as our Reason
with great Toil possibly might have found out, and cannot but approve and close
withal as soon as ever it is proposed to us. It Is a great Advantage to have
this Food brought to our Hands, and not to be obliged to hunt after it; for
that at the best would have cost us great Labor, and we might have missed of
it. And these it acquaints us with, not to amuse and entertain us with subtle
and useless Speculations, but as a necessary Foundation for the promoting and
encouraging our living Righteously, Soberly, and Godly, in this present Evil
World, which is the Apparent Design of the Gospel. And in requiring Godliness,
as well as Righteousness and Sobriety, it does vastly exceed all the
Instructions that we can learn from any of the Heathen Philosophers. They have
indeed, the Second Table written in their Books pretty fairly, though not without
some Blots and Errata's: But as for the First Table, they have but a few broken
Letters of the Duties of it, and these too in a very small Character. The
Gospel mightily insists upon, and presses the necessity of Loving God with our
whole Hearts and Souls, of making his Glory our Chief End in all that we do:
Doctrines that lie at the Foundation of Practical Holiness; which yet the
Heathen Philosophers never mentioned, nor dreamed of: And one may as soon
expect to find a Jewel by raking in a Dunghill, as to meet with any Passages of
this Nature in any of their Writings.

Again, it is a Religion every way suited to the State of Fallen Man: For it
plainly acquaints us, That we are in a State of Apostasy, and how this came
about. And it would greatly endear the Holy Scriptures to Men, if they did but
Distinctly know what a perplexing Inquiry this has been among the greatest
Wits, and the most learned Scholars, who have not had the Word of God for their
Guide; Stillingfleet's Orig. Sacrae, p. 491.
how Sin and Misery came to break into this World. Some attributed it to
Discord and Antipathy, a certain quarrelsome, pernicious, bloody Principle,
which they knew not what to make of; but this is to put us off with mere Words
and Sounds. Others, to the necessary Perversity of Matter. Others; to some very
malignant Spirit, that had slily wound it self into it. Others, to two Gods, a
Good, and a Bad one: And though it is impossible that more Nonsense and
Contradiction should be crowded together in the narrow Compass of so few Words,
Two Gods, whereof one a wicked, spiteful, and malicious One: Yet Plutarch tells
us, This was the most Ancient Opinion, and most Universally received among the
Wisest of the Heathen. And Oracles of Reason, p. 194.
one of these Heads of Brass, that pretends to utter Oracles of Reason, is of
the same Mind: For, says he, as to the Origin of Good and Evil, methinks it is
less Contradictory and Unreasonable, to believe as the Ancient Persians did,
That there were TWO Beginnings of things, the one Good, the other Evil: For how
can Evil proceed from a Being infinitely good, and without whom nothing is, if
Evil be not? And if Dr. Burnet Page 207.
have proved Genesis but a Parable, why may not the Persians be as much in the
right, as the Jews? And yet another of his Brethren tells us Page 197.
, That this is the first Head of the Deists Natural Religion; That there is ONE
Infinite, Eternal God, Creator of all things. And in another place, That the
generally acknowledged Lapse of Nature, and how it came, may be discovered by
Natural Reason; and it is reasonable to conclude without Revelation, that it
came (not from a wicked God, but) by a Deviation from the right Rule of Reason
implanted in us, etc. When two Deities butt and knock against each other, it is
no wonder that these two Authors do the same. Only there is this unhappy
Difference, that of the Two Gods, one is a very Good one, which makes some
Amends for the other who is so very Bad. But both these Epistlers are of the
same vile Stamp and Strain. Further, the Scripture gives us a distinct Account
of the State of the Quarrel between God and us; what the Issue of it will be,
if the Controversy be not taken up; and how we may be reconciled to him, whom
we can never successfully oppose; tells us of a Mediator, altogether such a one
as Fallen Man stands in Need of; what God requires of us, that through him we
may escape that Wrath and Vengeance that is due to us for Sin; and what we
shall receive from him in a way of Reward and Punishment, according as we
comply with his Terms, or refuse so to do. And it very much presses the great
Doctrine of Regeneration; a most God-like Doctrine, every way worthy of God,
and necessary for us because of the Corruption of Human Nature: And withal
shows whither we should apply our selves for Divine Grace, for the changing the
habitual Frame of our Souls, and the amending of our Lives. So much for the
Nature of Christianity.

II. Now for the Proof of it. The Word began first to be spoken by the Lord,
Heb. 2.
and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him; God also bearing them
witness, both with Signs and Wonders, and with diverse Miracles and Gifts of the
Holy Ghost, according to his own Will. And he would never have set the Broad
Seal of Heaven upon it, if it had been a Cheat, and an Imposture, and so have
unavoidably led us into a most fatal Error.

To this may be added, the wonderful Spreading of the Gospel; which is very
Admirable, considering the Strictness of its Precepts; the Weakness of the
Instruments by whom it was propagated; the strong Opposition that was made
against it every where by Men in Authority, and those of the greatest Wit and
Learning; the general Prejudices with which the Minds of Men were filled
against it; and its overturning all other Religions wherein Men had been Bred
and Born; and which therefore they use to be very tenacious of. If it had been
a Lie, it would never have been so blessed and prospered of God.

Consider further, what a wonderful Reformation it wrought in the Hearts and
Lives of all that entertained it. Surely that Seal could be no Forgery, but
must be cut by a Divine Hand, which made so many Divine Impressions upon such
Multitudes of Souls.

To all which may further be added, The Case of the Jews, who, though scattered
all the World over; yet, contrary to all other Instances in Nature, do not
mingle and incorporate with any People, but keep themselves as a Body distinct
from all the Nations among whom they dwell. And they are the Filth and
Offscouring of every Place, even among the Heathens, as well as the Christians.
The very Mahometans despise them: The Indians Terry 's Voyage into the
East Indies.
have a very Emphatical way, in their Language, of calling a Man two or three
very ugly Names in one Compound Word; yet that of calling a Man a Jew, is
reckoned worse than all the Terms of Reproach heaped up together. They are
every where standing Monuments of Divine Vengeance, for rejecting the Gospel;
and a lasting Proof and Testimony of the Truth of our Savior's Prophecies
against them. Especially if we consider the many Attempts which they have made,
but always in vain; but more especially their last, in the Reign, and by the
zealous Encouragement of Julian the Apostate Emperor, to rebuild the Temple at
Jerusalem, on purpose to prove our Savior a False Prophet; and the miraculous
Overthrow of it, and his Design, by Balls of Fire from Heaven, whereby the
Workmen were consumed, and the sorry Remains of the Foundations of that Temple
were entirely razed, and he made further to fulfill the Prophecy of Christ by
his very attempt to overthrow it; which is testified, not only by the Christian
Authors, but by the Heathen Historian Ammianus Marcel. l. 23.
also.

Neither are the Prophecies in Scripture concering Christ to be forgotten: such
as that of Daniel concerning the Messiah's being cut off within such a compass
of Years; Chap. 9.24.
which though it has its lesser Difficulties, yet as to the main Substance is
very plain; and therefore Porphyry most unreasonably pretended the Book of
Daniel was a History forged after the Events came to pass. And that Prophecy of
Christ's coming before the Destruction of the Second Temple. Mal. 3.
But above all, that which was one great Occasion of the Conversion of that
Noble Earl of Roch. Life, by Burnet, p. 140, 141, 142.
Man, who was once as remarkable for his Debauchery and Infidelity, as ever he
was for his Wit or Quality, viz. the Prophecy of Isaiah in his 53d Chapter,
concerning the Death of Christ, which does so exactly correspond with the
History of our Savior's Passion, though it was wrote many Ages before Christ's
Appearance in the World; and which the Jews, who abhor the Notion of a
Crucified Messiah, and constantly Blaspheme our Lord Jesus Christ, still kept
in their Hands as a Book Divinely inspired. Pilate writ an Inscription on the
Cross, over the Head of Christ, This is the King of the Jews, in Latin, Greek,
and Hebrew Characters. Every Jew is a Pillar of Brass, which God has set up,
and whereon he has engraven in Capital Letters, That Christ was a Teacher that
came down from Heaven: And this not in two or three, but in all Languages under
the Heavens: And he who has Eyes to see, will read; and he that has an Ear to
hear, let him understand.

And I think we ought not to slight the Acts of Pilate which he sent to
Tiberius, containing a Narrative of the Life, Miracles, Death, and Resurrection
of our Savior. These are mentioned, not only by Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 2.
Eusebius, but also by Tertullian Apol. c. 5. etc. 21.
and J. Martyr Apol. 2da. p. 76. and 84. Edit. Paris.
, who both of them more than once in their Apologies for the Christians, boldly
appeal to 'em. And they must have been Madmen, in so doing, if they had not
been well assured of the Truth of 'em. And one cannot but think it highly
rational that Pilate should send some Account of so Extraordinary an Affair to
the Emperor. But that which to me is of great Weight, and which I am surprised
to find omitted by Learned Men, yea by those who have written warmly against
them that have endeavored to put a Slur on these Acts, is this, That Maximinus
in his Perfecution caused Supposititious Of which see Eusebius Hist. Eccl. l.
1. c. 9. l. 9. c. 5. etc. 7.
Acts of Pilate to be Forged, full of Blasphemy against Christ, which he made
to be spread throughout the whole Empire, to be taught in the Schools, where
the Boys were to get them by heart, and to declaim upon them, that our Savior
and his Religion and Followers might be everywhere derided. But Providence put
an End to his Mirth and Laughter; for Divine Vengeance seized him, and he died
a wretched tormenting Death; and just before it, published an Edict in Favor
of the Christians. Now if there had been no Real Acts of Pilate, what need was
there of these Counterfeit ones, and of all this Industry for the spreading of
'em?

Of all these Heads of Discourse, two, viz. The Pardon of Sin, and a Future
State of Happiness: because, though they have been very lightly touched upon by
several, yet I do not know any that has thoroughly handled 'em. This Vein has
been scarce opened, and then has been presently closed again: the Skilful
Workmen having chosen rather to dig in some other Parts of the Mine; thinking,
it may be, that this might be wrought by the meaner Hand of any Common
Labourer; which has encouraged me to make the following Essay.

In the first Chapter whereof, I have been obliged to encounter some very
Learned Men, two of which are Deceased. I have carried it with a becoming
Deference to the Authors, while I have endeavored to Confute their Arguments
and Errors. It Is great Barbarity rudely to treat the Ashes of such Men when
Dead. I have therefore walked softly over their Graves, and not trampled
indecently upon them.

In the second Chapter, my Subject has led me to Cite several of the Ancient
Heathen Philosophers, though I have been far from producing all that I could have
brought. I have done as our Courts are wont to do when a Jury is Summoned; I
have Impannell'd as many as I thought necessary to serve my Purpose, and have
dismissed the Supernumeraries.

Some of the Quotations I have transcribed at large out of the Original, that
the Learned Reader may judge whether I have mistaken the true Sense of my
Authors, or dealt worse by them. I desire no Man to take them, as Traders
sometimes do a Bag of Money, upon Content, with a Promise of making them Good;
he who Examines 'em, will find them so. And that any one who has an Ability
and a Mind to it, may do it with the greater Ease and Readiness; generally the
first Time that I quote an Author, I mention the Particular Page and Edition
which I have all along made use of, where it was Necessary. The Neglect of
which, in many Writers, is as idle, as if a Man should direct a Letter to his
Friend in London, without naming the Street, or the Sign of the House where he
dwells; who thereupon is not to be found without the Expense of much Labor and
Time.

In the rendering of them into English, I have endeavored to give their true
Sense, without slavishly Confining my self to a Verbal Translation. I hate and
despise the Superstition of some Modern Publishers of Books, who cannot clap in
a the or an of, though it be absolutely necessary to make their Authors
intelligible, without giving the Reader a very formal Notice of it by a
turn'd-up Comma, the Solemnity of an Italick Character, and introducing the
little Particle with a Star prefixed in the Book, as one sometimes appears in
the Heavens to Usher in the Birth of a Young Prince.

In some Places I have endeavored to give somewhat of a pleasant Turn to a few
of their Expressions; without which, the Reading many Quotations is a dull
Business; though I know by Experience it is a much duller one to gather and
transcribe 'em. When there is no Air nor Briskness in the Face, the Limner will
give a Stroke of his Kindness, as well as of his Pencil; unless he be as heavy
a Creature as the Man that sits, or have as little Life and Soul in him as the
Picture he draws.

If any think I have been either too Light, or too Severe in a Reflection or
two on the Sentiments and Speeches of some of the Old Philosophers: I reply, I
have but followed the Example of Elijah, who derided the Prophets of Baal, that
were as Senseless and Empty Tools as the Idol they Worshipped. And I think that
a Silly Opinion, or a Ridiculous Saying, deserves no Veneration, because it
has been an Ancient one; or came from a Man, who as many Years as he lived
before me, yet it may be was not much Older when he vented it, than I now am,
when I smile at it and him. Had I been by when the Gibeonites produced their
Dry and Moldy Bread, I would not have tasted it; Their Broken Bottles, Clouted
Shoes, and Tattered Garments, for all their seeming Antiquity, should never
have been laid up among my Rarities: And if their Ambassadors, though doubtless
they were Men of Figure and Quality, should have endeavored to have imposed
them on me, I Would have presently hurled 'em all away, and thrown 'em on the
Dunghill; whence he that had a mind to have fed on, used and worn them, might
have picked 'em up, if he had pleased.

I have added an Appendix, wherein I have endeavored to Vindicate Revealed
Religion from the Exceptions of Mr. A. W. contained in a Oracles of Reason, p.
197.
Letter of his, which I find in the Rhapsody of the late unhappy Mr. Blount.
When he shows more Respect to our Blessed Savior and his Holy Religion, I
shall do the same by him. I have not said all that I could, but I hope I have
said so much as Effectually to Silence that Heathen Oracle.

ERRATA.
Page 36. l. antep. r. Homines. p. 39. l. 18. dele that. p. 132. l. 10. dele
Man. p. 179. l. ult. r. c. 1. p. 228. l. 14. r. carelessly.

THE PREFACE.
THOUGH refined and inquisitive Men have aimed at a perfect Comprehension of
All things; yet the Experience of every Age does convince us, that the Author
of Nature has set Bounds to our Knowledge as well as our Beings; There is a
certain Measure of Understanding as well as of bodily Stature which we cannot
exceed; and though in both there is a mighty difference, yet there are many
Points which are too high for us, and above the reach of the most Elevated
Minds. There Is none of them, but what an Ingenious Man would be glad to have
cleared up; but yet most of them are of a Speculative Nature, the Knowledge
whereof would be of very little Use and Service, and therefore we may safely
sit down in a quiet and contented Ignorance. There is an Obscurity on the Face
of Light; and though it manifests all other Objects, yet its Self is in a great
measure hidden from us. But were we perfect Masters of the Philosophy of it,
whether it be a Substance or an Accident, Fire, or the Pressure of the most
subtle Matter, how it so swiftly spreads, and strikes our Eyes, it would be no
help to the Traveller in his Way, or the Laboring Man for the quicker dispatch
of his Work.

Did a Man thoroughly understand the Cause of the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea,
and could he demonstrate it to proceed from the Motion either of the Sun or
Earth, or the Pressure of the Moon; could he dive as deep into that Secret as
some do into the vast Ocean, he would not enrich himself by the one as Men do
by the other. Could the Mariner reason ever so exactly about the Nature of the
Wind, open the secret Treasures whence it comes, and point out the invisible
Places whither it retreats, and assign the Natural Causes of its giddy and
uncertain Motions; he could not gather it in his Sails with greater Advantage,
nor the sooner reach his desired Haven.

But there are some Points of another Nature, the Ignorance whereof will
unavoidably create great Perplexity of Mind in any Considering Man. Of these I
shall pitch upon Two, which are of Common Concern to all, and of the greatest
Importance of any that can be mentioned, viz. The Pardon of Sin while we are in
this World, and our Future State when we leave it, and pass into the next. And
in treating on both of them, I shall compare Reason and Revelation, set one
against the other; and endeavor to demonstrate, against the Deists of the
present Age, That if we have no other Guide than the Former, we must needs be
at a dreadful Loss, and remain covered with the Shadow of Death; Psalm. 44.19.
but if we follow the Later, we shall have such a clear and satisfactory
Account of both of them, as will be comfortable as the Light of Life unto our
Souls. John 8.12.


A PRESERVATIVE AGAINST DEISM.
CHAP. I. Of Pardon of Sin.
WHenever we are Serious and Retired, our own Hearts will tell us, That God is
justly and highly displeased with us for our Sins; and that this Displeasure of
his will end in our total Ruin if it be not removed. Conscience indeed is not
always sensible of our Guilt; but it is soon awakened by any very sharp
Affliction: As the Seeds of some Distempers floating in a man's Blood, upon the
Change of Weather, are apt to drop down into a tender and sensible Part,
causing most acute Pains in the languishing Patient. No man therefore can have
any rational and lasting Peace and Comfort of Mind, who is not well informed
about the Forgiveness of Sins; which the Christian alone, by the help of his
Bible, can attain unto, but the Deist must be greatly bewildred about, who has
no other Instructor than the Light of Nature and Reason. For,

I. Essential Goodness of God, or else from the visible Effects of his Bounty
and Kindness.

From the Former of these it cannot be Assuredly inferred. For though Forgiveness
of Sin has its Rise and Spring in the Infinite Benignity of God; yet it does
not flow thence by Necessity of Nature, but it is a free Act of his Will, and
the Work of his Sovereign Grace and Pleasure. And therefore the Argument of the
Apostle is very strong and clear, 1 Cor. 2.11.
As no man knows the things of a man, save the Spirit of a man which is in
him: even so these things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of God, and he
to whom he is pleased to Reveal them. A shrewd Man may guess at the secret
Thoughts and Resolves of his Fellow Creature, but he cannot certainly know them;
much less can we in affairs of This nature penetrate into the Mind of God. That
Eye which is too weak to reach to the bottom of a shallow Stream, can never
pierce to the lowest Depths of the Ocean. Sinners are worthy of Punishment, and
it is not inconsistent with Goodness to inflict a deserved Punishment on an
Offender. God has a Right to inflict; and who can assure us that he will remit
his own Right, unless he himself declare his willingness to part with it? God
neither will nor can exercise one Attribute of his to the Prejudice of another.
He will not raise the honor of his Goodness on the Ruins of his Holiness and
Justice, or the Contempt of his Authority and Government: And how to reconcile
these with the Pardoning of Sinners, is a puzzling Difficulty in which Reason
cannot help us: And though it could, yet he is infinitely Just and Righteous, and
therefore at least he may resolve to punish the Offender for ought that he
knows; so that at the best it would be with our Souls, as it is fabulously
reported to be with Mahomet's Body in his Iron Coffin, that hangs in the Air
between the upper and the nether Lodestone; so should we be in Suspense
between encouraging Hopes and uneasy Fears, which must needs create a mighty
Torment in our Minds; this being a matter whereon our Welfare in both Worlds
does so entirely depend. The Scriptures tell us (and though that will have no
weight with a Deist, yet it will with those who own their Authority) that
notwithstanding the immense Goodness of God, yet Devils, who were originally
more noble Creatures than we, remain bound in Chains of Guilt as well as
Darkness, and are reserved to the Judgment of the Great Day. And that there
should be Forgiveness for fallen Man, when there is none for Apostate Angels,
who can assure us?

Nor can this be Certainly inferred from the visible Effects of Divine Bounty
and Goodness. Men perceive indeed that God is Kind; but withal they frequently
feel to their Cost that he is Just, and know within themselves that it is
Righteous in him to render Tribulation and Anguish to every evildoer. He does
do it in some terrible Instances in this World; and for ought that mere Reason
can tell us, he may do the like in the other World too; though he may defer it
for a Season, as long as this present Life does last; and fill men's Hearts with
Food and Gladness for a Time, to reward those broken Mixtures of Good that may
be in them, or as a Recompense for some useful Service they may do (though his
Glory be not designed by them therein), or to employ them as the Instruments of
his Providence for the relieving or vexing of others: or for some other wise
Ends that may be past our finding out. A Malefactor may know that his Prince is
very good and kind, who for wise Reasons of State, which he cannot penetrate
into, gives him an uncertain Reprieve sine Die, keeps him in an airy Prison,
and feeds him there very plentifully at the Public Charge: Yet this is but a
very slender Argument that therefore he shall undoubtedly be pardoned:
Especially if he know him to be a very Just and Righteous Governor, who greatly
hates and detests the foul Crimes he has been guilty of: And most of all, if
the Prisoner enter into new Conspiracies and Rebellions against him, while he
is so lovingly treated: Which is the case of all Mankind with reference to God,
who are daily provoking him, while they live every moment on his Bounty. The
utmost that can be solidly gathered from the common Patience and Goodness of
God, is but some loose and faint Hopes, which may encourage Sinners to hearken
out and enquire after a way of Reconciliation with God. The Ninivites carried
this matter as far as any can by mere natural Light and Reason, Jonah 3.9.
when they said, Who can tell if God will turn and repent, and turn away from
the fierceness of his Anger, that we perish not? But then on the other hand,
nothing being so suspicious as a Guilty creature, especially when he has to do
with a Holy and a Jealous God, he may as well say, Who can tell but that God
will Not turn, nor repent, nor turn away from the fierceness of his Anger, and
then we must perish, and there is no remedy? We can never have a firm
Foundation for a Full and Comfortable persuasion, that God will indeed forgive
Sins, unless some Act of Grace and Indemnity be published from Heaven to that
end and purpose.

Such a one we read of in the Holy Scriptures, in which we have the highest
Assurance that can be either given or desired. We have a firm word of Promise
frequently repeated, to build upon. The Son of God came down from Heaven on
purpose to preach this Doctrine in his own Person. He has purchased this
Blessing for us by the sharpest Sufferings. When he returned to Heaven, Luke
24.47.
he commanded that Remission of Sins should be preached in his Name; and has
settled an Order of Men, who are appointed by this Argument to beseech Sinners
to be reconciled to God. This is one express Article of the New Covenant which
he has sealed with his own Blood, that God will be merciful to our Iniquities,
and our Sins he will remember no more. He bequeathed this as his dying Legacy
among all his sincere Followers in his Last Will and Testament: A Remembrance
whereof he would have continually kept up among them; and in order thereunto he
instituted the Ordinance of the Supper; for the Cup which we there drink of, is
the New Testament in his Blood, which was shed for the Remission of our Sins.
And as a Priest he intercedes for this great Blessing, and as a King bestows it
on his People.

II. how far this Pardon shall reach, either as to Persons, or Offenses. If we
had been left barely to our own Thoughts and Conjectures in this matter, very
few, if any, could have had a well-grounded comfortable Assurance, that they in
particular should find Mercy at the hands of God.

We could not reasonably presume, it should be an Universal and Unlimited
Pardon. Surely God will make Examples of some, and, for any thing I know,
(might every one say) he may make one of Me, among the rest: If any be
excepted, why not I?

If I am a mean and inconsiderable Man, it is no great matter; no great loss, if
such an one should perish: And I am the rather induced to fear that I shall,
because of the Inequality of the Divine Favor, in distributing temporal
Mercies with so Sparing a hand to me, the bestowing of which is the chief
Ground I have to hope for his Pardon. And therefore those, who are very low and
poor, and under such miserable circumstances, that they rather endure life,
than enjoy it, have Reason to suspect the good will of God toward them; to
whom he has given such weak and feeble Motives to Repentance, and such slight
Grounds to hope for a Pardon thereupon.

If I am a Man of Figure, for that very reason God may single me out, to make
his Power, his Justice, and his Wrath, so much the more Glorious. And generally
wise Governors are wont to make some such as these, Public Examples of their
just Displeasure.

But be a man what he will, as to his Circumstances in this World; there is
none but has committed a great many Sins, and some of them are of a Crimson
Dye: For where is the Person to be found, who has not often offended against
shining Light, and indearing Love; against alluring Mercies, and bitter
Afflictions; against repeated Promises, and solemn Vows? Now it is true indeed,
that any single Sin, though of the smallest Size, will make sad Work in the
Conscience, if it be set home with Power on the Heart: As the disorder of any
minute single part of our Bodies, an inconsiderable Stone, or a small quantity
of Gravel in our Reins, will fill us with most exquisite Pain. Yet generally it
is the Multitude and Greatness of men's Sins, and the heinous Aggravations of
them, that make the deepest wound in their Spirits. Hence God has given us so
many repeated Declarations in his Holy Word, of the Fullness, the Plenty, the
Riches of his pardoning Grace and Mercy; That he will forgive iniquity,
transgression, and sin; That the Blood of his Son cleanses from all
Unrighteousness, etc. These Scriptures are like those Herbs, which some curious
Men tell us of, that have the Signature of those parts of the Body, whose
Griefs they are designed to assuage; Or the Figure and Color of those
Diseases, for the Cure whereof the kind Hand of Nature has provided them. They
clearly show our Disease, as well as are intended to heal it; and plainly
signify how hard a matter it is to settle the peace of a troubled Soul.

Nay the Better and more Serious any man is, so much the Greater would have
been his Uncertainty and Perplexity in this matter: For the Better any man is,
the more does he observe the inward Corruption of his own Heart, which others
take no Notice, and make no Account of; And the deeper Sense has he of the
Holiness and Justice of God, of the Vileness of his own Sins, of his Desert of
Wrath and Vengeance, and his Unworthiness of Divine Favor.

And every man, but especially such a one knows so much More against himself,
than he does against the Generality of Others; that it is reasonable for him to
conclude, that, all things considered, he is one of the Chiefest of Sinners.
How natural is it therefore, for all, and especially for such, to cry out, Though
peradventure there may be Mercy for Others, yet sure there is none for Me; I am
afraid, that I and My Crimes may be excepted, and that pardoning Grace shall
not extend so very far as to take Me and my Sins within its Reach and Compass;
that the Wing of Mercy will not be spread so wide, as to cover Me, and all my
numerous and mighty Offenses.

But now from this miserable Distress, Revelation does thoroughly deliver us,
by certifying us, that, as far as the Heavens are above the Earth, Isa. 53.7,
8, 9.
so far are God's Ways and Thoughts above ours: And therefore he is ready
Abundantly to pardon. Our Blessed Lord has told us, Mat. 12.31.
All manner of Sin and Blasphemy shall be forgiven. Blasphemy is a wounding the
Name of God. Now every Man is tender of his Reputation as of the Apple of his
Eye, and God is jealous of his own Honor. Yet, not only all other Offenses,
but even this too, of what sort and kind soever, though attended with very
aggravating Circumstances, shall be forgiven unto Men; it is spoken
indefinitely, to Any Man, (always provided he comply with the Conditions of the
Gospel), the Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost only excepted. And it is very
observable how these words are brought in. Our Savior was now most highly
provoked by the malicious Pharisees, whose malignant Souls were possessed by a
worse Devil than any of the Bodies of those who were healed by him, and
therefore wickedly imputed his Miracles to the Power of Satan. Our Lord did
most heinously resent this, as well he might. And yet before he thunders out
Wrath and Vengeance against them, words of Grace drop from his Lips toward
others, and Mercy gets the start of Justice. He begins with these words,
Wherefore I say unto you, All manner of Sin and Blasphemy shall be forgiven
unto men; and afterward adds, But the Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall
not be so. And the Apostle tells us, that among others, this is one peculiar
Excellency of Christ's Gospel above Moses's Law, That whereas he that despised
the latter by Sinning presumptuously against it, died without Mercy; yet
through the former such an Ample Forgiveness was preached, Acts 13.38, 39.
that by him all that believe are justified from All things from which they
could not be justified by the Law of Moses. And at another time; That where Sin
has Abounded, Romans 5.20.
there Grace shall much more Abound; i. e. upon men's Compliance with the
reasonable Terms which God has settled. Which brings me to the

III. Terms, upon which Forgiveness may be had. It will indeed tell us, that
God cannot but insist upon Repentance: But the great Question will be, Whether
this alone will do? The Pleas which have been made for it will appear to be of
no force; which are these,

1. That Repentance is the Blount's Assert. of Lord Herbert's Five Principles.
best thing a Man can DO, and therefore God must be contented with it. So says
another, and he was a Person of great Worth, Dr. Whichcot's Sermon, p. 318.
If the Sinner Repent, you have his Consent, and his whole Heart; you have then
gained his Mind and Soul, and he does then all that is in him to DO. It Is all
the S. N. Discourse of Natural and Revealed Religion, p. 86.
Satisfaction or Amends that we can make: Says another Ingenious Advocate, And
seeing it is All that we can DO by way of Reparation for our Offenses, though
Justice will take no notice of it, yet Mercy will. If God is indeed a Merciful
and Benign Being, he will most certainly accept the Payment we are able to
make, and not insist on Impossible Demands with his frail Bankrupt Creatures.

But I do not know what Statute Law Men have to oblige the Almighty to Compound
with his poor Debtors, and especially to take so very little as this is. To
Repent, indeed, is one of the best things that a Sinner can Do; but if that be
all he has to offer or say for himself, there is another thing that it becomes
the Criminal to think on, besides doing, and that is Suffering: And it is what
he has Reason to reckon upon. We may say in this Case, as God does in another,
Go now, Mal. 1.8.
and offer it to thy Governor, and see whether he will accept it. Courts of
Justice take very little notice of the Malefactor's Repentance. The Law must be
observed, and Ordinarily the Offender must be punished; And this is wont to be
done, notwithstanding the Mercy of the Judge, and without any Imputation of
Injustice or Cruelty. Nay on the contrary, it would be Injustice, Cruelty, and
fond Pity, if a Traitor, a Murderer, or the like Offender, after a Multitude of
repeated enormous Crimes, should be pardoned, merely because he does repent.

2. Ibid.
It Is urged, That no Generous Man, but will forgive his Enemy, much more his
Children, if such Enemy disapproves the wrong he has done, is troubled and
grieved for it, resolves to be friendly and respectful for the time to come,
etc. I say, there is no generous Man, but will forgive his Enemy, who is thus
affected to him; How much more shall God forgive all Persons thus Disposed, and
thus Reformed; seeing there is no Generosity in Man, but what is, with his
Nature, infused into him by God; or is an improvement only of the Divine Seed,
which God our Maker planted in our Natures. But to this I reply: In many Cases,
a Private Person has no lawful Power to remit the Penalty of a Crime: As in the
Case of the Murder of a near Relation, or the deep wounding of a Man's
Reputation, on the public vindicating whereof, his Usefulness, the Honor of
Religion, and the Good of many Souls, may depend. But however, God must be
considered, not as a Private Person, but as a Public one, as the Holy, Just
Rector of the World, under whose deep Displeasure we are fallen by our Sins,
Id. p. 234.
as this Author himself cannot but acknowledge afterward. Now, the Case of a
Private Person, and a Public One, is vastly different. It is ordinarily
necessary, for the Honor of the Government, and the Public Good, that
Offenders and Disturbers of the Common Order, should be restrained and
punished. And if this Plea had any thing in it, the Magistrate must forgive
every Delinquent, how Notorious soever, if he do but approve himself a true
Penitent: Whereas God does command the Magistrate, as his Vicegerent, to
inflict the Penalty on Offenders notwithstanding their Repentance; and in so
doing, they act as the Ministers of God: What they do, is his Act more than
theirs. Yea, God himself, in the Course of his Providence, does lay very severe
Judgments upon them that are truly Penitent, (of which more by and by). It Is
further pleaded:

3. Id. p. 86.
Wisdom will effectually dispose God to forgive the Penitent, because the
Creature is reformed by Repentance, is made such as it ought to be, and such as
God wills; which being so, it cannot be now Wisdom to destroy it by
Punishment, or to afflict it unnecessarily: It is not Justice, but Rage, to
Punish, when the Person to be punished is already Amended. This is further
enforced by another, Dr. Whichcot. Sermon. p. 314.
because to inflict Evil has only in it the Notion of a Remedy, the Place of a
MEAN, not of an END. Now we know that no more of a Mean is designed than what
is necessary for the End. -- Therefore I take it for granted, that where there
is Wisdom and Goodness in the Agent, all Punishment is for Instruction,
Reformation, and bettering of the Offender, or for Example to Bystanders. And
I cannot tell what is Good in Punishment, but these TWO. (But let him that can
tie Contradictions together, reconcile this with the following Words of the
same Great Man, Id. p. 318.
viz. Punishment in the Hand of God, is either for the MAINTAINING HIS
AUTHORITY, or for the DEFENSE of RIGHTEOUSNESS, or for the Reformation of a
Sinner, or for an Effectual Admonition to the By-stander. Where the TWO in the
compass of a very few Pages, are increased to FOUR. But he goes on.) Id. p. 317.
If the Sinner leave off to Sin, and condemn himself; then the Necessity of
Punishment is taken away: For that for which Punishment is made use of, is
obtained without Punishment. And we never make use of a Mean, if the End be
obtained.

But to this I Reply, This whole arguing proceeds on a wrong Supposition, That
the Reformation of the Offender is the only end of Punishment: Whereas
Satisfaction to the Law, the Honor of the Government, the Explation of the
Crimes committed, are at least as noble Ends, and as necessary, if not more so,
than that. Without due care in this Matter, the Divine Threatenings will appear
to be like those Flaming Swords that sometimes hang in the Air, vain Meteors,
and mere Vapors, that have no real Edge; and in the Judgment of many wise Men,
do not praesignify any future Calamities that shall certainly follow, but only
serve to affright weak and superstitious Minds.

How confidently soever some Men may talk, yet they have the Common Sense of
all Mankind lying against them. Who will satisfy Divine Justice? Who will make
our Peace with the Offended Majesty of Heaven? Has been a most puzzling Inquiry
in all Ages. The Heathens saw somewhat more was necessary than a bare
Reformation of Manners, to appease the Anger of their Gods; and rather than
depend upon that alone, have thought it more Rational to take up with any
thing, even the most foolish, and extravagant, and brutish Contrivances of
Purgations, and Offerings, of Humane Blood and Sacrifices. Micah 6.7.
Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the High God?
Shall I come before him with Burnt-offerings, with Calves of a Year old? Will
the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, or with ten thousands of Rivers of
Oil? Shall I give my Firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my Body for
the sin of my Soul? Yea, the great Patriarch of Natural, and bitter Enemy to
Revealed Religion, after all his Confidence, That mere Repentance would expiate
men's Offenses, was himself, at a loss in this matter, as appears by the
following Passage:

Et quidem quinque hos Articulos bonos, Catholicosque esse, unusquisque
procul-dubio fatebitur: ad Salutem tamen aeternam comparandam, non sufficere
perhibebunt nonnulli. Caeterum qui ita locutus fuerit, nae ille quidem audax,
nedum saevum temerariumque effatum (mea sententia) protulerit; quum nulli satis
explorata sint judicia Divina: quam etiam ob causam, neque eas sufficere
protinus dixerim: attamen magis probabilis mihi videtur eorum opinio qui aeque
pie ac leniter de Dei Judiciis statuunt, dum homo quod in se est praestat.
Herbert de Religione Gentilium, p. 217.
These five Articles (viz. 1. The Being of God. 2. That he is to be Worshipped.
3. That Virtue is the principal part of Divine Worship. 4. That we ought to
Repent of our Sins. 5. That there are Rewards and Punishments in the present
and future life) every one, without doubt, will acknowledge to be Good and
Catholic: but some will pretend they are not sufficient to Eternal Salvation.
But he that shall so say, is a bold man, and, in my opinion, pronounces a cruel
and rash Sentence. Seeing the Judgments of God are not fully known, for which
Reason neither will I peremptorily say they are Sufficient, etc. Such is the
Power of Truth, that it will be revenged on its fiercest Adversaries, and force
them who contradict it, to contradict themselves also.

4. It Is urged, that God is our Common Si justitiae Divinae haut factum satis
ex Poenitentia dixissent forte Sacerdotes, acerbioremque quam ex dolor interno
exigi debere poenam contendissent, hisce ita occurri tum temporis potuit, Deum
Summum esse Patrem communem, adeoque in Filium Poenitentem haut graviter
animadversurum. Herbert de Relig. Gentil. p. 199.
Father, and will not severely animadvert on his Penitent Child: Or, as another
Dr. Whichcot's Sermons, p. 310.
enforces it, God has stamped Impressions of Goodness and Kindness throughout
the whole Creation. -- Every thing maintains its own Offspring, and endeavors
to bring it to good (according to the several Natures of every kind), and if it
be capable, it bears its Offspring Affection. -- Now whatever Id. p. 312.
Perfection is found in any Creature, is in God Primarily, Originally and
Essentially. We all commend the Merciful and Compassionate Disposition above
the Cruel and Malicious. And shall we attribute that to God, which we condemn
in any Creature? But sure it is not reasonable to insinuate that God is cruel
and malicious for punishing Delinquents: Especially considering what this
Reverend Author says in the very next Page, viz. If God Id. p. 313.
do punish Sin, he does that which is Just. And should I argue, that because
God is Originally, Primarily and Essentially Just, and therefore he will
certainly punish Sinners, if this be all they have to plead that they do
Repent, it would hold altogether as strongly as his arguing from his Goodness
that he will forgive them barely upon their so doing. We all commend Justice in
Men, and especially in a Magistrate, and censure the lazy and fond Neglect of
it. And shall we attribute that to God which we condemn in the Creature? Or
shall there be any Excellency or Perfection in us which is wanting in him? He
that made the Eye, shall not He see? and he who formed the Ear, shall not He
hear? Besides, it is as certain that God is our Common Ruler, as that he is our
Common Parent; and it is Matter of Fact that he does inflict very severe
Penalties on his Rebellious Subjects, notwithstanding their Repentance.

5. It Is further urged, That Men are by Nature -- Homines natura sua fragiles
peccatoque obnoxios esse. Herbert de Relig. Gentil. ubi supra.
frail Creatures, and liable to Sin. And that, Dr. Whichcot's Sermon, p. 321.
though the Act of a Creature may be aggravated in respect of the Person against
whom it is committed, yet in themselves our Sins are but Acts of Weakness, and
they are so in God's Account and Esteem, etc. And if there were as much
Weakness in All of them as there is in this Objection, a man might be hard put
to it to make a Reply. But are our Wilful and Heinous Provocations to be
dwindled away and shrunk up into Sins of Infirmity? If all our Sins are both in
Themselves and in God's Account but Acts of Weakness, I don't know why they
should not be so in Ours too. For we cannot do better than to entertain such
Sentiments as are agreeable to the Nature of Things, and the Judgment of God
himself. But Good men have not been wont to take up with such Notions as these.
Saul urged for himself in the matter of the Amalekites; That he did not reserve
part of the Spoil from any evil Design, but from a good Intention, to have
wherewithal to furnish out a Sacrifice to the Lord; 1 Samuel 15.21, 22, 23.
and though he was their King, yet in this the People overruled him, and it
would have looked odly for him to have been less forward and zealous to provide
for God's Worship than his Subjects were. But yet for all this, Samuel charges
him roundly for it, and tells him it was Rebellion and Stubborness, which are
as the Sin of Witchcraft, Iniquity and Idolatry. And holy Men have been wont to
think as ill of their Own as of other men's Sins upon this Account. Holy David
aggravates his folly from this Circumstance, viz. the Person against whom it
was committed. And he so intently fixed his Eye upon this, as though none else
had been offended by him. Against thee, Ps. 51.4.
thee only have I sinned. And God himself, by the Mouth of Nathan, whom he sent
to him, warmly expostulates with him, 2 Samuel 12.9, 10.
Wherefore have thou despised the Commandment of the Lord to do Evil in his
Sight? And again immediately after, Thou have despised Me, says he to him in
the Name of God. And this is not only the Language of God in the Scriptures,
but in his daily Providence too. Let any man consider the numerous Calamities
wherewith many times the World is covered as with a black Cloud, behold the
Strugglings of dying Infants, listen to the Cries of a wounded Spirit, and
attend to the Groans of a departing Sinner, and then let him judge whether the
Sins of Men are Acts of Weakness in God's Account and Esteem.

Scripture indeed is brought in to countenance this strange Assertion: For it is
said Id. p. 322.
he knows our Frame. Ps. 103.14.
But if we read on to the end of the Verse, it will appear that this is not
spoken of the Corruption of our Natures, but the Weakness and Frailty of our
Constitution: For it is added, He remembers that we are but Dust. And the same
is the true sense and meaning of that other Text which is pressed into this
Service, Isa. 57.16.
For I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth: as is evident
from the following words, which contain the true reason of these; not because
their Miscarriages are the weak Acts of finite and fallible Creatures, etc. but
because then the Spirit should fail before me, and the Souls which I have made.
I might add, This is a Gracious Promise, which we know by mere Revelation,
whereas we are treating of what may be known by the mere Light of Nature and
Reason.

In short, no Man would with any Patience bear such a Plea as this in the Mouth
of his Servant or Child, for their wilful Contempt and Defiance of his
Authority. And such talk as this, is one of the most effectual ways to give a
fatal Check to the working of that Repentance which some design so much to
extol; and which indeed can hardly be extolled too much, provided Men do it not
so, as to justle a Mediator, and the Necessity of Faith in him in order to
forgiveness, out of the World. For the chief Consideration that melts down an
Ingenuous Spirit into a Godly Sorrow, is this, the Wisdom, Majesty, Authority,
Power, Goodness, and Justice of God whom he has displeased. So that some Men
by endeavoring to advance Repentance, do indeed diminish and discourage it; as
the Sun by raising up Vapors out of a River, lessens the Quantity of Water
that was in it.

6. It Is urged, That for -- Peccata Hominum non tam in Dei contumeliam, quam in
propriam utilitatem sub boni alicujus apparentis obtentu fieri plerumque; ac
licet in eo Nomines fallerentur, nihil tamen infenso in Deum animo patratum
fuisse. Herbert ubi supra.
the most part Men's Sins are not committed so much in Despite to God, as for
their own Advantage, under the plausible show of some Appearing Good. And if
this be all that a Thief or a Murderer have to say for themselves, That the one
robbed, and the other assassinated his Neighbor, not out of any direct Design
to affront the Law or Government, but merely to get a good Sum of Money, or to
be revenged on his Enemy, which to them did seem very desirable, this would
never prevent the pronouncing or executing the Sentence of Death upon them.

7thly. Lastly, It Is yet further argued, That it is Worthy Dr. Whichcot's Sermon.
p. 313.
of God to Pardon Penitents. It is more effectual to the Purpose of God's
Honor and Glory. For when he Pardons, he procures himself Love, and gains the
Heart and Soul of his Creature. But if he punish, the Party endures because God
is Stronger, and the Creature cannot make Resistance. And again, It Is P. 318,
319.
a greater Excellency to win and reconcile by Gentleness and Fairness, than to
overcome by Power and Force. To win and overcome by fair Means, by Reason and
Argument, by Courtesy and Gentleness, these show Wisdom and Goodness; but to
crush and subdue may be done by Power and Subtilty; by Power, because the
Person cannot make Defense; by Subtilty, because the Person was surprised and
taken at unawares. But the Case is not very fairly put. Here is mention made of
the invidious Words of Power, and Force, and Subtilty, and the Creatures
Weakness, which are not the Springs of God's punishing Men; but not a word of
Holiness and Justice, Preservation of Public Order, the Honor of the Divine
Law and Government, or the Desert of the Offender, which are the true Causes of
it. Men do not suffer, because God bears them down by main Force, as an
Oppressor; or outwits and over-reaches them by Craft; but because they have
deserved Punishment; and these valuable Ends, which I am sure it is Wisdom
effectually to secure, do call for the inflicting of it. And as for Goodness,
it never was the Intent of God, nor can it be for his Glory, as Governor of the
World, to represent himself as a Being of mere Clemency and Kindness. No
Creature would be more despicable than a living King resembling his own Marble
or Brazen Statue, with a Scepter in its Hand, which it never stirs, and a broad
Sword lifted up in a very threatening Posture, as though it would cleave any Man
in two that came near it; but this terrible Instrument is in a dead Hand that
never gives a Stroke; and therefore is fit only to take up so much Room, and
stand for a Show in a Public Place, where the smallest Bird or Insect would
quickly make bold with it, and pitch upon it without any Fear or Concern. And
God may, though he Chastize the Guilty, be for ever secure of the Reputation of
that his Goodness, having given abundant Demonstrations of it toward all his
Creatures, and knowing further how in a glorious manner to display it toward
those who never offended him. And Sinners having abused that Attribute, it is
but rational to fear that his other Attributes should be employed to repair the
Injuries and Dishonours which have been cast upon it.

But he adds to the same purpose, The Creatures suffering Punishment Id. p. 319.
, is but a very SORRY AMENDS for Transgression. For what does God GAIN by it?
God is so far from being recompensed by the Sufferings of CONTUMACIOUS Sinners,
that I dare say it is more satisfactory to God, more according to his Mind, that
a Sinner should repent, and humbly acknowledge his Offense in this State in
which he is, than undergo the Suffering of the Damned to Eternity. For God
GAINS NOTHING by the one, but he has the Heart of the Delinquent by the other.
These Words (and they are not the only ones in this Learned Man's Sermon, as
published by his Friend) may be carried so far as to countenance the wild
Opinion of Origin, That the wicked in Hell, yea, Devils themselves at last
shall be saved; and it may be a little further. For it is hard to think, That
God should continue CONTUMACIOUS SINNERS in exquisite and Eternal Torments, or
indeed severely punish them for any long Period of Time, if he GAIN NOTHING at
all thereby. But I will Confront this with another Passage in a Sermon of this
Id. p. 50.
Great Man: Where mentioning that Scripture, God so loved the World, that he
gave his only begotten Son, etc. He adds, It must be attributed to his Goodness
and Compassion, etc. It was that which he was NO GAINER by; for our
Righteousness is not profitable to him; and I say, no more is our Love. So that
it seems whether God save or destroy, he gains nothing at all either by the
one, or the other. Neither, indeed, is it possible that he should, if thereby
be meant any Addition to his intrinsical Excellency or Happiness, for that was
always, and ever will be infinitely perfect and incapable of any Increase or
Diminution. But in a way of Manifestation he does Gain very much in punishing
Sinners. For hereby he does evidence his Holiness, and Hatred of Sin, the
Severity of his Justice, and the Exactness of his Truth, which is no such very
SORRY AMENDS for Transgression, as it is very unwarily asserted to be. And it is
as true he may, and does Gain very much in this Sense in pardoning Sinners for
the sake of Christ's Satisfaction on their Repentance and Faith in him. For
upon this Bottom he does it on Terms that are Honorable to himself; but that
it would be so, to do it on mere Repentance without any respect to the atoning
Blood of a Mediator (of which unenlighten'd Reason knows not a Syllable) does
not yet appear. And though he lose the Hearts of Sinners whom he punishes, yet we
have Reason to suppose (what Revelation does abundantly assure us of) that the
bright and spacious Heavens are filled with nobler Inhabitants than the little
Spot of this dirty Earth, on which we tread: that there are (to use the Words
of an Mr. How Is Right Use of that Argument from the Name of God, p. 34.
Excellent Person) Numberless Myriads of Wise and Holy Sages in the other
World, the continual Observers of all his Dispensations, that behold them with
equal unbiased Minds, and from the Evidence of the Matter give their
Concurrent Approbation, and Applause. -- Great and mavelous are thy Works,
Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy ways. But it is Enough and much more
Considerable to approve himself to himself, and that all his Dispensations are
guided according to the Steady and Eternal Reason of Things. For as he well
Speaks in another place of the same Id. p. 8, 9.
Discourse, The Glory of God's Name must be understood to be Primarily an
Objective Glory, that shines with a Constant and Equal Luster in all his
Dispensations, whether Men Observe or Observe it not. And shines Primarily to
Himself, so as that he has the perpetual Self-Satisfaction of doing as truly
becomes him, and what is in it Self reputable, Worthy of him, and Apt to
approve it Self to a right Mind (as his Own ever is) let Men think of his Ways
as they please.

No Travelers have yet found out that imaginary Neck of Land whereby it is
supposed that Asia and America are joined together. No man by mere Reason can
discover the certain Connection between Repentance and Pardon. But here
Revelation does relieve us. The Holy Scriptures acquaint us that Repentance
toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ on the one hand, and Remission
on the other, are inseparably united. The Apostles Commission runs in this
form, To open men's Eyes, Acts 26.18.
and to turn them from Darkness to Light, and the Power of Satan to God, that
they may receive the Forgiveness of their Sins, and an Inheritance among them
that are Sanctified by Faith that is in me.

IV. When God will Pardon us, if he do it at all. Wise Governors are not wont
to receive into Favor great Offenders, who have gone on in a long course of
Rebellion, upon their first Offers of Submission. If we have nothing but our
own Reason to guide us, we might well suppose, that in Order to make us more
deeply sensible of our Crimes, and teach us the Value of so great a Mercy, God
may let us stand a long while in an humble Penitent manner at his Gate, before
he vouchsafe to open it to us, if ever he do so. Now besides that Uneasiness of
Mind which the being held in Suspense in so important an Affair, must needs
create in a Serious and Considering Person, there is this further afflictive
Consideration, That our Lives are very short and uncertain. And if the King of
Terrors should seize us before our Peace be made with God, we are undone: Or if
it surprise us before we have any solid Grounds to believe he is reconciled to
us, our Departure out of this World will be like that of a Malefactor out of
his Prison, who goes trembling to the Place of Execution, knowing nothing of a
Pardon till he comes thither, being half killed with the Fears, though he escape
the Stroke of Death.

But here Revelation gives us Light and Comfort: For it certifies us, that no
sooner do we sincerely turn to God in Christ, but immediately our Sins are
blotted out. Ps 32.5.
I acknowledged my Sin unto thee, says David, and mine Iniquity have I not
hid: I said I will confess my Transgression unto the Lord: and then it is
presently added in the same Verse, And thou forgavest the Iniquity of my Sin.
The Words do not more closely follow one another, than God's gracious Pardon
did his Candid and Penitent Confession; nor was this a Favor peculiar to the
Psalmist, but it is recorded for the Encouragement of others: As he himself
intimates in the following Verse; For this shall every one that is Godly pray
unto thee in a time when thou may be found. No sooner does Ephraim begin to
relent, but God is brought in, Speaking after the manner of a most Tender and
Compassionate Father, whose Soul is melted down upon the Return of his
disobedient Child. Jer. 31.18, 19, 20. Gataker in locum.
Is Ephraim my dear Son? Is he a pleasant Child? Or rather, as a Learned Man
reads the words, Is not Ephraim my dear Son? Is he not a pleasant Child? For
since I spoke against him, I remember him still: Therefore my Bowels are
troubled for him, I will surely have Mercy upon him, says the Lord. The
Publican, who in a sense of his Vileness, Luke 18.13, 14.
stood afar off, and, as an Argument of his Shame, would not so much as lift up
his Eyes toward Heaven, but, in token of his great Contrition, smote upon his
Breast, saying, God be merciful to me a Sinner, went down to his house
justified; i. e. absolved and acquitted of God: and so the wretched
Thanksgiving of the Proud Pharisee, Lord, I thank thee I am not as other men,
or even as this Publican, was utterly ruined.

V. renew his Pardon. Fresh Breaches, after a Reconciliation, are very
provoking. Every one would be apt to despise that Government which still should
Spare a Traitor, who has been pardoned once and again, and after that breaks
out into other Rebellions. There is such a Complication of aggravating
Circumstances in returning to the Commission of Folly, that we could rationally
expect no other than that Divine Justice thereupon should seize us, and say to
us, Pay me what you Owe: If God in his holy Word had not encouraged us, and
made it our Duty to believe and hope that upon our deep Humiliation and renewed
Faith in the Blood of Christ, he will yet be pacified toward us. Ye have
played the Harlot with many Lovers (which is an Offense of that nature, that a
man would never pass by one Single act of it; but it has been frequently
repeated by you with Variety of Persons, and therefore you can well look for no
other than a Bill of Divorce, Jer. 3.1, 22.
yet) return unto me, says the Lord. Return ye backsliding Children, and I
will heal your backslidings. And if an awakened Conscience tells us our
Treacherous Dealings have been many, and we are no more worthy to be regarded
by him; yet the Invitation is, Hos. 14.2, 4.
Take unto you Words, and turn to the Lord, and say unto him, Take away all
iniquity, and receive us graciously: and then follow those reviving Words, I
will heal all their backslidings, and I will love them freely.

There are indeed two Passages in the Epistle to the Hebrews which seem to
oppose this; and it is sufficiently known how the Novatians abused them of Old;
and many serious, but weak Christians, have in all Ages been tormented through
a misunderstanding of them. Which therefore I shall largely consider, and so
much the rather, because being rightly interpreted, I am afraid they will
appear to have a very black Aspect on some of our present Deists. The one is,
Heb. 6.4, 5, 6.
That it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, etc. If they shall
fall away, to renew them again unto Repentance, seeing they Crucify to
themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open Shame. The other is of
the like Import: Chapter 10.26, 27.
For if we sin wilfully after that we have received the Knowledge of the Truth,
there remains no more Sacrifice for Sins; but a certain fearful looking for
of Judgment and fiery Indignation, which shall devour the Adversaries. This
passage, at the first View, seems to render the case of every Man wholly
desperate. And it would much more do so, if one word were exactly translated.
For whereas we render it, If we sin Wilfully, according to the Original it
should be translated, If we sin Willingly, (...).
which is the Softer word of the two. And who is there that dares to deny but
that he has been guilty of many Voluntary Sins, even since he has received
the Knowledge of the Truth?

Now I shall endeavor to prove, that both these Places are to be understood
barely of the Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, only it would be attended in
these Hebrews, if they should be guilty of it, with more aggravating
Circumstances, than that same Sin in the Pharisees was accompanied withal.
Because the Persons offending are supposed by the Apostle once to have been the
Professed Disciples of Christ, which the Pharisees never were; and because if
they should commit it, they would sin against greater Miracles for the proof of
Christianity, since the more plentiful Effusion of the Holy Ghost after the
Ascension of Christ.

For here is the Characteristical Note whereby our Blessed Savior has
distinguished the Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost from all other Sins and
Blasphemies whatsoever, viz. the Unpardonableness of it. In the former of these
Places it is said, that it is Impossible to renew these men to Repentance: Which
is in other words to say, it is Impossible they should be forgiven. For why is
it, that the Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall never be forgiven, but
because it is impossible they should ever Repent who have been guilty of it? And
then the Apostle in the very next words does oppose them that should be guilty
of this Sin, to that Ground which receives Blessing from God, Heb. 6.7, 8.
and compares them to that which bears thorns and briars, and is rejected and
nigh unto Cursing, and whose End is to be burnt. And in the latter place the
Apostle tells us, that as for these Men, Chapter 10.26.
there remains no more Sacrifice for Sins. Which words are a plain Allusion
to the Law of Moses, in which no Expiations were allowed or appointed for
Heinous and Presumptuous Sins, but he who was guilty of them, was to be put to
Death without any Favor. It Is as if the Apostle had said, There is no other
Sacrifice for Sins but what the Son of God has offered up; this they impiously
reject, and Christ never designed to make any atonement by his Blood for the
Sin I am now speaking of, and there is no other: And where there is no
Expiation, there can be no Pardon. He further adds, remains nothing for these
men, but a certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery Indignation which
shall devour the adversaries. What more Significant and Emphatical Words could
the Apostle use to express the Unpardonableness of their Crime? And yet as though
this had not been enough, he further compares their Case to that of those Men
who despised the law of Moses, died without Mercy. Moses's Law. For, says he,
Of how much sorer Punishment suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has
trodden under foot the Son of God, etc.

It Is further evident from the Nature of the Sin here mentioned, that the
Apostle is speaking of the Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost. The formal nature
of that dreadful Sin I take to be this, A malicious reproaching our Blessed
Savior as an Impostor and Deceiver, imputing the Miracles which he wrought by
the Spirit of God for the Confirmation of his Holy Doctrine and Mission, to the
Power of the Devil. A man would wonder, if there were not a thousand Instances
of the like kind, how so many Learned Men could make a shift so much to mistake
this clear and plain notion of this Sin, and give us so many Extravagant
Opinions concerning it, as widely distant from each other, as all of them are
from the Truth; who does but consider how St. Mark closes the Speech of our
Savior concerning it. For he winds up all with these remarkable words, Mark
3.30.
Because they said, he has an Unclean Spirit: which give us a clear Light
whereby to discern the nature of this Sin. But some rather choose, as an
Evidence of their great Strength, to endeavor to break through the Walls, than
turn the Key that is very plainly in the Door, and would easily open it, and
let them into the House.

Now that it is this Sin, viz. the Reproaching Christ as a Deceiver, the Apostle
is here speaking of, will appear from the Expressions which he uses concerning
it. He calls it a Crucifying the Son of God afresh, Chapter 6.6. Chapter 10.29.
and putting him to an open Shame: A treading him under foot, and counting his
Blood an unholy thing, and doing Despite to the Spirit of Grace. All which do
amount to this, That they esteemed Christ to be a Vile Malefactor, a wretched
Impostor; that his Miracles, which for the Matter of Fact they could not deny,
were wrought by the help of the Infernal Powers, and therefore he was
deservedly put to death; and had it been to do again, they would as readily
have done it, as ever the Malicious Jews did.

Moreover, the Sin here spoken of, in one of the Places, Chapter 6.6.
is called a falling away, and that from the Principles of the Doctrine of
Christ, which in the Verses immediately foregoing he had newly mentioned; Ver.
1, 2.
i. e. a total Renouncing of the Christian Faith, and Returning either to
Judaism or Paganism, which these Hebrews were in great danger of, and which
it is the apparent Design of this Epistle to fortify them against. And though in
the other place it be called only in the General a Sinning Wilfully or
Willingly, Chapter 10.26.
yet thereby the same thing is meant. For just before the Apostle had been
exhorting them to hold fast the Profession of their Faith without wavering,
forsaking the Assembling of themselves together, as the manner of some was;
Ouvert-Act and Sign of their Apostasy. And then these Words are brought in, For
if we sin wilfully, etc. i. e. If we cast away the Profession of our Faith,
forsake the Christian Assemblies, and renounce the Doctrine of Christ.

Now it is worthy of our careful Observation, that the Heathens, but especially
the Jews, were so implacably bent against our Blessed Lord, that though a
Christian did desert the Assemblies of the Faithful, and offer to join with
them in their Judaical or Pagan Religion and Worship, yet this alone would not
suffice; But besides this, they required an express Abjuring, and Reviling, and
Blaspheming Christ as an Impostor. And without this, their Rage was never
satisfied; and to speak in the modern Language, they never thought they had
fully performed all the necessary Duties of New Converts. Acts 26.11.
St. Paul tells us, that when he persecuted the Christians, 1 Timothy 1.13.
being exceeding mad with Rage, he compelled them to Blaspheme, as he Himself
also did. And giving the Corinthians a Character whereby to distinguish between
Divine and Diabolical Spirits, 1 Cor. 13.3.
I give you to understand (Says he) that no man speaking by the Spirit of God,
calls Jesus Accursed; which does plainly imply, that it was very usual for
men to do so in that Age, for otherwise this Note of his would have been of no
manner of Service to them. Pliny, in his Epistle to Trajan, informs him what
was the Ordeal Fire by which he tried those who were suspected and accused,
whether they would disown Christianity, not only by proposing to them to
worship the Heathen Gods, and the Image of the Emperor, but also by demanding
of them whether praeterea Christo maledicerent, they would also revile Christ.
And he further adds concerning those that fell in that hour of Temptation, that
they not only worshipped the Pagan Idols and Trajan's Image, but also that Ii
and Christo maledixerunt, they reviled Christ. And Justin Martyr Apol. 2d. p.
72. Edit. Paris.
tells us, That Barchochebas, the Ringleader of the Jewish Rebellion, did order
the Christians to be severely punished, unless they would not only deny Christ,
but blaspheme him too. And Polycarp being required, in order to save his Life,
to reproach Eusebius. Hist. l. 4. c. 15.
Christ, replied, How can I Blaspheme my King and Savior.

And our Learned Harm. of N. Test. p. 289, 290. Vol. 1.
Lightfoot says, That as early as about the 10th or 11th Year after our
Savior's Ascension, Rabban Gamaliel and the Sanhedrin appointed a new Prayer,
in which was a Petition to God to destroy the Heretics, i. e. the Christians;
and this he set among the Common Prayers, and appointed it to be in every man's
Mouth. And that the Jews had their Emissaries every where abroad, that to their
utmost cried down the Gospel -- and blasphemed it, and Christ that gave it. Of
this (says he) there is Testimony abundant in the New Testament, and in their
own Writings.

So much shall suffice to prove, that it is the Blasphemy against the Holy
Ghost; but a more Aggravated one than that of the Pharisees, that is meant in
both these Places. And if any of our Modern Deists have been maliciously guilty
of this Sin unto death, I leave them to God.

But provided a man has not gone so great a Length as this is, how many soever
his Sins and Backslidings from God have been, yet on a renewed deep and
Sincere Repentance, and a lively Faith in the Blood of Christ, they shall be
remitted. Though I must add in the words of Moses, Exodus 8.29.
Let not Pharaoh deal deceitfully with God any more. For if this Grace be
turned into Wantonness, though God forgive Men, Ps. 99.8.
yet he may and will take vengeance upon their Inventions.

And this naturally leads me to the Last thing which remains to be spoken unto.

VI. to what Degree God will pardon those whom he does forgive. It is evident,
that he continues many Old Punishments, and sends New, and sometimes very
severe ones, on those that are truly Penitent. This was undeniably the Case of
David, 2 Samuel 12.9, 10, 11.
Wherefore have thou despised the commandment of the Lord, to do evil in his
sight? Now therefore the sword shall never depart from thine house, because
thou have despised me, etc. Thus says the Lord, Behold, I will raise up evil
against thee out of thine own house, etc.

And Death at last seizes them, as well as the rest of Mankind, which is
generally looked upon as the standing Mark of God's Displeasure against Sin.
And how can mere Reason assure me, that that shall put a final Period to all my
Miseries, that there are not some very severe Penalties yet behind for me to
endure in the other World? The Generality of men have trembled at the thoughts
and fears of future Vengeance. Lucretius -- At men's sibi conscia facti
Praemetuens adhibet stimulos terretque flagellis,
Nec videt interea, qui terminus esse malorum
Possit, nec qui sit poenarum denique finis;
Atque eadem metuit magis haec ne in morte gravescant. Lucret.

himself represents a guilty Mind as very jealous that Death was not the End of
Misery, but the Beginning of greater Evils. And therefore among other Replies
which the great Patron of mere Natural Religion makes to those who might
object, that Repentance was no Satisfaction to Divine Justice, this is one; If
any -- Si ulterior aliqua irrogari debeat poena, Deum Summum post hanc vitam,
ad tempus aliquod breve, vel etiam diuturnum, Supplicium de peccatoribus Sumere
posse. Herbert de Relig. Gentil. p. 199.
further Punishment ought to be inflicted, God may inflict it on Sinners for a
shorter or a longer time after this Life. Such a Notion as this is, did obtain
among the Heathen, as is acknowledged by their Advocate Id. p. 196. it. 208.
, and is too plain to be denied.

Were it not for Scripture, Purgatory would not seem to be an absurd Doctrine;
The Imperfection of Good men's Repentance, would incline one to suspect, that
after this Life, they might be cast into the Fire again, for the further
burning up that Dross that still adheres to them. (But of this, more in the
next Chapter.) And I do not yet see, but that, if the Scriptures be laid aside,
I may as well argue from the Instances of God's Severity in this Life, and from
the undergoing a very painful Death, and sometimes a bloody, cruel and untimely
one, which is the lot of many true Penitents, as well as others, That God does
not, and will not, pardon men, though they do Repent; As another may argue from
the Instances of his Common Bounty and Kindness to Wicked men, That he will
pardon them, if they do.

Moreover, by the Light of Nature we cannot attain to a well-grounded
Confidence, that if God should turn away his Wrath from us, he will, besides
this, receive us into the Arms and Embraces of his Love; become a Friend, as
well as cease to be an Enemy; not only refrain from Chastizing, but also feast
a Returning Prodigal; besides the laying of the Storm, cause the Sun to shine,
and lift up the light of his holy Countenance on our Souls, and bless us with a
sense of his Loving Kindness, which is better than Life. Though David was so far
reconciled to Absalom as not to Execute him, yea to permit him to return to
Jerusalem, yet for a long time he would not Suffer him to see his Face.

But here Revelation does thoroughly deliver us from all our Melancholy Fears:
For it assures us, that though God continue Old Afflictions, or lay New ones on
those whom he forgives, yet it is only for their Spiritual and Eternal
Advantage, to purge out their Corruptions, to exercise and improve their
Graces. That all the Strokes he gives them are like those of a Statuary on his
ill-shaped Marble, to bring them into a beautiful Image and Form, and so make
them more meet to grace and adorn the Heavenly Building which they are designed
for. That they shall never be in Heaviness, unless there be a Necessity for it.
That God will remember their Frame and his own Promise, and therefore never
suffer them to be tempted above what they are able to bear; as a Gardener by
his Glasses defends his young and tender Plants from those rough and cold Winds
which they cannot well endure. And if our Danger be Extraordinary, so shall his
Assistance also be. Act. 7.56.
When the Jews gnasht on St. Stephen with their Teeth, and were ready to devour
him, the Heavens were opened, and he saw Christ Standing at the right hand of
God. In all other places of the New Testament he is represented as Sitting
there. How comes he at this time to be seen in a different Posture? St. Stephen
was now in very great Danger. And so great was our Savior's Concern for him on
this account, that, as if the Throne of Glory had now been uneasy to him, he
rises up, and is seen standing at the right hand of his Father, that he might
be in a greater readiness to afford that Help to his distressed Servant, which
his present Circumstances did so loudly call for. The Scripture tells us, Psalm.
89.32.
That though he visit their Iniquities with a Rod, and their Transgressions with
a Stripe, yet his Loving Kindness he will never take away from them. That if it
be not apparently their own Fault, he will manifest himself to them, Joh. 14.21.
and fill them with that Peace which passes all Understanding. Phil. 4.7.
And there have been many in all Ages who have practiced upon and lived up to
the Principles of Christianity, and in so doing have found this to be true by a
long and comfortable Experience: Yea, not a few have fed on this Heavenly
Manna, that once were some of the Chiefest of Sinners, who, when they were
first awakened, have lain under dreadful Agonies of Conscience, and, one would
have thought, even after their sincere Conversion, should have gone drooping
and mourning all their days to their very Graves. Indeed a constant lively
Sense of their pasts Sins has continued engraven on their Spirits, but yet
they have been freed from that Distress and Terror of Soul which once they
labored under. As the Print of the Nails and Spear remained in our Savior's
Hands and Side, (for unbelieving Thomas put his Finger into 'em) but not with
that Anguish and Torment which they caused in him when he hung upon the Cross.
Yea, Gal. 6.16.
walking according to Rule, Peace, according to the Promise, has been upon
them, and they have been filled with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory. And if
it has not been thus with others, it is not the fault of Christianity, but of
the Professors of it.

CHAP. II. Of a Future State of Bliss.
THis is what no Wise and Thinking Man, but must be deeply concerned about, and
cannot choose but be very uneasy in his own Mind if he has not some clear
Account of it, which he may securely depend upon. For,

We are capable of subsisting in another State, and of being either very happy,
or very miserable in it, if God so please. There can be no rational Doubt of
this, but that the same Almighty Power and Providence, which brought us into,
and has kept us in this World so long, sometimes Comforting, and at other
times Afflicting us, can do the like in the next, and that in much higher
Degrees, and to all Eternity if he please. And,

As Reasonable Creatures, we have a Prospect of, and a Concern for, Futurity.
It is the Privilege of our Natures, that we can move this way or that, step
back in our own Thoughts to what is past, and forward also to what is yet to
come. And every Wise man will be frequently looking before him, often thinking
what is like to be his State hereafter.

And in all Ages all Sorts of Men, as far as we Certainly know, in all Nations,
though never so Ignorant and Brutish, Wicked and Barbarous, opposite to or remote
from each other, have agreed in this, though in a very few things besides, viz. A
Persuasion that there is a Future State of Happiness and Misery. Whether this
was the Effect of Tradition, or the Conclusion of their own Reason, or whether
it was derived down to us, together with our Being from our First Parents, the
Notion of it being engraven on them with a Divine Hand, and we taking the
Impression, being wrought off from them; I shall not now dispute. The matter of
Fact is certain, and that is sufficient to make any Man deeply concerned about
it, seeing it is the Common Sense of all Mankind; and that so much the rather,
because,

As Lovers of our Selves, we cannot choose, but earnestly desire to enjoy the
one and avoid the other. And yet,

As Sinners, we cannot but know our selves to be unworthy of the Former, and
very Liable to the Latter. And therefore Certainty in this matter is desirable
on that Account: As also,

Because of its mighty Influence upon our Conduct here in this World. If there
be no other Life but this, it would be our Prudence to make as much of it as we
can, without any great Strictness and Nicety, because it is our All. Xenophon
(...). Xenoph. Opera. Edit. Paris. p. 237. This Passage, together with the
foregoing Parts of his Speech that introduce it, Tully thus imperfectly
translates: Apud Xenophontem autem moriens Cyrus Major haec dicit, Nolite
arbitrari, O mihi charissimi Filii, me cum a vobis discessero nusquam aut
nullum fore, etc. -- Quare si haec ita sunt, fic me colitote ut Deum: Sin una
est interiturus animus cum corpore, vos tamen Deos verentes, qui hanc omnem
pulchritudinem tuentur and regunt, memoriam nostri pie inviolateque servabitis.
Tully de Senectute, Edit. Schrevelii, p. 1264.
brings in Cyrus, when hastening to his End, after he had spoken of his Soul's
subsisting and being happy after Death, yet saying, If these things are so, as
I do think, then reverencing my Soul follow my Advice: But if they are not so,
but the Soul dies with the Body, Yet however reverence the Gods. Methinks the
Speech is as weak as the Man; and there is no more of Force or Authority in the
Words, than of Majesty in the dying King that uttered them. The Generality of
Men will be strongly tempted to think, there is much more Sense in that
Epicurean Saying, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we die, and drop into the
void and empty Space where things unborn do lie.

But if there be another State, we must walk by other Rules and Measures. And
how shall we apply our Selves to the Use of Means, when we are at a loss about
the End? How can the Mariner steer his Vessel so as to gain his Port, in a
cloudy Season, when he can see neither Sun, Moon, nor Stars?

Assurance in this matter is also requisite for our Support and Comfort in this
life. Burnet 's Theory of the Earth. Archaeolog. Part II. Chapter V.
It is the vain Imagination of a modern Poetic Philosopher, that the Face of
the Primitive Ante-Diluvian Earth was smooth, regular and uniform, and the
whole Year was nothing but one Perpetual Spring without any Rain. We are sure
there has been no such Golden Age since the Memory of Man. Spring and Autumn,
Summer and Winter, Sunshine and Clouds, Fair Weather and Foul divide our Year;
and the Earth, since the Flood, is very uneven, and broken in many places; an
exact Emblem of the State of those who dwell upon it. We are born to Troubles,
Job 5.7.
as the Sparks fly upward; and may speedily be in such deplorable
Circumstances, that we can have nothing to fetch any Relief from, unless we can
draw it down from Heaven. We may die in a few Moments, and must within the
compass of a few Years: And it will be very dismal in such an Hour, for a Man
to feel himself dropping in the Dark, and not know where it is that he is like
to fall.

Lastly, The more Holy and Serious Men are, the more Inquisitive be they about,
the more Desirous of, a future State of Bliss. The Notions of it which are
impressed on their Minds, are more fresh and quick according to Men's
Improvement in Piety; like Letters that are cut in the Bark of a young Tree; as
that grows bigger, so do they grow larger and fairer every day. It Is with Holy
Souls as with Men at Sea, the violent Agitations of the stormy Element, wherein
they Sail, make them Sick and Weary of this present Posture of Affairs, and
earnestly long to be in a better and more settled Place. It is not more natural
for a Seed, when it is quickened, to cleave its way through the Clods of the
Earth, and lift up its head into the free and open Air; than it is for the good
Principle, proportionably to its Increase in the Soul, to shoot up in fervent
Desires and Breathings after the Heavenly State. Upon all these Considerations,
a satisfactory Account of it cannot but be very desirable. And though a senseless
Logg may, yet a Considering Man cannot be carried down the swift and hasty
Stream, without many Thoughts, Whither am I going? And how is it like to be
with me in that other World, to which I am making such visible and daily
Approaches?

But now if we cast away our Bibles, we throw our Compass overboard. For,

I. Assurance that there is a Future State of Bliss. About this the Heathens,
who wanted Divine Revelation, were at a very great Loss. They had such a Notion
among them, some Glimmering Apprehensions of it; they inclined to it as a
Probable Opinion, and wished it were true; but could not be very Confident of
it.

I grant indeed, as Learned Men have well observed, that the Later
Stillingfleet's Orig. Sac. p. 500.
Platonists of the Sacred Succession, out of the School of Ammonius, have
written with another Air, and in a much higher Strain of this as well as some
other important Subjects, than those that went before them. But it is not
unknown at what Fire they lighted their Tapers. They suddenly grew rich by the
Spoils they had gotten out of the Holy Scriptures, which yet they had not the
Honesty to own they had taken thence: But disguised their Notions by giving
them a peculiar Turn, that it might be thought, what they had transplanted from
the Sacred Writings, did Originally grow in their own Gardens.

And I do not deny but that sometimes the Older Philosophers express themselves
with some Briskness and Confidence. But then they assert, and do not solidly
prove it; and we have little reason to believe them, because at other times
it is plain they did hardly believe themselves in what they said. They have
betrayed a great Doubtfulness of Mind about it, and that in such a Season, when
they most of all needed a firm Persuasion of it as a warm Cordial at their
Hearts; in the midst of Troubles and Dangers, and when they were on the
Confines of the Grave: Let my Fellow Soldiers Congratulate me when I am dead,
(as Xenophon brings in Cyrus, speaking in his last Moments) because (...).
Xenoph. (...). inter opera, p. 238.
then I shall be in safety, and nothing can hurt me, whether I shall be with
God, or be reduced to Nothing: But which of these two should be his Case, was
Somewhat of a Doubt with him.

I cannot but pity the Distress of Soul that Socrates must needs be in for this
very reason, when he was on the Point of Martyrdom for the Unity of the
Godhead. Though, by the way, he was but a sorry Martyr for it, who in Prison
asserted a Plato Apol. Socr. p. 27.
Plurality of Gods, and with his dying Breath ordered his Friend to offer for
him a Plato's Phoedo, p. 118. Edit. Serrani.
Cock to Aesculapius; and so the last thing that he did, was to disown that
Fundamental of all Religion for which it is pretended that he suffered. And as
he was thus divided in his own Mind about the One God, so was he no less about
the Future State. The very last words which Plato makes him speak to his
intimate Friends in his Apology, are these: I must speedily die, but you shall
continue to live; but who shall be in better Circumstances in a little while,
You or I, is uncertain to every one but to God Apolog. p. 42.
alone. Tully indeed does endeavor to fetch him off: For, says he, that which
he says no one knows but the Gods alone with whom it should be better, he
himself knew; for he had said it before: Referring to that Quod praeter Deos
negat scire quenquam, id scit ipse, utrum melius sit. Nam dixit ante: Sed suum
illud nihil ut affirmet, tenet ad extremum. Tusc. Quaest. l. 1. p. 1063.
Passage of Socrates which he had newly quoted, I have great hopes that it will
go well with me, etc. (of which more presently), but he still to the last
observes his usual way of affirming nothing. The same do those two Learned Men,
In notis ad Apolog. Socratis, p. 41.
Serranus and Concordia Rationis and Fidei, p. 156.
Huetius, offer in his behalf; and that he does herein no more than what he
ought, having set up for the first Author of Doubting and Questioning every
thing; and so does but maintain the Character which he had assumed; and does
only accommodate himself to the Opinion of others, and the Hypothesis of the
Vulgar with whom he had to do; but that otherwise there was nothing which he
was more confident of. But this is but a very lame Excuse for him. I grant
indeed he does several times say that he does strongly hope he shall go to the
Apolog. p. 40. Phoedo, p. 63. it. p. 80, 81. it. p. 115. See this also in
Tully. Tus. Qu. l. 1. p. 1066.
Gods, and to the Seat of the Blessed, etc. But then he says no more
concerning Himself than he does concerning the SWANS: For, says he, when They
are sensible that they must die, as they sang before, they then do it more than
ever, rejoicing that they are a going to that God (...). Plato's Phoedo, p. 84,
85.
whose Servants they are. Now in spite of the Oracle, we may venture to say,
That he who talks of going to God in no other Sense than a dying Bird does, is
not a very Wise and Knowing man, nor like to be a very Happy one. But he
further adds, That Dying (...). Id. p. 85.
Swans do sing, because they belong to Apollo; and baving a sort of Prophetic
Instinct, they foresee the good things of the Future State, and thereupon they
are far better pleased with their last Day, than with any whatsoever in the
foregoing part of their Lives. And I reckon my self a Fellow Servants with
these Creatures, and to be Consecrated to the same God which they are dedicated
unto; and that I have not less of a Spirit of Divination than they,
communicated to me from him our Common Master, and that I shall not depart this
Life in a more Melancholy manner than they do. I think the God, the Birds and
the Philosopher, are all of a Feather, and very well matched.

But besides this, he does at every turn put in so many cold and qualifying
Passages, as plainly show he was like a Blind man, that gropes and feels out
his way, and moves with great Fear, not knowing where his next Step shall be:
For, says he, to fear Death is nothing else but for a man to seem to be Wise,
when he is not really so: For no man Apolog. p. 29.
KNOWS but that it MAY be to him the greatest Good. But then it may be the
greatest Evil for ought any one can tell; and the way to cure Men of this Fear,
had been roundly to have asserted, and solidly to have proved, but that was
more than he could do, that Death will be to them very great Gain and
Advantage. And presently after he adds: In this I differ from many; and if in
any thing I would affirm Ib.
my self to be Wiser than the rest of Mankind, it should be in this, That as I
do not well understand the things which belong to the Future Invisible State,
so I am sensible that I don't know them. But this I do certainly know, that to
injure and rebel against any that is our Superior, whether it be God or Man,
is a piece of very great Wickedness. But as for those things which I do not
know whether they are Good or Evil, I will never fear or avoid them, rather
than those things which I do certainly know to be Evil. Where we plainly see,
that notwithstanding his Skeptical Humor in which he did greatly delight and
indulge himself, yet some things he did certainly know, and they are
contra-distinguish'd from what he was not assured of, and which are the things
relating to the Future State. The same we may observe in another Place. What
(says he) would any one have me in a sneaking manner from a fear of that
Punishment which Melitus would fain bring me to (viz. Death) which I profess
that I do not know whether it be Id. p. 37.
Good or Evil for me; to choose that which I do certainly know to be Evil?
meaning thereby a Voluntary Submission to a Perpetual Imprisonment, Banishment,
or a Fine, which would have been a tacit Acknowledgment of his Guilt. Again, a
little after, (says he) I have great Hopes that Death will be Gain to me: For
one of these two things will follow upon it, either that then a man will have
no Id. p. 40. See this also translated by Tully. Tusc. Quaest. p. 1063.
manner of Sense of any thing at all, or else, as it is SAID, he will be
translated into another Place. And yet once more in the self-same Page, IF to
dye, be to go to another Place, and the things which are reported are true,
that all who have departed this Life are there, what greater Good can there be?
To which having spoken somewhat of the Condition of Good men after Death, he
adds these very remarkable words, If these things are true (...). Apolog. Socr.
p. 41.
, i. e. if I were sure they were so, I would willingly dye over and over.
Again, says he, I hope to go to Good men, though I will not boldly affirm it.
But that I shall go to the Gods Lords who are very good, if I would confidently
aver any thing in matters of this nature, this should be it. After this (...).
Plato's Phoedo, p. 63.
Plato brings in his Friend Simmias replying thus upon him, I am of the same
mind with you, (...). Plato's Phoedo, p. 85.
O Socrates, that it is altogether Impossible, or at least exceeding Difficult
to arrive at any Certainty in these Matters, while we are in this Life. -- And
therefore we must diligently do one of these two things, Either learn from
others, or find out by beating our own Brains, how these matters are: Or if
this be Impossible to be done, then take up with the best of Humane Accounts,
and least liable to be confuted, that is to be had, that by the Help thereof as
by a Vessel we may sail through the Dangers and Difficulties of this present
Life; unless a man can get a better and a Safer means of Conveyance, and that
is a DIVINE WORD. After this Socrates addressing himself to prove the
Immortality of the Soul, and the Future State, ushers in his Proofs with a long
Preface, telling his Friends, his chief Design was to persuade himself of their
Truth. But it seems it was more than he could do. For, among others, he has
these words: Phoedo, p. 91.
IF THE THINGS WHICH I SAY ARE TRUE, it is good to be persuaded of them: But if
nothing of a man does remain after he is dead, nevertheless this little time
which I have to live will be the more pleasant: And after Death, it will be no
disadvantage to me.

Upon this he endeavors to prove the Point as well as he could; and then, for
want of better matter, at large relates some of the Poetical Dreams about the
Future State; and thereupon concludes, as well he might, that it does not
become a man of Sense to aver, that what he has reported is true, etc.

Had not Socrates been really at a great Plunge, Plato would never have so far
transgressed the Rules of Decency which he well understood, and at other times
was wont to observe, as at every Turn to bring him in thus Hesitating and
Doubting: Especially considering the Weight of the Subject, and the
Circumstances of his Master, who now lay under the Sentence of Death. And a
Learned and Dying Man makes but an Odd Figure when he is brought in Dropping so
many Suspicious Words about the Future State, if he really be clear in his own
Mind about it. It looks more like Distrust and Fear, than Humility and Modesty.
And of all Men it was most intolerable in Socrates, who from an irksome Sense
of the miserable Uncertainty and Uselesness of other parts of Learning, set up
for a Reformer of Philosophy, and was altogether for Ethics, correcting the
Manners of Men, and promoting good Living in the World, the great Encouragement
whereunto is a Future Reward. For even Virtue it self, as Fair as it is, like
other Beauties, is not like to be warmly Courted by many, if it have no Dowry.
Add to all this, That he was not now talking to the Rabble, but discoursing
with his Intimate, Learned and Philosophical Friends, with whom he should have
dealt more openly and freely; and that so much the rather, because all along
they are brought in as much unsatisfied in their own Minds. From all which
Considerations it is evident, though he talked much, yet he knew but little of the
matter. And even for that also, it is not unlikely that he was beholden to
others. He (as well as they that succeeded him) resembled the New Moon, the far
greatest part of whose Face is covered with Darkness; and the small remainder
which is not so, shines with but a faint, pale, yea and a borrowed Light too.

If any one shall say, that Plato used an unaccountable Liberty in mingling so
much of his own Sentiments with the Speeches of Socrates, that like an
interpolated Book, it is hard to know what was his own, and what belonged to his
Master; I shall not deny it: Because I find, that, when Socrates himself heard
him once repeat his Diog. Laert. in vita Platonis, p. 207, 208. Edit. Colon.
Anno 1616.
Lysis, he cried out, How many things does this Young man feign me to speak?
For (says Laertius) he had written not a few things in the Person of his
Master, which he never said. But it will serve my Turn altogether as well,
whether it be the One or the Other. Either the Wise Socrates or the Divine
Plato, or rather both of them, did float up and down like an unsteady Vessel in
the Sea, that is tossed this way and that; they wandered in an Endless Maze of
wild Guesses and Conjectures at Random.

That Passage in Tully -- Se cum tempus mortis venisset, totos perituros. --
Nec tamen mihi sane quidquam occurrit, cur non Pythagorae sit and Platonis vera
Sententia. Ut enim rationem Plato nullam afferret (vide quid homini tribuam)
ipsa Auctoritate me frangeret. Tot autem rations attulit, ut velle caeteris,
sibi certe persuasisse videatur. Tusc. Quaest. l. 1. p. 1057.
is very observable, who having spoken of those little Philosophers, who
affirmed that Death was the total destruction of the whole Man, adds, Nothing
does occur to me to make me think the (contrary) Opinion of Pythagoras and
Plato is not true: For though Plato should produce no Reason at all (see what
Deference I pay to the Man) his Authority would quite bear me down. But he has
produced so many Reasons, that he seems Willing to persuade others, however
doubtless to persuade himself. So that in his Opinion he was little better than
a Wellwisher to the Cause. Let Us see whether He himself can do better. He had
as sharp an Eye as most Men ever had; and yet he introduces his Discourse on
this Argument with words to this effect: I am not going to utter Tusc. Quaest.
l. 1. p. 1053. -- Explicabo, nec tamen ut Pythius Apollo, certa ut sint and
fixa quae dixero, etc.
Oracles nor give Demonstrations, but inconsiderable Man that I am among many
others, I will give you my Guess as to what is likely: For I can go no further
than Probabilities. Let those talk of Certainties who profess themselves to be
Wise. Then he reckons up the several Opinions of the Philosophers: Some think
the Soul is extinguished with the Body, others that it is presently dissipated
after it has taken its leave of the Carkase, others that it remains in being a
long while, and others that it lasts always, etc. Now (says he) God knows
which of these Opinions is true; and which of them is most probable is a great
Question. And afterward having rejected the Opinion of Dicoearchus, Id. p.
1054.
that the Soul is nothing at all, says he, the Opinions of the rest give us
HOPE (if this be pleasing to you) that it is POSSIBLE that Souls when they
depart from their Bodies may go to Heaven as to their own House. To this his
Friend, who discourses with him, replies: I am very desirous it should be so;
and if it be not, yet I would fain be persuaded of it. And upon the
recommending Plato's Treatise of the Soul to him, his Friend replies: I assent
to what he says, Tusc. Qu. l. 1. p. 1054.
I know not how, while I am reading it: But when I have laid the Book aside,
and I begin to think with my self of the Soul's Immortality, all my Assent to
it slides away from me. Indeed the ARguments which Plato brings on this
Occasion, and which Tully has but too much honored by transcribing from him,
are almost all of them so weak and trifling, that I wonder how Cleombrotus,
when he heard him discoursing on that Subject, could be induced to leap from
him into the Sea, that he might presently be in the other State. Had I been his
Hearer, unless he could have produced stronger Proofs, and given a better
Account of the matter than he has done in his Dialogue of the Soul, I should
much rather have thrown Him than my self overboard, and have sent him into the
other World, that so he might thoroughly have informed himself about the
Subject he pretended to treat, but was so far from being a Master of. He talks
so weakly on this Head, that I think no man but one who is Non compos mentis,
would ever have brought in poor Cleombrotus as a Felo de se for Drowning
himself.

And in another place Tully brings in Cato after a long Discourse on this
Subject, winding up the whole in these Words: De Senectute at the end, p. 1265.
If it be an Error that the Souls of Men are Immortal, I am pleased to err, and
I will never, as long as I live, be beaten out of it: But if when I am dead (as
some little Philosophers think) I shall perceive Nothing; I am not afraid, lest
the Philosophers who are dead, should deride this Error of mine: But if we are
not Immortal, yet it is desirable for a Man in his proper time to be
extinguished. This cannot be excused by a Pretense that Tully speaks it not in
his own Person, but in Cato's: And that when a Man does personate another, he
must speak agreeably to his Character, though it be never so contrary to his own
real Sentiments. For he himself tells us in De Amicitia in the beginning, p.
1265.
another place, that he brings in Cato disputing of Old Age, because he did not
know a fitter Person; and that this manner of Writing in the borrowed Person of
Ancient and Illustrious Men has, he knows not how, more of Weight in it. And
therefore, says he, when I read my OWN Writings, I am sometimes so affected
with them, as though they were not my Sayings, but really Cato 's. So that under
the Covert of another's Name, he plainly writes his own Opinion. And a little
after in the same Book, having spoken of the speedy Return of the departed
Souls of very Excellent Men to Heaven, he cannot forbear adding: IF Id si ita
est, ut optimi cujusque animus in morte facillime evolet, etc. Sin autem illa
veriora, ut idem interitus sit animorum and corporum, nec ullus Sensus maneat,
ut nihil boni est in morte, sic certe nihil mali. Id. p. 1267.
this be so, then Scipio 's Soul to be sure is got thither: But IF it be TRUER,
that Body and Soul do utterly perish together, and there be no remaining Sense
at all; then as there is no Good in Death, so there is no Evil in it.

Seneca, when he was dangerously Sick, labors to Comfort himself against the
Fears of his Dissolution with this sorry Consideration, That Death Ep. 54.
would put him into the same Condition he was in ere he was born; that Men are
like a Candle, which is in no worse State after it is put out than before it was
lighted. At another time, says he, I was pleased in enquiring into the Soul's
Eternity Ep. 102.
, or rather to Believe it: For I did easily believe the Opinions of Great Men,
who were better at promising what was very grateful to me, than at proving it.
When he would comfort Ad Marciam, Chapter 19.
Marcia for the Loss of her dear Son, says he, That may be Good or Evil that
is Something; but that which is Nothing, and reduces all things into Nothing,
delivers us up to no Fortune; nor can he be Miserable who no longer is at all.
And again upon the same Occasion, says he to another, It may be he Epist. 63.
the last words.
is gone before; IF what Wise men have said, be true, and there be a Place to
receive us after Death. But this is poor Consolation, cold as the Grave wherein
a man's Friend is laid. Plutarch speaks no more confidently when he endeavors
to comfort Consol. ad Apol. Edit. Xylandri, p. 109, etc.
Apollonius upon the untimely Death of his very promising Son; he adopts that
Saying of Socrates, That Death is like a deep Sleep, or a long Traveling into
a foreign Country, or else it is a total Destruction of Body and Soul; and
speaks to the last as well as the two other, that he may demonstrate Death to
be no Evil. This was one of the Ingredients he uses to make a Plaster to heal
the Sore of his distressed Friend. And the best that he could say was, IF the
Saying of the Ancient Poets and Philosophers be true P. 120.
, as it is Probable that it is, that Good men are advanced when they die, and
some of them, as it is reported, more highly than others, and there be a certain
Place appointed for pious Souls in which they live, you have reason to hope
well concerning your Son that he is got among 'em.

As for Death, (says Antoninus, l. 7.. 32.
Antoninus) whether it be a Dissipation of the Elements, or a Reduction into
Atoms, or an Annihilation, it is either an Extinction or a Transmigration: Or,
as others read it, it is either Gataker in locum, p. 273.
a Dissipation of the Elements, Resolution into Atoms, Annihilation, Extinction
or Transmigration. A Saying that much resembles that of Seneca Contemnite
mortem, quae vos aut finit aut transfert. Seneca de Provid. chapter 6.
, Despise Death, which either ends or translates you.

He that would see more of Antoninus's Uncertainty, let him turn to the Places
Lib. 3.. 3. l. 4.. 14. and 21. l. 6.. 24. l. 7.. 50. l. 8.. 25. and 58. l. 10..
58. l. 12.. 5.
cited in the Margent.

To these Philosophers I will add the famous Historian Vita Agricolae, ad finem.
Tacitus, who, speaking in very affecting Terms concerning the Death of his
Father-in-Law Agricola, drops this Passage: IF there be any place for the
Ghosts of Good men; IF, as Wise men define, the Souls of Great Persons die not
with the Body, in Peace may thou rest, etc.

Of the same Strain is the Speech of that noble Roman Lady Veturia, a Woman of
an admirable Wit and Address, and whose Spirit was altogether as great as her
Quality; who, among other Arguments with which she diverted her Son Coriolanus
from ruining his own Country, when it was entirely at his Mercy, makes use of
this, That if she could but succeed in her Enterprise of prevailing with him to
lay aside his, she should not only gain Immortal Honor here upon Earth, but
also, IF there be a place, says she, -- (...). Dionys. Halicarn. l. 8. p. 522,
523. Edit. Wichelii.
for the Reception of Humane Souls after they are dismissed from the Body, mine
shall go not to a subterraneous and dark one, where it is SAID that miserable
Wretches are lodged, nor to the Plains of Lethe, as they are called; but to the
High and Pure Ether, where it is REPORTED that they who are descended from the
Gods, do lead a blessed and happy Life. I am not without some Grounds of
Jealousy, that the Whole of her Speech, whereof these Words are a part, as it is
set down, was made for her by Dionysius, according to the usual custom of most
Historians, who are wont to put Words into the Mouths of those Persons whose
Actions they relate, and don't so much tell us what They spoke, as what
Themselves would have said, had they been to have made a set Oration under the
same Circumstances; wherein they frequently over-do, make them talk much finer
than it can rationally be supposed They are capable of doing; lay on so much
Paint, that it easily appears to an observing Eye to be the work of Art, and
not of Nature: But be it the Incomparable Veturia, or the Grave Dionysius, it is
not very material. It Is evident the Person that spoke, was very doubtful about
a Future State.

Now if it were thus with the most Learned and Sagacious Men, with the most
Elevated and Exalted Souls; how sad in all likelihood must it needs be with the
Body of Mankind? If they who had got the Higher Ground above the Heads of the
Common People, and had the Advantage too of standing on one another's
Shoulders, could see such a little way before 'em; what shall we think of the
little Creatures that sat below? In short, we do not find that Everlasting
Life in the other State was in any Heathen Nation an Article of Religion
established by Law. It was but slightly touched on by Philosophers when ever
they did name it, which was but seldom, as a Motive to excite Men to the
Practice of Virtue. Other Arguments they use and trust to, which they did
better understand; and it is Prudence for a man not to urge those Reasons which
are strongest in themselves, but rather fight with that Weapon which he is a
Master of, and knows how best to manage. And it is a shrewd Observation of St.
August. de Civit. Dei, l. 4. c. 22. l. 6. c. 9.
St. Austin, That though the Heathens had abundance of Gods, to whom they did
particularly apply themselves, to one for one Blessing, to another God for
another Favor; and therefore the Knowledge of the Gods was necessary, that
they might direct themselves to them aright, and not ask Water from the God of
Wine, etc. Yet Varro himself, who was very well skilled in the matter, has not
mentioned so much as one God, whom they were to pray unto for Eternal Life.

It Is true indeed, we who have been taught from our very Infancy by the Gospel,
that there is such a Place as Heaven, and so glorious a Reward for the
Righteous in the other State, may be apt to think, that we have hit upon it by
the Exercise of our own unassisted Reason, or that it was very easy so to have
done. But herein it fares with us, as oftentimes it does with a Studious Man,
who having familiarly conversed with good Authors, does verily think some of
those Notions and Expressions too which he has learnt from them, are the
genuine Offspring of his own Mind and Thought. Just as Corn that springs up in
some places, seems to the Husbandman to be the natural Product of the Ground,
he having never sowed it with that sort of Grain; the Seeds of which, in
Reality, were taken up by the Wind from another Field whereto they did
originally belong, and invisibly dropped down there. I cannot better express my
Sense of this than in the Words of a modern Author, who herein speaks very
well, though judging by the main Design of his Book, I take him to be a very
Singular Unitarian, seeing he cuts off all the necessary Articles of our Faith,
excepting that of the Belief of Jesus to be the Messiah; though I charitably hope
he does not set Christianity on one single Foot, that it may be the more easily
pushed down. Reasonab. of Christianity, p. 276, 277, 278.
When Truths are known to us, says he, we are apt to be favorable to our own
Parts; and ascribe to our own Understandings the Discovery of what in Truth we
borrowed from others: -- and Truths which we are now satisfied of, we conclude
our own Faculties would have led us into without any Assistance. -- A great
many things we have been bred up in the Belief of, from our Cradles, (and are
Notions grown Familiar, and as it were Natural to us under the Gospel) we take
for unquestionable obvious Truths, and easily demonstrable, without considering
how long we might have been in Doubt or Ignorance of them, had Revelation been
silent: And many are beholden to Revelation who do not acknowledge it. But
Revelation is little beholden to such ungrateful Creatures, how much soever
they may be to it.

If we lay that aside, I do not see how a Man can be fully satisfied concerning
a Future State of Bliss. We may indeed, by the Light of Nature and Reason, be
sure that there is a State of Future Punishments, because of the great and
almost uninterrupted Prosperity of many wicked Men in this World. As sure
therefore as I am, that there is a God and a Providence, so sure I am that
there will be a day of Reckoning with these Men, and they shall feel that
Vengeance hereafter, that does not overtake them here.

But by the mere Light of Reason, I cannot be fully assured that there is a
State of Future Rewards for good Men: For this great Bar and Objection lies
against it, That the best of Men are Sinners, and Great ones too; and have
deserved to suffer far worse things, upon that Account, than any they meet with
here. And Deliverance from that Wrath and Torment, which the best of Men are
liable to, and worthy of, in the next World; that, though alone, would be an
unspeakable Favor. We cannot certainly conclude more from the Goodness of God,
nor reflect upon him as an hard Master if he proceed no further. A vile
Criminal has abundant Reason to thank his Prince, if he give him his Life,
which he has forfeited over and over; and cannot with Modesty expect, besides
this, to be received into the Number of his special Favorites, and be highly
preferred by him.

But now the Gospel-Revelation does give us a full Assurance in this matter:
Christ has made it a Fundamental Article of our Faith, has established it as a
main Principle of his Religion: 1 John 2.25.
This is the Promise that he has promised us, even Eternal Life. He has not
only given us some dark Hints about it, but set it in a clear Light, and open
Day. 2 Timothy 1.10.
We do not gather it by a long Train of rational Inferences from what he has
said, which would make but little Impression: For as a Line, the further it is
drawn forth, the more does it waver and tremble; so the longer the Train of
Deductions is in matters of a Moral Nature, the more hovering is our Assent to
any Truth, and the less Efficacy has it on our Souls: And whatever the Learned
may do, yet the Common People have not Leisure or Capacity for the spinning of
a long and fine Thread. But Christ has plainly told us of this, and that not
once or twice only, or by the bye; but repeated it often, expressly and
designedly, so that we meet with it in almost every Page of the New Testament.

To the Promise there is annexed the Oath of God; not that this makes the
matter more certain in it self: For God can no more be guilty of Lying than of
Perjury. But the Oath is added to the Promise for our sakes, to create the
stronger Belief of it in us, whom Guilt makes so very jealous: Like the Public
Stamp on a piece of Silver, which does not increase the intrinsic Value of it,
but only makes it the more Current. God willing more Abundantly to show to the
Heirs of Promise the Immutability of his Counsel, Heb. 6.17, 18.
confirmed it by an Oath; that by two Immutable things in which it was
impossible for God to lie; i. e. to deceive us, we might have the stronger
Consolation. This Promise has also been ratified by the Blood of Christ,
whereby the whole of the New Covenant; and among the rest this, which is one of
the main Branches of it, has been Confirmed. Besides which, he has also given
us an unquestionable Pledge of it, in his own Resurrection, and Ascension into
Heaven, whither he is entered as our Forerunner; which is as fully testified to
us, as any Matter of Fact can possibly be, by all his Disciples, who could not
be deceived in such an Object of Sense; and were Men of such great Piety and
Honesty, that they would not deceive us if they could; and who sealed their
Testimony with their very Blood, Confirmed all that they said with the Loss of
their Lives, and all the Comforts of them. And there is this further
observable, That when Christ was Ascending, the Angels assured them who stood
by and saw it; This same Jesus, Act. 1.11.
which is taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye
have seen him go into Heaven. And the self-same Penman, in his Gospel (which
should have been immediately joined to the Acts of the Apostles, had it not
been for St. John's Gospel intervening) tells us the Manner of his Ascension:
Luke 24.50, 51.
He lifted up his hands, and blessed them: And while he blessed them, he was
parted from them, and taken up into Heaven. He shall so come in like manner,
when his Work of Intercession is finished; Our great High Priest shall come out
of the Holy of Holies, to Bless his People, and appear without Sin unto their
Eternal Salvation.

II. Greatness of it. If we could get above the Fears of Divine Wrath and
Vengeance in the next World, which it is hard for a Sinner to do, who knows God
and Himself; Yet what Ground should we have to hope for a much better Being and
Condition there, than we enjoy here? Especially for a Happiness so highly
surpassing it, as that which in the Gospel is propounded to us. If God should
not punish, yea if He should reward, yet a Guilty Creature cannot reasonably
promise himself a very Considerable Recompense from a Holy and Righteous God,
whom he has so highly offended, and whom, when he has done his best, he has
so poorly served.

We shall find the Wisest of the Heathens had but very gross Idea's, mean and
poor Notions of the Future State of Bliss. Sometimes they speak of it in
General Terms only, which was but a Cover for their Ignorance; and those too
not very lofty and towering ones. He that is afraid of Death (says De Seipso,
l. 8.. 58.
Antoninus) either fears the utter loss of all Sense; or else that he shall
have a Sense of a different Kind from what he now has: But if there be none
left, then thou shall have no Perception of any Evil at all. And that I think
is unquestionable. But he adds, If thou have another Sort of Sense, then thou
shall be another Kind of Animal, and shall not cease to live. Emperors are not
at leisure to answer every poor Enquirer; else any Man that has any Sense at
all, would presume to ask his Imperial Majesty what Sort of Animal he shall be;
and what Manner of Life he shall lead: And so much the rather, because many of
the Learned Philosophers tell us that departed Souls do enter into Brutes. And
as wild and unaccountable a Paradox as this may seem to be, yet it has been a
very Ancient Opinion, and spread very far, especially among the Wise men of the
East, where Burnet's Archaeol. l. 1. cap. 2. It. in Appendice, p. 353.
still it does greatly obtain to this very day. Pythagoras and his Followers,
on this Account, are reported to have forborne all sorts of Flesh, whether of
Birds or Beasts: And allowing them their Principle, none could justly blame
their Abstinence. For it is but an Odd thing for a Man to sit down to his Meat,
when, for ought he knows, he may Chop up his Father, or Swallow down his
Mother; yea, a man's beloved Wife, for any thing he can tell, may become nearer
and more intimate with him after her Death, than ever she was in her Life. She
that lay in his Bosom, may descend into his Entrails, turn into Nourishment,
and, in a Literal Sense, become One Flesh with him. And these Philosophers are
so very particular, as to tell us what Sort of Brutes departed Souls enter
into: Some into Bees Socrates in Platonis Phoedone, p. 81, 82. and Tim. Locr.
de Anima, p. 104. Macrob. in Somn. Scip. l. 1. chapter 9.
, others into Asses, etc. Now though a Man could reconcile himself to the
drudging laborious Life of the one, yet it would go very much against the Grain
to bear the cruel Stripes, and heavy Loads of the other. Nor should I very
heartily join in Bayles Dict. in Hali Beigh. out of Rycaut. p. 18.
that Man's Prayer, That my Soul, after Death, should have the Honor of
entering into a Camel, as Sober and Patient and Sweet an Animal as it is: For
it is a Laborious Life those Creatures lead, and a long Way they travel with a
Pack of Drugs from the East, much bigger than the Bunch on their Backs.

Plutarch, in his Consolatory Epistle to his Wife, on the Death of her little
Daughter, says, She is (...). Consolat. ad Uxorem, p. (Oporum) 611.
gone to a place where there is no Sorrow. But he has no better Proof of it
than the Customs and Laws of their Ancestors, which forbad them to use those
Funeral (...), and. Id. p. 612.
Rites in behalf of Infants, which they were wont to employ about Grown
Persons: For this, says he, would be unlawful, seeing they are translated into
a better and a more Divine Place. By the manner of arguing one would think this
were the Speech of the little Child before her Departure, not the Language of
her Grave Philosophical Father. But these are but General Words, let us come a
little to Particulars.

Cluverius De Antiqua Germ. l. 1. c. 32. p. 222.
tells us, that it was a Custom among the Celtae, the Galls, and the Albani,
which he proves out of Diodorus Siculus, Valerius Maximus and Strabo, to bury
some Pieces of Money with the deceased Party, and send some by him to their
Friends in the other State, for their Use there; and to lend their Acquaintance
Money to be repaid them there; and that this is a very common Custom among many
Heathen Nations to this day: As also to Hody of the Resurrection, p. 6, 32, 33,
46.
kill Camels on their Graves, Horses, Concubines and Butlers; and burn their
Garments and other Attire; or bury them and Household Stuff and Arms with them
for their Use when Lucian de Luctu, p. 432. Edit. Bened.
they came thither; and they could have no very Extraordinary Apprehensions of
the Happiness of Souls there, who were guilty of such a Practice as this. But
these were Barbarous People, as the Greeks in their abundant Civility to the
rest of Mankind were wont to call all the World besides themselves; though they
were Originally beholden to other Nations for all the Learning and Knowledge on
which they so much Valued themselves. Let us therefore see what these Sons of
Wisdom have to say to the Point in hand.

Homer may challenge the Privilege of being heard first, because of his Great
Antiquity, and his being the first Discoverer of the Elysian Fields. He brings
in Proteus thus speaking to Menelaus: The Gods shall send thee to the Elysian
Fields, which lie on the utmost parts of the Earth (...).
(...), etc.
Odyss. l. 4. v. 564.
, where thou shall live safe and happy; there being neither too great a
Quantity of Rain or Snow, or too long a Winter; but the blessed Inhabitants are
continually refreshed with the gentle Breathing of cool Breezes that come from
the Ocean. A good, dry, and warm place, comfortable enough for a naked Soul, or
one that has at best so thin and slight a Clothing as that of Ether must be
supposed to be. But a good Seat is not very desirable, without suitable Sports
and Diversion. And Virgil will inform us what they are. Some spend their time
in Wrestling Pars in gramineis exercent membra palaestris, Contendunt ludo, etc.

Virgil Aeneid. l. 6. v. 643.
. One would think he was describing other Fields, which I am loath to mention,
and not those of Elysium. Others in Singing and Dancing, the Happiness of a
Stage or a Playhouse. The Warlike Souls having put off their glittering Armor,
in a very peaceable manner are refreshing themselves, and their unbridled
Steeds. The Lances that were wont to be cruelly run through the Sides and
Hearts of their Enemies, are Mercifully stuck into the Ground only. And they
behold their Chariots with as much Pride and Pleasure as ever they rode in 'em
when they drove them over the Carkases of their fallen Enemies: For though they
have left their Bodies behind 'em, they have carried along with 'em the same
Secundum illum (Virgilium) res quoque leviores, quas viri exercuerant, etiam
post Corpus exercent. -- Quae gratia Curruum, etc. Macrob. in Somn. Scip. l. 1.
cap. 9.
Humors they had, whether Jocular and Pleasant, or Savage and Cruel.

Plutarch not having Cordials of his own strong enough to support the Spirits
of Apollonius for the Loss of his Virtuous Son, borrows one from Pindar, whom
he quotes, describing the State of the Pious after Death, to whom he would have
him believe the Departed Youth was gone; whose Happiness he describes in Words
to this effect: They do continually Plutarchi Consolat. ad Apollon. p. 120.
enjoy a clear Sunshine, when this Earth of ours is wrapped up in Darkness. The
Fields round about them are adorned with beautiful Roses, and shaded with Trees
that yield Frankincense, and bear Golden Fruit. Some sport themselves on
Horseback, others divert themselves with Music. The Country is always
pleasant, and so are they who dwell in it. And there are no other Clouds but
what arise from the Smoke of Incense, which they plentifully burn on their
Altars, whose sweet Odours at once refresh their Gods and themselves too.

But it may be some will say these were Poets, (yet Poets were their great
Divines Stillingfleet's Orig. Sacr. p. 57, 58.
of Old:) Let us therefore hear some of their grave Moral Philosophical
Writers. Plato brings in Socrates In Axiocho. Tom. 3. p. 371.
, giving a Description of the future Happy State which he learnt from Gobryas,
who had it from I know not what Brazen Tables, exactly resembling that of
Pindar; for which reason I shall not translate it. Though, in the Close, Socrates
confesses he is not sure that these Particulars are so, but only in the P. 372.
General, that the Soul, when it leaves the Body, goes to a place where it
lives free from Grief; but whether it be above or below, he knows not. Seneca
tells us that there the Ep. 102. Aliquando Naturae tibi Arcana retegentur, etc.
Secrets of Nature shall be opened; there shall be neither Night nor Shade; all
the Stars mingling their Lights together, and joining them as in one Common
Stock. And if this be so, the latter part of the Opinion of the Magi, which De
Iside, p. 370.
Plutarch from Theopompus informs us of, may be true, that after a bloody
Scuffle among the Gods for six thousand Years, at last Mankind shall be happy,
and neither need Food, nor cast a Shadow. But as for the Former part of it,
viz. their not wanting of Food, Tully is of another mind: And, in truth, no Man
talks so pleasantly on this Argument as he does: For he fancies that Separated
Souls will get a little above the Clouds and thick Exhalations of the Middle --
Necesse est ita feratur ut penetret and dividat omne Coelum hoc, in quo nubes,
imbres, ventique coguntur, etc. Tusc. Qu. l. 1. p. 1056.
Region of the Air, into a clear and warm place; which will be so agreeable,
that they will not attempt to climb higher; and there they shall be nourished
with the same Food with which the -- Eaque ei demum naturalis est Seeds eum ad
sui similem penetravit, in qua nulla re egens aletur, and sustentabitur iisdem
rebus quibus Astra sustentantur and aluntur. Id. Ib.
Stars are fed. Now it may be the Reader may long to know, but he will not long
to take his Commons with them, when I have told him what Sort of Diet it is,
those Heavenly Bodies are nourished by. It Is very Coarse, if De Not. Deorum, l.
2. p. 1134.
Tully himself, or Totum hoc Coelum, quod igneus ether, mundi summa pars,
claudit, omnes hae Stellae, quarum iniri non potest numerus, omnis hic
coelestium coetus; and (ut alia praeteream) hic tam prope a nobis agens cursum
Sol, omni terrarum ambitu non semel major, alimentum ex terreno trahunt, and
inter se partiuntur: nec ullo alio scilicet quam halitu terrarum sustinentur.
Hoc illis alimentum, hic pastus est, etc. Senec. Quaest. Not. lib. 6. c. 16.
Seneca may be believed: For it is no other than the thick and greasy Vapors
which Steam up from the Waters, or the Dunghill of this Earth on which we tread;
and a Man Man might justly fear the being starved among them: For as the Stars
are many, and very great, so they are hard Laborers; and therefore, as we
might reasonably suppose, if he had not told us, -- Tot Sydera tam exercitata,
tam avida per diem noctemque, ut in Opere, ita and in Pastu. Quaest. Not. l. 2.
cap. 5.
greedy Eaters too; and besides them, the Sun, who is much nearer (especially
according to his Opinion) and a very great Devourer, has nothing else to
nourish him but what he can plunder from this little Globe of ours. And that
the Music may be suitable to the Feast, the Separated Souls are entertained
there with the imaginary Quid? hic, inquam, quis est qui complet aures meas
tantus and tam dulcis Sonus? Hic est, inquit ille, qui intervallis conjunctus
imparibus, sed tamen pro rata portione distinctis, impulsu and motu ipsorum
orbium conficitur, etc. Tully in Somn. Scip. p. 1318. col. 2.
Harmony of the Spheres. But the Orator goes on: Profecto beati erimus, cum
corporibus relictis, and cupiditatum and aemulationum erimus expertes, etc.
Tusc. Qu. ubi supra.
There they shall be freed from Aemulation and Covetousness, (though in so great
a Scarcity of Provisions as must needs be among them, there is Temptation enough
to that Vice) and from the great Height of the Place have a notable Advantage
of better understanding the Heavenly Bodies, (who so unconscionably rob 'em)
and the whole Structure of this Earth, (which is so kind as to nourish them)
though so wretched a Place, one would think, should be no very pleasant Sight:
Especially considering what he pleases himself withal at another Time, that
when he dies he shall O praeclarum diem, cum ad illud divinum animorum
Concilium coetumque proficiscar, cumque ex hac turba and colluvione discedam.
De Senectute, p. 1264.
depart from this rude and disorderly Rout and Crew here below. And I confess
it is a desirable thing to get out of such a mad Crowd; but then it cannot be
very agreeable to a Wise and Serious Spirit to behold them at a Distance, no
more than to be among them. But then he shall be joined to Ib.
that Assembly and Council of Souls, and converse with those Famous Men, whom
he had known, and heard, and written of. This indeed is a noble Strain, one of
the best that I have observed among all the ancient Philosophers. But Socrates
said it before him, and from him he borrowed it: For Plato brings him in,
comforting himself with the Thoughts, that on his Removal hence he should be
with Orpheus and Musaeus, with Hesiod Plato's Apolog. Socr. p. 41.
and Homer. Now Poets he knew were pleasant Companions in this World, and I
suppose he might think they were so in the other also. He adds, that he should
be wonderfully pleased with the Society of Palamedes and Ajax; though I don't
very well understand what very agreeable Conversation there can be between a
Moral Philosopher on the one side, and a rough and boisterous Soldier on the
other. Especially, if according to the Notion of some of the Heathens, they
retain the same Delights and Humors there which they had here. For my own part,
I should not be very fond of the Company of Ajax, who, because he could not get
the Warlike Accoutrements of Achilles, the better to Murder other Men, grew so
mad thereupon as to kill Himself.

Hesiod (...), etc. Hesiod.
tells us, and Plato De Republ. l. 5. p. 468, 469.
falls in with him, and In Romulo, p. 36.
Plutarch, That Good Men, when they die, are turned into Demons. And so did
the Old Roman Divos and eds qui coelestes sempr habiti, colunto: and ollos quos
in Coelum merita vocaverint. Deorum Manium jura sancta sunto: Hos letho datos
Divos habento. Tully de Legibus, l. 2. p. 1196.
Laws. Though, as our Works, p. 631.
Learned Mede has observed, some departed Souls were mere Heroes, of an
Inferior Rank, but Novices for a time, and like Punies, not yet called to the
Bar. But as these made them Gods, so Musaeus and his Son as quoted, and one
would think approved too by Plato (...). Plato de Republ. lib. 2. p. 363.
, make them Brutes; for, according to them, they spend all their time in
Perpetual Revellings and Drunkenness; the Healths go round, till their Heads do
so too, and Everlasting Tippling and Sottishness is made the fairest Reward of
Virtue. These Descriptions of the Future State are so absurd and mean, and some
of them so very gross and foul, that it is impossible to Spiritualize them, or
make any tolerable Apology for them, though a Le Clerk in Notis in Orac.
Chaldaica, p. 176.
Learned Man has attempted it. But take the Best of these Authors; and as for
the Vision of God, Communion and Fellowship with him, which is the Life of a
Soul, and the most Valuable part of the Happiness of Heaven, they had no
Thoughts, no Notions, no Hopes at all, or at best but very weak and faint Ones
of so high a Privilege, which they seldom mention, if ever they touch upon it.
Possibly here and there a Passage or two looking that way, may be picked up;
but a Man must go deep for that Ore; and when he has got it up, it is so small,
that it is lost in the much greater Quantity of Dross; and like the Silver
that is found in some Countries, the Separation is very difficult, and what is
brought up will not bear the Charges of Digging and Refining. So far was
Plutarch from having any raised and settled Apprehensions of this, that in his
Treatise of the Tranquillity of the Mind, where one would have expected it,
instead of some noble Flight he can hardly lift up his Wings above the Ground.
Though in another place De Iside, p. 382.
indeed he drops a noble Saying in the midst of a heap of wild Stuff, where it
stands like a fair House quite out of the Road, and in the midst of a dirty
Bottom, in which none would have looked for it, nor can see it till he be just
upon it: That the Souls of Men, while in the Body, have no Converse with God,
but only as they have some little Knowledge of him, as in a Dream by the help
of Philosophy: but when being dismissed from the Body, they enter on that pure,
invisible and impassible State, God is their Ruler, they depend on him, and
behold without Satiety, and desire that Beauty which Men are not able to
express. But herein he exceeded himself, and spoke above what he did at other
times: For the Highest that he could reach, when he was treating on a Subject
where it was most proper for him to have brought it in, was this: De Tranquil.
Animae. Operum, p. 476.
He that has learned the Nature of the Soul, and thinks that by Death it shall
gain a Better, or at least not a WORSE Condition, has no small Freedom from the
Fear of Death.

And that is as high as mere Reason can carry any Man, that we shall not be in
a WORSE Condition. Now this would be but a melancholy Consideration, to be sent
into just such another World as this is, and be doomed to live Eternally in it.
The Comforts of the present State are fickle and uncertain, empty and frothy;
its Troubles are massy and heavy. And such of 'em as are of a lighter nature,
many times miserably discompose us: As the Modern Philosophers tell us, that a
Column of Air (a thin and slight Body) presses very hard upon us. Whatever it
may be in the Physical, in the Moral Sense it is an undoubted Truth, that there
are Vacuities and Empty Spaces in every Part of this World; they are spungy and
hollow Substances which we feed upon. They who have drunk at the River-Head,
have never been able to quench their Thirst, nor could they be satisfied with
any Enjoyments here below. Young Men, not having experienced the Vanity of
them, think the Good things of this Life to be very Valuable; but in a little
while they see their own Error and Mistake; and that what they took for a
Diamond, is but congealed Water, easily melted between our Fingers; or a
Glass-drop that is shivered in pieces with one Touch of a Man's Hand. If Grace
has not mortified us to this World; yet Age, Sense, Reason, and Experience,
will make us weary of it: A place wherein a Good and Wise Man has hardly
Patience to hold out living for so short a Space of Time as seventy or eighty
Years. How sad would it be, to be always chained down to such an Element of Sin
and Sorrow, without any Capacity or Hope of being ever removed? How slow are
the Minutes, how tedious are the Hours to a Man in Misery? Time to such a one
is like the Shadow on a Dial, which he that looks upon cannot perceive that it
moves at all. And yet many of the Calamities we groan under, we know
beforehand will be what the Fathers said of Julian's Persecution, a little,
though a black Cloud, which will quickly blow over. At the worst we always have
this to relieve us, that in the Grave, (to which we know not how near we may
be,) Job 3.17.
the Weary are at Rest. And yet in the Thoughts of the Pained Man, as well as
in the Style of a Prophet, a single Day stands for a Year. How intolerable then
must it needs be to a distressed Creature, to think, I am in a Region of
Misery, where there is a constant Revolution of Day and Night; and in the
Climate wherein I dwell, these are very unequally divided, the latter usually
being much Longer than the former! Were I to linger out some Thousands of Years
only, it were sad; but it is infinitely worse than so with me: For, wretched Man
that I am, thus must I languish away to the Ages of Eternity, without any hopes
of a better State.

But now the Gospel-Revelation drives away these black and gloomy Thoughts and
Fears, as the Rising-Sun does the Darkness and Horror of the Night. For it
proposes to us a Future Happiness so great, that we have not Words big enough
to express, nor Faculties large enough to comprehend. 1 John 3.2.
It does not yet indeed appear fully what we shall be. Yet so much is clearly
revealed, as is abundantly sufficient to raise our Souls to an Admiration of
it, and draw forth our most ardent Desires after it. Let us briefly consider it
as to our Souls and Bodies.

1. As to our Souls. They shall be enlightened with the clearest Knowledge of
God; so that there shall not be the least Speck on our Eye, or the smallest
Cloud on our Mind. We shall be filled with flaming Love to God, and never more
complain of any Chilness or Coldness of our Hearts toward him. We shall
perfectly resemble him, and not be any longer such party-colored Creatures, as
we now are, which makes us almost ashamed of our selves. We shall dwell under
the bright Beams of his Love and Favor, and never more complain, Whither has
my Beloved withdrawn himself? We shall contemplate, praise, and adore him,
without any Weariness, or one distracting Thought; yea, we shall feel a
constant and perpetual Delight and Joy continually bubbling up within,
wherewithal our Souls shall be continually overflowed.

2. As to our Bodies. This is one part of our Happiness, the Discovery whereof
is entirely owing to Revelation. The Philosophers never dreamt of it: It Is well
known with what Contempt the Stoics spoke of the Body; they called it the
Gatak. not. in Anton. p. 309.
Pouch, the Garment, the Sheath, the Hull, and the Leathern-Bottle of the Soul,
and the Bond Senec. Epist. 65.
of Slavery: They would not allow it to be so much as a Men's cujusque, is est
quisque. Tully Some. Scip. p. 1319.
Part of themselves: They and the Platonists, and Pythagoreans, and all others
who were for the (...), or (...), renounced all Thoughts of the same Body. And
that Party of the Stoics, and Plato, who were for the Revolution of all
things, expected to receive the same Body indeed; but then it was just the same
in all Origenes c. Celsum, p. 208, 209. It. 244, 245.
respects whatever, not only as to Substance, but also as to all its ill
Qualities and Diseases. Many of them thought Stillingfleet's Orig. Sac. p. 496,
497.
that all the Evil that is in the World proceeded from the necessary Malignity
of Matter, which was of so stubborn a Nature, that it was too hard for the Gods
themselves; and these Men could not rationally desire to be again hampered by
the hateful Hyle, which was altogether as invincible as it was mischievous.
Plutarch In Romulo, p. 35, 36.
tells us, it is a very ridiculous thing to imagine that the Bodies of Good Men
do ascend, and to place Earth in Heaven it self. And the Primitive Persecutors
were wont, after they had burnt the Christians, to scatter their Eusebii Hist.
l. 5. c. 1. ad finem.
Ashes, that so they might render the Resurrection impossible, as well as they
judged the Doctrine of it to be Celsus apud Origin, l. 5. p. 242.
ridiculous.

But Revelation assures us, that at the last Day we shall have our Bodies
restored with great Advantage; for they shall be of so great Purity and
Fineness of Composition, as to be subject to no Wastes, need no Repairs, be
liable to no Necessities, suggest no bad Thoughts, and be the Seat of no
Diseases or Deformities. These vile and base Bodies, shall then become bright
and glorious; These earthly and fleshly ones, shall become spiritual and
heavenly; These weak and infirm ones, shall become active, strong, and nimble
as the Wing of an Angel; 1 Cor. 15.
These mortal ones, shall put on Immortality; And these corruptible ones, shall
put on Incorruption: For so shall be the Resurrection of the Just. They shall
be made like to the glorious Body of our dear Redeemer; Phil. 3.21.
be bright Mirrours and everlasting Monuments of the Infinite Power of God,
wherein it shall be seen what he is able to do, by the working of that mighty
Power of his, whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself. Yea, such
glorious Creatures shall holy Men be at the last Day, both in Soul, and Body
too, that the Angels shall stand amazed at them; And Christ shall be admired in
his Saints, 2 Thessalonians. 1.10.
and glorified in all them that do believe, in that day.

III. Eternal and Unchangeable. Many of the Heathen Philosophers were so far
from believing this, that they had contrary Apprehensions. Aristotle for a long
time, the great Idol of the Learned World, though so famous for all sorts of
Learning; and though he has given us the best System of Ethics, yet is supposed
to have plucked this up by the Roots, and destroyed the very Subject of the
Point; for he has been thought to deny the Immortality of the Soul; and his
Friends have been put to it to clear him. Let us consider the Stoics, whether
as they came very near to Christianity in their Moral Precepts, they also do
the same as to this grand Motive and Encouragement to the Practice of them.
They were so divided in their Sentiments, that Learned Men have been almost as
much at a Loss to know what Opinion they actually held, as they were what was
most reasonable to embrace; and the one have been as much divided in their
Reports, as the other in their Sentiments. Out of Deference to Authority, we
must hear the Imperial Philosopher in the first place, who proposes the
Question, Antonin us, l. 12.. 5.
why the Gods who have ordered all things well, and with a singular Love to
Mankind, have neglected to take care, that Men, and especially the Good, who
have maintained as it were a frequent Correspondence with them, and by their
pious Works and holy Ministrations have been familiar with them, that these
Men, when they are Dead, do no longer exist, but are extinguished for ever.
Meric Casaubon In notis in M. Antoninum.
indeed interprets these Words of the Resurrection of the Body. But Learned De
Mente sola satagit Marcus, de Corpore nihil solicitus, quod nec se, nec suum,
nec sui quicquam a quoquam censeri volebant Stoici. Gataker in Annot. in
Antonin. p. 423. Edit. Cantabrigiae 1652. Hody of the Resurrection, p. 23, 24,
25.
Men have proved that herein he was mistaken. He speaks of the utter Extinction
of the Soul by Death. And the Answer he gives to this stabbing Question is,
That if it be so, you must know for certain, they would have ordered it
otherwise if it had been just, and possible and natural, and ought to have been
otherwise managed. And yet at another time he propounds this Question,
Antoninus, l. 4.. 21.
If Souls do continue, how will the Air contain 'em all; especially considering
they have been from Eternity? Which he answers by propounding another, How the
Earth is able to contain all the Carkases, which for so very long a space of
time have been buried in it? And then adds, As the Carkases of Men, when they
have been for some time in the Earth, are changed and dissolved so as to make
room for others; so Souls being translated into the Air, after they have abode
there for some time (...), etc. Id. Ib.
are changed, burnt, melted down (like the Metals of a Founder, I suppose,) and
so run into the common Soul of the World; and thereby make way for others to
come into their places; and because Men die very fast, I conceive this must be
very quickly done, lest the Place be crowded, and separated Souls be stifled
for want of Room and Breath, though in the midst of the Air it self. Were it not
that he adds these Words, That thus a Man would answer on this Hypothesis,
(...). Ib.
that Souls do supervive their Bodies; I would say, that to reconcile this with
the Passage which I but just now cited out of him, would be as difficult as
it is to make the two Poles to meet and kiss each other. He reels and staggers
to and fro, and knows not what Opinion to be of. If he had not a more steady
hand in Government than he had in Reasoning and Philosophy, he would have made
but a very indifferent Ruler.

Others of the Stoics believed, that after Death the Soul lasted as long as
its Body did continue. And the Egyptians were of the same Opinion, and that was
the reason of their embalming the Bodies of the Dead. For this we have the
Authority of Servius Ad Aeneid. l. 3. p. 664.
, which the most Learned Gataker indeed puts a Slur upon, saying, I don't Unde
habeat, nescio. Gataker Annot. in Anton. p. 140.
know whence he had it: Nor I neither; but he who lived so many hundred years
ago, might have met with it in some of their Books, which have not been
transmitted down to us; nothing being more common than it is for Learned Men as
much to bewail the Loss of many Ancient Writings, as their nearest Relations
could do the Death of the Authors of 'em. Nor is that other Reflection of that
Great Man, whereby he would discredit this Testimony of Servius, of any great
Weight, viz. as though the Quasi sc. a Stoa dogma istud arripuerint. Aegyptii sc.
Id. ib.
Egyptians had borrowed this Opinion from the Stoics. For it is very likely
that Servius's Author might so misrepresent it, as if the Egyptians had taken
it from the Stoics; whereas, in truth, the latter stole it from the former;
according to the known humor of the Greeks, who did vainly arrogate to
themselves those Inventions, which it is very plain they borrowed from their
Neighbors. And some tell us this was the true Hody of the Resurrection, p. 12.
Reason why the Egyptians were wont to keep the Carkases of their Friends in
their Houses and Closets, and set 'em at Table as formal Guests, believing they
had there the Whole Man, not only the Body, but the Soul too. Though such Company
I suppose would not very much support the Discourse, nor greatly inflame the
Reckoning.

Other Stoics thought, that it was with Human Souls, as it is with Gatak.
Annot. in Antonin. p. 140. It. 301.
Material Beings; there was some solid Substance at the bottom, which did
always remain, and from which, in process of time, new Souls did spring when
the Old ones were dissolved; somewhat like new Milled Money produced from the
old Coin that was so miserably clipped and debased.

Others of them thought Souls did last till the Universal Id. p. 139.
Conflagration, which they put at a very considerable distance from the Age
wherein they lived. Cleanthes said All Souls did so; but Chrysippus and some
Arius Didymus in his Account of the Stoical Philosophy, as quoted by Eusebius.
Praep. Evang. l. 15. c. 20. p. 822. Edit. Paris.
Others say only those of Good Men. But then they were to cease from being
individual Beings any longer, and to be refunded into the Elements of the
World, or that Universal Soul, whence they were Originally taken. Which a
Learned Man Huetii Concordia Fidei cum Ratione, p. 159.
thus very aptly represents. It Is as if a Man should fill a Vessel with Water
taken out of the Sea, and then some time after should break the Vessel, and let
the Water run again into the Ocean; wherein it is as it were lost, being
mingled and incorporated with the mighty Mass, though it be not annihilated.

And this was the Opinion of Pythagoras too and his Followers; and Id. 160.
Heraclitus also, the Author and Founder of a Sect of Philosophers who bore his
Name.

But others of them did not think that Souls, though they took them for pretty
durable Beings, did last altogether so long. They fancied that they did Stoici
usuram nobis largiuntur tanquam cornicibus: diu mansuros aiunt animos, semper
negant. Tully Tusc. Qu. l. 1. p. 1060.
perish at length after they had worn out several Bodies, with which from time
to time they were clothed, as with so many new Suits of Apparel.

And herein they did agree in the main with the Pythagoreans and Platonists,
who held the Transmigration of Souls, either into Brutes, or other humane
Bodies, or both successively; which as we observed in the foregoing Section was
a most Catholic Opinion of whole Nations in the East; as also it Cluverius de
Germ. Antiq. l. 1. c. 32. Hody of the Resurrection, p. 6, 7, 8. Dr. Jackson,
Vol. 3. p. 424.
was of the Egyptians, and the Druids too, and the Ancient Germans in the West.
How often the Soul might be a Widower, and with how many Bodies it might
successively Marry, I do not know, nor think it worth the while to enquire. But
herein some at least of the Stoics did differ from others, that at last they
thought the Soul it self did drop away and crumble into nothing. Hence
Dionysius Halicarnassaeus reflecting on the unhappy Death of the brave and
generous Coriolanus, has these Words: If when (...). Dionys. Antiq. Romans p.
529, 530.
the frame of the Body, whatever that be, is destroyed, that of the Soul
perishes also, and is annihilated; I don't see how those can be accounted
Happy, who having received no Advantage from their Virtue, yet perish for it.
But then, as appears from the following Words, he did not carry this so far,
that those great Souls should remain for ever, or be Eternally rewarded, though
he says that some do so think; because he thought, agreeably to the Sentiments
of the Stoics, they would be sufficiently recompensed for all their Virtues
and Sufferings, if they continued only for a Considerable Time in a State of
Happiness above, and were highly commended here below, as it happened, says
he, to that Man.

Besides these, as St. Austin De Civitate Dei, l. 22. c. 28.
informs us out of Varro, there were a Sort of Men who held that there was a
certain great Year, when all the same Stars and Planets shall return to the
same Configuration, and then there shall be a new Production of all Men, and
all other things again, which shall rise up successively in the same manner,
and all the fame Circumstances wherein they have already appeared. So that I
shall again begin just as I have lately done, to write the very self-same Book,
on the very same individual Paper, with the very self-same Pen and Ink, and my
Reader be got just to the very self-same place in it where he now is. And though
by the Title which St. Austin from Varro gives them, viz. that of Genethliaci,
one would take 'em to be a despicable sort of Figure-flingers and Conjurers,
yet they were no less Men than See for this Dr. Jackson, Vol. 3. p. 425. and
Hody of the Resurrection, a p. 16. ad 23.
Plato and Pythagoras, and their Followers, and the Egyptians, and many of the
Indian Philosophers; and some of the very Stoics too, though they derided St.
Paul as a Babbler for Preaching the Resurrection in the Christian Sense. These
Men are far from being agreed about the exact Number of Years when the Stars
and Planets shall return exactly to the same Configuration: And therefore I
cannot tell the Reader how often Souls, as well as other Beings, shall run this
Round, and, like Fairies, dance in this imaginary Ring. Only for our Comfort we
must know, that this will be an -- (...). Numenius in Eusebius. Demonstr. l. 15.
c. 19. p. 821. Edit. Paris. It. Origin. c. Celsum, l. 4. p. 208.
Everlasting Tautology.

Besides all this, there are some Philosophers, and St. Austin Hoc dixerunt
valde magni Philosophi. St. Aug. de Tempore, Sermon. 139. It. 142.
tells us they are of the highest Form, who thought that the Souls of Good Men
are a long time at Rest; but after a very considerable Time they come down from
Heaven, and appear in Bodies again. And there was yet another Hypothesis, which
was no Fiction of Virgil's, but what he brings in as a known Dii quibus
imperium est animarum, umbraeque silentes,
Et Chaos and Phlegethon, loca nocte tacentia late
Sit mihi fas audita loqui, sit numine vestro
Pandere res alta terra and caligine mersas.
Virgil Aeneid. 6. v. 264.
Tradition, That the wicked, but curable Spirits, after they had smarted for
their Folly in the infernal Gulf for a thousand Years, were like so many Head
of Cattle driven to the Waters of -- Animae quibus altera Fato
Corpora debentur, Lethaei ad fluminis undam
Securos latices and longa oblivia potant.
Virgil. Aeneid. l. 6. v. 713. O Pater anne aliquas ad caelum hinc ire putandum
est
Sublimes animas, iterumque ad tarda reverti
Corpora? quae lucis miseris tam dira cupido?
Id. v. 719. Has omnes ubi mill rotam volvere per annos,
Lethaeum ad fluvium Deus evocat agmine magno,
Scilicet immemores supera ut convexa revisant
Rursus, and incipiant in corpora velle reverti.
Id. v. 748.
Lethe, where they drank so long till they were perfectly besotted to that
degree, that they did irrecoverably forget every thing which they had ever done
or suffered. But as Lucian De Luctu. Tom. 2. p. 428, 429. Edit. Benedicti.
wittily observes, it fell out very happily for the World that Alcestis, and
Protesilaus, and Theseus, and Ulysses, slipped by without taking a Cup there, or
else it had been impossible they should ever have remembered any thing, and
given us such a particular Account of it, as they have done when they returned
to this Earth of ours. After this Draught, they are received up into Heaven
where they enjoy all manner of Happiness, till being weary of it, the freak
takes them to make another Trial of their Fortune here below, and so they
return to this World again; whereupon unless it be a very sorry Heaven indeed,
they pay very dear for their Folly.

Thus have the Heathens for want of a Guide from Heaven entertained these so
very different and extravagant Notions about it. And for any thing that mere
Reason can say to the contrary, it may be but a short Term of Happiness which
we shall enjoy in the other State; and that would be a more abundant Recompense
than we could pretend to deserve. And though the Soul being Immaterial is
naturally Immortal, and has no contrary Principles of Corruption within; yet
who can assure us but God may withdraw his Preserving Influence; and then our
Spirits must fall back again into that primitive Nothing, whence they sprung up
into Being by his powerful Word of Command. Or for any thing we know by Natural
Light, the other Life as well as this may be a continued State of Trial, though
in better Circumstances, and from which we may fall. It may often happen among
departed Souls, what Modern Philosophers have dreamt does frequently come to
pass among the Heavenly Bodies, where a Star is many times covered with a
rising Scum, and overrun with so thick a Scurf as to be degraded into a
wandering Planet, or a Pilgrim Comet, perpetually frisking and bounding from one
Vortex to another, a long time before its surrounding Crust being broken it
recovers its ancient Eminency again.

But Revelation acquaints us, that the time of our Probation ends with this
Life. The dying Groans of a Saint are the last that ever he shall fetch. He
shall Sin no more, Sorrow no more, be Tempted and Afflicted no more: His Bliss
shall continue without any Interruption, and without any End. And this, though
but a Circumstance, yet is of that Weight that it may justly be esteemed a
considerable Part of the Happiness of Heaven, to be secured in the Enjoyment of
it, without any Fear or Possibility of a Change for ever.

IV. immediately after our Death. It seems to be too great a Leap for so very
imperfect a Soul as every good Man's is in this Life, to enter upon so great a
Glory forthwith upon its being dislodged from the Body. We see nothing like
this in Nature; all Creatures being wont from mean Beginnings gradually to
creep on to the Height of their Perfection in a leasurely way, by very slow and
easy Steps. And we have the more reason to think it should be so in the present
Case, because good Men in this World are not wont to improve very fast in the
Divine Life, but still they have many Imperfections adhering to them. And one
of the greatest Signs of their Growth, is to be deeply sensible of the
Remainders of Corruption which do still hang about them. If the Scriptures be
laid aside, it is hardly to be supposed, that a Soul which has been so long in
so muddy and defiled a Vessel, can be drawn off from the Body so very clear, as
to carry no Dregs along with it; but that it will need to pass through a great
many Purgations before it be thoroughly refined. And who can tell how severe,
and how long a Trial it must endure before it be qualified to receive, and
fitted to bear so great a Weight of Glory?

The wisest of the Heathens have thought, that none but those who have been
perfectly Socrates in Platonis Phoedone, p. 80, 113, 114. Plat. Gorgias, p. 526.
purged in this Life, can go straightway to Heaven: But as for others, it would
require a very considerable Time to cleanse them from that Dross that sticks to
'em before they can be prepared to enter into it. They have fancied that
several departed Souls did first wheel and roll about the Earth for Tully's
Somn. Scip.
many Ages. That some of 'em, when delivered out of the Body, are like poor
Tusc. Qu. l. 1.
Prisoners, who having lain in Irons for a long while, cannot presently feel
their Legs, and hardly know how to walk, when their Shackles are off. Plato was
so Extravagant in his Conceits as to affirm, that many of them could not
recover their In Phoedro, p. 248, 249.
Wings in a less Space of Time than Ten Thousand Years: But the Pinions of some
Philosophical Spirits, who were Lovers of Wisdom and beautiful Boys, would grow
considerably faster; so that in the Compass of Three Thousand Years they would
be capable of flying upwards. Though, as Eusebius Praep. Evang. l. 13. c. 16.
has well observed, we have nothing but his bare Word for all this; and
herein, as well as in many other Points, he did notoriously Contradict himself.
For at another time he makes Socrates tell us, They who have committed great
Sins, but yet curable ones, according to the Nature of their Crimes, are cast
into several Rivers of Fire, where they lie for a In Phoedone, p. 113, 114.
Year, according to the Tradition of their Poets, and then come to a certain
fenny marish place, where they pray to those whom they have injured, that they
may come forth and be received into the Mansions of the Blessed. And if their
Prayers prevail with these Men, they presently are drawn out; but otherwise
they must lie by it. Hermagoras In Macrob. in Somn. Scip. l. 2. c. 17.
, a Platonist, tells us, Guilty Souls are punished for infinite Ages before
they are delivered out of Tartarus; and then, when they are sufficiently
purged, they return to Heaven. And Virgil says, according to the Platonic
Notion, that some dirty Souls are hung up a drying -- Aliae panduntur inanes
Suspensae ad ventos: aliis sub gurgite vasto
Infectum eluitur scelus, aut exuritur igne, etc.
Aeneid. l. 6. v. 740.
and bleaching in the Wind; others which are very foul, are rinsed and scoured
in the Water; but some must be cast into a scorching Fire before their Spots
can be clean got out, and they be fitted for a Walk in the Elysian Fields to
cool and refresh themselves. There is one Saying of Socrates that is very fit
to be applied to all these Fooleries, which Plato makes him deliver, even at
the end of that very place where he speaks more soberly of this Subject than
any-where else, as far as I have observed: it is this: It may be, O In Platonis
Gorgia, p. 527.
Callicles, these may seem to thee to be Old Wives Fables, and thou will
despise them. And it would not be strange if they were despised, provided that
by all our Search we could any-where find what is better and truer.

This is not to be found any-where, but by Divine Revelation, whereby we know
and are sure, that as soon as ever Good Men die, they cease from their Labors;
When they are absent from the Body, they are present with the Lord. It is but
departing, and being with Christ. Angels receive the dislodging holy Soul to
convoy it into the Seat of the Blessed. How far it is thither, and how long an
Angel may be in Wafting a holy Soul to that Place, is uncertain; though we may
judge the time is but short. This Day (says Christ to the Penitent Thief, when
the Day was already far spent) shall thou be with me in Paradise. And we find
that the Angel Gabriel, Dan. 9.21.
who at the Beginning of Daniel's Prayer had a Divine Order to fly to him, made
so great a Dispatch, as to be with him about the Time of the Evening-Oblation.
Now suppose that Prayer of Daniel's to begin early in the Morning, (for I will
allow him to have been up very betimes at his Devotions, especially on a solemn
Fast, as this seems to be; yet) from thence till Three in the Afternoon, which
was about the Time of the Evening-Oblation, is but a very few Hours. The
Compass of Time is but very short, before a holy Soul enters into the Heavenly
Paradise, after it has left the Body; and it may be it usually arrives there
long before the forsaken Carkase is lodged in the Grave, without the trouble of
any tedious Delays, or the Hazard of any new Trial, or the Severity of any
further Discipline.

V. Persons shall enjoy all this Happiness. If we were left to the wild Guesses
of our own dim-sighted Reason, we might well suppose that so great a Glory
should be confined to a very few special Favorites, and not lie open for All.
Some shall be excluded; And every Man that knows himself, would have been apt
to suspect, Am not I one of that unhappy Number? And especially these three
Sorts of Persons would.

1. Those that have been very great Sinners, either as to the Heinousness of
their Crimes, or the Time of their continuing Impenitent under them. The
fabulous and idle Poets indeed have placed the Dog, the Bear and the Dragon in
the Heavens (and succeeding Astronomers have left them in the quiet Possession
of the Place, still calling the respective Constellations by those Names;) But
that was the effect of a wild and extravagant Fancy. Sober Reason will hardly
allow that they who in the Course of their Lives have long resembled those
Brutes, should upon any Terms be translated thither. The Returning Prodigal
does express the Natural Sense of such Men, when they prove true Penitents, in
that Speech of his to his Father; Luke 15.19.
I have sinned against Heaven, and before thee, and am unworthy to be called
thy Son; make me one of thy hired Servants. The meanest Place, the lowest
Office, in thy Family, is too high for me.

But now by Revelation we are assured that Heaven stands open to receive
Publicans and Harlots, Mat. 21.31.
upon their sincere Conversion. And those Jews, that had such a Malignity of
Spirit as to contradict and blaspheme, yet had not missed of Eternal Life, if
they had not thrust it from them, and judged themselves unworthy of it. Act.
13.46.


2. Those that are mean and poor, and unlearned, and such the Bulk of Mankind
is. Socrates would have Heaven to be the Peculiar of Elevated and Refined In
Platonis Phoedone, p. 81, 82.
Philosophical Spirits. As for those that have been notorious for Gluttony, and
Wantonness, and injuring others, he tells us their Souls, when the Men die,
pass into such Brutes, whose Manners they did most nearly express in their
Lives and Actions. As suppose into Goats, Asses, or the like. He is indeed a
little civiller to the good honest Moral Men, as they call 'em, who have been
famous for Temperance and Justice, which they have acquired by the dull way of
Custom and Thought, but have not arrived to in the more exalted Method of
Philosophical Precepts and Discipline. For he allows they may be transformed
into Bees, and Wasps, and Ants; or it may be some of them may put on an Human
Shape again, and make a new Set of Indifferent Men.

But the Soldiers are wont to carry all before them here below, and they hope
to do so above. The Cluverii Germ. Antiq. l. 1. c. 32. p. 221.
Celtiberi, Hispani and Cimbri and the Druids thought that they who died
Valiantly in the Field, should have the highest Place in Heaven. And Julian In
Caesaribus, p. 39, 40.
, who may reasonably be supposed to be well acquainted with the People of that
Country where he had so successfully managed a War, tells us, this very
Persuasion made the Old Germans behave themselves so Courageously in the Field.
For my own part, if it had been my Work to have Billeted them, I should never
have Assigned them their Quarters in Heaven, who generally make every place
where they come to be a Hell upon Earth. But Titus Josephus de Bell. Jud. l. 7.
c. 4.
the Roman Emperor carries it so far, that it is not to be endured. For in his
Speech to his Soldiers, he tells them that Valiant Men who die in the Field,
shall climb up to the Stars; but Cowardly Fellows who die by a Disease, though
every blot of wickedness be wiped away from them, shall sink down Beneath.
Plato De Repub. l. 5. p. 468.
is more moderate, he would have all Men who excel in Virtue, whether they died
through Age, or any other way, advanced to be Demons in the other State; but
he gives the upper hand to those who die with their Swords in their Hands, and
sell their Lives to their Enemies at a dear rate. Tully would have Heaven to be
the Reward of the Brave and Public Somn. Scipionis.
Spirited-men, who have been very serviceable to their Country by dispatching a
Tyrant out of the way, or some such Heroical Action. Especially, if to the
Political and Active Virtues, there be but added the Idle Macrob. in Somn.
Scip. l. 1. c. 4. It. l. 2. c. 17.
ones, as Macrobius calls them, i.e. the Contemplative and Philosophical ones.

And we, it may be, might be apt to think it very likely, that some of the
great Monarchs of this World, if they employ their Authority and Power for
God's Honor; some of the Rich Men, that use their great Estates; or some of
the Wise and Learned ones of this World, who improve their Wit, and Parts, and
great Knowledge, for the propagating his Cause, and spreading his Interest, may
be thus amply rewarded by him: But as for poor unlearned Men, how little can
they do for him, who are but as the Dust of the Balance, that has not Weight
enough to turn the Scales, either this way or that; and therefore cannot, with
any Modesty, expect to receive very much from him; especially since they find
that God gives them so very little of the good Things of this Life? And if
Scripture be laid aside, the only Rule is the Goodness of God, and the Effects
of his Bounty and Providence: And thereupon these Men might well fear, that he
who gives them these lower Blessings with so sparing a Hand, would not bestow
those infinitely greater ones upon them.

But now by Revelation we are assured, That those inconsiderable Men, whom
their Fellow Creatures would scorn to look upon, may come to see the Face of
God: They, whom their rich Neighbors would disdain to place among the Dogs of
their Flock, Job 30.1.
may sit down and Feast with Angels. And this is so unlikely to bare Reason,
that the Apostle James might well usher it in with that solemn Preface, Jam.
2.5.
of, Hearken my beloved Brethren, has not God chosen the Poor in this World,
rich in Faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom? Yea, Christ assures us, That those Men
stand fairest for that blessed Place: He never said so Severe a thing
concerning any Poor Man, as he did of all the Rich, Matthew. 19.24.
That it is easier for a Camel to go through the Eye of a Needle, than for them
to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

3. Those that are eminently Holy and Serious. For the better Men are, the more
sensible they are of their own Vileness, and unworthiness of Heaven, though at
the same time they are the more desirous of being admitted into it.

VI. Terms are, upon which this Blessedness may be ours. Astronomers have not
invented more Imaginary Lines in the Heavens, than we should have been
contriving fanciful ways to have brought us thither. That Repentance, and
persevering Holiness, are necessary, is obvious at the very first sight: But
the Doubt is, whether these are Sufficient. To say nothing of the Justice of
God, it seems inconsistent with the Divine Wisdom to require no more than
these. For all prudent Governors are always wont to observe a Proportion
between the Rewards that are offered, and those Services for which they are
proposed; even the highest Generosity must, in some measure, be conducted by
this Rule, or else it degenerates into Extravagance and Folly. For the
proposing vast Recompenses for very slight and trivial Matters, betrays great
Want of Judgment, in not setting a true value upon things, either upon Rewards,
or Services, or both.

Now, by the Law of our Creation we owe God all possible Duty and Obedience, a
great deal more than the best of us do yield to him: And should God have
exacted it on the Account of his Sovereign Authority over us, without promising
us any thing at all, much less any great Matters; we had been indispensably
obliged to it. And our best Actions stand in need of Pardon, so far are they
from deserving to be Crowned. Nothing in us, or done by us, can bear the least
Proportion to the Heavenly Glory. And therefore, that besides a Pardon, God
should promise us Eternal Life as the Reward of what we do for him, is what can
hardly enter into our Thoughts.

But now Revelation does relieve us in this Matter. The Scriptures tell us,
That Christ, by his perfect Obedience and Death, in our room and stead, has
highly Glorified God, and his Government; and not only redeemed us from Hell
and Destruction, to which we were liable, but also merited Everlasting Glory
for us: And that the Design of this whole Affair, is, to magnify the Riches of
God's Grace, and show the vast Regard he has to the Death and Intercession of
his own Son, that on his Account he offers such an unspeakable Reward to us;
Romans 5.12.
That as Sin has reigned unto Death, so might Grace reign through Righteousness
to Eternal Life, by Jesus Christ our Lord. It is not for any Works of
Righteousness that we have done, or can do; it is not because of their
Intrinsic Worth, that such great Things are given to us. Heaven is the
Purchase of Christ's Blood, it is for His Sake we are accepted and rewarded:
And so upon our Faith and Obedience, we freely receive the Blessings which he
has merited: And the more we abound therein, the greater is our Reward, not
because of our Merits, but because of God's gracious Promise, and Respect to
the Blood of his Son; for which he assigns us different Degrees of Glory, in
Proportion to our different Measures of Holiness and Obedience.

VII. viz. Natural Light and Reason cannot assure us where Grace is to be had
to enable us to perform the Terms, on which the Pardon of Sin, and the
Enjoyment of the Heavenly Glory is suspended. Whosoever consults himself, the
Vanity of his own Mind, the Corruption of his own Heart, the Turbulency of his
Passions, the unruliness of his Appetite, the Strength of Temptations, the
Weakness of his Resolutions, and the Force of Evil Examples, will quickly see
an absolute Necessity of a Divine Power to turn him into and keep him in the
Paths of Holiness. Some Ingenious Men tell us very strange and surprising
Stories of the mighty Strength of Wheels, and Pullies, and Screws; that it is
possible by the Multiplication of them to pull up an Oak by the Roots with a
single Bishop Wilkin's Archimedes, p. 96.
Hair of a Man's Head, lift it up with a Straw, or blow it up with ones Breath.
So that by these Contrivances one of Sampson's Locks when shaven off, would
have had far greater Strength, and done greater Wonders than he himself when
all of them were on. As Extravagant as this may seem to be, yet it is much more
easy and likely, than for any Man by his own feeble Arm to pluck up those
inveterate Evil Habits, which Time and Custom have settled in him, and made
natural to him. Now what well-grounded Confidence can we have from the mere
Light of Nature, of Divine Help for the accomplishing this great and necessary
Work? Whether any shall ever enjoy it; seeing the same Sins that make us need
it, render us most unworthy of it? Or in what Proportions it shall be given
forth, and how long it shall be continued? Whether the Spirit of God shall be
like those Periodical Winds, which in some Parts of the World do annually blow
to help the Mariner forward in the pursuit of his gainful Voyage; or whether it
shall only be like that bright Minute which Astrologers tell us of, that comes
but once in the whole Compass of a Man's Life, and which if he lazily let slip,
he shall never have such another, but is doomed to Misery by a Fatal Necessity
all the remainder of his Days?

But the Christian Institution is peculiarly called the Ministration of the
Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.8, etc.
as contra-distinguish'd from the Judaical one, though that also had God for its
Author; so small a Portion of it was given forth under the one, like little
Drops of the Dew from Heaven which just wets the Ground; in Comparison of what
is bestowed under the other, like a plentiful Shower of Rain from above that
abundanly Waters it. It was in the New Creation as in the Old. The cold and
dark Evening went before the warm and bright Morning; and God appointed the
lesser Light to Rule the Night, and the greater one to govern the Day. The
Jewish Dispensation like the Moon had its Glory and its Influence on these
lower Bodies. But the Gospel is like the Sun, who may with more reason than any
thing which some Ancient Philosophers dreamt of, be called the Soul of the
World, whose bright and warm Beams give a new Life and Being to all things here
below, awaken the sleepy and drowsy Spirit in every Creature, and cause the
Fruits of the Ground to Spring up and flourish, and Crown the Year with an
abundant Increase.

Therefore our Blessed Savior styles himself the Light of the World; Joh. 8.12.
a Title which he does deserve, because of the Objects that he has informed us
of; having set those Old Truths which before were but darkly apprehended, in a
full and clear Light; and acquainted us with those New ones, which had it not
been for him, we had for ever remained Igrant of. And he does deserve it no
less, because of that Vital Influence with which his Heavenly Doctrine is
accompanied; without which all Knowledge in our Minds would be but like decayed
Drugs, which though taken into our Bodies, having lost all their Virtue, never
operate upon them; nay, Men could not act worse, if they verily believed, or
knew those Doctrines to be false, than they do now they believe and know them
to be true. Joh. 1.4. Ephesians. 5.14.
His Light is the Life of Men; Wherefore he says, Awake thou that sleep,
and arise from the Dead, and Christ shall give thee Light. And by the
Scriptures we are certified, that God has appointed his own Son to be his High
Almoner to distribute this Royal Gift of his among us his needy Creatures. That
being God and Man, he has the Infinite Goodness of the one, and the tender
Bowels of the other united in him. And he has not only the Kindness of an
Ordinary Man, but his Humane Nature was filled with a Spirit of Love and
Compassion; and therefore he who has so strictly commanded us to deal forth
our Bread, Isa. 58.10.
and draw out our Souls to the hungry, will be much more ready to do it
himself. The Woman of Samaria, though none of the best Temper or Character, who
denied him a Draught of Common Water, might have had the Water of Life from
him, if she had but seriously asked it of him. Joh. 4.10.
And though the Hearts of his Countrymen the Jews were full of Malice against
him, yet from a Custom that had obtained among them of bringing Water from
Siloam to the Temple, and pouring it out there, he takes Occasion to intimate
to them that He was the Fountain of Saving-Grace, and gives them an Universal
Invitation, saying, If any man, though he be never so poor, Joh. 7.37.
or has been never so wicked, yet if he thirst, let him come to me and drink.
And assures them that they should not repair to him in vain. He that believes
on me, as the Scripture has said, out of his Belly shall flow Rivers of living
Water. This spoke he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should
receive, as St. John, the infallible Commentator, adds. And there are several
Circumstances of this Speech of his which the Evangelist mentions, and are
worthy of our Observation: In the last Day, that great Day of the Feast, Jesus
stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst, etc. It Is the Feast of Tabernacles
that is here meant, one of the three on which all the Males in Israel were to
appear at Jerusalem; the First and the Last Days whereof were Great Days, and
in a Special manner to be observed as a holy Convocation, wherein it was not
Lawful for them to follow their Worldly Employments. And consequently this
being a Day of Leisure, there was the greater Confluence of the People. And it
being the Last Day, and they on the Point of departing to their several Homes;
just as they were going he utters these Words, that so they might stick and
abide by them as men's last Speeches are wont to do. And then it is added that
Jesus stood up. The usual way among the Jews was for those who taught the
People to do it Sitting; but here we find our Savior chose the other Posture,
that his Voice might reach the further. And he did not faintly Whisper, but he
Cried, that every one there might be sure to hear him; and that by the Loudness
and Fervency of his Delivery he might make the greater Impression upon their
Souls. So earnestly did he desire to draw Men to him for their Spiritual
Advantage.

And as a Sanative Virtue was sent forth from the Body of Christ here on Earth
for the Curing the Natural Distempers of all those who resorted to him, and
believed on him; so shall Influences of Grace flow forth from him in Heaven for
the healing the Spiritual Diseases of those who seek to him and depend upon
him. He will do as great Miracles and Cures on Men's Souls, as ever he did on
their Bodies. Open the Eyes of them who were Born blind: quicken them who are
dead in Trespasses and Sins: restore their Feet to them that are Lame; cleanse
them that are Lepers, and cast out the unclean Spirits from those who have been
possessed by them.

And to remove all Jealousies and Obstructions, he has given us such a
Description of the Gracious Nature and Will of God, as is most worthy of him,
and most proper to incline us to return to him; to awaken the Negligent, and
encourage the Doubting. He has clearly informed us of his Holiness, Justice
and Omniscience, as a Remedy against the vain and fatal Imaginations of those
who are secure in Sin, and are apt to fancy him like a drowzy Judge on the
Bench, who neither hears nor regards how Causes go. He has as fully displayed
before us the Riches of his Grace, that awakened Sinners might not despair, and
so prove obstinate and irreclaimable. It was the Reproach of the Israelites,
Ps. 106.20.
that they changed the Glory of God into the Similitude of an Ox that eats
Grass. It Is of a more pernicious Consequence to transform him into the Likeness
of a roaring Lion; thirsting after Men's Blood, and greedy to devour their
Souls. Our Blessed Savior, in pursuance of his great Design, which is to
recover Men from Sin, has given us quite other Representations of him: That he
is desirous to be at Peace, and ready to give forth of his Grace: Luke 11.11,
12, 13.
That the most tenderhearted Father cannot be half so ready to give Bread to
his Starving Child, as God is to give his Holy Spirit to them that ask him. And
to cut off all Objections to this purpose, viz. how can God consistently with
his Holiness, Justice, and the Honor of his Government, bestow so rich a
Blessing on us? the Scriptures further tell us, it was one End of his Death to
purchase Saving-Grace for us. It was part of the Prize for which he ran, a
Branch of that Joy that was set before him, Heb. 12.2.
as an Encouragement to him to endure the Cross, and despise the Shame, and
Pain of it. He knew he should have a Seed, and see the Travel of his Soul, Isa.
53.10, 11.
and be satisfied with the blessed Fruit thereof. And when he ascended up on
High, Ps. 68.8.
he received Gifts for Men, indefinitely of all Sorts and Ranks, yea even for
the Rebellious also; Acts 5.31.
and was exalted to be a Prince and a Savior to give Repentance to Israel, and
Forgiveness of Sins. Yea, says the Apostle to those Men whose Hands were yet
reaking in the Blood of Christ, and who therefore, one would think, should
never have been applied unto; or if they had, of all Men living they should
have been the Last that ever should have heard such glad Tidings; yet on the
contrary, Unto you First, says he, Acts 3.26.
God having raised up his Son Jesus, has sent him to bless you in turning, not
a few only, but every one of you from his Iniquities.

Considering the Nature of the Gospel, the Representation therein given of God,
the Temper of Christ, his tender Love to the Souls of Men, which drew him down
from Heaven; his Carriage on Earth, his Death, Ascension, Exaltation, and the
Ends of them; which he who did not stick at the hardest Command of his Father,
that of laying down his Life, will be sure punctually to answer; and his own
Honor, which is so deeply engaged, the Glory of a King consisting so much in
the Multitude of his Subjects, Prove. 14.28.
we have the highest Reason to believe, that nothing is more Grateful to him,
than the lifting up a perishing Sinner out of the Pit, and the helping a
strayed Soul in its Return to God.

The CLOSE.
I Cannot Conclude without making a little Reflection upon what has been said.
And,

1. How should we love, and value, and adhere to, the Gospel of Christ, and the
Blessed Author of such a Revelation! How are Writers esteemed, who treat of
Matters which are of very great Use and Service to Mankind, in the things of
this Life; And what a Price do Men set upon those Books, wherein Difficulties
are cleared up, and those profitable Inventions are contained. Now what is
there of so great Importance, as Pardon of Sin, and Immortal Life, the Doctrine
whereof is encumbered with so many Difficulties, which are too hard for Natural
Light and Reason; but are so clearly, plainly, and fully, Solved by the Holy
Scriptures? How are Men pleased with an exact Description of a Foreign Country,
though they do not so much as dream of dwelling in it, nor have any thoughts or
hopes of having so much as one Foot of Land there! How then should we value the
Gospel, that gives us so full and plain an Account of the Heavenly Country, and
how we may be possessed of all the Glory of it! What an Esteem have ingenious
Men for a Book of Astronomy, that gives an Account of the orderly Motions of
the Sun, Moon, and Stars! What an happy Invention is that of those Glasses,
whereby they discover some lesser Bodies, which the naked and unassisted Eye is
not able to perceive; though thereby they have no more Benefit from their Light
and Influence, than those who are the most ignorant of these Affairs. How
should we value the Sacred Oracles, which do discover the Heavenly State to us,
which is not to be known by mere Reason; and how we may so order our own
Motions, as to get above, and outshine any of those glorious Luminaries. Let
us adhere to the Bible; for if once we give up that, we are off from our
Center, we shall find nothing whereon our Soul can rest, but shall be at our
Wits-end. Methinks that Courtier spoke like a Man of Sense to the Pagan King
Edwin, whilst he was considering whether he had best to turn Christian, or no,
when he said thus to him: Bede's Eccles. Hist. Gentis Angl. l. 2. cap. 13.
The present Life of Man upon Earth, Sir, if compared with that Time which is
to us unknown, seems to me to resemble a little Sparrow; which, while your
Majesty was feasting within with your Royal Retinue in your warm Parlour,
during the roaring of the blustering Winds, and the falling of great Quantities
of Rain and Snow without, flew in at one Door, and presently flew out at
another. All the time it was in the House, it was well sheltered from Wind and
Weather: but as soon as it got out into the cold Air, we were altogether as
ignorant whither it went, as we were, whence it came. Thus we can give some
Account of our Soul during its Abode in the Body, while it was housed and
harbored therein: but where it was Before, and how it fares with it
Afterward, is to us altogether unknown. If therefore Paulinus (he was the
Christian Bishop who labored to Convert those Heathens) by his Preaching can
certainly inform us herein, he deserves, in my Opinion, to be followed. And the
King, after he had heard Paulinus's Sermon, spoke like an Understanding Man,
when he said, I have long ago been convinced that the Idols we have Worshipped
were mere Nothings; because the more diligently I have sought for the Truth in
this way of Religion, so much the farther was I from finding it. But now I
openly profess, that by this Preaching, the way of obtaining Eternal Life and
Happiness is clearly laid before us. Whereupon he immediately gave Orders for
the Demolishing the Heathen Temples and Altars.

2. Let us take heed that we do not fall short of Pardon and Heaven. Sad was
the Case of that wicked and profane Lord at Samaria, who barely saw the great
Plenty with his Eyes, but never tasted of it; he stood at the Gate to let in
others, but was trampled to Death by the Multitude pressing in upon him. Much
worse will be our Case, if we only hear of the great Provision which God has
made for us in the other State, and never feed upon it, but be trodden down to
Hell in the Crowd of our own unpardoned Sins. It is a double Misery, to be
drowned within sight of Shore; to miss of that Pardon, and of that Heaven, that
are so plainly revealed, and of which we have heard so much, and so often.

3. Let us clear up our Right and Title to both of them. How long have we
remained in Doubts and Fears? and shall we always continue in that uneasy
Posture, like a Door on its Hinges, moving this way and that, but still hanging
in the same Place where it was many Years ago?

To clear up our Right, it is necessary that the following Rules be observed.

(1.) Don't give Way to immoderate Worldly Sorrow. If we be like a Carcass that
lies under the Weight of that Earth which presses upon it, and never stirs Hand
or Foot to help it self: If we lie down under our Burdens, only mourning, and
complaining, and indulging our selves in black and gloomy Thoughts; we can
never expect that God should help us; especially, if we do worse than this, if
we sinfully afflict our selves, we cannot reasonably hope that God should
comfort us, and raise up them who madly cast or bow themselves down. If with
our own Hands we plunge the Dagger into our Breast, it would be a Miracle if we
did not lose our Blood and Spirits, faint, and feel a great deal of Pain. They
that will chew upon nothing but Wormwood and Gall, and delight in rolling it up
and down in their Mouths, are likely to walk in the Bitterness of their Souls
all their Days.

(2.) Watch against the Encroachments of Bodily Melancholy. This naturally
disposes a Man to Fears and Jealousies, is the black Root of many idle but
vexatious Scruples and perverse Cavillings, and will make him refuse to be
comforted, though there be ever so great Reason for it. If a Stander-by convince
him of some saving Work of God on his Soul, and of his Right to Pardon and
Eternal Life; yet as soon as he is gone, all is undone again: the Melancholy
Christian being like a faulty Watch, which may be wound up and go a little,
while ones Hand is upon it; but no sooner is that removed off, but it runs down
in an Instant, and stands still again. When such meet with Worldly Crosses,
(from which none are exempted) it casts them into deep Fits of Sorrow, which in
a Serious Person presently runs into dreadful and amazing Fears about his Soul,
and the supposed miserable and forlorn State thereof. As Peter, when he was
over-shadowed with a Bright Cloud; so any other of the Disciples of Christ when
covered with a Black one, Luke 9.33.
are apt to speak they know not what, especially against themselves. All proper
Natural Means therefore must be made use of to subdue and keep under this evil
Humor, which is so great an Enemy to a Life both of Grace and Peace.

(3.) Be skilful, diligent, and serious in Examining and Observing your selves.
We must distinctly know the Marks and Characters of those that shall be
pardoned and saved according to the Scriptures. We must understand how
methodically to go to Work, to find whether they are in us or no. We must
narrowly observe the main drift of our Actions, and the secret Springs, Ends,
and Principles, of all that we do; and deal by our own Hearts, as Learned Men
by an Obscure and Profound Author, or an ill-written and blotted Manuscript,
which they carefully read over again and again, with a very curious and
critical Eye, that they may rightly and thoroughly understand them. And unless
we do this, we shall never be able to attain to any solid and stable Comfort.

(4.) Be much in the Exercise of Grace, and endeavor daily to grow in it.
Grace in the Habit, is like Fire in the Flint or Steel; which is not discerned,
but by the Collision of one against the other with some Force and Strength; nor
the good Principle in the Heart, but as it sallies forth into vigorous and
lively Exercise in the Life. Stir up the sleepy Habit, blow up the Heavenly
Spark into a bright Flame, and thine own Eyes shall see it, and thy own Soul
shall feel the warmth of it, and thou will be no longer in perplexing Doubts
concerning it.

(5.) Lastly, Be more exact and circumspect in your Walk.

Bring Matters to an Head, see what it is, that is the Cause of your Jealousies
and Fears, some Sin of Omission or Commission; and destroy the Root, as ever
you would have no more of this bitter Fruit. If you do these things you shall
no longer suffer any dark Eclipses; or if you should, they will be but short
ones, and you will presently emerge out of them; you will live in Comfort, and
die in Peace. You will have no Temptation to cleave to this World, when God
calls you away; like green Fruit, that sticks to that Tree whereon it grows,
and must be violently plucked and torn thence: But you will depart with great
Freedom and Willingness, be like Ripe Fruit, that presently and easily Drops
from the Tree whereon it does but loosely hang: And an entrance will be
administered to you abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and
Savior.

AN APPENDIX TO THE Foregoing Discourse.
AMONG other Letters in Mr. Blount's Collection, I find one written by A. W.
who threatens Revealed Religion with a Regular Attack in a Syllogistical Way,
which he is not over-skilful in. For when he comes to prove the Major
Proposition of his first Syllogism, which is an Affirmative, and which
according to the Rules of Art, should be the Conclusion of the second; instead
of that, he substitutes a Negative; and besides, he shuffles that which was the
Subject in the Former into the room of the Predicate in the Latter. For this is
the Major of the first Syllogism. Oracles of Reason, p. 198.
That Rule which is necessary for our Future Happiness, ought to be generally
made known to all. And this is the Conclusion of the second Syllogism, whereby
he proves it, viz. Therefore that Rule which is not generally known, cannot be
the Rule of our Happiness. So that I suppose his Religion, and his Logic, are
of apiece, both merely Natural.

But that which he would be at, is this, That no Revealed Religion has been
(any, he is so very bold, as to say it never could be) made known to all Men,
as it certainly would have been, if it were necessary to Future Happiness; else
there is no visible means for the greater part of Mankind to be happy; which is
inconsistent with God's Infinite Goodness, who provides for all his Creatures
the means of attaining that Happiness whereof their Natures are capable.

I shall speak more largely to this Point than is necessary for a sufficient
Answer to the Objection. Partly, because I will endeavor to reconcile the
Minds of Men in some measure to this hard Problem of not granting the Gospel to
so great a Part of Mankind: Partly because I am not altogether without Hopes,
that it will fare with A. W. as with that Man in the Gospel, who was once Mad,
and Possessed with an Evil Spirit, but quickly after being in his right Mind,
Luke 8.35.
sat at the Feet of Jesus as an humble Disciple of his. It will be so, if he
will stand to his Word; for he says, It has been demanded of me Page 210.
, whether I should be convinced of my Opinion, and admit of Supernatural
Religion, in case the Gospel, i. e. a Supernatural Religion had been
promulgated to all the World? I answered, I should; and was contented the whole
Stress of the Dispute should be terminated in that One Point. I therefore offer
the following Considerations.

1. Page 207.
generally acknowledged. Now the Divine Goodness was abundantly manifested in
the Original framing of Man in a Capacity for Happiness; and abundantly
providing him with Furniture for the attaining of it. But he voluntarily fell
from that good Estate by his own Default: God therefore is not justly
chargeable, if he should leave all Mankind in their Deserved and Self-procured
Misery, and never have set on foot in any Place of the World a Design of saving
any Man. This is not a Matter of Right, which fallen Man can challenge as due
to him; it may be withheld without any Wrong or Cruelty, because it is a Matter
of pure Arbitrary undeserved Favor.

2. This Revealed Religion, which is generally necessary to the attaining
everlasting Happiness, and which he says NEVER COULD, I say both could and
would have been universally known, had it not been for the gross Negligence,
Wickedness, and Malice of Men themselves. For God preached it to Adam
immediately after the Fall; as also to Noah, the two Common Parents of all
Mankind. Adam had the Gospel in Miniature, in these Words, The Seed of the
Woman shall break the Serpent's Head. And we have great Reason to believe, that
what was wrapped up in these very General Terms, was more particularly unfolded
to him, than it is here recorded. For it is evident, That Moses studies
Brevity, and gives an Historical Account of a great many Ages and Events,
within the narrow Compass of a few Pages. And there was the less need that he
should in this place further Dilate upon the Messiab, a short Hint was enough,
because that was the Subject which he was more fully to open in his following
Writings.

And it is highly probable, That our first Parents did understand somewhat of
the Death of Christ as a Sacrifice, which is the Marrow and Substance, the Sum
and Center of the Gospel, and the Foundation-Stone of all our Hopes of Pardon
and Salvation. This may be strongly inferred from Abel's Sacrifice, and God's
Acceptance of it. The cutting in pieces of God's good Creatures, in whose Make
and Frame there are so many Prints of a Divine Power and Wisdom; the pouring
out of their Blood, the burning of their Fat, etc. This cannot be accounted for
as a Reasonable Service, but only as it served to keep up in Men's minds a Sense
of the heinous Nature and Desert of Sin; of the Justice of God, who would not
Pardon without a Sacrifice, and yet of his Mercy at the same time, which was a
Foundation of Hope to the Sinner, in as much as he would accept the Life of a
Beast in lieu of the Offender; but principally as Sacrifices were Types and
Figures of the Death of the Promised Seed, who in due time was to put away Sin
by the offering of himself. This Custom was spread over all the World; and it
cannot be imagined how All Men, in all Ages, and in all Places, should have
agreed upon this as a principal Part of Divine Worship; but only that it
descended to them by Tradition from the first Father of Mankind. But how
inexcusable was it in them to receive the Shell, and drop the Kernel; to retain
the outward Rite and Sign, but lose the great Thing signified thereby; without
which the outward Act looks like a Barbarous one, unworthy of God to accept,
and of Man to offer; so that he that made the Oblation, seemed to be as brutish
as the very Beast that he slew?

And no doubt but Adam, and other Holy Men, did communicate what Knowledge they
had of the Messiah to their Children, as they in all Reason should have done to
those that were descended from them. Noah is expressly called a Preacher of
Righteousness: 2 Pet. 2.5.
And did he warn the World of the Flood, and can any one think he would speak
nothing of the Promised Seed? Enoch spoke of Christ, Jude 5.14.
and of his appearing to the Destruction of the Wicked; and no doubt but he
spoke also of his first and second Appearing for the Salvation of the
Righteous. Zacharias tells us, That God spoke of the Redeemer by the Mouth of
his Holy Prophets which have been since the World began. Luke 1.70.
And if they were Good Men, they must needs speak, especially to their own
Families, concerning him.

And so much of the Doctrine concerning Christ, as was absolutely necessary in
those Days, lay within a very narrow Room, viz. That Man was in a fallen State,
and this they could not but know and feel: And that God had promised to rescue
them from it by some Extraordinary Person, who should be sent to this purpose
in due time; and all that trusted in him, and through him returned to God and
their Duty, should be pardoned, and saved by him. And was this such a Load to
their Memories? Is a Jewel a Burden to a Man that carries it about him? Does
the pained Man feel the Smart of his Wound, and forget the Healing-plaister;
especially when the Blood is trickling down every Day, and there is not a long
Parenthesis between the Returns of his sharp Fits, at the distance of many
Years, but he has a continual Monitor of it, as they had of their Misery and
need of a Remedy? Was it an unreasonable hard Task for the Father to teach, or
the Son to learn so Short a Lesson as this is; especially considering that then
the Life of Man was not shut up in such narrow Limits, as now it is? The Cloth
is now shrunk up to Threescore Years and Ten, but then it was stretched out to
several Hundreds: A very fair time sure, for both Master and Scholar. A Learned
Dr. William's 2d Sermon. of Revel. p. 8, 9.
Man has well observed, That the Longevity of those Patriarchs, with whom this
Lesson was deposited, and who were to take care that it might be preserved
inviolable, was a very great Advantage: For three of them alone filled up the
first Period of 1656 Years, from the Creation to the Flood, viz. Adam,
Methuselah, and Noah. And Four of the Fathers after the Flood, though the extent
of their Lives was then shortened, fell in with the 856 Years from the Flood,
to the giving of the Law by Moses; and in him we have fresh Information about
the Promised Messiah.

But if their Days had been much Shorter, and the Lesson much Harder and
Longer; yet it should have been studied with the greatest Application of Mind,
as is usual in all Arts and Sciences, which are of an infinitely Inferior
Nature. They tend to a Man's comfortable living in this World; But the Doctrine
of the Promised Messiah, was what their Eternal Welfare was wrapped up in; And so
was that of their Children too. And therefore considering that Love to
Themselves, and to their Posterity, which is so very deeply engraven on the
Souls of Men; such a Doctrine should have been diligently and affectionately
taught, readily learned, fixedly retained, and carefully transmitted down from
Age to Age; they should sooner have forgotten their own Names, than have
forgotten that. Cardan Baxter 's Saints Rest, Part 3. Chapter 13.
speaking of one who had a Receipt that would suddenly and certainly dissolve
the Stone in the Bladder, concludes of him, That without doubt that Man is in
Hell, because he never Revealed it to any before he died. The Sentence, I
confess, is somewhat severe; but as a Lover of Mankind, a Man can hardly
forbear to think the same, even though neither He, nor His, were ever troubled
with that most afflictive of all bodily Distempers. But if this Man had by his
own Wickedness contracted, and then transmitted that Disease to his Children,
and knew it would run down from him in a Blood to his Childrens Children to the
End of the World; if yet he had not revealed so rare a Secret to his own
Offspring, that they might be freed from that racking Torment in this World,
which he had brought upon them; such wretched ill Nature did deserve to be
punished with Everlasting Torments in the other State.

All this being considered, one would think it were Impossible but that the
Substance of Revealed Religion should have been transmitted, and a sufficient
Knowledge of it diffused everywhere, and been propagated together with the
Humane Nature. And so it would, had it not been for most inexcusable Negligence
and Perverseness, most amazing Folly and Madness. God has not been wanting to
Men, but Men have been most unaccountably wanting to Themselves and their
Children. Now by what Law is God obliged, in a miraculous Manner, to restore a
fair Estate to a Family, when one was settled upon it, and has been very
wickedly and foolishly embezzled? Or to make Corn spring out of the Earth, when
Men refuse to Plow their Ground, and throw away their Seed?

But least of all, could this have been reasonably expected, either by the Men
of the Old, or those of the New World. For they lost not only the Notices of
the Promised Seed, but even of God himself; and dropped the plain Principles of
Common Morality, as well as those of Revealed Religion. Whether Idolatry, that
absurd and sottish Practice, began before the Flood, is not so very certain;
however it is plain that the whole Earth was covered with Debauchery and
Violence, all flesh having corrupted their way; whereon God resolved to sweep
them all away at once, eight Persons only excepted, to people it again with a
better Race. But when they had stocked it, Wickedness, notwithstanding God's
Curse, so lately and so visibly attending it, grew very fruitful, increased and
multiplied as fast as Mankind did; And that vile Idolatry, and abominable
Immorality, into the Dregs whereof they so speedily sunk, provoked God to
abandon them in a fearful manner, as the Apostle excellently discourses in the
first Chapter to the Romans. And it was a Righteous thing in him to do it. Nor
can there be any just Grounds to reflect on him for not setting on foot a new
divine Revelation, which they had wilfully and carefully lost; when besides
that, they so abominably sinned against the Common Light of Nature and Reason.

However at length, been transmitted and reflected into every Room thereof. For
he renews the Promise of a Seed in which all the Nations of the Earth should be
Blessed, to Abraham and his Children, who were Considerable Men, and
Considerable Travelers, and in very Great Esteem with some Kings: And no doubt
but these Holy Men were forward to instruct them and their Subjects in this
main Point, had they been but willing to learn.

After this God brings the Children of Abraham out of Egypt, being increased
like the Stars of Heaven, and like those in the Galaxy, gathered together into
a Body, that so mingling their Lights, and shining with united Rays, they might
be the more visible; maintains them in the Wilderness, plants and preserves
them in Canaan by a Train of mighty Miracles, though he could have done it with
less Noise, to awaken the Neighbor Nations to come and join with them. For
when he chose the Israelites, he was far from excluding thereby the Rest of
Mankind from the Hopes and Means of Salvation. As the Apostle argues concerning
the Way of Salvation by Christ, Gal. 3.17.
so may we concerning the designed Extent thereof: The Law which was Four
hundred and thirty Years after, could not, in God's Intention, disannul the
Promise, that in Abraham's Seed All the NATIONS of the Earth should be Blessed,
so as to make it of no Effect. Was the Law given the Israelites at Mount Sinai,
against this Promise? God forbid. So far was it from this, that it is supposed
in the Law of Moses, the Heathens would turn Proselytes, and Provision in that
case was made for their Encouragement. Their Law indeed was a Partition Wall;
Ephesians. 2.14.
but it was so to keep the Jews in, not in God's Design, whatever it might be
in theirs, to keep the Gentiles out: And therefore in this Wall there was still
a Door kept open for their Entrance; and that no more came in, is to be
ascribed partly to the Wickedness of the Jew, and partly to that of the Gentile.

And Abraham was a Person of great Renown in the East, among the Syrians and
Chaldaeans. Several great Nations, particularly the Saracens, (for they
themselves scorned to be called Hagarens) descended from him, and valued
themselves upon it; and they were very formidable to the Roman Empire, had a
vast one of their own in the East, and pushed their Conquests Westward as far
as Spain it Self. And the Israelites were a Considerable People, especially in
the Days of David, Solomon, and Hezekiah, as appears from the Bible, wherein we
have Records of their Affairs, and which may justly Challenge as much Credit
with any Man, even though he don't believe its Divine Authority, as any other
Ancient History. The Greeks indeed, and the Latins who transcribed from them,
take little notice of them. But most of them were late Authors, and very much
unacquainted with those Parts of the World for a long time. And though Herodotus
could not see them, yet other Ancient See them mentioned by the Bishop of Meaux
in his Discourse sur l'Histoire universelle, p. 42, 43. It. p. 154, 155.
Historians that lived thereabouts did, and made mention of them. And it may be
we might have found them in that Father of Historians, in his particular
History of the Assyrians, if we had it; which either we have lost, or he never
wrote according to his Promise.

The time would fail me if I should speak of the Captivities and Dispersions of
the Jews into the East, and Egypt, etc. that, together with them, Divine
Knowledge might be scattered abroad: Or of the Translation of Part, if not the
Whole of the Old Testament by the means of Ptolomy; whence, as appears from
Tacitus and Virgil, the World about the time of the Birth of Christ was big
with Expectations of the Appearance of some Extraordinary Person for the
General Good of Mankind. Only I cannot but remark that Evil Spirit that reigned
among the Jews, who translated the Sacred Writings very unwillingly, and merely
out of Fear of Ptolomy, whom they durst not incense against Themselves by a
flat refusal of it: but yet they Annually kept a Mournful Lightfoot's Harm.
Vol. 1. p. 490. Walton's App. Bib. Proleg. 9.. 3.
Fast on the Account of that Version; so much did they envy the Glory of God,
and the Good of Mankind; and so loath were they to communicate this Treasure to
the Heathens, desiring still to have kept it locked up in their own Language.

I shall not enlarge on the Design and Command of our Savior to Disciple all
Nations; nor of the incredible Diligence of the Apostles in Spreading the
Gospel, nor the Barbarous Treatment they met with. It had reached much further,
had not Men raised up a Bank against it. Nor of the Fault of Christians or
Heathens at this day, who can Export to, and Import from the remotest Parts all
sorts of Commodities for a little Worldly Profit; but the one does not
endeavor to spread, nor the other covet that Sacred Treasure of Divine
Knowledge, that is worth infinitely more than Thousands of Silver and Gold.

On the whole, it is evident, that Revealed Religion, as to the Substance of it,
and as far as was absolutely Necessary, was twice promulgated to all the World;
once to Adam, another time to Noah and his Family; and therefore I claim A. W
's Promise Page 210.
, and expect that he Renounce his Deism, and Declare for the Gospel: And if he
be a Man of Honor, and value his Word as a Gentleman, he will publicly
profess himself a Christian. It was also preached to the Israelites, that from
them the Sound thereof might reach other Nations. And we Christians have it in
the last and best Edition of it to the same End. And it is owing unto the gross
Fault and vile Wickedness of Men, that this Religion has not been Universally
diffused, God having provided very apt and proper Means in order to it. And
having done so, he was not obliged in an Extraordinary way to send an Angel
from Heaven with a Bible in his hand to every Particular Person; No more than
the Government think themselves obliged to send the Acts of Parliament to every
Parish, or every distinct House therein. It Is rationally supposed, that every
one will so far mind their Own Concerns, whereon their Liberties, and Lives,
and the Common Welfare does depend, as to enquire them out and look after 'em
themselves. And if the Ordinary means of attaining to the Knowledge of them, be
wretchedly neglected, unusual Methods cannot reasonably be expected.

Yet after all, Compassionable, because they want the Ordinary Means of
Knowledge; and they honestly live up to the Light of Nature, they are in the
hands of a Good God, who will not deal hardly with them, but make all the
Favorable Allowances their Case will reasonably admit of. And this I am sure,
they will fare much better than Mr. G. or A. W. who have the Sacred Writings,
but, like Swine, trample this Jewel in the Dirt, and impiously Blaspheme the
Son of God, who is our Savior, and will be their Judge at the last Day.

For it is in vain for this Gentleman to plead as he does, That Oracles of
Reason, p. 205.
if the Heathens living up to the Height of Natural Religion might be Eternally
happy, I see no Reason but why we may be so too. I will be very liberal in my
Suppositions at the present, that Heathens and Deists too live up to the HEIGHT
of Natural Religion; and also that the Former may be Saved: but I will give him
a Reason why the Latter cannot: viz. Because through the Wickedness of their
own Hearts they contemn and defy that Divine Revelation which was never
proposed to, and therefore could not be abused by, the other.

Nor must he think to come off another Day, Evidence of the Truth of Revealed
Religion. For thus he argues; Id. p. 206.
If our Happiness depend upon our Belief, we cannot firmly believe till our
Reason be convinced of a Supernatural Religion. And if the Reasons of it were
Evident, there could be no longer any Contention about Religion: All Men would
embrace the same, and acquiesce in it. No Prejudice would prevail against the
Certainty of a Future Good. It Is every Man's greatest Business here to labor
for his Happiness, and consequently none would be backward to know the Means.
-- And if I cannot believe, it is a Sign the Evidence is not strong enough to
make me. And a little before, says Page 202.
he, We ( i.e. We Deists, for I think that is the true meaning of the Passage,
though it be brought in as spoken by an Objector; We) say, that Religion is only
true, which is or may be reasonable and convincing to all Men: Now if it be not
Generally held, it appears not convincing. Hereby he has highly obliged the
Atheistical Crew, and given them an Argument to overturn the Foundations of the
Deists Natural Religion. For they may say, If the Reasons of it were Evident,
there could be no longer any Contention about the Being of a God, or a Future
State. And if I cannot believe either of these, (as says the Atheist I cannot)
it is a sign the Evidence is not strong enough to make me. Nay, as a foul Gun
recoils and wounds him that shoots with it, so does this way of Arguing return
upon our Deists. For there are Multitudes that do believe Natural Religion is
not sufficient for the Happiness of Men, especially of those who have a
Revealed one proposed to them, but denied by 'em. It Is so evident, that this
may be retorted upon themselves, that our Author observes it, and makes this
modest Reply to it, P. 202, 203.
That there are but few of a Nation that ever consider to the Bottom of a
Religion; which we must be so civil as to suppose the Immortal Deist to do. But
it is evident that many Men in all Religions at this day have centered in the
Opinion of Natural Religion, and its Sufficiency of (I suppose it should be
for) Happiness. But no Christian does or can think so, as long as these Words
are in the Bible, He that believes not shall be damned; and except ye believe
that I am He, ye shall die in your Sins. And Reason will tell us, if Scripture
had been silent, that those Men must perish that profanely treat the Son of
God as an Impostor, and his Religion as a Lie.

Further, according to this way of arguing, hardly any thing can be either True
or False, whereas every thing must be either one or the other. Let us take for an
Instance the Doctrine of Transubstantiation. If the Reasons of it were evident,
there could be no longer any Contention about it. All Men would embrace it, and
acquiesce in it. If it be not Generally held, it appears not convincing. If I
cannot believe it, (and all Protestants, the Heathens, and some of the Papists
themselves tell us they cannot believe it) it is a Sign the Evidence is not
strong enough to make me. Therefore the Doctrine of Transubstantiation is not
true. And by the same way of arguing, I will prove it is not False neither. For
if the Reasons against it were evident, there could be no longer any Contention
about it; but all the World would presently turn good Roman Catholics in this
Fundamental Point. And if I cannot believe it to be False, says the Papist,
it is a Sign the Evidence is not strong enough to make me.

But the Reason why Men do not believe the Gospel, is not the want of External
Evidence, but Internal Disposition; which latter is as necessary as the former.
We have Motives sufficient to sway a wise and pious Man to embrace
Christianity; but God has not given us such a glaring Evidence of the Truth of
it, as we have that two and two make four. If he had, Assenting to it would be
no Proof of any Man's Ingenuity, there would be nothing Praiseworthy in it. A
Deist may be proud and conceited, mad upon his Lusts, and therefore Unwilling
the Gospel should be true; he may not duly weigh the Arguments which are
brought for the Confirmation of it; nor earnestly and honestly pray for God's
Assistance to discern aright; nor be true to that Light which he already
enjoys; and for these Reasons God in his Righteous Judgment may leave him to
the Devil and Himself, and then he cannot believe; but for all that he shall
Eternally perish, and that very justly too, in and for his Infidelity.

And this Gentelman must be a great Stranger to Humane Nature and the Course of
the World, who says, No Prejudice would prevail against the Certainty of a
Future Good: It Is every Man's greatest Business here to labor for his
Happiness, and consequently none WOULD be backward to know the means; which the
Experience of all Ages does evidently confute. In short, besides Evidence and
Argument, there is required a pious Temper of Soul, lying open to, and easily
impressible by Divine Truths; and one of such a Make would quickly close with,
and firmly adhere to Christianity; as a prepared Soil easily takes in, and
firmly retains such a sort of good Grain as is most agreeable to it.

I would not have this Gentleman deceive himself with vain Hopes, Infinite
Mercy Page 209.
, which is, as he expresses it, as 'twere God's High-Court of Equity in the
Case, to relieve from the Extremity of the Law. For the Case between God and
Fallen Man is not as he, with the Socinians, represents Ib.
it, like that of Debtor and Creditor; but that of a notorious Rebel, and a
Wise and Righteous Governor, (which one Observation will answer most, if not
all the Pleas brought from Divine Goodness). And if a vile Traitor should tear
in pieces the Prince's Act of Grace, and defy him that brought it to him,
instead of complying with the Terms of it; and then pretend to cast himself on
the King's Mercy without Repenting of that insolent Abuse of his offered
Indulgence, but stubbornly persist, and openly justify himself in so doing,
though he do pretend to be sorry for his other Crimes; no Chancery would relieve
him, but every Man of Sense would think it very Equitable that he should be
executed according to the utmost Rigor of the Law.

It Is easy to apply this. Page 200.
that what Sir C. Wolesly tells us is most true, That Mankind in all Ages have
applied themselves to God as guilty Offenders, and have agreed that an
Expiation was necessary, but looked up to him for the Revelation of it:
wherefore they used several Sacrifices and Lustrations, etc. He makes this very
Extraordinary Answer to it, viz. These several Expiations were indeed all but
Symbolical, and referred to our Sorrow and Repentance; That is the true and
only Expiation of Sin, and is so agreed upon by all Men in all Ages, and of all
Religions, wherefore take it for an Undoubted Truth. For my part, I cannot but
take it for an undoubted Falsehood, and gross Mistake. I grant that they thought
Repentance Outram de Sacrif. p. 168.
as well as Prayer ought to accompany their Sacrifices. But he that says all
their Sacrifices were only Symbolical of Repentance, and that it was so in the
Sense of all Ages, and all Religions, says he knows not what. 'Twas not so
among the Jews. They offered Sacrifices to make Atonement for their Sins, and
an Expiation of them; and they judged that their Sins were imputed to the
Beast, who thereupon was killed, that by its suffering Punishment in their
stead, they might be released, and God be reconciled to them.

But the smell of a Jew, especially in the Bible, is offensive to this
Gentleman; and therefore let us go to the Heathen Nations, which will be more
suitable to him. They ransacked the whole Earth, Air, and Water, for Oblations
to their Gods. Some think Swine were the most Ancient ones. But it is more Owen
Exerc. on Heb. Vol. 1. p. 310.
likely that the Fruits of the Earth were so; Herbs and Plants Potter 's Antiq.
of Greece. p. 188.
they plucked up by the Roots, and burnt them with their Leaves and Fruit. And
the Gods fed as well as the Men; for this was before Flesh was eaten. But when
the one fared better, so did the the other, viz. on Bulls, Oxen, Heifers, Rams,
Goats, Boars, Swine, Sheep, Lambs, Dogs, Cocks, Geese, Pigeons, Turtles,
Horses, Tunnies, yea, and Eels too Id. 193, etc. Lord Herbert de Relig. Gentil.
p. 200.
, if they were of the Larger Sort. But some Men were either Poorer, or else
better Husbands than so; and they made a Cake, and fashioned it into the
likeness of an Ox, and so sacrificed it.

Their Folly did not stop here, but turned into downright Frenzy; for they
butchered Men, Women, and Children; their best Friends and nearest Relations,
and burnt them on their Altars. Herodotus, Diodorus Siculus, Porphyry, and
Caesar, etc. tell us this was a most Universal Custom. Though at length in
several Places they began to relent, and find out a Temper. For at Rhodes
Porphyry, de Abst. l. 2. p. 221.
they at last were contented with the Sacrificing of some vile Criminal only;
the Romans Servius in Virg. p. 552.
, their Slaves; and instead of that, afterward they would lay their young Men
on their Altars, and soundly scourge them, (though I think the Fathers should
have been in their Places); yet others would Whip them to Death Potter, uti
supra.
. Diphilus in Cyprus made them offer an Ox. Amasis Porphyry de Abst. l. 2. p.
224, 5, 6.

See the Testimonies out of Philo 's Translation of Sanconiathon. Clemens
Alexandr. Dionys. Halicarn. and Diodorus Siculus. In Eusebius de Praeparat.
Evang. l. 4. chapter 16. Herodot. l. 2. Caesar de bello Gall. l. 6. c. 4.


in Egypt substituted three Images of Wax, in the place of three Men. At
Laodicaea, a Stag at last supplied the room of the Virgin. Iphicrates, or Hist.
l. 19. c. 1.
as Justin says, Darius abolished this Custom among the Carthaginians, and
Adrian almost throughout the whole Empire. The Alteration, and the abolishing
of it, shows what was the old Custom, which did obtain universally among the
Greeks too Porphyry uti supra.
; so that a late Ingenious Potter's Antiq. Greece, p. 193.
Author was mistaken in saying, It was hardly in use among them, or any
civilized Nations. And Philo out of Sanconiathon says, The Phaenician History
is full of such Instances. To which may be added several Testimonies out of the
Scriptures, of offering their little Ones to Moloch, etc.

And could all this be done only as a Symbol of Repentance? He must be in great
want of a Sign, that shall hang up his Friend, or his Child at his Door for
one. There can be no Shadow of Reason to move them to such a way of signifying
their Sorrow, if that were all that was intended.

But it looks somewhat like a Rational Motive, if they had any Hope hereby to
expiate their Sins, and turn away the Anger of God from them; which is so
Terrible an Evil, that provided it may be obtained, it cannot be too dearly
purchased. And the Same Authors that tell us of their Practice, tell us that
this was their Principle. They knew Mankind to be the noblest Part of the
visible Creation; and thought the more Excellent the Sacrifice was, the more
likely it was to reach this end. This is evident from the Cause, and their End
in offering any Sacrifices, but especially Humane Ones. They hoped the Death of
the Victim should be in lieu of that of the Offender; and the Gods they thought
would not be Quod pro vita hominis, nisi vita hominis reddatur, non posse
Deorum immortalium numen placari arbitrantur. Caesar de Bello Gall. l. 6.

Cum inter coetera mala, etiam Peste laborarent. -- Homines ut victimas
immolabant, and impuberes aris admovebant, pacem eorum sanguine eorum
exposcentes. Justin. Hist. l. 18. c. 6.


appeased, unless the Life of one Man went for another. This is plain also from
the very Names they gave their (...). Expiatio. Piamentum. Piamen. Februa.
Lustratio. Purgatio.
Rites and (...). Piaculum. (...), etc.
Sacrifices, and the Manner of their offering them; which was, not only among
the Jews, but the Heathens Outram de Sacrif. p. 278, etc.
too, with Solemn Prayers to God, that all the Plagues which they or their
Country had deserved, might light on the Head of the Victim, and so they
themselves escape. And hereupon they thought that all their Sins did meet upon
it, and defile it to that Degree, that none who had touched it, dared to return
home till they had washed and purified themselves.

And now let the Reader judge, whether Sacrifices were only Symbolical of their
Sorrow; and that Men never dreamt of any atoning Virtue in them: But that all
Men of all Nations looked on Repentance as an Expiation, and the only one too.

I Will put an end to the Readers trouble, Oracles of Reason, p. 197.
One Infinite, Eternal God; and yet the Reader may remember that in my Epistle
to him, I have showed him, That Mr. G. is for Two Page 194.
Gods, the one Good, the other Evil. Mr. B. tells us, The First Good, who is
also the First Principle of all Beings, has but ONE Affection or Property, and
that is Page 90.
LOVE: And yet in the same Page adds, There is nothing dreadful in the whole
Nature of God, but his JUSTICE; no Attribute else being terrible.

A. W. says this is one of the Chief Heads of their Religion, That we are to
expect Page 197.
Rewards and Punishments hereafter, according to our Actions in this Life,
which includes the Souls Immortality, and is proved by our admitting
Providence. But yet, in the same Letter see how faintly he speaks, viz. Grant
that they SEEM reasonable, etc. But Mr. B. speaks Out Page 125.
, That the Doctrine of the Immortality of the Soul, was but a cunning Trick and
Invention of the Politicians, who had not so much a regard to TRUTH as Honesty,
(a very great Instance of their Honesty to invent Useful Lies), and that herein
they did as Physicians do by their Patients, or Nurses by their Children, who
tell them a fair Story, though never so false, that they may deceive them for
their Good.

If the Son don't speak home enough, let us hear the Father, who says Ideoque
nos Creaturae sumus aeterni Dei apparitiones momentaneae, quas tantum terris
ostendunt Fata, nec ultra esse sinunt, veluti effigies in Aulaeis. Discourse of
Sir H. B's de Anima. In the Oracles of Reason, p. 156.
, We Creatures are the Momentary Apparitions of the Eternal God, which the
Fates only show to the Earth, and don't suffer to be any longer, as Images in
Tapistry Hangings. The whole Discourse Mr. B. calls, An undigested Id. p. 154.
Heap of his Father's Thoughts. And that these are only such Id. p. 157.
Twilight Conjectures as our Humane Reason (whereof we yet so vainly boast) can
furnish us with. -- So that indeed all Philosophy, excepting Skepticism, is
little more than Dotage. A Censure true enough, though not so decent from the
Mouth of Mr. B. A Son should not use his Pen to let fall such Blots on his
Father's Writings and Memory. But how vainly indeed, to use his own Word, does
he boast of REASON, when he calls it the Sovereign Preface to Oracles of
Reason, p. 3.
Rule and Touchstone, the Supreme and Primitive Director of every Man, if it
give no better a Light than this? and what Sorry Oracles is it like to utter?

Mr. B. tells us, To be Page 91.
sure the Deist is no Idolater, none can accuse him of Idolatry. But the Reason
is a very poor one, viz. because he acknowledges one Supreme Everlasting God,
and thinks Magnificently of him. So do the Papists as well as he, and yet
Protestants unanswerably prove them guilty of Idolatry. And the Deist,
according to his Principles, will be an Idolater, if he live in a Popish or a
Pagan Country. For, says A.W. Page 203.
the Learned in all Religions, in the outward Ceremonies of every Religion, are
every Man of 'em content to Conform to those of their own Country. And seeing
some of the Heathen Worship is very filthy and obscene, we may guess at his
Sobriety and Chastity, if ever he should fall among 'em. But suppose it should
be free from Obscenity; yet for a Man to join in the Worship of an Image or a
false God, which he believes to be so, merely because it is the Religion
established by Law, is Gross sneaking Hypocrisy, which a Man of Honor would
Scorn; and thereby we may guess at their Moral Virtue which they talk so much
of, as another of their Fundamentals.

And seeing the Deists, as they themselves say, think so Ib.
Magnificently of God, and Mr. B. was such a zealous Account of the Life and
Death of Mr. Blount, p. 6.
Assertor of the Glory, Honor, and Adoration of ONE GOD, let us a little
examine this. Mr. G. says there can be no such thing as a pure Page 187.
Spirit, independent of all Body and Matter; and that they that advance the
Opinion of pure and Immaterial Substances, trust to Fancy and mere Conjectures;
and so God is a Mateiral Being. And having degraded the Deity from a pure
Spirit into a Body, he endeavors to prove there are answerable Qualities to be
found in him. For, since it is Evident from this Page 190.
uncontrovertible Maxim, Nemo dat quod non habet, that the Qualities of all
things, and therefore of Body, are in God himself (that is, in an infinite
Degree of Perfection) the most pure of Spirits, it is not likely that Body
should be derogatory to the Purity of infinitely inferior Spirits. And so God
is an infinitely hot, dull, and heavy Body; and yet at the same time he is
Infinitely Cold, and brisk and light too. For there are Bodies to which all
these Qualities do belong. And does not this Man now think very MAGNIFICENTLY
of his Maker?

But how bold soever he may be with him, he is very civil to the Female Sex, in
providing Husbands for 'em from among the Page 190.
Angels; though what he further says on that Subject for two Pages Page 191, 192.
together, I shall not transcribe, because I will not stain my Paper, nor
pollute the Mind of my Reader. And yet this wretchedly unconstant Man quickly
after tells us, That a Woman is the most lovely Page 191. at the Bottom.
BRUTE of the Universe. A Flight this is, which I hope LINDAMOUR, as the Writer
of Mr. Blount's Life and Death calls himself, will not forget, the next time he
pays his Devotions to the Divine Image, as he words it, of the Honorable and
Divine HERMIONE; for whom this Deist, though to be sure he is no Idolater, has so
great a Veneration, that he talks of Sacrificing Account of the Life and Death
of Mr. Blount, p. 1, 2.
his own Life for her with his own Hands, as Mr. B. did for Astrea, his
Brother's Wife. This Lindamour defends and applauds as an Heroical Action in
Philander, with this remarkable Saying out of Almanzor, I my self am King of
me; though how this is consistent with the third Fundamental of A. W's Religion,
viz. That it is our Duty to Worship and Obey God as our Creator and GOVERNOR, I
leave to his Consideration. As also how he will reconcile Mr. Blount's Practice
with these Words of his in his Discourse against the Surrenderers of Charters,
viz. Page 178.
He that commits Murder with the Sword of Justice, aggravates his Crime to the
Highest Degree: As these Gentlemen would have done in making the Government
Felo de se, and Accessory to its own ruin.

Though it be not a matter of so great Moment as the rest which I have already
mentioned; yet I cannot but observe, that Mr. B. Page 128.
accuses Sir H. Savil, that he has so far Complemented the Jewish, as to Rob
the English World of the fifth Book of Tacitus 's History, by omitting any Part
of it in his Version; and yet he himself is guilty of the same Fault; and
besides the mistranslation of what he gives us, has kept back a Considerable
part of Tacitus's Account. But I suppose he thought, that wherever there is a
Jew, it is fit there should be somewhat of Circumcision.

I Will add but one more, (though I could produce several others): The Deist
sometimes bears up very briskly about Repentance, It Is the true and only
Expiation of Sin, and is so agreed upon by all Men, in all Ages, and of all
Religions; wherefore take it for an Page 200.
Undoubted Truth; and this not revealed, but innate, and a part of Natural
Religion. Sure by his Confidence he looks on this as Full Payment. And yet a
little after, it is but a little part of Composition-Money, but it is all we
have. Repentance is what we can answer Page 209.
to an Atonement, and therefore we may reasonably assert it is all God will
expect from us. It Is but as a Thousand Pounds when a Man owes a Million, and
the Creditor can have but All. And as pert as Mr. B. is, yet sometime his Heart
fails him. For the highest he can go is but Vero-simile est, similem Deo a Deo
Page 90.
non negligi. It Is likely that he who is like God, is not neglected of God: Not
to be Neglected of God, is but a very faint Expression. A Man may be not
neglected of God, and yet be but in very low Circumstances. And yet even this
too is but likely, which is but very cold Comfort.

All these Flowers I have gathered out of one Garden, though from several Beds.
The Passages are written, some by one Author, some by another; but we may look
upon them as the Sense of the Party. Mr. Blount has affixed the Seal of the
Company to all these Papers, and published them all together, as Oracles of
Reason. He, I am sure, was answerable for them; and so is the Writer of his
Life, who thus highly commends them, after having spoke very Contemptibly of
other Writings as Trifles, and their Authors as Whiffling Scribblers. Account
of Mr. Blount 's Life, p. 2.
But the Subjects and Compositions of these following Sheets, left no room for
either of these, i. e. Apology or Abstract. Their Merit took away all Occasion
of Apology, and the Majesty and Consequence of their Design all pretense to
Abstracts. Those that desire to see these Sacred MONUMENTS, must be more nice
Considerers than to be satisfied without attentive OBSERVATION: They are TRUTHS
of too great Importance to be Slightly run over; of too great Beauty, not to
hold our Eyes some time on them, to take a thorough Survey of their various
Perfections. I have looked attentively into these MONUMENTS, and think that
Lindamour would do well to put in for what he speaks Ib.
of, the next Verger's Place that falls at Westminster; which if he can get, he
cannot then point to any Tomb, that is fuller of Stench and Rottenness than the
Papers which in his Preface he has so highly extolled. On the whole, I believe
the Reader will incline to my Opinion, That some Men run down Christianity
because it is Religion, rather than because it is Revealed.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
In the Epistle to the Reader.
THE Necessity of opposing Desism,. 1. Serious Piety in General the Best
Defense against it,. 2. And Humility in Particular,. 3. The Rational Grounds of
the Christian Faith,. 3. An Account of the following Treatise,. 4.
In the Preface.
SOme Things we are in the Dark about: and may contentedly be so. But not as to
Pardon and a Future State.
In the Book.
CHAP. I. PArdon, a Matter of great Importance, p. 1 Natural Light cannot Assure
us that God will forgive, p. 2 Nor if he will, how far Pardon shall extend as
to Persons or Crimes, p. 10. Nor of the Terms upon which, p. 18 The Pleas that
it will assure us of Pardon upon mere Repentance considered, a p. 18. ad p. 45.
Nor When God will Pardon, p. 45. Nor how often, p. 49 The Blasphemy against the
Holy Ghost is the Sih meant in Heb. 6.4. and chapter 10.26. p. 51 Nor to what
Degree God will forgive, p. 63 Under each of which Heads is shown what
Assurance we have from Revelation.
CHAP. II. A Future State of Happiness, a Point of great Importance, p. 72
Natural Light cannot Assure us there is such a State, p. 80 The Heathens
uncertain of it, p. 81 Nor of the Greatness of it, p. 119. The wretched Notions
of the Heathens about it, p. 120 Nor of its Eternity and Unchangeableness, p.
149 The Sentiments of the Heathens about this, p. 150 Nor that we shall enjoy
it immediately after Death, p. 168 The Fancies of the Heathens about this, p.
170 Nor who shall enjoy it, p. 175. The Opinions of the Heathens about this, p.
177 Nor the Terms of it, p. 183. Nor where Grace is to be had, to enable us to
perform the Terms on which Pardon and Future Happiness are suspended, p. 187
Under each of which Heads is shown what Satisfaction we have from Revelation.
The CLOSE. CHrist and his Gospel to be loved and adhered to, p. 201. We should
be careful we don't fall short of Pardon and Heaven, p. 205. and clear up our
Right to 'em, p. 206. Directions for our so doing, Ib.

In the Appendix.
A.W 's Logic like his Religion, p. 213. His Objection against Revealed
Religion, That it has not, and could not be Universally known, p. 214. The
Reasons of so large an Answer to it, p. 215. The Case of Men different from
that of other Creatures, p. 216. The Gospel Preached to Adam and Noah, p. 217.
Men's own Fault, that it did not from them descend to All in every Age, Ib. God
not obliged to spread it by Miraculous Methods, p. 226. Preached to Abraham and
the Jews, though other Nations not excluded thereby from the Means of Grace, p.
228 The Fault of Christians and Heathens that the Gospel is not further Spread,
p. 234. A. W 's Promise challenged, p. 235. Heathens left to God, p. 236. But
certainly in a better Case than Deists among us, p. 237 No want of Evidence for
Christianity, but somewhat else in them, p. 238 Their Hopes from Infinite Mercy
vain, p. 244. Sacrifices not merely Symbolical, nor Repentance an Expiation;
much less the only one in the Opinion of all Men, p. 246. The Contradictions
and gross Blunders of our Modern Deists, p. 254.

