A TESTIMONY To the TRUE and Spiritual Worship: AND A WORD of Consolation to
the Children of LIGHT. Also a MESSAGE of TRUTH to PROFESSORS.

By Tho. Tailor..

Printed in the Year, 1670.

A Testimony to the True and Spiritual Worship: And a Word of Consolation to
the Children of Light.
GOD is a Spirit, all Pure, Holy, Just, and True; and therefore in Spirit,
Purely, Holy, and Truly, will he be worshipped of all that come to him; and
therefore all that Worship, which stands in the Impure and Unholy nature of the
Flesh is of no acceptance with him: Cain may Sacrifice, and Israel may be
Circumcised, and Judas do something like an Apostle, but so long as the
Murderous, Scoffing, Covetous, Traiterous Nature of the flesh stands, all is
nothing.

The Lord God, blessed for ever, has in this day of his powerful Love made
manifest himself, amongst the Children of men on Earth; and now Sons and
Daughters do Prophecy, and Old and Young do Sing of his Praise, and Sound
forth with joyful Hearts of the worthy noble Acts of his Right Hand; because
his Kingdom is come, and his Glory in Sion is appeared; and the Tabernacle of
God is indeed with men, and he himself, not a Shadow, or a Figure, or outward
Representation of him, but he himself, who is over all God blessed for ever,
dwells in, and with his People, his dearly beloved Seed, who have believed in
his Light, that true Light, that lights every man that comes into the World,
and have not despised the day of Small Things, but have waited in the Light, in
the Faith of his holy Power, for the fulfilling of his Promises, and so through
FAITH and Patience have received the Promises of Everlasting Life, and
Salvation fulfilled in them; whereby the Mountains are thrown down, and the
Valleys lifted up, and all made plain, pure, and perfect for the Holy God and
Father of all Mercy and Goodness to dwell in, and walk in: Glory, glory to his
great Name, who has not left himself without a Witness of his Faithfulness
this day, nor left the Throne of David's Kingdom without an Heir to sit upon it,
to Order and Establish it in Righteousness: And now, even now in this our day,
the Day which the Lord has made, is the blessed Fountain of the great Deepth
of the Love of God in Christ Jesus truly opened; and the Waters of the Heavenly
Temple are so deep that a man may swim in them; and it is not now as sometimes
in times past, here a line and there a line, here a little and there a little,
but now has the Lord our God, according to his excellent Loving Kindness,
fully opened to Judah, and the Children of the Heavenly Mother Jerusalem, the
Mystery of his Will, and Fountain of his Eternal Goodness, in Christ Jesus the
Light, whereby our Souls are satisfied; and Sin and Transgression done away,
and the Everlasting Righteousness* which makes Pure and Perfect the very Heart,
Soul, and Conscience to God brought in; ever Blessed be his glorious Name for
his unspeakable Gift, Amen, and amen.

And now are all false Religions seen, and by the Light, which makes them
manifest, judged; for the false Births, which are of the great Whore, (Mystery
Babylon) whose Religions are carried on by the will of the Flesh, as by the
fleshly wisdom they, were invented, stand all in the Curse, where nothing is
perfect, but their own misery and wretchedness; and therefore it is that both
Priest and People, in this wretched state, do all with one consent cry out
against the perfect Work of Jesus Christ in his People, saying, None can be
Perfect here; And so do in a word deny the very end for which Christ came, and
the end for which the Ministry of Christ was given; for Christ give himself for
his People, That he might wash them in the Word of Life, and so present them to
himself a glorious Congregation, without Spot or Wrinkle, or any such thing,
Ephesians. 5.25. etc. And thou art all Fair my Love, says Christ to his Spouse,
and no Spot in thee. And there is no spot in thee. And the Law made nothing
perfect, but the bringing in of the better H O P E (Christ in us the Hope of
Glory, Col. 1.27.) did, Heb. 7.19. And the very end of the Ministry was, for
the Edifying and Perfecting the Saints, who are Christ's Body, Ephesians. 4.12. And we
labor to present every man perfect to God in Christ, Col. 1.28. And John
17.23. I in them and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one. But now
the false Ministry, which stands in the Flesh, in which no good thing dwel^s
keeps People always learning, and never brings any to the Knowledge of the
perfecting Truth of the Lord Jesus; for how should it? For they have Run and I
have not sent them, says God, therefore they shall not profit the People at
all. Jer. 23. And under this woeful Condition lies all the World of unbelieving
people, who believe not in the Truth, Christ Jesus, but follow their own dark
spirits, which see nothing of the Kingdom of God, nor the holy Worshippers
therein.

A long and dark Night of Apostasy has passed over the World since the
Apostles time, wherein the spirit of Antichrist and Devils has wrought
effectually in the Children of Disobedience, as was foretold, to the blinding
of their minds, and hardening their hearts against the everlasting Gospel of
Truth, the Heavenly Light and Power of God unto Salvation; and has so deluded
them, that they have thought they were doing God service, when they were
persecuting his Truth, and Members of his Body, as many in the same dark
deluded state do at this day; but now the Lord is lifting up his Standard
against that great Whore, Dragon, false Prophet, and their Armies, who Gog and
Magog like, would devour the Lambs of Christ.

And now no Weapon formed against Christ, his Truth and People shall ever
prosper any more at all, but the Lamb shall have the Victory; and the Kingdom,
Dominion, and Greatness of it shall be given to the Saints of the Most High
God, whose Kingdom is everlasting, and that Nation, Kingdom, and People, that
will not bow to Truth, will moulder away, and come to nothing, as the Lord has
said: for now is the effect of every Vision fully to come, and no more at all
to be prolonged. And therefore, Woe, woe to the Inhabitants of the Earth, and the
Sea, who are putting the Day of the Lord afar off, crying Peace, Peace, when
there is no Peace; for there is no Peace to any who will not have Jesus Christ
(the true Light, that lights every man that comes into the World) to rule in
them, and over them; for his is the Kingdom, Glory, and Power, and he will
reign for evermrre, in the midst of his Enemies. Glory to his Name without
ceasing, Amen, and amen, says my Soul, whom thou have redeemed, O Holy One of
Israel, to set forth thy Praise amongst the Living in Jerusalem, thy holy Hill,
so be it.

So now O all ye that love Righteousness, and daily wait to see the heavenly
Kingdom thereof, set up in you, and in all People; I T.T. your Brother, in the
Joys and Sufferings of the Gospel; having had through the mercifulness of our
God and Father, perfect knowledge of his good Way from the beginning of this
Day of his Love, which has dawned upon his beloved Seed in these Islands, and
in all the World, do declare and bear my Testimony for God amongst many
Brethren, that there is no way to God the Father of Light, but by the Light
Christ Jesus, that true Light that lights every man that comes into the
World with a Light that is Pure, Free, Spiritual, and Sufficient, that all men
through it may believe, and so be led out of Darkness, Sin and Death (the ways
of sin) into the mavelous Light and Life, of Righteousness and true Holiness,
and so into fellowship with the Holy God, without which Holiness none can see
him, nor enjoy him forever. For this Gift of God the Light is Holy, and in all
that believe and receive it, it brings forth its own blessed Image, which is
Holiness. And it is Free, and works according to its own blessed Nature in all
that join to it, setting them free from all their spiritual Enemies whatsoever;
and so making them Freeborn Children of the Heavenly Jerusalem, which is free
for evermore, from all the false and imbondaging impositions of the Man of sin
whatsoever.

And so also because this heavenly Gift of God, Christ Jesus the Light, who
lights every man, John 1.9. is perfect, and shines in the heart, therefore it
does of its own Nature, make perfect every man that with their hearts receive
it, and so come to God by it: It makes perfect to God, as pertaining to the
very Heart and Conscience all its Lovers; for if you love the Light you love
God, from whence it comes; for he that loves him that is sent, loves also him
that sent him.

And therefore I say unto all People upon the face of the Earth, that all that
Faith, Hope, Worship, Religion, or whatever it may be called [That stands not
in (and is not carried on in) this Power of God the Light, which lights every
man,] is nothing worth. Every good, and every perfect Gift (says James) comes
down from the Father of Light, who is unchangeable; and it shines out in the
heart of every man, though the Darkness, which through the Fall has gotten
place there, and comprehends it not, yet the Light is there a sure Foundation,
a tried Cornerstone, Elect and Precious; blessed are all that fall upon it, so
as to be broken into godly Sorrow, and Tenderness of heart; and blessed are all
that build upon it, they shall be called the Elect of God, Precious Sons and
Daughters of Zion, and their Building shall never fail them, nay, the Gates of
Hell shall never prevail against their FAITH, because it standing in the Power
of God Christ Jesus, the Light that ever lives, to keep them in a good and
safe Condition, that thus come to God by him.

The Day is dawned, which makes all things manifest, praised be God forever;
even the Spirit of Truth, which leads into all Truth, is come; and the holy
Anointing is witnessed (in all that believe in the Name of the Living
Unchangeable God) which teaches all things, and it abides in the faithful
Hearts, and is sufficient. And he called the Light Day; and so the joyful DAY,
which the Lord has made, being come, we will Rejoice, and be Glad in it,
though the Children of Darkness be never so Angry; For the Lord, our Strength,
will maintain our Cause against all his Foes for evermore, so be it.

And now, though the Children of the Night be many, and Professors of the
Letter of Scripture, that want the Life of it, come forth as so many Armies, to
plead for, and contend for their several formed Ways, and invented Worships,
against the Children of God this day, who Worship God in Spirit and in Truth,
yet greater is he that is in us, then he that is in the World; and so, though
we are forced to Build, in this our holy City, New Jerusalem, with our
Spiritual Sword in our hand, yet we are well content, finding the Lord still
with us in this Day of the Restoration of all things: And so though Tobiah and
Sanballat, with all the Heathen mock, and carry false Reports, concerning us,
to the Rulers of the Earth; yet through the Help of our God we are enabled to
go on in our Holy Spiritual Work, in the Lords Holy City and Temple; and the
Word of the Lord prospers in our Hand, and in our Hearts. And though they say
we deny the Ordinances of God, because we cannot plead for, or put confidence
in a Shadow or Figure; yet holding the Head Christ Jesus, the Light and Life
eternal, we are safe enough, and have the Witness of God in our hearts
justifying us, and sealing in our hearts our Acceptance with his Majesty, which
is our Peace and assurance forever; for praised be the Name of God for ever,
who has given us an understanding to know him that is true, the Son of God,
and we are in him that is true, who is the Everlasting Ordinance of God; and in
him are we baptized, with a Baptism made without hands; and our Supper is with
the Lord in Spirit and Truth where we are daily given to feed feeely at his
Table, whose Body is, Meat indeed; who said, I am the Living Bread that gives
life for ever, John 6. And he that believes in me, and feeds on me, shall
never die, chap. 6.50, 51. God gave the Children of Israel Manna in the
Wilderness, and they died notwithstanding, but my Father gives you the true
Bread, For God so loved the World, that he gave his Son to be the Light and
Life of man; and so to as many as received him then, and do receive him now, to
dwell in their hearts by Faith, to them he gave, and daily does give Power to
become the Sons of God, whose Birth is not of the mortal seed, of Flesh and
Blood, nor the mind or will, or words thereof, but of the incorruptible Seed of
the Word of God, eternal, real, and essential, which lives and endures for
ever, which perishes not with the using, as mortal things do; but it l^ves and
triumphs in its own creating, saving, sustaining, upholding, comforting, and
satisfying virtue and power forevermore, well witnessed in the hearts of the
spiritual Believers this day; For in the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God, and the Word was God, and by it was all things made, and it was
and is the Light and Life of man; and he delighted, and does also this day
greatly rejoice and delight in the habitable parts of his creation; For I will
dwell in them, and walk in them, who open unto me says the Lord that Spirit,
who by his Servant said, Behold I stand at the door and knock; and by his
Servant also now says, Behold the Lord God that Spirit stands at the door of
your hearts [all people] and whosoever opens unto him, he will come in unto
them, and the pure in heart shall see the pure and holy God supping with them,
and they with him; and they shall drink abundantly of the heavenly Wine with
Jesus Christ in the Fathers Kingdom fresh and living ever: for now is the Lord
rending away the Vail, the Covering that has been upon the hears of people,
and making to all people the Feast of fat things, full of marrow, and of Wine
upon the Lees well refined, so be it.

And now is the Lord God blessed for ever fulfilling the Promises of his great
Love in Christ Jesus, which have been since the world began, in this day of the
pouring forth of his holy Spirit, whereby the holy City, New Jerusalem, is felt
come down from God out of Heaven, and God himself dwelling with men, even the
Tabernacle of God with man, as was said before; all holy praises to his Name:
yes, he that sits upon the throne has made, and is daily making all things
new; it is done, and now the Lamb is known to be the Light of his People, and
they need no other; for the Anointing which they have of him teaches all
things; and now is Jerusalem a rejoicing indeed, and her people a joy; but now
the Uncircumcised in heart and ear, who do always resist the Holy Ghost, are
greatly troubled and offended by reason of the great darkness and enmity of
their hearts, because they cannot in their unclean mind enter in; for into this
City no unclean thing, nor any that loves or makes a Lie can enter; for now the
Serpents meat is Dust, and his head is bruised, glory to God for ever. See Isa.
65.17. etc. Rev. 21.1. etc. Acts 7.51, 52.

And now are all the Climers, who have not come in by the door, but are climed
up another way, in their unclean minds, whom Christ calls Thieves and Robbers,
seen, and by the same that discovers them judged and condemned; these are they
that have taken away the Key of Knowledge, and will neither enter into the
Kingdom of God themselves, nor suffer those that are entering in to enter: These
are they whom Christ cries woe against, who love to be called of men Master;
heady and high minded men, with the great Train of their seduced Followers, who
plead for them, and fight for them, because they cry peace to them in their
sins, and tell them they must never be perfect whilst they are here, but must
carry about them a body of sin, without all hope of ever being freed from it,
whilst on Earth, and so in effect deny the end of Christ's coming, who came to
set free the Soul, by destroying the Body of Sin; also they deny the very end,
the very end of Christ's Ministry; for when he assended up on high, he gave
gifts to men, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of
Christ, for the perfecting of the Saints, Ephesians. 4. Come, ye Contenders against
Truth, Is not the perfecting of the Saints in holiness, by bringing them out of
unholiness; and in Faith, out of unbelief; and into the Spirit, out of the
Flesh, and all fleshly and perishing observations? And does not the Ministry of
Christ, which is the true Spiritual Ministry attain its end, and do its work to
the utmost? yea, yea, though the Ministers of Antichrist free, and funie, and
gainsay, and contradict, and blaspeme, and spend their strength in vain, and
perfect nothing but their sins; yet the work of the Lord goes on, and prospers,
and the Body of Christ is built up, and the Songs of Sion sung in the holy
Land, and none can take part therein but the Redeemed of the Lord, who are
redeemed from the Earth, into the heavenly Society, and Church of the
Firstborn, whose names are written in Heaven, and who follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goes; these are not defiled with the Cup of the great Whore,
for they are Virgins, and have Oil in their Lamps, and so need not go to the
Merchants of Babylon to buy. And so all people bow to Truth in the inward
parts, for obedience to that is the Sacrifice which God requires, and better
then all other Sacrifices; all your Sabbath out of this, are but mere
druggeries, and all your Willworship, Ceremonies, and Traditions (being out of
this) are but mere mock Services; yea, out of this, (to wit, the Light and
Truth in the inward parts) your very Faith is vain, and your hope of none
effect, and your prayers sin; for unto thee who wilt not have it to rule in
thee, the Lord has no respect, nor to thy Offering: So prize your time, O all
ye Strangers to the Life of God, and make supplication to your Judge, the Light
Christ Jesus, that Lights every man that comes into the World; for this is the
condemnation, that Light is come Into the World, and men loved, and do love
their evil deeds, and hate the Light; for every evil Doer hates the Light,
says Christ, yea, it is so, whatsoever the Hypocrite, the Evil-Doer with his
mouth may say to the contrary.

And all ye children of the Light, walk in the Light; and be thankful, for the
Lord is arisen in mighty power to crown you with his Glory, his glorious
Righteous, Wisdom, Holiness, and Salvation, he is come indeed to fulfill all his
Promises in you, and for you, to the glorifying of the Arm of his own Power,
and for your Souls endless comfort; and why should any of you be afraid of what
man can do against you, seeing you fear God, and love the children of men, and
you are not of them who seek to destroy men's lives, but to save them, as much
as in you lies.

Arise, Arise, break forth into singing ye Sons and Daughters of the Heavenly
King, the Lord our Righteousness; for thy Light is come, and the Glory of the
Lord is risen upon thee: And thou shall no more be termed desolate; for thy
Maker is thy Husband, and thy Land is married indeed: And thy Plants grow, and
thy Gardens cast a sweat smell: Oh happy are they who believe in thy Light, and
walk in the clear Sunshine of thy Day: No Stumbling nor occasion of Stumbling
is on thy Mountain, nor in thy Valleys, but on the dark Mountains, whereon the
Haters of Christ walk, is all the stumbling of this present World. Thou who art
come in at the true Door, Christ Jesus, the Light of the World, thy Kingdom is
not of this World, but is a Kingdom without end, which cannot be shaken,
wherein dwells Righteousness indeed; and thy Pasture is fresh and green all the
Year long, being wet with the Dew of Heaven; yea, in thy happy Lot are both the
upper and nether Springs, and Bread of Life for evermore, where rests with thee
(in the purest Love) thy Brother in the Joys and Sufferings of the Gospel,

In the 12 th of the 6 th Month, 1669 T. T.

A Message of Truth to Professors.
WOE to the Teachers of the People, that daub with untempored Mortar, and cry,
Peace, Peace, when the Lord has not spoken Peace; For the Lord speaks Peace to
none in their Sins; but they Teach for Doctrine, That none can live out of Sin
whilst on this side the Grave; and so they Minister for Antichrist, the Man of
Sin, and not for Christ, who is without Sin, in Gods Righteousness.

And he that keeps Christ's Commandments dwells in him, and he in him; and
his Commandments are not grievous, says John: And again, He that is Born of
Christ sins not; for the everlasting Father of the Unspotted Generation is
he. And herein (says the same John, and all the living Members of Christ) is
our Love made perfect that we may have Boldness in the day of Judgment; because
as he is, so are we in this World.

But the Masterly Teachers of this World cry out, O the Commands of Christ (who
is God) are hard, none can keep them, we must live in Sin whilst on Earth, no
Perfection here, no Victory over all while on this side the outward Grave.

These have their Eyes abroad, and judge after the Flesh; and the things of
Gods Spirit are Foolishness to them: The Grave of Sin they lie dead in, and
know not the Resurrection from it; and so are ignorant of Christ, who is the
Resurrection and the Life: And the Eye in such is shut, as yet, that should
hear the Sons Voice, whose Voice raises the Dead.

O foolish and flow of Heart to be^ieve all that Christ and his Prophets have
spoken; Does not Christ say, The hour is coming and now is, when the Dead shall
hear the Voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live; For as the
Father has Life in himself, so has he given to the Son, to have life in
himself, John 5.25. And in another place, He that Lives and Believes in me,
shall never die for God is not the God of the Dead, but of the Living; for the
Dead cannot Praise him. And I will Ransom them from the Power of the Grave; I
will Redeem thee from Death; O Death I will be thy Plagues, O Grave I will be
thy Destruction, Hos. 13.14.

And again, Ezekiel. 37.12, etc. Thus says the Lord God, Behold, O my People, I
will open your Graves, and cause you to come up out of your Graves, and ye
shall know that I am the Lord; and I will place my Sanctuary in the midst of
you for evermore. These words are faithful and true, and the Israel of God, who
are risen with Christ, know them; and in the Birth Immortal, being passed from
Death to Life, do set to their Seal, That God is a Faithful Performer of his
Promises this Day: For Life and Immortality is brought to Light through the
Gospel, which is the Power of God to Salvation, in all that believe in God, and
know his Christ in them, who is the D E A T H of Death, and Destruction of Sin,
and Life Eternal to enjoy; Glory to his Name forever: And against this Living
Faith and Quickening Power the Gates of Hell shall never be able to prevail.

But as was said before, Woe to the Teachers of the People, who Daub with
Untempered Mortar; who look outward, and judge of things according to the
Flesh, and outward appearance of things; and plead for the Life of Sin during
the whole time of man's being upon Earth, and look at the Grave without, and
Death without, and so lie dead in Sin, and buried in the Grave of their
spiritual Wickedness themselves; and so lead about a People, silly as Women in
Matters Spiritual, laden, like themselves with diverse Sins and Lusts, always
learning, but never able to come to the Knowledge of the Truth: For who know
the Truth, as it is in Jesus, are set free by it; For if you be set-free by the
Truth then are ye free indeed, says Christ. This is more then all outward
Knowledge and Profession, to be so free, as not to be under the Power of any
Sin, Lust, Temptation, Will of Man, nor any of the Powers of Darkness
whatsoever, but Free, as Christ is Free, who is over all, God blessed forever.

But now that Christ is come, to set up this his holy Glorious Kingdom in the
Hearts of the Children of Men; Where is this Faith to be found on Earth? But
all the Multitudes of Earthly Professors cry, The Kingdom of Heaven hereafter;
The Kindom of Glory hereafter; no Perfection on this side the (outward) Grave;
none c^n overcome, or put off the Body of Sin, whilst here, and the like: Not
knowing what they say, nor whereof they affirm, when they speak of such things;
because, to the Kingdom of Heaven within, in man, they are wilful Strangers;
Eyes they have, but see not; and Ears, but hear not; for the inward Eye, which
should see, have they fast closed; and the Ear, which should hear, have they
shut, lest they should see and hear, and be converted, and be saved. But
Blessed is the Eye that sees the Kingdom of God, which he has set up, and is
setting up in his Trembling People; and the Ear that hears the unutterable Word
of the living Father, which raises the Dead; they shall never be Praising of
him in the Congregation of the Righteous, where none can come to make afraid;
for these Love and Fear the Lord, and that frees them from the Fear of Vain
Man, whose Breath is in his Nostrils.

But all whose Religion stands upon the Sandy Foundation of man's Wisdom, and
Thoughts, and Doings, which perfects not to God, these will be like the Chaff,
which the Wind scatters to and fro; the Regenerating Power of Gods eternal
Spirit they being ignorant of in themselves, all their show of Religion is mere
Hypocrisy, and the Religion of Hypocrites shall never be established; for all
who gather not with Christ shall scatter, and every Plant that his Heavenly
Spiritual Hand has not plan^ed, shall be rooted up.

O! What Darkness have you rapt your Selves in? and how is the Understanding
Part clouded in you, that you will neither see nor learn to know the things
that pertain to Everlasting Life? Can you say the Branches of the fallen Tree,
the first Adam, are Unholy and Corrupt, because of the Unholiness of the Root?
And will you not see that the Members of the Heavenly Man, Christ Jesus, who
never fell, are Holy, because of the Holiness of the Root? For if the Root be
Holy, so are the Branches. Anoint your Eyes with Eye Salve, that if possible
you may see, and know a better Root in you, then the fallen man's nature, to grow
on, that the Kingdom of Holiness you may feel come near you; For they that are
in the Flesh cannot please God, whatever they may Profess: And this adds to
their misery, that when they have brought forth the deadly Works of the Flesh,
they would charge them upon Gods Elect, and make their Works like their own:
These Fleshly ones are great Enemies to Christ, and his Righteousness, and his
Members; for they that are in Christ are New Creatures; and to Abel and his
Offering God has still Respect, though Cain and his Offering was always
rejected, because polluted with Sin; as the Prayers and Performances of all
Hypocrites are at this day: Therefore for this purpose was the Son of God
manifested, and is at this Day received of the Faithful, even to destroy Sin,
which is the Devils Work. And in him, to wit (Christ Jesus the Ligh^) is there
no Sin, nor sinful Nature.

So they who love Christ, and Walk in his Life, and Light, please God; For he
is that Way undefiled, wherein no Unclean can walk: but the Redeemed are here:
And what if I should set down the words of Jesus, to wit, Whosoever abides in
Christ, Sins not; whosoever Sins, has not seen him nor known him, 1 John
3.6. Can you believe it? I know you cannot whilst you stand reasoning with
Flesh and Blood, not believing in the Light, that lightneth every man that
comes into the World, but call the Light of Christ in man Natural; and then
put the Letter (which only witnesses to the Light) instead of it: And then the
Enemy works in your natural Earthly wisdom, causing you to wrest Scriptures to
establish your empty Forms, which makes nothing perfect; and this was the sin
of the old Jews, who though they talked of the Messiah, yet when he appeared
they would not come to him, that they might be saved; and so under the dead
Profession of the Letter, they lay slain: And though they had a Zeal for God,
as you have now, yet it was not according to knowledge, and so stumble at the
Stumbling-Stone; and so in their dark minds would needs keep up the Forms and
Shaddows of things in opposition to the Substance (the thing it self) Christ
Jesus, when he appeared, as you do now. O that you could be persuaded of this,
how well would it be for your poor Souls in time to come.

Therefore now that the True, Heavenly, Everlasting, All-sufficient Light is
broken forth again, from under the Clouds, after the long dark Night of
Apostasy; turn your Minds in, to know a measure of it in you, and wait therein
to be led out of all the dark Paths of Sin and Error by it: For I am the Way,
says Christ, the Light, that true Light which lights every man that comes
into the World; and I will send my holy Spirit of Truth to lead into all Truth:
He i^ come, and his Promise fulfilled; Glory to his Name forever, And do you
not know how that Christ is in you, except you be Reprobates, says the
Apostle. And if we walk in the Light as he is in the Light, then have we
fellowship one with another, and the Blood of this Innocent Lamb cleanses from
all Sin, and washes from all Unrighteousness all real Comers thereunto, says
the same Spirit: Therefore go not sorth, for without are Dogs, and all Liars;
but Truth, and the Kingdom of it, is to be found within, nigh in the Heart, or
never.

O how Beautiful is the Way of the Just! Holiness is the Girdle of their Reins
continually, their hearts ponder deep things in Holiness; they do no Iniquity
who walk in this Everlasting Undefiled WAY, Christ Jesus, the Light; for, by
the Light are they led out of all Defilements; and to such there is no occasion
of Stumbling.

O stoop down low with your minds to the Light of Christ in you, that
convinces you of sin and evil, that through the Light, the true Door, and
Daily-Cross to the Carnal Mind, you may come into the Sheepfold; for all who
clime up another Way, are but as Thieves and Robbers, and must be judged as
Goats, and set on the left hand, because they would not hear Christ Voice, the
Light in the Conscience, to be led by it. Great Woe to the Climers over the
Door; such neither receive Christ, nor his Servants whom he sends; but chose
rather to follow such as love to be called of men Master, and live in the
respect of Persons, and persecuting Nature, and daub over an old heart with
fair Promises of Life, as it is amongst you this day; for what though some in
the outward-stand against you for your Form, and Worlds sake; as the Heathen of
old did the outward Jews yet both those outward Jews then, as you outward
Professors do now, stood, and do stand, against Christ, and us for his Truth's
sake: For we find it true from you all, That whosoever walks in Christ, and
holds forth his Life, and so Worship God in Spirit and Truth, shall be hated
of all men, whether Professors or Profane, who are out of that Life and holy
Worship, even for Christ's very Name and Life's sake, because it is a Cross and
Offense to all the World, who are in their own Wills, under what Form or
Profession soever, who are gotten into a Profession of Christ, without Christ,
and the daily Cross which his Followers bear. Therefore all who are climed up
into the Tree of an outward Profession without the true real feeling and
spiritual acquaintance with the daily Cross, and fiery Law of the Lord, and
flaming Sword (which Guards the Tree of Life) which is in the Hand of the Angel
of the Covenant, for the cutting down of the Man of Sin (that the Birth
Immortal, which is Holy, may enter in and possess the Inheritance) must come
down again; I say, they must come to the beginning, from which in their fallen
Wisdom they are wandered, to learn of him in Silence, who speaks from Heaven,
whose Word is nigh in the heart, before ever they be established; for except
you become as little Children, not in Talk, but in Truth, ye cannot enter Gods
Kingdom.

O ye People, hearken a while, whether Teachers or Hearers; You who have been
feeding upon the Tree of Knowledge, and never came through Gods judgments, the
Flaming Sword, to the Tree of Life: Your Food (...) Death, your Works will
Burn, and your Figleaf-Covers will fall off you, and you be left Naked and Bare
to the shame of your Nakedness, as in the day that you were Born: For what is
any Covering unless it be that of the Spirit of Christ. The Lord God, who is of
purer Eyes then to behold Iniquity, will bring your Deeds to the Light of his
Judgments within you, from which you cannot flee; and before him will nothing
stand but that which is Pure.

Your defiled Preachings, Prayings, Singings, Hearings, Readings, will be
rejected, and cast out as Dung from the Presence of the Pure Holy God, that is
a consuming Fire: You have multiplied words without Knowledge: Ye have not
been, neither yet are ye Doers of Gods Will (to the Witness of God in your
Consciences I speak) therefore in vain do you say Lord, Lord; and he will not
hold them guiltless that take his Name in vain. Your Garment is not of the Pure
White Linen, which is the Saints Righteousness; but Linen and Woolen is your
Covering, a thing forbidden by Gods Law. Your Field is not sown with the one
Heavenly kind of Grain (the good Wheat) but another Seed have you mingled with
it, and the mixture is so great, that the bad has almost choked and covered
the good in you: If you will work you must into Gods Vineyard, and be exceeding
Dilligent, and Laborious (in Spirit) in plucking up the Weeds by the Roots in
you, The Light of Christ in the Conscience waiting in it) will give thee
Understanding: But Woe will be to them who call the Light Darkness, and put
Darkness for Light; and so suffer the Good in them to wither, and nourish the
Bad Part in them, which is like the Grane, that never has enough; but is
always learning at man without, and not at Christ within, and ministering from
the outward dead spirit of the World, and not from the measure of the living
Spirit of Christ; and so not taking heed to the Word of Faith, which is nigh in
the heart (the Word of Christ which is Spirit and Life) they never get victory
over their sin, as is manifest, but go laden Teacher, and Hearer, all their
life long with diverse sins and lusts, as was said before. So Woe to the selfish
Workers, who speak their own words, and think their own thoughts on this the
holy Sabbath day of the Lord God, wherein he has given his People rest from
all their weary labor and burdens: The outward day, the first day of the Week
shall not cover you, nor be a Sabbath to you; but in the breach of Gods holy
and everlasting spiritual Sabbath of Rest, you being found, you must bear his
Judgment. Behold, all ye that kindle a Fire this day, and that compass about
your selves with Sparks, walk in the light of your Fire, and in the Sparks that
ye have kindled; yet know, that your reward from the Lords hand, is to lie down
in sorrow. I say, all you who feed upon, and whose Faith stands in the wisdom
of vain man's words, raised up in the subtilty to please the iching Ear, and not
in the Power of God, which washes the inside; a day of scattering comes upon
you, it comes, and a grievous Whirlwind from the Lord; and the pleasant
Breasts of Mystery Babylon, which you so much delight in, shall be dried up; for
the Lord has rejected your confidence, because you have rejected his good Word
and Counsel, and chosen your own Delusion, and evil entreated his Servants,
whom he sent, rising up early, and sending them time after time, to warn you to
come out of all your dead Forms, and dead Faith, into the living virtue and
power of his eternal Spirit of Truth, to worship him there, and to know it in
you, but you would not; therefore the Lord will yet do that great W^rk and
Wonder amongst you; he will confound the wisdom of your Wise, and bring to
naught the understanding of your Prudent Men, and they shall be as Women, weak
and feeble, the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it; and the Songs of your Temple
shall be Howlings in that day, because of the Vine of Sodom, that will bear no
more Grapes, but so many as have drunk of the Wine of her Fornication, must
drink of the Cup of Gods Wrath. And all you who talk of your Faith and
suffering Condition, and yer live in your sin, you know not what spirit you are
of; for the same mind, that you think to suffer in, is it which by
Transgression grieves the Spirit of God, and stands against the setting up of
his Kingdom in your selves, and the Testimony thereof in his redeemed Ones this
day: And so, if you could give your bodies to be burnt in this your Unsaved and
Unsanctified Condition, it would profit you nothing at all. Wherefore come out
from amongst them, all you that would be happy, and touch no unclean thing, but
give your hearts to the Lord, to know his Light in you, to teach you; and he
will receive you, and hide you from the Wrath that is to come upon all that are
not in him, as says his Spirit in his Servant.

This is a Message of Truth to all you in and about Stafford, and those of like
Spirit with you elsewhere, who go under the name of Presbyterians, Teachers and
Hearers, to read and ponder in the cool mind, that you may know what the Lords
Mind is concerning you in this his day, wherein he is manifest with his Fan in
his Hand, to purge the Floor, that he may gather to himself the good Wheat, and
burn up the Chaff: For we knowing the Terrors of the Lord, persuade you, and
all People, in love to your Souls, to take heed of dallying with God, who is a
consuming Fire; for his Judgments are manifest, and who can stand before his
Wrath? O be not Proud, lest your hands be made strong; but be meek, and lowly,
and gentle in heart, to learn of him that is so, that you may find rest for
your souls; for there is no Peace to the Wicked, says my God the true God,
that made Heaven and Earth, whose Wrath from Heaven is perfect, revealed
against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men (without respect of Persons
or Professions) who hold the Truth in any manner of Unrighteousness, So be it.

In the 2d Month, 1670. T. T.

WEEP thou England, Houl, Houl ye People; for the Dreadful Day of the Lord God
is at hand, it is at the Door, as an Armed Man, coming swiftly upon you, to
break down and tread under feet thy Pomp, Glory, and Strength.

Thou have exceeded in thy Sins, and art grown monstrous in thine Iniquities;
so the Lord will be exceeding Terrible unto thee. Thou have suffered the Wicked
in thee to have Liberty, and to take their fill of sin, when the Voice of the
Righteous cannot be endured in thee; but he that departs from Iniquity, and
would persuade others so to do, is even made a Prey of by Ungodly and
Unreasonable Men; their Bodies Imprisoned and Banished, and Estates spoiled,
and all sorts of Injuries done them for God's Name and Truths sake. And
therefore will the Lord God arise to take Vengeance for these things; Yea, his
Soul will certainly be avenged on such a Nation as this, says this Spirit in
his Servant.

AND moreover, because you have said in your hearts, We have compassed them
about with an Act, and none shall Worship God but as we please: Therefore will
the Lord, the mighty God, compass you about with his Terrors, and you shall
find no place to hide your selves in, from his Wrath, because of the Pride of
your Hearts, and Evil of your Doings, O all ye People of the Land (says the
Lord God) who are guilty of these things.

T. T.

THE Lord, even the Lord God of infinite endless glorious Power and Truth,
plead our Cause, our innocent Cause, against you the Rulers of this Nation, and
of all the World who hate us, and persecute us without all cause. The Lord has
raised us up in Righteousness, ever praised be his Name, to bear our Testimony
for God and his Christ, against all the Ways and false Worships of fallen man;
and therefore it is that such as are in the fall, through the ignorance and
evil that is in them, number us with the Transgressors, and account all manner
of Punishments and Grievances too little for us; yea, Banishment, Imprisonment,
Spoiling of our Goods, and Death it self is judged not less then we deserve: So
the Scripture is fulfilled, see John 16.2, 3. And all this for no manner of
evil at all, but merely because we cannot cease to Worship and Serve the living
and true God, our Father, as he has taught us, and does teach all that come to
him: For our Worship to God is pure in Spirit and Truth: And this is the true,
standing, and established Worship for evermore; and God is now mightily seeking
such to worship him. And so the Lord, the Ever-blessed and True God, plead our
holy Cause against you, who hate us without a Cause. We have laid before you
the Truth and Righteousness of our Cause, and our Good Will to all men, and how
it is not in our hearts and hands in the least to injure you, or any; but to
this day you will not hear, but stop your Ears to our innocent Cries: and
therefore to the Lord God of Heaven and Earth do we call, and before him, who
is the KING of Kings, and LORD of Lords, and RULER of Rulers, and JUDGE of
Judges, do we lay our innocent Cause.

O that you had known at least in this your day, the things of your peace, but
you will not, and therefore how can ye expect less then a Forsaking and
Casting-off by the Lord, as the People of old (called Israel)-found, who would
not hear the Voice of the Lord and his Servants, crying and calling unto them
in those days: Read the Prophecy of Hosea, Hos. 1.6, 8, 9, and see what
Lo-ruhaemah and Lo-ammi signify, and humble your selves greatly before the
Lord; for assuredly great wrath is gone out from the presence of the eternal
Majesty of Heaven and Earth against you; and nothing can stay it, but your
ceasing from Persecuting the blessed Truth of God, which we, the People of God,
in Scorn called Quakers, do love, and live in. It is so.

T. T.

THE END.

