A Few Necessary Questions and Conclusions for the present Parish-Teachers of
ENGLAND, etc.
Deeply to Ponder and Answer in God's Fear, for the Good of their own and the
Peoples Souls that are under them; for the Lord is arisen to call all things
into Judgment.
1. WHether any can be said to be true Gospel. Ministers, who are not sent of
Christ, as Christ was sent of the Father, seeing Christ said, As my Father has
sent me, even so send 1 you; for all Power is given me in Heaven and Earth?
Joh. 20. 21. and 17. 18. Mat. 28. 18.

2. Whether any can be justly blamed for not hearing or upholding such as are
not thus sent of Christ, seeing Christ said, My Sheep hear my Voice, and a
Stranger they will not follow, for they know not the Voice of a Stranger, Joh.
10. 1 John 4.

3. Whether it be not the greatest Presumption for any, upon what Pretense
soever, to take upon them to be Ambassadors for Christ (the great King) who
were never authorized or commissionated thereto by Christ, as aforesaid, it
being his proper Right to send forth his own Laborers?

4. Whether any who are not thus sent of Christ, as Christ was sent of the
Father, can profit the People at all, though they have never so much Authority
from Man, or be furnished with never so much Oratory, or Wisdom of Words, or
Excellency of Speech, according to Man, seeing the Scripture testifies, The
World by Wisdom knew not God? 1 Cor. 1.

And if any should say, How was Christ sent, or can any be sent now as Christ
was sent? I answer, Christ was sent in the Wisdom, Power and Spirit of the
endless Love and Life of the Father, to preach the Kingdom of God, and the
everlasting Gospel thereof, as it is said, Luke 4. 18. The Spirit of the Lord is
upon me, for he has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor, etc. and so
were the true Ministers formerly sent of Christ, Luke the last 49. Acts 26. 16,
17. Acts 20. 28. Joh. 16. 13, 14, 15. 2 Cor. 3. 5, 6. And as in all former Ages
all the true Messengers and Ministers of God and Christ were sent in the
Wisdom, Power and Spirit of God and Christ, and thereby directed and guided in
their Work, both when, to whom and what to speak, Jer. 17. etc. Ex. 3. 10. etc.
Ames 7. 14. 16. Acts 10. 19, 20. Acts 8. 26, 27, 29. 1 Cor. 2. 12, 13. Gal. 2.
7, 8. Even so are Christ's true Messengers and Ministers sent now, and always
must be because without Christ they can do nothing, Joh. 15. 5. and because no
Man knows the Things of God, but the Spirit of God; and therefore without that
Spirit it must needs be impossible for any, either rightly to know or minister
the Things of God, ^ Cor. 2. 7. etc. and so says Christ, I am with you (not
some, but all my Servants) Joh. 17. 20, 21, 22. (not for a time only, but
always) even to the End of the World, Mat. 28. 20. And therefore faith the
Apostle, How can they preach, except they be sent (to wit, as Christ was, Luke
4. 18. etc.) as is plain by the Apostle's applying that in general to Christ's
Ministers, which the Prophet speaks in the singular number of Christ, Romans 10.
15. compared with Isa. 52. 7. Again, Christ was sanctified and sent, so are
also his Messengers and Ministers sanctified, and sent as Lambs among Wolves,
Joh. 17. 16, 17, 18, 19. etc. Isa. 6. 7, 8. Let no unsanctified man here
shelter himself under Judas, who was only for the turn of fulfilling the
Scripture numbered amongst the twelve, but not at all for a Pattern of true
Gospel Ministers. Again, Christ came not to do his own Will, but the Will of
him that sent him; and so it is with every one that Christ sends, and who abide
in his Doctrine; and as Christ endured the Contradiction of Sinners against
himself with all Patience, even so do all he sends, and who abide in his
Doctrine, not avenging themselves, but committing their Cause to God, who is
the Avenger of all Wrongs done to his Servants: Also seeing Christ said, The
Tree is known by its Fruits, and by their Fruits ye may know such as come to
you in Sheeps Clothing, but are inwardly ravening Wolves, Mat. 7. 15.
Therefore is is further asked of you,

1. Whether such as love to be called of men Master, which Christ forbad, Mat.
23. 10, 11, 12. or seek and affect other Titles of worldly Honor, and to be
great, and to exercise Lordship in the Earth, like the Gentiles, do not plainly
manifest themselves to be such as Christ is not with, seeing he said to his, It
shall not be so amongst you, Mark 10. 24. etc. And how can they believe (says
Christ) who receive Honor one of another, and seek not that Honor which comes
from God, only? Joh. 5. 44.

2. Whether such as make Merchandise of their Words, even selling them as it
were for Money, by agreeing with the People for so much a Year, to settle at a
Place for preaching etc. and yet will not settle at a Place as Teachers, but
where they know beforehand so much Hire or certain yearly Maintenance provided
for them, seconded with the worldly Power, to compel People to pay it them, or
by Force to take it from them, whether they will or no? I say, is not this a
manifest Token that such Ministers are not sent of Christ, seeing he said to
his, Freely ye have received, freely give; and the Apostle said, We seek not
yours, but you? but if you say, the same Apostle also said, If we have
ministered to you spiritual Things, is it a great Matter if we partake of your
carnal Things?

3. The I query (to let pass the Question here concerning what you minister,
whether it is spiritual or carnal) whether ever the Apostle or any true
Minister of God and Christ, either under the Law or Gospel did ever use any
other Means for that they had allowed them of God, but the Power of the Word
only? Or did ever the Apostle, or any Minister of Christ receive, much less
compel by worldly Force, any Maintenance for preaching from such as denied them
to be true Ministers? And so such now as not only compel Wages from their own
Hearers, but even from such as they do no Work for, do plainly manifest by
their Fruits that they have run, and God never sent them, and are so far from
being Successors of the Apostles in their spiritual and heavenly Ministry, as
that they merit to be accounted of the Kind or old Eli's Sons, who by their
Doings caused the Offerings of the Lord to be abhorred, 1 Samuel 2 from ver. 12.
to 18.

4. Whether such as cannot content themselves with the In-comes of one Parish,
though it be sixty, eighty or one Hundred Pounds a Year, but seek after one or
more Parishes or Places of Revenue besides, are not out of Measure covetous,
and so palpably out of the Doctrine of Christ, and so Idolaters, seeing the
Apostle says, Covetousness is Idolatry? Ephesians. 5. 5.

5. Whether did ever any Minister of Christ's sending preach up the Tenth of
Peoples of Labor, or Increase of the Earth and earthly things, as a standing
Gospel-maintenance for his Ministers, seeing the Apostles VVritings are wholely
silent in the thing? And now if any of you in your high Minds think much or
strange to be questioned concerning these things, such may know that these are
the latter Days, spoken of by Jeremiah, Chap. 23. 20, 21. wherein God has
done and is doing great things for his People; And in the latter Days (says
the Prophet there) you shall consider perfectly of the pouring forth of God's
Wrathful Indignation upon the false Prophets and Teachers, who have run, and
God never sent them, as also throughout that whole 23d Chapter of Jeremiah is
to be seen: also concerning the false Prophets and Teachers you may read John
10. 1. etc. Isa. 56. 9. etc. Ezekiel. 34. 1. Mic 3. 2 Pet. 2. with diverse other
Scriptures, which speak of the false Prophets and Teachers, also of the true
ones; from all which these few (amongst many plain and necessary Conclusions)
following may be gathered, viz.

1. The true Prophet, Messenger or Teacher is sent of God (as before) in the
Power and Spirit of God, with the living Word of God, which is as a Hammer and
a Fire, to break the hard Hearts in sunder, and to burn up the Chaff and Dros
in the Minds of disobedient People, who know God's Will, but do it not, but
hold the Truth in Unrighteousness.

The false Prophet or Teacher, he runs in his own Will, and having stoll'n the
Word from his Neighbor, uses his Tongue to say, the Lord says, when the Lord
never sent him, and so with good Words and fair Speeches deceives the Hearts of
the unwary Hearers, making glad the Hearts of Hypocrites, and crying Peace,
when the Lord has not spoken it.

2. The true Prophet, Teacher or Minister, as he has received freely, so he
ministers freely; but the false Teacher, as he runs in his own Will, so he
ministers for a Self-End, and if People put into his Month, he cries Peace but
if otherwise, he prepares War against them, and out of his corrupt Heart cries,
Give, and can never have enough.

3. The true Minister has a Mouth always open for God, and against Sin and
Evil in every Appearance of it, without Respect of Persons, and like a true
Watcher gives notice of the Wolf's Approach, and does not flee when the Wolf
comes, but opposes him in the Loss of all, because Christ's Sheep are dear to
him: But the Hireling flees, because he is a Hireling, and cares not for the
Sheep; and as concerning Sin, it may live in People forever for him, for he
cannot bark against Sin, he is so full of it himself; for how can he that is an
unclean, covetous, proud Person himself (with a Face) stand against such Sins
in others; nay, nay, the barking of such must needs be against such as do from
the Heart depart from Iniquity, and so separate from such as live in it,
according to the Call of the Lord.

4. The true Prophet, Minister or Teacher fights the good Fight of Faith, and
his Weapons are spiritual, and not carnal, and so he fights not with Flesh and
Blood, to destroy Men's Persons, Liberties or Estates, but his War is with the
wicked Devil (the Power of Darkness in men) that separates men's minds, Hearts
and Souls from God, and brings them into Sin's Captivity, and so under God's
Wrath; and so the true Minister's Work is to preach People out of that woeful
Condition into the Liberty of the Sons of God: But the false Teacher or
Minister hi^ Weapons are carnal, and he runs to the worldly Powers to help him
against such as oppose his evil Doctrine and Practice, crying, Men of England,
etc. help; as the Jews cried out against Paul, Men of Israel help, and so
matter not though they weary the Magistrate, and set all the World in an
Uproar, to keep themselves up in their high Places of Deceit, and so prove the
greatest Enemies against God's Truth and his Servants of all other, as is
abundantly to be seen in Scripture, concerning the Priests and their
Confederates, who persecuted Christ to Death, and raged against his Followers,
because of their holy Testimony for God against their Soul-destroying Ways.

5. The true Messengers and Ministers of Jesus Christ, as they are powerfully
sent of God, so they work effectually for God, for the edifying of the Body of
Christ, and perfecting of his People in Holiness to God: But the false Teacher,
as he has run without God, so his Work is for strengthening that Part in man
(to wit, the Serpents Wisdom) which is against God, and wars against the
Simplicity of Christ and Good of the Soul in all; and so they being themselves
out of that heavenly Power which perfects the Soul to God, and gives it perfect
Victory over all Sin, they cry, No Perfection here, no perfect Victory over Sin
on this Side the Grave; and so they lead about a People laden with Sin and Lust
filly, as Woman in the Transgression, ever learning, and never able by their
Means to come to the Knowledge of the Truth it self, which sets the Soul free
from all Sin; for how should People ever come to the Knowledge of the Truth by
following such Teachers as are out of the Truth; for if the Blind lead the
Blind, must they not both fall into the Ditch?

Also seeing you profess the Scripture, and not unwritten Traditions to be your
Rule, and would have people to believe, that what you do is according to
Scripture, therefore it s demanded in a few Words further,

1. What Scripture have you for your Sprinkling of Infants, and Signing them
with the Sign of the Cross, and telling people, That thereby they are made
Members of Christ, Children of God, and Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven,
when in your own Catechism, in Contradiction to your practice you teach, That
Children by Reason of their Infancy or tender Years then cannot perform the
Requests of Baptism, to wit, Faith and Repentance?

2. And what Scripture have you for your Sureties (so called) which you most
unscripturally call the Childrens Godfathers and Godmothers, which you
pretend to make up the Defect in the Infants, by and for putting these
Pretended Sureties upon such bold Undertakings and unadvised Promisings of that
for the Child which they never yet did for themselves, nor indeed have Faith to
believe that so great Works can be done in any upon Earth, to wit, to forsake
the Devil and all his Works, etc. seeing that such generally hold, That none
can live without Sin; Is not Sin the Devil's Work? yea, yea; and is there any
Undertaker for man to Godward, but Christ? and was there ever any Surety
betwixt God and Man, but Christ only, who says, Without me ye can do nothing?
so then this evil Custom of your undertaking being derogagatory to the Honor
of Christ, who can say that God has required it at your Hands? but if you will
yet plead for it, show us your Scripture for it, if you would be esteemed to
act as Protestants, and not as Papists, and to own Scripture above men's
Inventions and Traditions.

3. Also what Scripture have you for your Surplice, Canonical Coats, Typpets,
etc. and for wearing Black rather then other Colors, seeing the Apostle blamed
such as placed Religion in Days, Meats, and the like; surely he would not agree
with such as place their Religion in Garments and Colors; blessed be the Lord
whose Day is dawned, which makes all things manifest, and none will hate the
Light of it but Evildoers.

4. And what Scripture have you for your Tithes, Easter-reckonings, Mortuaries,
and the like, now under the Gospel, and for your Laws, which you call
spiritual, to compel the People to pay you them, seeing Christ is come, the End
of that Levitical Priesthood, under which Tithes were payable by a Law?

5. What Scripture have you, who profess your selves to be Cbristians for your
Swearing, swearing in your Courts, (so called) swearing in your Spiritual
Courts, (so called)? the poor people called Churchwardens groan under the
Burden of this evil Custom; O this is far from following Christ, who said and
says unto his, Swear not at all; but you are grown to that pass, that you
cannot trust one another without Swearing, no not in your Church Matters; is
not this a Fruit of Apostasy, and departing from that ancient Faith which was
once delivered to the Saints?

6. And what Scripture have you forgiving David's Prayers, Prophecyings,
Roarings, Quakings, Tremblings and Confessions in Rhyme and Meeter to the
World to sing, who are of another Spirit then David was, and so utterly
unacquainted with David's Conditions; and so instead of singing with the Spirit
and Understanding, as the ancient Christians did, you sing in a Form without
the Power, thereby not honoring, but rather dishonouring the Lord, who is, a
Spirit, and will be worshipped in Spirit and Truth?

7. And what Scripture have you for teaching People to worship one another, and
for your Ring in Marriage, where you teach them to say ( With this Ring I
theewed, and with my Body I thee worship) Is not God alone to be worshipped?
how then are such to be accounted Christian Ministers, who abide not in his
Doctrine? 2 John 9.

And lastly seeing you pretend to be Christ's Ministers, and so God's Free men,
I ask you these few plain Questions further, Gal. 1. 10. viz.

1. Why do you limit your selves, or suffer others to limit you to such and
such Forms of Words, and Gestures, and Apparel, as is in Use amongst you in all
your Services? is it from any Excellency you see in those Words or Forms more
then in any other? or is it because you are so weak of Judgment, or brittle of
Memory, as that you can do little without Book? or is it not rather for filthy
Lucre sake you are willing to be so tied, because you know that without
Conformity to the Wills of the great Ones in this Matter, you can get no Power
to compel Peoples earthly things from them? O what will not the Love of Money
compel covetous minded People unto! 2 Timothy 6. 10, 11.

2. What is it that makes you go to the Bishop, rather then any other Man or
Men for Ordination? (as you call it) Is it because you know or believe that he
is more holy then any other? or has more Power to confer any spiritual Gift
upon you by Imposition of his Hands more then any other? If you say, he has,
where had he it? and wherein does it appear? or is it not rather that you go
now to the Bishop for Ordination, as you or your Brethren went formerly to the
Classical Presbytery (so called) in Oliver's time, because this is the Way now,
as the other was formerly, to empower you to come into Parishes, and be their
Teachers, and command their earthly things from them by Force, whether you do
any spiritual Work for them or no? yea, from such as in the Lord's Light see
you to be no Ministers of the Spirit, and therefore not able to minister
spiritual things and therefore deny you: Oh that ever such a thing should be
among such as profess to be Gospel Ministers.

3. Whether do you believe that all things in the Church ought to be done and
spoken in the alone Power and Spirit of the Lord Jesus? and if so, then how can
you expect but that God will overturn, overturn all Things, until he (to wit,
the Lord Jesus Christ, to whom all Power in Heaven and Earth it given) comes to
rule in alland over all, to whom of Right it belongs: So be it.

And what is the Cause that you are so dark in your Minds, as concerning the
Mystery of Christ's Kingdom, and the spiritual saving Power thereof, if it be
not that mentioned in the third. Chapter of Micah 's Prophecy, verse, 5, 6, 7.
where it is written, Thus says the Lord concerning the Prophets that make my
People err, that bite with their Teeth, and cry Peace, and he that puts not
into their Mouths, they even prepare War against him; therefore Night shall be
unto you, that you shall not have a Vision, and it shall be dark unto you, that
you shall not divine, and the Sun shall go down over the Prophets, and the Day
shall be dark over them; then shall the Seer she ashamed, and the Diviners be
confounded; yea, they shall all cover their Lips, for there is no Answer of God.

So be not proud, for the Lord has spoken, but see in the Dread and Fear of
God how you can acquit your selves from the Charge against false Prophets and
Teachers mentioned in this Paper, and more abundantly in the Scriptures; for if
you be found in their Sins, how can ye escape their Plagues, Rev. 18. 4. For Woe
will be to them that seek deep to hide their Counsel from the Lord, and their
Works are in the dark, and they say, who sees us, and who knows us; see Isa.
29. from ver. 10. to ver. 16. Read, and consider, and be wise for your Souls.

From one who travails for the Prosperity of Sion, Tho. Tailor.


