A New Confutation OF SADDUCISM.

BEING A true Narrative of the wonderful Expressions and Actions of a SPIRIT
which infested the House of Andrew Mackie of Ringcroft in the County of
Galloway in Scotland, from February to May 1695. ontaining, amongst other
things, Predictions as to future Times, in a Letter writ with Blood, and dropped
by the said Spirit.

Writ by Mr. ALEXANDER TELFAIR Minister of the Parish; and attested by many
other Ministers and Persons of Credit, whose Attestation and Names are
subjoined.

LONDON, Printed for Andrew Bell, at the Sign of the Cross-Keys in the
Poultrey. 1696.

The PREFACE.
THE following Relation being published in Scotland by a Reverend Minister, and
attested by several other worthy Ministers and Gentlemen, it is supposed that
the publication of the same here may be every whit as necessary and useful as
there; and that too for the very same Reason hinted by the Reverend Author in
his Epistle to the Reader, viz. for the Confutation of growing Atheism, or at
least of Sadducism, by which Men pretend to dispute the Existence of good and
bad Spirits, and by consequence the Being of an Heaven or an Hell, because
their luxuriant Principles and loose Practices render them obnoxious to be
excluded from the one, and condemned to the other; and therefore they conceive
it to be their Interest that there should be neither. There Is no doubt but this
Narrative will be entertained with the Scoffs and Flouts of our Deists and
Socinians; who tho they do not think fit to own it, yet seem to have a mighty
Propensity toward the Opinion of their grand Patron Socinus, That the Souls of
Men continue in a State of inactivity and imperception till the Resurrection:
And having once gone so far, they will be easily induced to believe, that
there is no Resurrection at all, than which there cannot be a more powerful
Attractive to Sensuality, the judicial Plague of our Beaus and Wits, whose
practice of Let us eat and drink, etc. for to morrow we must die, is the
natural Consequence of their loose Principles. And indeed it is but very
rational for such Men to think it their Interest that there should be no such
thing as a Resurrection, when the Lord Christ, against whom they commit daily
Outrages, by denying him to be God, must be their Judge; and it is no wonder that
such as shall then cry to the Hills and to the Mountains to cover them from the
Face of the Lamb that sits upon the Throne, should now seek for Cobweb
Arguments to skreen their Consciences from the direful Apprehensions of his
second Coming. With such Persons there is but little hopes of prevailing;
however if this Narrative connot convince them, it will serve as one more
Testimony against them. They may cheat themselves and delude others by their
false Glosses and ridiculous Comments upon those Texts which mention Witches,
and those who deal with Familiar Spirits, as being only Poisoners or Mistresses
of the Bottle, and Juglers. It is not to be supposed that so many good and
credible People as have from time to time attested what they have seen, heard
and felt, as to the Operations of those evil Spirits, are either all of them so
silly as to be perpetually imposed upon themselves, or so wicked as to concur
toward the imposing upon others; of which the plainness of the following
Narrative is a very good proof.

In the mean time let Scoffers do as they please, and go on and mock till their
Bonds be made strong. Those who fear God will find reason, as is hinted by the
Author, to bless him who has sent a stronger than the strong Man, even the
Lord Christ, to destroy the Works of the Devil, and triumph over those
Principalities and Powers, and spiritual Wickednesses, who seek, sometimes by
Force, and sometimes by Fraud, to mar the Success of the Gospel. All Persons,
especially Masters of Families, may be henceforewarn'd, not to neglect private
and public Prayer, lest he who has threatened to pour out his Fury upon those
Families which call not upon his Name, should suffer the Devil to infest them
in the same manner as here related, or worse, in their Persons, Families, and
Estates. And such as are free from those dreadful Assaults and fiery Darts of
the Tempter, may learn from their Neighbors Affliction to bless God, who has
not led them into the same Temptation, and ought to redouble their Prayers that
they may be delivered from him who goes about as a roaring Lion, seeking whom
he may devour.

A new Confutation of Sadducism, etc.
IN order to satisfy such as desire to be informed, and to prevent the many
false Reports concerning the Apparition and Actions of an evil Spirit which
infested the Family of Andrew Mackie of Ringcroft in the Parish of Rerrick, I
have undertaken this following Narrative, having been an Eye and Ear-Witness my
self to many of the things therein related, and taken the rest upon the
Information of others who had been Witnesses in like manner to the several
Passages which they gave an Account of. It was not an Itch to appear in Print
that induced me to this Undertaking, but merely to satisfy those who thought it
incumbent upon me, as Minister of the Parish, and as having had the best
Opportunity to know the whole Affair by the frequent Visits which I was obliged
to give unto the afflicted Family, according to the Duty of mine Office.

Before I come to the Relation it self, I find it necessary to premise some
things concerning the various Conjectures as to what might be the Cause of the
Trouble given to that Family by the wicked Spirit.

1. It was given out that the said Andrew Mackie, who is a Mason Stonecutter.
by Trade, devoted his first Child to the Devil, at his taking of the
Mason-Word A Secret reserved by some of that Trade in Scotland to themselves,
which intitles those that have it to some sort of Privileges in the Society,
but some way or other the common People have entertained an ill Idea of it, as
an Enchantment, Devilism, etc.
: But this is so far from being true, that he assures me he never took that
Word, and moreover that he knows nothing of it. The Man is of good Morals, nor
is there any thing known of his Conversation, but what has been honest, civil,
and harmless. He delights in the Company of those who are Religious; and by his
public Prayers in his Family, when infested by that evil Spirit, he gave great
satisfaction to his honest Neighbors, and Evidence that he has been no
stranger to that Duty. And as for his Wife and Children, there was never any
thing laid to their Charge which might be looked upon as a procuring Cause of
this Affliction.

2. It was also said, that a Woman of an ill Name had left some Clothes, etc.
at that House, in the custody of the said Andrew Mackie; and that the Woman
dying, he or his Wife should have detained them from her Friends. Whereupon I
examined them strictly concerning that Matter, and both of them declared, that
the said Woman left some things with them put up in a Sack, but they delivered
the same as she left it to her Friends, and did not so much as know what was in
it.

3. I am informed that there was one Macknaught who formerly dwelt in that
House; and being under a Decay, both as to his Person and Goods, he sent his
Son to a Witch, who lived at Routing-Bridg, in the Parish of Iron-Gray, to know
what might be the Cause of it: But the Youth meeting some Foreign Soldiers in
his way, goes along with them to Flanders, and never returned with his Answer.
Some Years after there was one John Redick a Neighbor of Macknaught's, that
having occasion to go Beyond Sea, met with young Macknaught in Flanders; who
enquiring after his Father and other Friends, and understanding that John
Redick was going Home, desired him to acquaint his Father, or any other whom he
should find dwelling in Ringcroft, that they must take up the Threshold of the
Door and search for a Tooth; which being found, they must burn, for none who
dwelt in that House would ever thrive till this was performed. But John Redick
returning Home, and finding old Macknaught dead, and his Wife removed from the
place, took no notice of the Matter, till he heard of the Spirit's infecting
Andrew Mackie's Family, and then he told it me.

But there was one Thomas Telfair who dwelt in that same House for some Years,
betwixt Macknaught's Death, and Andrew Mackie's Possession of it; and being
informed some other way of what the Witch had said to Macknaught's Son, he took
up the Threshold, found the Tooth, and and threw it into the Fire, where it
burnt like so much Tallow. But he informs me, that he never had any trouble
during his abode there, neither before nor after he burnt the Tooth. This is
all that has ever been alleged to be the occasion of this Trouble; so that I
think the true Cause is still unknown, and shall now come to the Matter of Fact.

In February last, Andrew Mackie abovementioned, found some young Cattle of
his always let loose in the Night, and their Bindings broke; which he conceived
to proceed from their own unruliness, and therefore he made stronger Bindings
of Withs for them, but they were broken still: Then he began to suspect that it
proceeded from some other Cause, and therefore removed the Cattle to another
House; but the very first Night after he found one of the Beasts tied with an
hair Rope to one of the Beams of the House, so light, that its Feet only
touched the Ground, and it could no way move it self, yet it received no hurt.

Some Nights after a great Quantity of Peat Firing made of Earth.
was brought into the middle of the House and set on fire, when all the Family
was asleep, and if the Smoke had not awaked them, they had certainly been
consumed in the Flames; but they extinguished the Fire, and though they made a
narrow search, could neither hear nor see any Agent.

On the 7th of March following there were Stones thrown into all the parts of
the House, but they could not discover from whence they came, nor what threw
them; and thus it continued till the Sabbath, throwing in at times both by Day
and by Night, but chiefly in the Nighttime.

On Saturday, the Family being all without-doors, the Children coming in saw
something like a Person sitting by the Fire, with a Blanket about it; which
frightened all of them but the youngest, who being about ten Years of Age, chid
the rest for being afraid, telling them, that if they blessed themselves they
needed not fear; and perceiving the Blanket to be his own, blesses himself, and
saying, Be what it will it has nothing to do with my Blanket, he runs and
pulls the Blanket away, but found nothing under it save a four-footed Stool
turned up-side down.

On the Sabbath, March 11. the Pot-hooks and Hanger were carried out of the
Chimney, and being wanted four days, they found them at last in a Cockloft,
where they had searched for them several times before, but could not find them.
This is attested by Charles Macklelan Lord of the Manor.
Lord of Collin, and John Cairns of Hardhills.

When it threw Stones at any Person, it was observed that they had not half
their natural Weight: It threw them more frequently on the Sabbath than on
other days, and more then too when any Body was at Prayer, and mostly at the
Person praying.

Andrew Mackie having acquainted me with the Matter on the Sabbath Afternoon, I
went to his House on Tuesday after, where I staid a considerable time, and
prayed twice with the Family, during which time there was no trouble. Then I
came out with a Resolution to go Home; but as I was speaking to some Men at the
end of the Barn, I saw two little Stones drop down on a Field a little from me;
and forthwith some People came out of the House, crying, that the Spirit was
become as troublesome there as ever: Whereupon I returned to the House, and
while I was at Prayer, it threw several small stones at me which did me no hurt.

After this it gave no farther disturbance to the Family till the 18th day of
March, that it began to throw Stones as before, but more frequently and of
greater weight, so that they hurt more where they hit than those it threw
formerly: And thus it continued to the 21st, when I went again to the House,
where it molested me mightily, threw Stones and diverse other things at me, and
beat me several times on the Shoulders and Sides with a great Staff, so that
those who were present heard the noise of the Blows. That same Night it pulled
off the side of a Bed, knocked upon the Chests and Boards, as People do at a
Door Attested by Charles Macclelan of Colline, William Mackminn, and John Tait
of Torr.
. And as I was at Prayer, leaning on the side of a Bed, I felt something
thrusting my Arm up, and casting my Eyes thitherward perceived a little white
Hand and an Arm, from the Elbow down, but it vanished presently.

On the 22d it grew more troublesome, both to the People of the Family, and to
the Neighbors who came to visit them; beat them with Stones and Staves, and
compelled some of them to leave the House, contrary to their Inclination
Attested by Charles Mackclellan of Colline, and Andr Tait of Torr.
.

It threw Stones at some People as they came to the House, and would pelt them
with Stones about the Yards; and sometimes threw Stones at them as they went
from the House, as particularly at Thomas Telfair of Stocking.

It wounded the abovenamed Andrew Mackie, the Master of the Family, on the
Forehead, and thrust him several times by the Shoulders; which he seeming not
to regard, it caught him by the Hair, and he felt something like the Nails of
one's Fingers scratch the Skin of his Head. And sometimes it would drag People
about the House by their Clothes Attested by Andrew Tait
.

It caught John Keige, Miller of Achincairn, so fast by the side, that he cried
out to his Neighbors for help, saying, it would tear one of his Sides from
him. That same Night it uncovered the Children as sleeping in Bed, and beat
them on the Hips, the Noise whereof was distinctly heard by the People in the
House, as if it had been done by a Man's Hand. The Bar of the Door, and other
things, would move about the House as if one had been carrying them in their
Hand, yet nothing could be seen doing it Attested by John Telfair of Achinleck,
and others.
.

It rattled on the Chests and Bed-sides with a Staff, and continued to throw
Stones, and to beat the People with a Stick, till the 2d of April at night.

It would cry Hush, Hush, at the close of every Sentence in Prayer; and whistle
so distinctly, that the Dog would bark and run to the Door, as he used to do
when any one whistled for him to set him on the Cattle.

April 3. It whistled several times, and cried Hush, Hush, as is attested by
Andrew Tait.

April 4. Charles Macclelan of Collin, Proprietor of the House, and Andrew
Mackie Master of the Family, went to a Meeting of Ministers at Buttle, and gave
them an Account of the Matter; whereupon those Ministers made public Prayers
for the Family, and two of their Number, viz. Mr. Andrew Aewart Minister of
Kells, and Mr. John Murdo Minister of Carsmichael, went to the House and spent
that Night in Fasting and Prayer, during which time it was very outrageous, and
threw great Stones at them, some of them weighing about eight Pounds. It
wounded Mr. Andrew Aewart twice in the Head, pulled off his Wig in the time of
Prayer; and as he was holding his Handkerchief betwixt his Hands, threw a Stone
into it which forced it from him. It gave Mr. John Murdo several heavy Blows;
but it was observable, that the Wounds and Bruises given by this Spirit were
speedily cured. It threw a fiery Peat among the People, which however did them
no hurt. It disturbed them chiefly in the time of Prayer; and in the Dawning,
as they rose from Prayer, it poured down Stones upon every one in the House,
and hurt them; so that there were none of the Company that Night who did not
feel more or less of its Fury. This is attested by Mr. Andrew Aewart, Mr. John
Murdo, Charles Mackleland and John Tait.

On the 5th of April it set some bundles of Straw designed for Thatch, on fire
in the Yard. And that same Night, the House being thronged with Neighbors, it
threw down Stones among them. And as Andrew Mackie's Wife went to bring in some
Peats for firing, she found a broad Stone near the Door shake under her Foot,
which she had never perceived to be loose before; whereupon she resolved to see
what was beneath it next morning.

And accordingly, on the 6th of April, when the House was quiet, she took up
the Stone, under which she found seven small Bones, with some Flesh and Blood,
wrapped up in a piece of old sullied Paper; but being troubled and frightened at
the sight thereof, she laid them down again, and ran to acquaint her Landlord
Charles Macclelan of Collin with it, whose House is about a quarter of a mile
distant; during this time the Spirit raged more than ever, throwing Stones and
Fireballs in and about the House, but the Fire vanished as it fell: It threw
likewise an hot Stone into the Bed between the Children, which burnt through
the Bed-clothes; and after it was taken out by Andrew Mackie's eldest Son, and
had lain above an hour and half on the Floor, Charles Macklelan of Collin;
abovementioned, was not able to hold it in his Hand it was so hot. It did also
thrust a Staff through the Wall of the House, shaking the said Staff over the
Chidren in the Bed, and groaned. The said Charles Mackleland thinking it fit to
go to Prayer before he took up the Bones, it raged cruelly all the while, but
as soon as he took up the Bones, it ceased for that time, (as attested by
Charles Mackleland). As soon as the Gentleman abovementioned took up the
Bones, he sent them to me; upon which I went immediately to the House, and
while I was at Prayer, the Spirit threw great Stones, which hit, but did not
hurt me, and it forbore giving us any farther trouble that Night.

April the 7th, being Sabbath Day, it began again to throw Stones, and wounded
William Mackminn a Blacksmith on the Head; it did also throw a Plow-share at
him, and a Trough of above three stone Weight, which fell on his Back, and yet
did not hurt him. That same Night it set the House twice on fire, but it was
speedily quenched by the assistance of the Neighbors. In the Evening, as John
Mackie, eldest Son to Andrew abovementioned, was coming to the House, an
extraordinary Light fell about him, and went before him to the House, with a
swift Motion, and that Night it continued to trouble the House as usually.
Attested by W. Mackminn and John Mackie.

April the 8th, as Andrew Mackie went through the Yard in the morning, he found
a Letter written and sealed with Blood, and directed on the back thus, 3 Years
tho shall have to repent a net it well; and within was written, Woe be to the
Cottland, repent and tak warning, for the Door of Haven ar all ready bart
against the; I am sent for a Warning to the to flee to God, yet troublt shall
this Man be for twenty days, a 3 rpent repnent opent Scotland, or else tow shall.

In the middle of the Day, all those Persons now alive, who had inhabited that
House since it was built, (which is about 28 Years) were ordered by the Civil
Magistrate to appear before the Lord of Colline abovementioned, my self and
others; and because there was some suspicion that a secret Murder had been
committed in the Place, they were all of them obliged to touch the Bones, but
no discovery was thereby made.

On the 9th of April the Letter and Bones were sent to a meeting of Ministers
at Kirkubright, and they appointed five of their Number, viz. Mr. John Murdo,
Mr. James Monteith, Mr. John Mackmillan, Mr. Samuel Spalding, and Mr. William
Falconer, to go with me to the House, and spend some time in Fasting and Prayer.

On the 10th we went accordingly, and I no sooner began to open my Mouth, but
it threw Stones at me, and all the rest that were in the House, but always most
at him who was at Prayer: It did frequently make the whole House to shake,
broke an Hole through the Roof, etc. and threw in great Stones, one of which
being above a Quarter weight, fell upon Mr. James Monteith's Back, without
doing him any hurt; it threw another at him as big as a Man's Fist with great
force while he was at Prayer, which hit him on the Breast, but did neither hurt
nor disturb him. It was thought fit that one of the Ministers, with another
Person, should go out by turns and stand under the Hole on the outside,
whereupon it forbore throwing in any more Stones at that place: But the Barn
being joined to the end of the House, it forced open the Barn-door, broke down
the Partition Wall, and threw Stones into the House that way, but without doing
much hurt to the People.

After that it took hold of some of them by the Legs as if it had been with a
Man's Hand; it hoisted up the Feet of others while standing on the Ground; and
thus it did to William Lennox Lord of Millhouse, to my self and others, and
continued troubling the People in that manner till ten a Clock at Night; but
after that it desisted while we were about the House. Attested by Mr. James
Monteith, Mr John Murdo, Mr. Samuel Spalding, Mr. Falconer, William Lennox, and
John Tait.

On the 11th, 12th, and 13th, it raged more than ever, and none who came into
the House during that time escaped heavy Blows. Andrew Tait of Torr coming to
stay with the Family one of these Nights, his Dog caught a Fulmard by the way,
which Andrew threw aside when he came into the House; and three more young Men
coming in also to bear the Family company, the evil Spirit beat all of them
with the dead Fulmard as they were at Prayer; at which the three who came in
last, and knew nothing of the Fulmard, were much affrighted, especially one of
them called Samuel Thomson, whom it gripped hard by the Side and Back, and
thrust an Hand, as he conceived, beneath his Clothes and into his Pocket, which
frightened him so much, that he fell sick upon it immediately. Attested by
Andrew Tait.

On the 14th being Sabbath Day, the evil Spirit set fire to some Straw that was
in the Corn-yard, and continued throwing Stones till ten a Clock at Night. It
did also throw a ditching Spade at Andrew Mackie, with the Mouth toward him,
but he received no hurt by it. After this it tossed a Meal-sive about the
House, which Andrew Mackie caught at, and with much difficulty kept his hold;
then it tore the Sive from the Rim, and wrapping it up together, threw it at
Thomas Robertson of Airds, by whom this Passage is attested.

On the 15th of April, William Anderson a Grasier, and James Paterson his
Son-in-Law, came to the House with the Lord of Colline; and the Latter going
home at Night, Andrew Mackie sent his Sons to wait on him, who as they
returned, were cruelly stoned by the Spirit, and the Stones did so tumble
amongst their Legs, that they were in hazard of being broke by them. A little
after they returned to the House, it wounded William Anderson in the Head, and
occasioned him to bleed very much. In time of Prayer it whistled, groaned, and
cried, Hush, Hush. Attested by John Cairns.

On the 16th it continued whistling, groaning, and throwing Stones in time of
Prayer, crying also, Bo, Bo, Kick, Cuck, pulling the Men backward and forward,
and hoisting them up from their Knees. Attested by Andrew Tait.

That Night Andrew Mackie and his Family left the House and went to a
Neighbor's, desiring five of his Friends to stay in the House, but it did no
hurt that night, neither to those left in the House, nor to Andrew Mackie and
his Family, nor the Neighbor's where they lodged, only it threw Andrew
Mackie's Cattle upon one another, as they were fastened to their Stakes, which
had like to have killed them, and some of them it let loose. Attested by John
Cairns.

On the 18th Andrew Mackie and his Family returned to the House, and received
no hurt that night, only it tied some Sheep (which were at a little House at
the distance of three or four pair of Butts) together in pairs by the Neck,
with Ropes made of Straw that it had taken from the Stable, and left some Ropes
behind which it did not make use of. Attested by Andrew Tait.

On the 19th it set fire to the Straw in the Barn where Andrew Mackie was
threshing, but he put it out before it did any damage; and then it thrust
Staves through the Wall at him, but did him no hurt.

On the 20th it continued throwing Stones, whistling and hushing, and using all
its former words. When it hit any body, it said, Take you that till you get
more, then it would certainly hit them again; but when it said only take you
that, then it desisted throwing at that Person for some time. Attested by John
Tait.

On the 21st, 22d, and 23d, it continued throwing stones, beating with Staves,
and throwing Mud in the Faces of all that were in the House, especially in time
of Prayer.

On the 24th, which was appointed to be kept as a Day of Humiliation by the
Parish upon that Account, it continued throwing stones from morning to night in
a most fearful manner, without intermission, so that all in the House were
afraid of being killed.

On the 25th it threw stones all night, but did no great hurt.

On the 26th it threw stones in the Evening, knocked several times on the
Chests, began to speak, and call those who were then in the House, Witches and
Rooks, saying, it would take them to Hell. Whereupon the People said among
themselves, that it would now speak if it had any to speak to it. Then they
awaked Andrew Mackie, the Master of the House; who hearing it say, Thou shall
be troubled till Tuesday, asked, Who gave it a Commission? To which it
answered, God gave me a Commission, and I am sent to warn the Land to repent;
for a Judgment is to come if the Land do not quickly repent, and commanded him
to reveal it upon his Peril: And if the Land did not repent, it said it would
go to its Father, and get a Commission to return with an hundred worse than it
self, and would trouble every particular Family in the Land.

Upon which Andrew Mackie said to the Company, if I should tell this, no body
would believe me. Then it answered, Fetch Betters, fetch the Minister of the
Parish and two honest Men upon Tuesday night, and I shall declare before them
what I have to say. After which it said, Praise me, and I will whistle to you;
worship me, and I will trouble you no more. Andrew Mackie answered, The Lord
who delivered the three Children out of the fiery Furnace, deliver me and mine
this Night from the Temptations of Satan: then it replied, You might as well
have said, Shadrach, Meshech, and Abednego.

While Andrew Mackie was speaking, one James Telfair of Buttle offered to put
in a word; whereupon the Spirit told him, You are basely bred, meddling in
other Men's Discourse wherein you are not concerned. It likewise said, Remove
your Goods, for I will burn the House. He answered, The Lord stop Satan's Fury,
and hinder him of his Designs. It replied, I will do it, or you shall guide
well. Attested by John Tait of Torr, and several others.

On the 27th it set the House on fire seven times; and on the 28th, which was
Sabbath Day, it continued setting fire to the House, from Sunrising to
Sunsetting; and as it was quenched in one part, it was instantly set on fire
in another; and when it could not get its Design of burning the House
accomplished, it pulled down one end of it in the Evening, so that the People
could not stay in it any longer, but went and kindled their Fire in the Stable.

On the Sabbath-night it pulled one of the Children out of the Bed; and
catching hold of him, as he thought, by the Neck and Shoulders, took up a great
Log of Wood, and holding it over the Children, said, If I had a Commission I
would brain them: This was heard by all the People in the House, and attested
by William Mackminn and John Corsby.

On the 29th, being Monday, it continued setting fire to the House so
frequently, that Andrew Mackie being weary with quenching it, he put out all
the Fire about the House, and poured Water on the Hearth; yet it set the House
on fire again several times, tho there was no fire to be had within a quarter
of a Mile of the House. Attested by Charles Macclelan and John Cairns.

About the middle of that Day, as Andrew Mackie was threshing in the Barn, it
whispered in the Wall, and then cried, Andrew, Andrew, but he gave no answer to
it: Then with an austere angry Voice it bid him speak; but he kept silent: Then
it said, Be not troubled, you shall have no more trouble, except some throwing
of Stones upon the Tuesday to fulfill the Promise; and then bid him take away
the Straw.

I came to the House much about that time, after which it set fire to the same
once. I staid there till between three and four of the Clock on Tuesday
morning, during which time there was no trouble about the House, except that
two little stones dropped down by the fire at our first coming in; but a little
after I went away, it began to throw stones as formerly. Attested by Charles
Mackleland and John Tait.

On Tuesday night, being the third of April, Charles Macklellan of Colline,
with several Neighbors, being in the Barn at Prayers, he observed a black
thing in the corner of the same, which increased gradually as if it would have
filled the whole House; he could not discern any distinct Form it had, but only
that it resembled a black Cloud: It was very frightning to them all, and threw
Barley Chaff, and Mud in their Faces. It did also gripe some of them by the
Middle, Arms, and other Parts, so hard, that for five days after they thought
they felt those Gripes; and about two hours after it grew dark, it ceased
troubling them any further for that night. Attested by Charles Macklelan,
Thomas Mackminn, Andrew Palin, John Cairns, and John Tait.

On Wednesday night, being the 1st of May, it fired a little Sheep-house, which
was entirely consumed, but the Sheep were got out safe, and since that time it
never gave any farther trouble to Ringcroft. All these things being of
undoubted Verity, I conclude with that of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 5.8, 9. Be sober,
be vigilant, because your Adversary the Devil as a roaring Lion, walks about
seeking whom he may devour; whom resist steadfast in the Faith.

The Particulars of this Relation are severdly attested by those who were
Witnesses to the respective Parts of it, viz.
Mr. Andrew AEwart Minister of Kel. Mr. James Monteith Minister of Borg. Mr.
John Murdo Minister of Carsmichel. Mr. Samuel Spalding Minister of Parn. Mr.
William Falconer Minister of Keln. Charles Macklellan Lord of Colline. William
Lennox Lord of Milhouse. Andrew Tait of Torr. John Tait of Torr. John Cairns
of Hardhills. William Mackminn. Andrew Palin, etc.
FINIS.

