A TALE In a TUB OR, A TUB LECTURE

As it was delivered by My-beele Mendsoale, an Inspired Brownist, and a most
upright Translator.

In a meeting house near Bedlam, the one and twentieth of Decembler, Last,
1641.

Written by J.T.

London, Printed 1641.

A TVB Lecture
BEloved Sisters, and my well infected Brethren, attend this Text, as you shall
find it written in the first Chapter of Bell and the Dragon, the third Verse,
as it follows,

Now the Babylonians had an Idol they called Bell, and there were spent upon
him every day, 12 gress measures of fine flower, and 40 sheep, and 6 vessels
of wine.

I will first of all make a Division in the former part of my Text, I will
leave the latter to the Last, and expound that as I shall Wax to an End.

Now the Babilonians had an Idol they called Bell.

This sentence I shall divide into 4 parts, because your understandings my
Beloved Brethren, consists chiefly in the Knowledge of Divisions, the
particles are these.

1. The Time. 2. The Nation. 3. The Crime. 4. The Denomination.

The Time. Now. The Nation, The Babylonians. The Crime, had an Idol. The
Denomination, called Bell.

Now the Babylonians had an Idol called Bell.

First I will begin with the time, you must not conceive that it was 1, 10.
100. 1000 years ago, but Now, at this present, Now the Babylonians, etc.
Beloved there is much evil and abomination to be picked out of these three
letters Now, according to the explication of a dear deceased Brother of ours
which you called Anthony Now, Now, and called he was from us too soon, yet the
worst the wicked can say of him is, that he dyed a dutiful death, and he did
but Come when he was called, but leaving our Brother as he has left us, I will
proceed with this word Now, Now the Babylonians, Now does, plainly and
significantly expound it self in these words, at this time, this present, this
instant, and never were people more strangely misled by falls teaching and
preaching then Now: you shall hear how many sentences or questions this word
Now will answer me: When were golden Crosses, Images and pictures suffered to
stand in defiance of the Brethren, nay even in the open streets? my Text does
answer Now: When were lying, fcurrilous pamphlets, which abuse the Brethren in
prose and Verse, by the Name of Roundhead, more in Fashion then Now. There was
one who writ a Book, entitled, A Medicine for the times, where assuredly he
does vindicate that pillar of Golden superstition, Cheap side Cross, calling
us thieves, who bare away the lead, because those limbs should not be again set
up by Idolatrous people, and when was this book generally sold to draw the
hearts of the people from us, but according as it is in my text, Now: but were
he in our Conventicle that writ it, and he that printed it, I think it were
convenient that all of us with one a-cord should endeavor to hang them to
death, and were they here, no fitter time then Now: but sithence they are not
present, we will defer their execution till we can confidently say we have
them Now: but because I will not trespass upon your patience much longer then
my limited time, 6 hours, I will Now conclude this part of my Text, and
proceed to the next, which is the Nation.

This Nation were Babylonians, for so my Text tells me,

Now the Babylonians.

Beloved, these Babylonians are a Nation that inhabited Babylon, and derive
their names from Nimrods Tower, Babel, a Tower, which according to my Authors
description, was 4 hundred thousand times higher then the Tower of London,
bearing twice as many hundred thousand piece of Ordnance, for it was the
intention of that proud Nimrod, to shoot down heaven: amongst this Nation
lived that grand enemy to our sect, The Whore of Babylon, a most fathomlesse
Harlot, and corrupted every man that had any Part in Babel (the more fools
they) this Nimrod was the first that ever taught Idolatry, for (as I have bin
told) you know I cannot read my self, before ever the Art of carving or
painting was, he taught the people to adore the fire, which expressed his hot
zeal in Idolatry, it was only their ignorance in arts, that kept them from
setting up such a Cross, as is in Cheap Side: not long after Nimrod succeeded
King Astiages: after his decease, Cyrus of Persia received his Kingdom, as you
shall read in the first Verse of this Chapter, and according to my Text is
living at this present, for,

Now the Babylonians had an Idol, Called Bell.

And thus much shall suffice to have bin spoken for the second part of my Text,
which is the Nation, Babilonians, now the Babilonians, I will now proceed unto
the third, which is their crime, their Idolatry, their Image worship the Devil
by this time had instructed them in the Art of making Idols, for so my Text
says,

Now the Babylonians had an Idol.

This Idol was made of Brass without and clay within, a brazen face, and an
earthen heart, filled with corruption and fraught with abomination. This word
Idol properly derives it self from Idle, which in signification, my attentive
Brethren, is sloth, Iazinesse, they would employ their times in nothing but
making Images. I Will warrant you in those days a Journeyman Image-Maker might
get his half crown a day, do you but censure then, my dear Assembly, how
they flourished in their wickedness, but, since they had nothing else to do
but to set up Idols, it shall become us to make it the business of our whole
lives to pull them down: but take this caution with you, when you next attempt
the holy destruction of that nest of Idols, Cheap Side Cross, be not too
violent, least you suffer as our Brother did, yet had he past the Pikes, he
had bin living to this day. This Idol in my Text, was Brass without, and
earth within, a cheap Idol to those in Cheap Side, for they are Gold without,
and lead within. Beloved, Lead was not made to form Idols with, but for the
good of mankind, which is to make Bullets, and Tyle Houses; your only way to
confound this aforesaid Cheap Side Cross, is to pull down to the ground, that
old Idol Charin, and beat down this with the stones, that we may have no
more cause to say,

Now the Babylonians had an I doll called Bell.

I am now come to the Denomination of this Idol, they called him Bell, for so
says the Text.

Now the Babilonians had an Idol.

This notorious Babe of Idolatry, who has to name, Bell, has his Name derived
from that general enemy to mankind Belze-bub, one whom we all know to be the
Devil; this Bell was made of brass, and that is the only reason (my beloved)
that our Bells be held so much in contempt amongst the Brethren. This Bell
according to the text had spent upon him every 10 great Measures of fine
Flower, 40 Sheep, and 6 Vessels of wine: now who devoured this Flower? Bell,
who consumed the 40 Sheep, but Bell, who drank the wine, so that there was a
general exaction laid upon each Pint and Quart, but Bell, or A-bell.

I have observed that there was never any good in that word where Bell had a
share in it what was Adam Bell, but a hunter, so was Nimrod, who built that
ambitious Tower Babel; I have heard with mine own ears, those blads which
call themselves Cavaleroes call a Cross Bard sword Troy Bell. what is a Bel-man
but a night walker (as I apprehend him) nay do not your superstitious papists
curse the Brethren with Bell Book and Candell; was not that Cardinal an arch
Heretic who had to name Bell Armine; do not those persecuting papists in
Ireland ReBel, yes double and Tre-Bel; and I hope there will be such an Equal
uniformity amongst us who are the select Brethren that no particular man may be
said to bare the Bell: nor shall any man hereafter be counted a man the sounder
for being Bel-Metle, for Bell was Brass without and Clay within.

Now the Babilonians had an Idol called Bell, and there was spent upon him
every day 12 measures of fine flower, and 40 sheep and 6 Vessels of wine,
beloved had I been to serve Bell with this banquet I would have made Bells ears
ring noone ere he should have had it; now who do you conceive should worship
this Bell? noe worse man then Cyrus the King, as you shall find it in the
fourth verse;

And Syrus worshipped it and went daily to adore it.

And it is thought (by some Authors) that this Syrus first made this Bell, if
he did, he was but a Bell founder; or at least the first that ever was a
Bel-founder. I shall love a Bel-founder the worse for it all days of my life;
I could proceed further and would but for fear of the law, who if I should be
too zealous, would censure this Lecture to be a Libell, therefore, this shall
suffice at this time, next meeting shall perfect the work begun: repair to
your houses and consider of these sayings, Farewell.

FINIS.

