Baxter's Book, Entitled, The Cure of Church-Divisions, ANSWERED and CONFUTED.
And he proved to be a Physician of NO VALUE: Who has manifested his Folly and
Weakness in undertaking a Work which he has so little Understanding in

By Thomas Tailor.

For, from the least of them, even unto the greatest of them, every one is
given to Covetousness, etc. -- They have Healed also the Hurt of the Daughter
of my People with sweet words, saying, Peace, Peace; when there is no Peace,

Jer. 6.13, 14. -- But ye are Forgers of Lies; ye are all Physicians of no
Value,

Job 13.4. Printed in the Year, 1671.

Baxter's Book, Entitled, The Cure of Church-Divisions, ANSWERED and CONFUTED.
RICHARD BAXTER, a man, who through a show of Learning and Religion, had gotten
(in Oliver Crumwel's days) a great esteem in the minds of the ignorantly
Zealous Professors of Religion in this Nation, and especially in the parts of
Worcestershire, about Kidderminster, where he then resided) has since the
change of the Times, and coming in of the Old Common Prayer Book again, much
manifested his Nakedness, Confusion, and Unsoundness to every Eye, that in any
measure is open to see the difference of Truth and Error in the ground of it,
as by his works appear: and that it is so, amongst other things, that Book of
his, falsely called, The Cure of Church-Divisions, which I have now underhand
to answer, does plainly manifest: For, instead of curing Divisions, he has
showed himself to be a Physician of no value, and so instead of curing has
struck at (under a Judas Kiss of Unity and Concord) the very Life and
Foundation of all true Christian Unity and Amity; to wit, The Free and Perfect
Teachings, and Gifts, and Work of the Spirit of Truth (the Spirit of the Father
and Son in his believing Members) whereby they cry in a spotless Mind, Abba
Father, and freely and powerfully declare the Glory of his Kingdom to the
Children of Men; and instead thereof, would bring in and establish that
Soul-deceiving and Church-dividing doctrine of Humane Learning and Humane
Helps, as absolutely necessary to the procuring and engaging, as it were, the
Holy unlimited God to give unto the Creature his holy Spirit, and the Knowledge
of the Mysteries of his Eternal Will and Kingdom for the same; as in Answer to
an Objection in the 6th page of his Book, in his first Direction (so called) is
to be seen. The Objection against his carnal Reasonings, for Old Men's
knowledge, is in page 5. where he says.

I know those that I have to do with will say, That Divinity is not learned by
Labor and Men's-teaching, as other Sciences and Arts are; but by Teaching, (I
add, yea, and most free Gift) of the Spirit of God, and therefore the Youngest
may have as much of it as the Eldest.

And to this R. B. there thus answers.

Answ. There is some Truth (says he) and some Falsehood, and much Confusion in
this Objection.

Reply, But O the Darkness, ye^, rather Enmity, that is in Baxter's heart
against the free Teaching of God's Spirit! that he would find any thing against
so plain and manifest Truth, as is in this Objection! But what will not Flesh
do that is lifted up with Conceits of his own wisdom, to keep up its Honor
before the people, rather then the Pure Undoubted Truth of the Gospel, and
Self-abasing Spirit of Truth, should Reign and have the Pre-eminence.

But let us hear how this R.B. proves that, that there is either (...) or
Confusion in the Objection.

It is true (says he) that the saving Knowledge of Divinity must be taught by
the Spirit of God; but it is false, that Labor and Humane Teaching are not the
Means which must be used by them who will have the Teaching of the Spirit.

But to this I say, That a Child of Light, in the least Measure, does easily
see the Falsehood of that spirit, by which this R.B. is acted in this his
answer: For the wind of the Spirit blows where it lists, and thou hear'st
the sound thereof, thou natural Man; but neither knows whence it comes, nor
whither it goes; so is every one that is born of God: And without this Birth,
all thy knowledge is damning, not saving, John 3.7, 8. etc. And Job 32.7, 8. I
said days should Speak, and multitude of years should Teach Wisdom: but there
is a Spirit in man; and the Inspiration of the Almighty gives them
Understanding. And says God, It shall come to pass in the last days, that I
will pour out my Spirit upon all Flesh; and they shall all know me, from the
least to the greatest: yea, and Young Men shall see Visions, and Servants and
Handmaids shall Prophecy: and ye have received an Unction from the Holy One:
and ye know all things, (says the Apostle John) and ye need not that any man
teach you. This is the Day of the Lord, wherein these things are fulfilled;
praised be God: And the new Covenant abundantly witnessed in the Children of
Light, whom this wicked Book of Baxter's strikes at; but his Wickedness turns
upon his own Pate, and his own Inquities shall slay him: For he, by his carnal
Wisdom; would darken Knowledge, and shut the Kingdom of Heaven against men, as
his Predecessors of old, the Pharisees mentioned Mat. 23. did: But the Lord
has opened a Door to the Believing Souls this Day, which all the powers of
Darkness shall never be able to shut; Glory to his Name forever.

But what is that Labor and Humane Means that People must use for getting the
Spirit of God, or saving Knowledge of Divinity, as he calls it: Is it tumbling
over a Ruck of Books, stuffed with art and Humane Wisdom, or Learning from
below; as this R.B. has long done, to the darkning of his Heart from the
Knowledge of God, and Way of his Spirit; so that he knows nothing of it after
all his long lost labor, but what he knows naturally, as a bruit Beast (and
that is plain) for it sanctifies him not, as by his confessing, That his best
Duties, even his Prayers are not without sin; and affirming, that no man prays
without sin? as in his Book is to be seen, page 195, and in his Preface.

And so the Prayer of Faith, and Preaching by the Spirit, he is ignorant of;
yea, Preaching by the Spirit is become a Mock and a Derision to him and his
Brethren at this day: but Paul, and all the Ministers of Christ, Magnify the
Free Grace and Infinite Gift of the Spirit of God, according to that (2 Cor.
3.) Saying, Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think a good Thought;
but our Ability is of God, who has made us able Ministers of the New
Testament; not of the Letter, but of the Spirit; for the Letter kills, but the
Spirit gives Life: And that which the Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor
has entered into the Heart of man (or Humane Heart) to conceive, has God
revealed to us by his Spirit; for the Spirit searches all things, yea, the
Deep Things of God; and which Things we Preach or Speak not in the words which
man's (or Humane) Wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost teaches, comparing
Spiritual things with Spiritual, 1 Cor. 2.

But this R.B. comparing Spiritual things with Carnal, is not wise, who,
because old men, and long Students in Arts and worldly Sciences are most Wise,
or likely to be so; therefore they that labor and study most in Books of
Divinity (so called) get most of the Spirit's teaching.

O sad! That ever the minds of the Children of Men should be so covered with
darkness, and yet read the Scripture of Truth, which witnesses to no one thing
more then to the Free Teachings of the Spirit of God, without humane Helps! For
all the Help that is humane, or that man who is ( ab humo, that is) from the
Earth can afford, is but natural, and of this World, which comes to naught;
therefore is it said, That none of the Princes (that is, the chief men) of this
World knew the Mystery of Christ and his Kingdom then, which made them so band
against him, see the 2d Psalm. And the Natural Man, with all his natural means,
discerns not the things of the Spirit of God, because they are spiritually
discerned: So every one that would know the Mind of the Spirit of God, must
come to feel (through the Most Holy Faith) a measure of it in themselves: For,
after ye believed, ye were sealed with the Spirit of Promise, says Paul: And
the Word is nigh thee, even in thy Heart and Mouth: O thou that have an Ear to
hear, hear what the Spirit speaks, even the Word of Faith, which we Preach.
Therefore go not forth from the Anointing of God in thy Heart, to hear the
frothy and false Doctrine of such as R.B. who have run and set up themselves by
their humane Helps, in the place of Teachers, and God never sent them, and
therefore they cannot profit the People at all; but lead them about, like silly
Women, laden with diverse Sins and Lusts; yea, in their Prayers and best
Performances, as is manifest; and so, not being sent and enabled by God's
Spirit, they can never lead you to it, but from it, as is manifest.

Also R. B. in page 6. before mentioned, says, The Objection has much
Confusion in it. (and how proves he that, but by saying) 1. It confounds the
Spirit's teaching us, by inditing the Scripture with the Spirit's teaching us
the meaning of the Scriptures. 2. And it confounds the common Knowledge of
Divinity, with the saving Knowledge of it. No man comes to a common Knowledge,
fit for a Teacher of others, without the Spirit's teaching by the Scriptures;
for that was the first part of the Spirits teaching us, to inspire the Prophets
and Apostles, to deliver a Teaching Word to the Churches, by which we might all
be taught of God through all Generations. But many men have excellent common
Knowledge by this Word, and by the common help of the Spirit, without that
special Help, which begets saving Knowledge: And all Knowledge requires Time
and Labor to obtain it, though the Spirit gives it, and though it may be
sanctified to us in a little time; but that may be a means of saving others,
which saves not the man that has it.

And in page 114. farther says, Take them not for no Ministers that want Grace
totally: and marvel not that Gifts are more necessary to the validity of
Ministration, then Grace is; he may perform the Office of a Minister to the
benefit of the Church, that has no Saving Grace at all. Thus for Rich, Baxter.

O! What Sorcery and Egyptian-Darkness is here, to make void the New Covenant,
and Free Gracious Teachings of the Spirit of God in these days, and to
establish the Letter in the room and stead thereof, which only witnesses to it,
and is a Declaration concerning what the Spirit of God did in them, and in the
World before Christ's coming in the Flesh, and what was done during his being
in it, and what the Spirit would do in the Believing Souls, and in the World
after that time? But this the Hirelings do, that they by their trading with,
and giving their false meanings upon the Scriptures, they may keep the people
in Blindness, and so from the Anointing, and Teaching, and Enjoyment of that
Spirit that was in them that gave forth Scriptures, that they may not see their
deceitful Doctrines and Merchandises, lest they should buy no more of them: For
no man that knows the Badness of Babylon will buy them any more, and then will
the Merchants of Souls Mourn: For, they that know the Lord, and his Spirit's
Teaching in them, which is the Good Old Way, yea, and the ever New, Fresh,
Profitable, and Living WAY; will follow no more such men, as would bring in,
and establish a Graceless Ministry, as this Baxter does here, to his
everlasting Shame. But such Graceless Priests the Lord will have none of; nor
his People neither: For my Sheep hear my Voice, says Christ, and a Stranger
they will not hear: Surely a Graceless Man is this Stranger: They (to wit,
graceless men, says John, 1 Epist. 4.) are of the World, and the World hear
them; we are of God; Stewards of the manifold Grace of God, 1 Pet 4 10 And they
that are of God hear us.

And so, ever Blessed and Praised be the Great and Glorious Name of the Lord
Jesus, who has restored to them that obey him, the Glorious Doctrine of the
Spirit's Teaching, as was in the Apostles days, according to his true Promise;
where all in the Truth (of which we, the People of God, in scorn called
Quakers, are Members) where all, I say, is done in and by the Holy Spirit,
praised be God, and nothing owned among'st us, but what is so done: Here is
Praying in and by the Spirit, and Preaching in and by the Spirit, and Singing
in and by the Spirit of our Holy Lord God; and so the Head being Spiritual, and
the Members of the Body every one Spiritual (for we are all Baptized by one
Holy Spirit into the one Heavenly Body) our Food is also Spiritual Heavenly
Bread, and Heavenly Wine, and the Water Spiritual that Sanctifies us, and makes
us clean to God in all our Sacrifices and Services: for Christ gave himself for
his Church, which is his Body, that he might wash it, and present it spotless
to himself, and without all Deformity, by the washing of Water (even the Water
of Life) in the Word of Life, the creating Word of the everlasting Father,
which is Spirit and Life, the Resurrection and the Life in every believing
Soul; for we are redeemed from Death thereby, that we might forever hereafter
serve God, in the newness of his own Spirit, and not in the oldness of the
Letter, as all such do as know no other teaching Word but the Letter, as this
Baxter does; and so they having gotten a little Brain-knowledge by their humane
helps, and not by the Spirit of Truth, they wrest Scripture to their own and
others destruction, desiring and boasting themselves to be Masters and Teachers
of others, whilst themselves need teaching what the very Principles, or
beginning Doctrines of the true Christian Religion is, as is plainly manifested
by his seeking to bring in a graceless Minister, or Woolf into Christ's Fold,
surely the Woolf comes not but to rob and destroy. All that ever came before
me, says Christ, are Thieves and Robbers, and never came in by the Door, as
its plain, the graceless man, does not, but has clim'd up another way by his
humane helps, as Baxter speaks; and to this purpose, see John the 10th, and
Mat. 23. where Christ at large sets forth such woolfish Teachers; who can perk
themselves up in Places of Teachers, by the World's help outwardly; but will
neither enter into the Kingdom of God themselves, nor suffer others, but shut
up the Kingdom of Heaven against Men, by such deceitful Doctrine and
Antichristian Inventions, as this Baxter has, by saying, That Gifts are more
necessary to the validity of Ministration, then Grace is; and that he may
perform the Office of a Minister to the benefit of the Church, that has no
Saving Grace at all; And all knowledge requires Time and Labor to obtain it,
though the Spirit gives it; which last saying does directly thwort and
contradict the Scripture; which says, I was found of them that sought me not,
I^a 65.1. And Paul sets believing and working in this great matter of the
knowledge of God and Christ to Salvation, one against the other, as the way of
the Law and Gospel, for (...) that (...), says he, is the reward recko^'d of
Debt, not gift of Grace;but to (...) it is of Grace, to the Glory of Gods great
Love to man; for says Scripture, God so loved the World, that he gave his Son,
that whosoever on him believe, should not perish; but have Life Eternal; And
none can truly say, but those are the best (...), and wisest People that have
Eternal Life in them; though they never labored for it, nor sought for it; and
so such as this Baxter, who looks at all, as obtained by Time and Labor, they
are those spiritual proud ones, who are swelled so big with spiritual Pride,
that self Idolizing sin, which, as himself says, in his second Direction (so
called) is the great Rebel against God, the chief part of the Devil's Image;
that one sin which breaks every Commandment; the heart of the old Man, the
Root and Parent, and Summery of all other sin; the Antichristian Vice, which is
most directly contrary to the Life of Christ, etc. and these Letter-wise-men,
that have patched together a Garment of Fig Leaves, to cover their sinful
nakedness, are proud of mere supposed spiritual excellencies; for the way of
the Blessed Spirit, and its free Gifts, and free workings in the Children of
Men, they are strangers unto; and then through their Humane, Learning and lost
Labor, having gotten a little or a great deal of talk from the Letter of the
Scripture concerning Religion, in their Earthly Spirits, which sees nothing of
the Kingdom of God; they condemn the Generation of the Just, whom God Teaches
and Blesses with all Spiritual knowledge in Heavenly things, and call them
Spiritually proud; because they cannot but speak very highly, and yet in the
truest humility of Heart, concerning the great things that God has done for
their Souls; and because they cannot join with the Wicked whom God abhoreth,
neither in their Worship, nor other sinful Customs.

And so out of that old Bottel, come all those unsavory expressions of R. B.
before mentioned, against the free Teachings of God's Spirit; yea so great an
Enemy he is to the wholesome Doctrine of free Grace, that Page 7. he says, Is it
not Blaspheming of God's Spirit to make it the Patron of men's sloth and
idleness under pretense of Magnifiying Grace.

To which I answer, That pretending we deny, and truly say, with the Apostle,
That God who commanded Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined in our
Hearts, to give us (yea, most freely without our own Labor, or any humane
Help) The knowledge of the Glory of his Kingdom; and those that call this
Doctrine, either in the Apostle, or us, a Patronizing of Sloth and Idleness,
are those that do really blaspheme God's Spirit which teaches it.

But many Texts (says R. B.) commands us diligence; and sloth is a great Sin.

To which I say, the Scripture indeed commands a diligent improvement, and Holy
exercise of the free Gifts which the Spirit has gives the Faithful: But the
Scripture never said, that Humane Labor and Helps are the Means to be used for
getting the Spirit's Teachings; and without which no knowledge in Spiritual
Matters is now received; Stir up the Gift of God in thee, says Paul to
Timothy, so say I; But he no where puts the Humane or Carnal man to Work or
Labor to get the Spirit; for that is quite contrary to this Scripture, Gal.
3.2. as also Romans 9.16.

Obj. But this Baxter asks this Question, Why has God settled a Teaching
Office in his Church, and commanded all to attend, and hear, and learn; if we
are taught by the Spirit without man's help? Why were the Apostles sent forth
into all the World, etc?


Answer, Here is the great stumbling of these Unbelievers, (the Worldly wise
ones indeed) what, because God in his free unlimitted Spirit did begift men,
and in his own Spiritual Power sent them forth to preach and publish all abroad
the Glory of his Kingdom, and Good Will to men; cannot People therefore be
taught by the Spirit without man's Help? What reasonings this? when the
Scripture expressly says, That all the Gifts and Alities, Helps, and Means of
bringing People to God, and the Knowledge, and Enjoyment of all the Good Things
of his Kingdom, are merely, solely and wholly from God and his blessed Spirit's
free Gift in Christ, and not from man at all: And therefore, when the
Corinthians began to look at man, whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, he calls
it Carnal, and said, Christ was not divided; signifying, plainly it was Christ,
and the Spirit of his Power that alone did all in all; as Christ said, John 15.
Without me you can do nothing; for in the True Church Christ ever was, and ever
will be all in all, and man nothing; as Paul said of himself, Paul is nothing:
But in the False Church where R. B. is pleading for man; yea Graceless
Ministers, man is all, and Christ suffered to have no Rule: But those mine
Enemies, says Christ, That would not that I should Rule, bring them and stay
them before my face.


But what sottishness is this in R. B. to ask such a Question as this when
himself confessed in the very last words before it; That none are so forward to
preach as these same men that cry down men's Teaching: Whereby it plainly
appears that we do not deny God's Teachings, and the Spirit's Good and Gracious
Gifts freely given for the edifying and building up of the Body of Christ; till
we all come to a perfect man, to the measure and feature of the fullness of
Christ, no more then the Apostle did, Ephesians. 4.11. etc. but that which we cry
down, is that Antichristian spirit in R. B. and all such men as by seting up
self; and flesh would draw from Christ and his Teachings in Spirit to look at
them, and their painted words, and love killing Doctrines; who are this day
Goliath like come forth to defy the Armies of the Living God; but the Stone cut
out of the Mountain, without Hands, shall dash them and their Images all to
pieces: Glory to the Lord for Ever. And though they with their Humane or
Earthly spirit and Sorceries, withstand the Truth and Spirit thereof, as Jamnes
and Jambres withstood Moses, when he was about to call Israel out of Egypt; yet
as their Folly was soon seen, so are these, and they shall not proceed far; but
Israel out of Egypt shall go, and those Faithful ones that are escaped shall
they not with all their Enchantment bring back again into Egypt: Glory to the
Lord for Ever Amen.

But would thou indeed know, Oh vain man, R.B. for what the Apostles, who had
Ability to preach (without man's help) were sent forth, then thou may know, it
was to reprove such as thee that would limit God to vain man's Help, and to
call his People from amongst you, who lay heavy Burdens on men's Shoulders, but
will not touch them with one of your Fingers; it is even so.

But whereas thou addest and say, Those are taught of God, who are taught by
those who are sent of God to be their Teachers: It plainly shows the numerous
Company thou boasts of, who believe thee, are not taught of God; for thy
Doctrine already mentioned shows most plainly that thou wast never sent of God;
for never did any, whom God sent, set themselves against the free and Gracious
Teaching and Gifts of God's Spirit, to Establish Humane Helps, as thou do:
But as if that which thou have said were nothing, thou addest Page 8.

Advise with the experience of all the World; Who was the man that ever you
knew, able to Expound one Chapter in the Bible by the inward Teachings of the
Spirit alone, without any Labor of his own, or Help from others by Voice or
Writting? Where dwells the man, who by mere Inspiration can turn one Chapter
out of the Hebrew or Greek into the vulgar Tongue? and where is the man that
can solidly unfold any Doctrine of Divinity, which he never read or heard of,
or can Teach that Truth, and deny that Religion which he was never taught by
man.

And afterward in his Second Direction, and Page 16. having led his wretched
Disciples into a Laborinth or Mist of words, about their uncertainties in their
Matters of Knowledge; and having advised them to humility, as he calls it, or
not to think too highly of their own knowledge; he there adds, and says in
that 16th. Page especially, If you know your advantages for knowledge have been
less then other men's, that you are young; or that it is but a few Years since
you entered upon the study of the Scriptures; or that you have not any stronger
natural Parts then other men; that you have not had that Measure of Learning
which might further your knowledge of the Holy Scriptures; but that others that
differ from you have had much more of all these Helps and Means then you, and
have Prayed more, and Meditated more, etc.

And in Page 17. in his Answer to an Objection; which is, That the Learned
men are not always the wisest in the matters of Religion; he says, many men
are learned in the Languages and Sciences, who are not learned in the
Scripture; because they applied not their Studies that way; and many men are
learned in the Scriptures and Sacred Languages who yet live in sin, though they
are able to Teach the Truth, for others: (here by the way) all may take notice
what a False Teacher this Baxter is, who is not ashamed to say, That man that
lives in sin, may Teach the Truth for others; for such as live in sin neither
know the Truth (which is Christ) nor have seen him, (as John's first Epist.
Chap. 3. expressly says) but this Baxter goes on and says: But those that
well understand the Scriptures without learning the Languages which they are
written in, and the Customs of those Times, and Countries, or without much
reading, and long study of the Scriptures themselves, and the Writings of them
that better understand them, are so few, if any at all; that if you will
pretend to be one of them, you had need of some Miracle, or something like a
Miracle, to make your selves or others believe that you are not deceived.

I Might here add his other false Doctrines immediately following these in that
his Book, as his Answer to an Objection there set down against singularity, or
so; the Objection is this: The greater Number are not always in the Right;
therefore why should my singulary discourage me: But because his Answer has
pretty many words in it, I refer it to another place, and to what he has
already said do answer, and say in brief thus.

First, That as by his other words, so also by these it is most, manifest from
what Fountain this Baxter's knowledge has proceeded, to wit, not from the
Inspiration of the Eternal Spirit, which gave forth Scripture; but from his own
Earthly or Natural spirit and Humane Industery and Studies, and trading in
Books and Letters without him, from which Earthly or Humane Spirit and Wisdom
has not come (nor possible ever can come to any) the right meaning and
understanding of Holy Scripture (as such as he would have it) for the natural
man as the Apostle says, Perceives not the things that be of the Spirit of
God, 1 Cor. 2.14. But all false Visions, and lying Divinations have ever come
from that Earthly spirit, and all the cruel wrestings of the Holy Scriptures
from the beginning to this day, have proceeded from it, to the miserable and
woeful undoing of the Generallity of that People called Christendom; as also
the Blood-sheds, and all the cruel usage of Spiritual Minded Men, for their
pure Conscience sake, have issued from that Fountain of the Earthly spirit, and
the false Births thereof from the beginning, and that great Whore found Guilty
of all; for in her was found the Blood of Prophets, and of Saints, and of all
that were slain upon the Earth, R^^^. 18.24. for what Spiritual man did ever
ask such a Question, or rather affirm; for in him, his question is an
affirmation, to wit, That no man is able by the inward Teachings of the Spirit
alone to Expound one Chapter in the Bible: And that there is none can solidly
Unfold any Doctrine of Divinity, which he never read or heard of, or can teach
the Truth, or defend that Religion which he was never taught by man.

Oh happy therefore are they who are come to the Everlasting Covenant of God,
and to know the inward Teachings and Leadings of his Holy Spirit in their
Heart, to Lead them into all Truth according to Promise, Joh. 16. without being
beholding to Vain Man's Help; for whereof is he to be accounted, as is
manifest, even as a Thing of naught, is the best of them, out of the Truth: For
O! How Ignorant of the Ministry of God and Christ, and the Holy Spirit's
Inspiration, sufficient Teaching, is this Baxter, who is not content to sit
among the Parish Teachers, as a Fellow; but even takes upon him to be a Teacher
of the Teachers? Yea, so Ignorant and Unbelieving is he concerning the Spirit's
Power and Sufficiency in these days, that without an outward Miracle he will
not believe any such Thing: Nay he would not have People believe, for
themselves, that God teaches their own Hearts, unless it come in man's Way,
and by Humane study, Labor, and natural Means: Therefore the Lord saw good for
his own Glory, and for the Vindication of his own Honorable and Everlasting
Truth, which the Hirelings had made void by their Traditions; and for the
absolute necessity of his own beloved Seed, to restore unto us the Ancient
Doctrine of the Holy Spirit's Sufficiency in all the Work of bringing man out
of the Fall to God, that the Lord, the Spirit, might be the first and the last;
yea all in all in their Salvation, without man's Help; for he is worthy, who as
he created all things, by his own alone Power, and according to his Good Will;
so he restores all things according to the Counsel of his own Will, and not of
Flesh, nor of Blood, nor of the Will of Man, as the Apostle also speaks, Joh.
1.13. but, Oh, How unlike is this Doctrine of the Apostle's, to Baxter's; for
when the Apostle had said, To them that received Christ, to them he gave Power
to become the Sons of God; left any should think, as this Baxter does, that it
was either by man's Labor, or Study, or Humane endeavor, or Art, or Parts; or
any natural Abilities or Helps whatsoever; he says, It was not of Flesh, nor
of Blood, nor of the Will of Man, but of God. And of his own Will begat he us,
by the Word of Truth, says that other Apostle, Jam. 1.17, 18. and he bids not
err, as this Baxter does, to set up another Fountain or Root; and that this
Word of Truth is not any outward Writing, Voice, or any Creature, John in his
first Chapter tells us, That in the beginning was this Word, and the Word was
with God; and is God; and his Name is called the Word of God, Revel. 19.13. so
this Word, though it works according to the witness of the Scripture, which it
gave forth freely, and as it self pleases, in the Children of men; yet it is
not the Scripture; For search the Scriptures, or ye do search the Scriptures,
says Christ, That witness of me, but you will not come to me that you may have
Life; and these were they that Paul said, He bore them record that they had a
Zeal for God (and Scripture) but not according to knowledge; for they being
Ignorant of God's Righteousness, went about to Establish their own
Righteousness, and submitted not to God's: And so even so this Baxter, and many
such like, have a blind Zeal, and a great Talk of the Scriptures without, and
of the Spirit's Teaching by the Letter, and Humane Helps, and the like; but
will not come to Christ, to know him in them, that they may have Life, and
Wisdom and Righteousness: But would Establish their own, which is mere
Emptiness and Vanity in the sight of God and all truly Spiritual men, 2 Cor.
13.5. Romans 10.3.

And how far this Baxter's Language in those other words, where he says, That
if any will pretend to a good Understanding of the Scriptures, without learning
the Languages which they are written in, and the Customs of those Times,
Countries, or without much reading and long study of the scriptures themselves,
and the Writings of them that (...) and (...) them, had need of some Miracle,
or sounding (...) to persuade themselves, or others, that they are not
deceived. How far, I say, is this Doctrine and language in this (...) from the
Language of the holy men of God that writ Scripture let the Spiritual Man who
best understands all things judge; for the holy Apostles Magnified the free
Grace, and the free Teachings of the Spirit of Grace, and debased man and all
Humane Helps, as is said before, and as the Scripture every where witnesses:
But this Baxter tyeth the Wait and main stress of all upon Humane Learning,
natural Parts, knowledge of Customs and Countries, much reading, long study,
and the like; insomuch, that without them, man must not look that any should
believe him: Nay, nor he must not own God's Teaching in his own Heart without
these; unlest seconded by some Miracle, or the like.

But, Oh the Misery therefore of such poor Souls, as follow such wretched
Teachers, and their damnable Doctrine, as I may well And Oh forever Blessed are
they who are brought from off such Barren Mountains into the good Fold, where
all the Lambs of Christ lie down in the good Pasture of the Spirit's fullness;
and walk up and down in the Light of the Lord, under the hand of the good
Shepherd Christ Jesus, where none can come to make afraid, nor deceive; for in
the Light of our God, we see all these false Teachers, and their devouring
Doctrines; and by the holy Power of God are delivered from them, and made able
in the overcoming Spirit of Truth, to declare against them: Glory to God
forever, Amen.

Again, Let us revew, and consider in particular a little of those words of his
before set down; where he says, as an Argument to persuade his young Ones and
Dissenters, to his falsely called Humility.

Especially says he, If you know your advantages for knowledge have been less
then other men's; that you are younger, or that it is but a few Years since you
entered upon the Study of the Scripture; or that you have not any stronger
natural Parts then other men; or that you have not had that Measure of
learning, which might further your knowledge of the holy Scripture: But that
others that differ from you, have had much more of all these Helps and Means
then you; and have Prayed more, and Meditated more. etc.

To which I Answer, That by these words it is easily seen, what manner of
knowledge it is that this Baxter trades in, and would have all Slaves unto; and
what are his Means for obtaining it; to wit, a mere natural Knowledge, which by
mere Worldly Helps, and Advantages may be attained: for a mere Heathen
accompanied with many Years; and much Humane Learning, and strong Natural
Parts, that can but talk much of the Scripture; especially having on him a Form
of Prayer, and the like, must needs go for a better knowing Christian with him,
then the dearest Child of God; especially if he be young in Years, and want
those natural Helps, and outward appearances. Oh what havoc has such
Doctrine, as this of Baxter's, made amongst his deluded Hearers; and Admirers
in this Nation so that now, let the Man of God come to one of them in the
purest Evidence, and most powerful demonstration of the Spirit of Truth, if he
appear not to them clothed and accompanied with these Natural and Worldly
Abilities and Indowments; they are fenced against the Lord's Messenger with
such Arguments as these; You are but young; you have but studied a while; you
are of slender and mean Natural Parts; and little or no Schollar-ship; and have
Prayed but little, etc. in comparison of our Grave and Learned Divines, and the
like: So that as Christ said, so we find now true; That Publicans and Harlots
enter into the Kingdom of God before such; and now what a Curer of
Church-divisions this Baxter is like to prove is easily seen; and therefore
that charge which his self-condemned Heart feared would come upon him, may
justly be brought upon him here; which in his Preface to his Book, he sets down
thus.

They will affirm says he, That I have clawed with one party, and have girded
at the other, and have sought to make them odious, by bringing them under the
Reproach of separation, of censuring and avoiding the Ungodly; and that being
lukewarm my self, and a Complier with sin, I would have others to do so too:
And that these Reconcilers are neither Flesh, nor Fish; and attempt
impossibilities, even to reconcile Light and Darkness, Christ and Belial, and
that for the sake of peace, we would sell the Truth, and would let in Church
Corruptions, out of an over eager desire of agreement; and when they have all
done, neither Parties will regard them. These are this Baxter's words, in that
Preface of his to that Book; which is justly come upon him.

And indeed; He may as well go about to reconcile Light and Darkness, as bring
the Children of Light, whom God has delivered our of the Darkness of, and
filthiness of Egypt and Sodom spiritual, into Unity with them again; for there
is Enmity put between the two Seeds, and those words of Christ, in John 17.21,
22. etc. which he deceitfully puts in the Title Page of his Book, are only
proper to the living Members of the Spiritual Body of Christ, (which he calls
mystical) and not to any of the Worlds Churches, or visible mixed Congregations
of People whatsoever; the words of the Apostle in John. 17.21. etc. are
weightier then any Hypocrite can bear, and they are these: That they all may be
one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that thou also may be one in us;
that the World may believe that thou have sent me; and the Glory which thou
have given me, I have given them; that they may be one, even as we are one: I
in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one; and that the
World may know that thou have sent me, and have loved them as thou have loved
me. God is arisen to drive Hypocrites from under all such shelter of words, as
they would hide themselves under; for now is the City and Kingdom truly
manifested and witnessed, into which no Uncircumcised, or Unclean shall enter;
but only the Redeemed born Babes, and living Members of Christ. And now to the
knowledge and experience, not of the Evil World, but of all that know God do I
appeal to judge, whether this R. Baxter, or any of like spirit with him, can be
said to know any thing of the Oneness, betwixt the Father and Son, the Members
of his holy Heavenly Body, much less can be any of them, who are not afraid to
affirm, That such are not to be disallowed from being Ministers of the Gospel;
though they want Grace totally: And that Gifts are more necessary to the
validity of Ministration, then Grace is; and that he may perform the Office of
a Minister, to the benefit of the Church, that has no saving Grace at all; (as
Page 114. of his Book aforementioned, and that there is no man alive that
Worshippeth God without some sin; and adds, Do you ever pray your selves in
secret, or in your Families with out sin, as in Page 19.5.

And in Page 30. of his Preface to that Book, That there is no Person, Church,
on Worship on Earth faultless, and with out Corruption; (and says there
further) I justify not the faults of my own daily Prayers, and yet I never
pray without them.

And in Page 34. etc. That Cain was the first born Member, in the Church of
Adam's Family: and cursed Cham was of the Church of Noah: and reckons Lot's two
Sons in law; and Esau; yea, and the ten Tribes in their Apostasy, to be of the
Church.

And so having reckoned up, and raked together, all the Faults of the Blessed
Seed of Abraham, before Christ's coming in the Flesh, and of all those called
Christians after that, mentioned in Scripture; he most wickedly, and
imprudently says Page 44. That no one Member is in all these Scriptures, or
any other, commanded to come out, and separate from any one of all these
Churches; as if their Communion in Worship were Unlawful, Directly contrary to
2 Cor. 5.11. Revel. 18.4, 5, 6. etc. Come out of Mystery Babylon (the false
Church) says God, to his People.

Oh the Blasphemy of such men's Hearts, that dare Entitle wicked men, for a bear
Profession sake of Religion, to the Glory of the benefit of this Prayer of
Christ's, who prays (and his Prayers were always heard) That his might be
one, as he and the Father were, and are one; the Father in Christ, and Christ
in them, and so made fellow Heirs, and Pertakers of the Glory of Christ by free
Gift: But neither R. Baxter, nor any graceless Minister, nor sinful praying
People, whom he pleads for, can ever be one, as the Father and Son are one:
Therefore I may safely say to you all Who desires the good of your Souls, and
the Glory of God: Come out from amongst them, and join not with them: No, not
in their Worship Actions (as he calls them) nor be ye Partakers in any of their
sins, or sinful Worship, lose ye partake of their Plagues; for the Temple of
God is Holy, and the Worship of God is Holy: And so R. Baxter, with all his own
Corruptions, and all his heaps of Lies, and false Accusations of the Brethren
of Christ are for the Lake; It is so.

And so I return to set down Baxter's Unchristian Answer, to that former
Objection against the singularity of separation; the Objection is as before:
The greater Number are not always in the right; therefore, why should my
singularity discourage me?

Now to this Baxter answers, Page 17.18. The greater Number (says he) through
the World are not in the right about Christianity; for they are not Christians,
and the greater number of vulgar Christians be not in the right perhaps, in
many Points of Learning, and Scholastic Controversies; because they are not
learned in such Controversies; but all Godly men, and Christians, are in the
right in all Points Essential to Godliness and Christianity: And therefore they
are in the certain way of Life.

And if in any integral, or accedental Point, you think you are wiser then the
greater part of men, as Learned, and as Godly as your selves, you must give
very good Proofs of it, to your selves and others, before it is to be believed:
I know that in all Ages God gives some few men more excellent natural Parts
then others; and he engages some in deeper, and more laborious Studies then
others; and he Blesses some men's Studies more then others; and therefore there
are still some few who know more then the rest of the Country, or Mankind; and
it were well for the rest, if they knew these, and would learn of them: But
these are such, as come to their Knowledge by hard and laborious Studies, and
Meditation; though also by the Spirit's Blessing their endeavors: and they are
such, as give proof of the Knowledge they pretend to; and they are such as
employ their Knowledge to preserve the Peace and Concord of Believers, and do
not proudly make a stir with it to set up their own Names, though hereby they
set the World on fire.

To which by way of reply, I answer and say, That there is not the least Child
of Light: But does truly, and easily see the nature of the Spirit, by which
this R. B. is still acted, and the end he drives at; for as for the Spirit by
which he is acted, it still appears plainly to be the spirit of this World that
never knew God, nor the Mysteries of his holy and Heavenly Kingdom, by which
Earthly spirit (by much poring on Books without him) he has attained to a deal
of Unsanctified graceless) Knowledge, (as himself speaks Page 114.) to deceive
the simple People by, who are Ignorant of Satan's Devises; and as for his end,
it is also as manifest to be this, to wit, to bring People, who were in some
measure pressing out of Babylon back into Egypt and Babylon again, and yet to
cover his deceit, lest the Simple should see him without an Interpreter, he
brings in the Spirit as to help his Humane Labor, and Carnal Endeavors: But
the Spirit of God, which he strikes at in all his writing, will be no Drudge or
Slave to any such Vain Self-ended Proud Mind in any.

But of these words, where he says, That all Godly men and Christians are in
the right, in all Points Essential to Godlyness and Christianity; and therefore
in the certain Way of Life, as he says.

Let us consider; for in his sense, they are most notoriously false and wicked:
for as for Godly men, who ever imagined otherwise (much less denied in words or
so) that they were in the right; but as for that he says, That all Christians,
viz. all that were sprinkled when they were Children, and that so being grown
up, make an outward Profession of Christ (for such in Spiritual manner he means
by Christians, as is most manifest) are in the right, in all Points Essential
to Christianity, and so in the certain Way of Life; It is such a notorious
piece of falsehood, and so impudent an assertion, that no one saying can more
gratify the Devil, and so help to build up his Kingdom, then it does: Nay, it
certainly gives the Lie to the certain experience and Testimony of all the holy
men of God, both formerly and now; for Paul said in his day, That many
professed, and nominal Christians do so walk, as that they were Enemies to the
Cross of Christ, whose god was their their Belly, and who gloried in their
shame, and whose end was destruction, Phil. 3. and were these in the right
Points Essential to Christianity, and in the certain Way of Life? what
Contradiction and Blasphemy is this? And the same Apostle tells some among the
Corinthians, That they had not the knowledge of God, Cor. 15. and what, were
these right also in all Essentials? what is not the knowledge of God an
Essential Point of Christianity? Nay, without the knowledge of God, no Eternal
Life; and yet this Baxter, is not ashamed to affirm, That such as know not God,
are in the certain Way of Life. And further, to the experience of all that know
God do I appeal, whether this R. B. does not here in his blindness, justify
the very Papist; Yea, and all other sorts of People, who any way in the outward
profess Christ; especially if they be outwardly sprinkled with Water, young or
old: for, says he, in his Preface, Page 33. Christ has solemnly and purposely
made the baptismal Covenanting with him (to wit, by outward washing) to be the
Term and Title to Church-Member-ship and Communion, and the owning of this
same Covenant is the sufficient Title of the Adult (or those of ripe years) and
the Imposers that come after, and require another kind of Evedence of
Conversion, or Sanctification then this, do confound the Church, and enslave
the People, and leave no certain way of Trial. Thus far, R. B. by which it
appears, whether this Baxter, by endeavoring to keep his credit with the
world, is wandered beyond all the Bounds of Reason and Modesty: Nay, Mystery
Babylon her self, though she be become a Cage of every unclean and barefull
Bird, and a very Habitation of Devils, must not pass unjustified by him; but be
reckoned to be right in all the Essentials of Christianity, and in the certain
Way of Life: For without all Controversy, this Mystery Babylon is of that
Number who in words profess God and Christ, and have a Name to live, though
they be dead, (as this Baxter is) or it were not a Mystery, if it were not
covered from the Worlds Eye, with a show of what it is not, Revel. 17, 18, 19.
Chapters: Yet so far is this Baxter sunk into the Dark Pit of Antichristian
Abomination; that he acounts it an abuse, and false Interpreting of Scripture,
to persuade any from that Command [ Come out of Babylon] to separate from
professed or nominal Christians, though full of Iniquity, Page 32. then which
nothing more can gratify his Father, the Wicked One, and his Adulterous
Mother, the Synagogue of Rome; for though he would seem in some words, here and
there, in his Book, to be no Papist; yet there is never an Argument he brings,
for the Fellow-ship with Dead and Corrupted Members; and against those that
separate from such; but they will fully serve, to prove the Company of the Pope
to be a Church, and all them to blame who have separated from him in outward
Church Fellowship upon any pretense whatsoever. So foolish is the World's
Wisdom when it is set against Truth: But this Baxter having laid his Wicked and
False Ground; That all that are called Christians are in the right, in all
Points essential to Christianity, and in the certain Way of Life: he may easily
conclude that to be unwarrantable separation which goes from such: But then I
say, How will the Protestants warrant their first separation from Popery? or
how did this Baxter, with his Presbyterians in Oliver's time, with their
Directory, excuse their separating from the Bishops, and their Comon-prayer?
and how will be salve his old Nonconforming Brethren's flight into New England
(where since they have shed the Blood of the Martyrs of Christ) from the former
Bishops?

But now his false Ground and Foundation being overturned, it is most manifest
that, that separation is most lawful, which is from such, who call good evil,
and evil good, put Light for Darkness, and Darkness for Light, as Baxter, and
all the Wicked do; from whom the People of God in these Days separate: And so
in obeying the Voice of our God, who says, Come out of Mystery Babylon my
People, lest ye partake of her Sins, and so of her Plagues, (we are justified)
for the sins of the Wicked, (who in words, profess God and Christ, but in deeds
deny all) is reached Heaven at this day: And does not the Apostle say, If any
man that is called a Brother be a Fornicator, or Covetous, or an Idolator (and
Covetousness by the Apostle's Doctrine is Idolatry) or a Railer, or a Drunkard,
or an Extortioner, with such not to keep company, no not as to eat with them 1.
Cor. 5.11.

And does he not say in an other Place, Have no Fellowship with the unfruitful
Works of Darkness (nor with the unfruitful Workers in Darkness as before) but
rather reprove them, Ephesians. 5.11. must we not yet separate from them, yea, yea
in their very Worship Actions as well as others; and when even the greater
number are so far defiled and tainted with the Leprosy of Unrighteousness;
that they are so far from amending, that they persecute all that will not be as
bad as themselves: Surely when the Lord has spued out a People, as he
threatened to do lukewarm Laodicea, Revel. 3.16. yea, and cast them off, for
their resisting of his good Spirit as he did the Jews; it is no time for his
People to stay amongst them then, and to continue with them in their
Worship-Actions, as he calls them; but every one to deliver his own Soul, by
coming out of such Babylonish Worships; whose Prayers are Abomination to God,
as all sinful Prayers are; and neither this Baxter, nor any one that he knows
upon the Earth prays without sin, as himself before has confessed; and so
all of them together do daily and continually that which they should not do,
and leave undone what the Lord Commands them, and so have no health in them;
and so now that the True Light shines so clear again from under the long Cloud
of Antichristian Apostasy; it is the wisdom of all that love God and their own
Souls, to join to the Lord in the Covenant of his Light and Spirit, where no
Committers of sin can join; for Darkness, and the Workers thereof, can never
join with the Light, and the Workers thereof: So now that the Trumpet has
sounded, all ought to come to the holy Worship of God, amongst the holy
Worshippers, that Worship in the Spirit of Holiness and Truth; (where no Worker
of Iniquity, nor Hypocrite can come) out of all the Defiled Worship of the
World whatsoever or under what Name soever in the Fall: But this Baxter is in
such love of hypocrisy, that he makes a necessity, of the Hypocrites being
amongst the true Members of Christ, as though they knew not how to do without
them; as if the good Corn, could not grow so well if the Weeds were wanting;
saying, Page 56. It is more for the sake of the truly Faithful, then for
themselves, that the Hypocrites have their Station, and Privileges in the
Church; God makes use of their Gifts and Profession for his Elect, to many
great Services of the Church. To which I answer, That this Language berayes
thee further to be of Babylon, and not of Zion, what R. Baxter, with all his
seeming Zeal for Reformation in Oliver's days, become now a-Pleader for the
Hypocrites, and their great Service in the Church! But this is but like his
Doctrine of his graceless Ministers which he pleads for, Page 114. of his Book;
so R. Baxter, and his Hypocrites, and graceless Brethren, with their Gifts (or
rather Thefts void of Grace) have been so far from being serviceable to the
Elect True Church, that they have done it (and ever did) all the Injury that
ever they can by their wicked Doctrines, Ungodly lives, and heaps of Lies and
false Accusations, and cruel Persecutions; in so much that the growth of the
heavenly Seed, the Lillies of God, the true Heirs of the Kingdom, has been,
and is, as a Lilly among Thorns: But Christ and Richard Baxter, are directly
contrary in their Judgment one to the other; for Christ would not suffer the
Devil in the man to preach him, but commanded him to come out, and hold his
peace, because Christ never had need of Devils, or wicked men, or Hypocrites to
preach him; but says to such, What have thou to do, to take my Laws and
Covenant in thy Mouth, and hate to be reformed, Psalm. 50.16. etc. and so far
are graceless Priests and Hypocrites from being serviceable in this matter to
his Church, that he says, My Sheep hear my Voice, and they follow me; but the
graceless Minister and Hypocrite, who is a Stranger to me, they will not hear,
for such come but to rob, and destroy, read John 10. and see if ever R. Baxrter
understood Scripture, who talks so contrary to it: As did those Pharisees of
old, whom Christ cried out so many times Woe against, Mat. 23. Who would neither
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven themselves, nor suffer others. And those in
Ezekiel who, sowed Pillows under men's Elbows, making glad the Hearts of the
Wicked Hirelings, by persuading People that they must not disown them from
being Ministers, though they be totally void of all saving Grace; and that
Hypocrites have a Station in the Church, for great services with their
(graceless) Gifts to the Elect; and by pleading for Games, and Fashions of
Apparel; yea and the Opinions in Religion of bad People, yea to such a measure,
that he is not ashamed to say, That many an Error is taken up, by going too far
from other men's faults, as is to be seen in Page 224. of his Book, with many
such like heathenish sayings, up and down his Book; a few whereof I only touch
here and there as they come to mind, that by those the Reader may see the
nature of that wretched spirit, that has long lurked in him, under a cloak of
zeal for Reformation, when the World pretended to such things, but now that the
World is for a manifest establishing of their old dark Stuff, he turns about
and is all for them as it were, and against Zeal, against Reformation,
Separation, Revelation, or any thing that may manifest People to have a care of
their Souls: But Oh the misery, the misery, the unspeakable misery of such as
are not yet redeemed from under the slavery and Egyptian Bondage of such men:
But the Lord will break the Rod of the Oppressor, as in times of old, as in the
days of Midian and Egypt, where both Jannes and Jambres who withstood the
Lord's Servant Moses, in his calling Israel out of Egypt were made manifest,
and their Folly by all clearly seen, as this Baxter's is by every open Eye:
Praised be the Lord for his Infinite Love in all things.

But the Hearts of the Righteous whom God delights to comfort, he does all he
can to make sad by persuading the dark cruel World, that the cause of all the
miseries of the late years, yea, and at present in these Islands, is much (what
if not mostly) occasioned by those, who in tenderness of Conscience to God,
could not, nor cannot join with, nor uphold the Popish Customs, and
Antichristian imposition in Matters relating to Religion, and the Soul, which
is more precious to them that know it, then all the World: And in the Truth we
may say, that if we should come amongst the Steeple-house Worshippers, or any
other Company, who are only separated from them in form, and not in Life and
Power, and their exercise, or Gift, and heavenly holy Worship and Service to
the Lord Jesus Christ our God, we should even sacrifice the Abomination of the
Egyptians before their Eyes; and would you not Stone us, or Imprison us, or
otherwise evil entreat us, even as you do, and ever have done? yea yea, and as
they dealt with the Prophet Isaiah for saying (Chap. 66.3.) He that kills an
Ox, is as if he flew a man, he that sacrifices a Lamb as if he cut off a Dogs
Neck, etc. and Chap. 1.11. etc. To what purpose is the multitude of your
Sacrifices unto me, says the Lord, I am full of them; and who has required it
at your hands, to tread my Courts? bring no more vain Oblations, etc. for which
it is said they slew him; so they would deal with us. And what measure have the
dear Servants of God in New England met withal, not long since, for the like
witness against those Hypocrites, but Death and cruel Whippings, and
Banishment; and in old England lately, but most savage and cruel usage? And
would this Baxter yet have us, yea, and those he counts his Brethren, and of
his Flock, who have any tenderness in them to communicate with such whose Hands
are full of Blood? if he were as the mouth of God, he would put a difference
between the Clean and Unclean: But he being of an other spirit, is for leading
People back again into Egypt, not for bringing them out of Egypt into the
Promised Land; and so his Work and endeavor is accursed of God, and abhorred
of all that know God, who are escaped out of Sodom and Egypt, and Babylon
spiritual, where our Lord was crucified: And to us the Lord has said, Let them
return to you (ye saved People) but return not you to them; for their Pastors
are become brutish, and have not sought the Lord; therefore they shall not
prosper, and all their Flocks shall be scattered. Jer. 10.21. He that has Ears
let him hear, and he that reads let him understand, for the time is at hand;
for the Lord is arisen to plead with all the false Worshippers upon Earth, and
with him is no respect of persons. And now is the Lord God of ever blessed
Power and love appeared in the Earth, after the long Night of Apostasy, to
restore all things, and now are the Virgins called upon through the whole
World, to trim their Lamps; for behold the Bridegroom is come and coming, and
now the foollish Virgins, who have been long sleeping, and slumbering in a dead
Profession of Christ and the Scriptures, are found wanting in their Faith,
Holiness, Love, and all other Christian Virtues, and so in their Unholiness
shut out; yea, and though they run to the Hirelings, that set all things to
sale, to buy, yet still before they come, the Door is shut; for whilst the Lord
stood waiting upon them, with his pure free and full Grace and Spirit, they
would have none of it; but rather chosed to go their own Ways of Carnal
endeavors, and man commanded Religion, and so like the Jews of old, going
about to Establish their own Righteousness, have not submitted to the
Righteousness of God, which is by Faith in Christ Jesus: But the wise Virgins,
who are of an honest Heart, to fear God, and wait for the Lord Jesus Christ, to
appear in their spirits, to set up his heavenly and everlasting Kingdom in
them, they receive daily of his fullness, which fills all in all, where the
true Oil of the Kingdom is found in their holy Lamps, to the praise of the
Glory of the unspeakable Love, and free Grace of the Almighty Father, so be it.

Again, to that part of this Baxter's former Answer, where he says, That in
all Ages, God gives to some few men, more excellent natural Parts then others;
and he engages some in deeper and more laborious Studies, and he blesses some
men's Studies more then other; and therefore there are still some few, who know
more then the rest of the Country, or Mankind; and it were well for the rest,
if they knew these, and would learn of them.

Quer. But how may one know these hard, and laborious Studiers, as he calls
them?

Oh, says this Baxter, They are such as give proof of their knowledge they
pretend to; and they are such to employ their knowledge to the preserving of
the Peace and Concord of Believers; and do not proudly make a stir with it, to
set up their own Names; though thereby they set the World on fire.

To which I answer and say, it is still more and more manifest, that this
Baxter lays all the weight and stress upon natural Parts, and hard Studies; as
though the Kingdom of God, were not at all come, nor the Promise of God
concerning the free Gifts, and plentiful pouring forth of the Spirit, not yet
fulfilled; and so a necessity of learning at the feet of Gamaliel, and earthly
Doctors still: But now that the Spirit of Truth according to God's blessed
Promise is come, and witnessed amongst us that believe, praised be God, we
cannot go to such as this Baxter, with all their natural Parts, and hard
Studies; for the Spirit of Truth leads us, and all that obey it into all Truth;
but this Baxter, and such as he leads, are in all Error, as is manifest; for
they are of those, that lead about a Company of poor Souls, silly as Women
leaden with diverse Sins and Lusts, ever learning, but never able to come to the
knowledge of the Truth, which sets free from sin; for that (and nothing else)
is the Truth, which sets free from sin; for says Christ, If ye know the Truth,
the Truth shall set you free indeed. But this Baxter, and all such, teach it
for Doctrine, That they are so far from being free from sin, that their very
prayers and best performances are not free from sin, but sin is in them all: Oh
sad, that ever they should dare to pretend to the Ministry of the Gospel, who
preach such a Doctrine as make nothing perfect, but leaves them in sin all
their lives long: And no wonder that they and their Doctrine should be void of
all good Fruit; for says God, They have run, and I have not sent them;
therefore they shall not profit the People at all. And yet they would gladly
have People know them, and learn of them, though they can do them no good at
all; and this is that sorry and bad Proof, that the Hirelings make of their
great knowledge they pretend unto, which they have gotten with their natural
Parts, and hard Studies; and so thy own words shall witness against thee, Oh
Baxter, and thy Brethren, who have given no good proof of your knowledge to
this day; nor have thereby preserved Peace and Concord amongst Believers, but
done what you can to break it; for that Doctrine that makes not men free from
sin, leaves all the seeds of Discord and Dissension, still in Peoples Minds;
for as sin separated man from God at first; so does it to this day keep them
asunder, and so keeps them from Love, for God is Love; and none live or dwell
in Love, but such as live and dwell in God: But such as live in sin, and never
pray without it, are out of God, as the Apostle said of People in unbelief,
They were without God in the World. It is not any outward Conformity, that
will, or can make them to be at peace with, or love one another; for if it were
possible to bring Papist, Athist, and Carnal Protestants and Professors of all
sorts, into one Form of outward Worship, as for Time, Place, Words, or the
like: Yet there would be neither Love, Peace, nor Concord amongst them, for
want of Unity with God and his good Spirit, the only true Ground and
Foundation of all true Love, Peace, and Concord: And so, Oh R. Baxter, we have
known thee this many years to be a great Enemy of God, and therefore we may not
learn of thee, nor any such, but of Christ do we learn, ever praised be his
Name, who teaches his People to profit; and so its only the poor deluded
Multitude that know^ thee not, who learn of thee, and suck in such poisoned
Doctrine, as makes them most incapable of the pure Word of Life and Doctrine of
Salvation; so that Publicans and Harlots, who make little or no Profession,
enter into the Kingdom of God before you.

And as for making a stir with thy knowledge, and striving to set up thy own
Name thereby, though thou set the whole World on fire by it; who more notorious
then thy self in this R. Baxter, as witness all thy lying frothy words, Books,
and Pamphlets which thou have spoken and written, against the appearance of
Christ and his Truth, in these late years; but thy Studies and thy Works God
has cursed; for no Child of Light, will ever buy any of thy Merchandise, nor
the deceitful Wares of any other Merchants of Babylon for evermore; Blessed be
God for his unspeakable Gift, Amen.

But the end of these words of setting the World on fire set down here by this
Baxter, is easily seen to be this, to wit, to persuade People that those, who
are zealous for God in these days in publishing his everlasting Gospel upon the
Earth, in a cross to the World, are such as set up themselves, and would set
the World on fire: And so he is manifest to be one of the old evil Generation
of Priests, who accused Christ for a mover of Sedition, and Paul for a
pestilent Fellow: Oh, it was that good stirring Spirit of the Lord Jesus in
himself, and his Followers, which did so trouble the World, the combustible
World in all Ages that made, and does make the Hrieling Priests, and their
deluded Followers so rage, and cry out; but as for setting the World on fire,
in a goodsence Christ Jesus says, That he came to set Fire in the Earth: But
for setting the World on fire in Baxter's sense, that is sowing discord and
dissension amongst People; this is the work, and ever was the work of the
Hireling Priests, who loved to be called of men Masters, as this R Baxter is
(as is said before) witness not only our own Age; but the holy Scripture, and
the Histories of all Times and Ages, as those that read may understand: And yet
these proud Masterly and false Teachers, were ever the first, and for wardst
that cried against Christ and his Followers, for disturbing the World's Peace;
when as this Doctrine of Christ's Spirit, though it did always disturb the
Devil's; yet it did always tend to the working of the hearts and Souls of the
People into God's Peace, and did ever, and does at this day work this glorious
and blessed Effect in all that believe: Whereof we are Witnesses, praised be
God, though for the Testimony of Christ, we are troubled on every side, by the
wicked World: So that even now, when the Wicked have no peace (for there is no
peace to the Wicked) we whom the World mock, stone and persecute under the
Nickname of Quakers, or so, have peace in all our Dwellings: And within Egypt
is full of Darkness, that one may feel it, yet in our Goshen is plenty of
Light, ever praised be God: And when the World of false Christians are learning
War, and preparing Weapons, we are ceasing from War, and not to learn it any
more, as the Lord has said. And therefore, Oh ye Inhabitants of the Earth, if
ye knew us, ye would not hate us, and persecute us, but love us with your
Hearts, because of the good will of our Hearts toward you; for our Weapons are
not Carnal, but Spiritual: Not for pulling down, or Destroying of you, but your
Enemies, your sins, which wars against your Souls: And the Reason why we cannot
join with you, in your Liturgyes, and Worship-actions, is not because we hate
you; but because we Love God, and your Souls; for if we should join with you in
your defiled Worship, as your selves confess they are, we should strengthen you
in an evil Way: But by our separating from you, because of the unholiness of
your Sacrifices, occasion may be ministered to you to question your State, and
so some of you in time may come out of your Darkness, into the mavelous Light
of the Lord Jesus with us, and praise the Lord in the Land of the Living, so be
it.

Another of this Baxter's Follies, and false Doctrines, I may here mention, as
one may read it in that Book of his, that I have under hand, to wit, in Page
114. are these words; It may be unlawful says he, in a Ruler to command a
thing that will do no good, because it is a vain Command, and makes men spend
that time in vain, and yet be the Subject's duty to do it.

Answ. This is just such Doctrine as Paul's Enemies taught, who said, Men might
do evil, that good might come of it, whose Condemnation was just. So to avoid
Sufferings from men, he would have us to obey Unlawful Commands, which will do
no good, but rather a great Evil; to wit, make People spend precious Time in
vain: Away with such Antichristian stuff amongst the Heathen, for all true
Christians abhor it in their Hearts, as the Lord the good Shepherd has
commanded them. And now R. Baxter to that part of thy feigned Prayer, Page 252.
where in words thou seem to desire, That God would stir up some faithful
Friend to tell thee with convincing Evidence, where it is that thou have
miscarried, that contrition may prepare thee for the Peace of Remission.

Here the Lord has contrary to thy will and desire stirred up one in
faithfulness and love to thy Soul, and the Souls of the poor deluded People
whom thou have deceived, to tell thee plainly of thy faults, and grievous
miscarriages, as by what is convincingly in these Lines set down does appear,
and might be more abundantly, if all the miscarrages in this Book (only to let
pass all thy other) were answered unto in particular; but these in this Answer
of mine, being as it were least of what the rest are, may satisfy at present.
And Oh that the Righteous Judgments of God may come upon thy Heart, and the
Hearts of all them who are in the same false fleshly confidence with thy self;
whose very Prayers are not without sin, that you may never have peace day nor
night, until you humble your selves before the Lord, and repent of all your
hard Speeches, and evil Deeds that you have spoken and done against him and his
Servants for his Truth's sake; that if it be possible you may be saved from the
wrath that will certainly come upon you, if you Repent not; for that old wicked
Paper full of Lies, as I made manifest before thee, and some of thy Company in
thy Study (to thy shame) at Kidderminster, which thou writst in the pride of
thy Heart against us in Oliver's days when thou wast lifted up, Entitled
Reasons to persuade, why no reasonable Man can be a Quaker, amongst the rest of
that kind, which thou art not humbled for to this day, as I perceive by this
Book, do all stand upon Record before the Lord, the Righteous Judge against
thee; for in those thy doings, and all of that kind against the manifest and
manifold Appearances of Christ in his People of every degree, thou have plainly
declared thy self to be of Rabshekaie's spirit, who raised against the Living
God and his despised Israel; and of that spirit that Jannes and Jambres, who
withstood Moses in his work, under God, of calling Israel out of Egypt; and as
the Lord pleaded the Cause of his People in those days, so will he (as he
has) for ever plead our Innocent Cause against thee, and all his Enemies; for
of a truth the Lord God blessed for ever, has raised us up to be his Servants,
Sons and Daughters, to bear his Name in Righteousness before the Children of
men, in a pure holy Witness against all the false Ways, and Worships, of false
man (so be it) and so it will be as hard for thee, and all, to kick against the
Pricks, as it was in persecuting Saul, Acts 9. read and consider, lest the day
pass over you, as it did from the unbelieving Jews, who would not receive God
come and manifest in flesh in those days, to whom Christ said, Ye will not come
to me, that ye might have Life; but they would seek it in the killing Letter,
and as it were by the works of the Law, until midnight darkness, and utter
Desolation came upon them. For, Oh how the Earth is filled with Violence,
because of such Doctrines and Teachings as this Baxter and such men brings
forth; for behold how the Field of his Followers and Admirers are all
overgrown with Briers and Thorns, and noysom Weeds, as the proper Fruit of
their accursed Doctrines, as this Baxter himself sets down, in his 48th
Direction, Page 236. of his Book, in these words, that is to say: Oh Friends,
how bad are we our selves? What pride is in our Hearts? What Ignorance in our
Minds! So wanting are we even in the lowest Grace Humility, that we have scarce
enough to make us take patiently, as now we are giving out upon others; So
selfish, as dishonors our Profession, with the brand of contradictedness,
and partiallity; So weak, that our Duties are liable to greater censures then
we can bear; And our inward Graces weaker then our outward Duties [This must
needs be so in the Duties of the graceless Minister thou pleads for] of such
ungoverned thoughts, that Confusion and Tumult instead of Order and fruitful
Improvement, are the daily temper and employment of our Immaginations [This
must needs be so in you that live in such opposition to the Life of God
manifest in his Children at this day] So passionate, impatient and corrupt,
that we are a trouble to our selves and others, [This must needs proceed from
such a corrupt Fountain] and a dishonor to the Gospel [it is so] and a
hinderance to the conversion of those whom our holy examplary lives should win
to God: So strange to Heaven, as if we had never well believed it [that is so,
and therefore the Sheep of Christ deny your voice, you who are such Strangers
to him] And to say all in one, so empty of love to our dear Redeemer, and to
the God of love, that our Hearts lie vacant to entertain the love of worldly
Vanities [ye Hypocrites, what have you to do to name Christ, who are thus
unbelieving and unredeemed] and to fly back from the serious thoughts of God,
which should be our daily work and pleasure, and fly from the face of Death, as
if we should be the worst, when nearest to our God. Oh Hypocrites, how can you
for shame call God yours, when you are thus beyond measure bad, when Scripture
says, He that says he knows God, and keeps not his Commandments is a Liar,
and the Truth is not in him, see 1 John 2.4. and repent lest ye all perish
together, Priests and People; for the Lord is arisen to Judgment, and none can
stand before him, which has unclean and filthy Garments, as you are covered
with, whom Baxter here puts on to be Teachers of others, and yet remain your
selves with him under such woeful sins and condemnation, as is here spoken of:
But surely if you did believe, and feel inwardly that it were so bad with you,
as here in words is signified, you could not go away so lightly with your
burdens, as you seem to do, but it would stop your mouths, and cause all your
Pride and Glory to cease.

For consider but the first thing, that this Baxter would have you his
principal and best taught Hearers to confess, to wit. That Pride is in your
very Hearts; which if you were sensible of, you would cease calling God your
Father, and Christ your Redeemer in this wretched State; for to you in this
State, it may be truly said, as Christ said to those unbelieving Jews, Ye are
of your Father the Devil; for Pride of Heart, is the chief part of his wicked
Image: and indeed, the main thing in this day, which hinders you from coming to
Christ (the meek, pure, and lowly Lamb of God) is the Pride of your corrupt
Hearts, as Jeremiah said to the Jews, If you will not give Glory to God, before
your feet stumble upon the dark Mountains, my Soul shall mourn in secret for
your Pride: It was the Pride of their Hearts, that was the ground of all their
Evils, as it is of yours; for from the Pride of your Hearts, comes your
Ignorance of Mind, and partiallity, and want of all good, to the dishonouring
of your Profession, and what not? So that it may easily be known, who sent this
Baxter, who has profited you nothing at all: For they have ran, and I have not
sent them, says God, Therefore they cannot profit the People at all, Jer. 23.
And that this R. B. might make it fully appear under whose Banner he fights,
and for whose Kingdom he pleads, lest the rest of his Book should leave it
doubtful: He is now come forth in his proper shape, as the absolute Enemy of
God, and all good men, that in any measure are looking Heavenward, being
burdened with the fellowship of the Wicked, and instead of helping the Lord's
little Ones, against the great Power of the Dragon in the Persecutors, he has
hammered forth all the wicked Weapons that he can for the Wicked Persecutors,
and against the tender hearted ones of God, who are traveling to the holy
Land, with Egypt left behind; as in that 55. Direction so called, and Page 254.
of his said Book appears, where he has these words.

Little do many real Separates, who cry out against the spirit of persecution,
suspect that the same spirit is in them; Whence is Persecution, but from
thinking ill of others, and abhorring them, or not loving them? And do you not
so by those (says he) whom you causlesly separate from?

Answ. Here by way of Answer, before I set down any more of this naughtiness of
his, I cannot but take notice of this word) causlesly) which here this Baxter
puts in, to cover his deceit; for though at the first look one might judge, he
intended only causless, or unwarrantable, or wicked separation; yet Reader thou
must know, he intends as well the truly tender hearted People of England, who
in conscience to God, and according to his holy Commandment are come out, and
separated from the fellowship of the Wicked in these days, and so cannot take
part in the Offerings of the dead as well as others; and at these in a special
manner he strikes, after his accustomed manner, through the sides of others;
for his main Envy is against the living Members of Christ: And so though those
that separate without cause, may have the like mind to those they separate
from, being different only in Form, but not in Heart from them; yet such as
are separated by the Power of God (as Paul was, whom God separated from his
Mothers Womb, calling him by his Grace) have not; for these stand out of their
own thoughts and are in the Will and Work, and Worship of God, whose Worship is
in Spirit and Truth: But to proceed, Baxter says further.

You will say, that though you think them not to be true Christians yet, you
love them as men, and wish their good, and so will those say by you (says he)
whom you call your Persecutors; though they think you to be proud and humerous;
and disobedient, yet they say, they love you as men; and do but correct you, to
cure your self-willedness and humor, and to do you good, and to preserve the
public Peace: They think you to be bad, and therefore Imprison you: You think
them to be bad, and therefore avoid Communion with them.

To this I cannot but by the way speak a word; Who is there that sees not the
very spirit of the Egyptian Sorcerers acting in this very thing, to the
hardening of Pharoah's Heart, lest he should let Israel go? But this Baxter
goes on in his wickedness, and says, They (to wit the Persecutors) think you
so bad, as to be unworthy of civil Liberty and Privileges: You think them so
bad as to be unworthy of Church Privileges and Liberties: They think you
unworthy to be suffered in the Land perhaps; and you think them unworthy to be
suffered in the Churches; they cry against you, Away with them, they are
Schismatical, or Heretical; you cry against them, Away with them, they are
Profane.

Answ. Now in answer to this I say, That we who are of the World, scornfully
called Quakers, have everlasting cause to praise the Lord, who has redeemed
our Souls from among such devouring Wolves, as this R. B. and from such a
venomous spirit as he is acted by; What Heathen upon Earth could strengthen the
hands of the Persecutors against the Righteous more then this Baxter, by such
Arguments as this does? what if this Baxter had lived in the days of the
Apostles, and first Christians, when God separated them from the Congregation
of the unbelieving Jews; surely he could not but have been but accounted
famous, and worthy of great Honor amongst those persecuting Jews, for such
Arguments as these* for never an Argument he brings, for the Persecutors now;
but it would as much have fitted the Persecutors then against the Christians;
yea, and it would formerly, yea, and does at this day fit the Papists against
the Protestants, as well as the persecuting profane superstitious Protestant
against them, whom God has drawn by his mighty Power this day from amongst
them. For seeing he sets but thought, against thought, the Persecutors thoughts
of the Righteous, against the persecuted man's thoughts of him; and seeing all
thoughts are questionable, he leaves this ground for the persecuting Jew, to
reason to excuse himself against the first Christians, according to his hellish
Invention on this wise, viz.

'You Christians who separate from us, are of as bad a spirit as us Jews, whom
you call your Persecutors; for what is Persecution, but a thinking ill of
others, and abhorring them, or not loving them? And do you not so by us, whom
you causlesly separate from? And though you say, though you think us not as
Servants of God, or so, yet you love us as men, and wish our Good, so do we
you, and that which we do against you, which you call Persecution, is but a
correcting of you, to cure your self-willedness and humor, and to do you good,
and to preserve the public Peace: And though you think much, you Christians,
that we Imprison you, deny you civil Liberties and Privileges, and count you
unworthy to be suffered in the Land; yet all this by Baxter's Doctrine, is far
less then you do to us Jews; for you think us so bad, that you avoid Communion
with us, and deny us Church Liberty and Privileges; yea and think us unworthy
to be suffered in the Churches. Come Baxter; Would this have been good and true
reasoning by the Jews against the Christians, or by the Papists against the
Protestants? then if it would not (as no sober man can say it would) then
forever stop thy mouth, and let shame cover thy face for ever speaking any more
of things pertaining to Christian, or Christ's Religion; for an Enemy to Christ
and his People thou art here manifest to be: And lest thou should want any
thing to make thee complete in wickedness, thou go on, and in answer to an
Objection, which is to this purpose: That the Persecutors separated from, are
bad, and profane, and he that separates, says he, charges them truly; but he
is not Schismatical, or Heretical, but they accuse him falsely. To this I say,
this Baxter with a Whores forehead, on the behalf of the Persecutors, answers
and says: You (to wit, you that separate) say so, and they (to wit, the
Persecutors) say the same of you: They say you are Schismatical; but they are
not Profane: Now how shall a Stander by know, [saith Baxter] which of you are
in the Right, doubtess by the Witnesses and Evidences, [saith he] they try you
in some Court, or before some Magistrate, before they punish you, [saith he]
You never try them, nor hear then speak for themselves; nor examine any Witness
publicly against them; nor allow them any Church Justice; but avoid their
Communion upon Reports, or pretense of private knowledge: They judge you
Personally, one by one: You condemn whole Parishes in the lump unheard: They
condemn you, as for a positive Crime; but you condemn them, without charging
any one Crime upon them, etc. To which I answer for the Lord and his Truth, in
this day of Israel's trouble and trials, and say.

The Lord rebuke thee, thou lying spirit, in this R. Baxter; was there ever
heard such notorious Falsehoods and Abominations come from one professing the
Gospel, yea, professing himself to be a Minister of the Gospel, yea, and taking
upon him to be a Teacher of the Teachers, as is here from this R. B. Oh, the
Envy, Oh, the Malice, the deep rooted Iniquity of this man, against them that
depart from Iniquity in these Islands, and cannot join with the People of this
wicked World, in their bloody Offerings: Oh, the Patience and long suffering of
God toward such, though they continue long in their Wickedness; but the Lord
will certainly plead with thee, O Baxter, and all his Adversaries, for your
great envy to his People, and Work in these days: But come let us see again,
if these Lies of Baxter's, would not have suited as well for the Persecuting
Jews against the first Christians, or the persecuting Papists, against the
Protestants, as it does for the Persecutors in these days against those, that
in obedience to God are separated from them?

For what it Tertullus, or any Jewish lying Orator had stood up in behalf of
the Jews against the Christians, and said, The Jews try you in some Court, or
before some Magistrate, before they punish you; but you Christians never try
them, nor hear them speak for themselves, nor examine any Witnesses publicly
against them, nor allow them any Church Justice, but avoid their Communion upon
report, or pretense of private knowledge, and so condemn them by the lump; yea,
a whole Nation together? etc. And so if the Papist against the Protestants had
used the like reasoning, would it have been any thing but gross untruth and
falsehood in either of their Mouths? Or were either the first Christians, or
first Protestants, any more to be blamed for their separation, because of such
Liars? Nay, nay, neither are the People of God in these days any worss to be
thought of for separating from the Wicked, notwithstanding all these gross lies
of Baxter, or any of his spirit: I say they are most gross Lies, if they be
said of us the People of God, whom the World in scorn calls Quakers, that we
have not Tried them, etc. For we have Tried them, and heard them often what
they can say for themselves, and we have by the Spirit of the Lord found them
wanting of the Life and Power of Godliness, like the Heathen, who profess not
Christ, and public Witnesses there are of it, not only their own works which
are daily manifest in the face of the Sun, but also their own words and
confessions when they meet to worship; for they say, they have left undone what
God commands, and done what he forbids, and so have no spiritual Health in
them; which signifies plainly, they have denied Christ come in the Flesh; for
whosoever receives him, receives God's saving Health, and are saved People,
Spiritually healthful; they have condemned themselves by their unbelief and
evil Deeds from the Commonwealth and Inheritance of Israel: And so not only
the Spirit of the Lord in us, but even the Witness of God in their own
Consciences charges not only one, but even many great and grievous Crimes upon
them. And so Baxter with all his Lies, and evil Inventions, is for the Lake;
and if ever he be saved, it must be through fiery terrible Judgment, which will
consume the Adversary: For, Oh! how has Satan blinded his Eye; that he should
thus rise up against the People and Work of God in these days to his hurt? And
when it is objected that of all men living, no man think that a Persecutor is
godly, and fit for Church Communion, he does not like a Christian Confess to
the truth there (...) but after his accustomed manner, Heathen-like, he invents
his sorry shifts to avoid the force of the Truth, by saying, Did all the
Ministers and common People persecute you? and then asking a Question
concerning the doings of the Soldiers under Oliver, and the like, which are
mere shifts; For what is the doings of any Men, to make void the Truth by it?
for whatsoever any in their Ignorance of the Truth, have done against the
Truth, serves nothing to the making void of this, to wit, That a Persecutor of
the Godly, is not godly, nor fit for Church Communion; but instead of giving
Glory to God, by confessing to truth, this Baxter, after he has wearied
himself with his words, of what was done in Oliver's time, or so; he sums up
his devilish Doctrine of pleading for the Persecutors, and against those whom
God has separated from them, (saying to the same wicked purpose as before) It
is but one and the same sin in Persecutors and the Separates, which causes the
one to smite their Brethren, and the other to Excommunicate them; the one to
cast them into Prison as Schismatics, and the other to cast them out of the
Church as profane, etc. And so for this thy suming up and concluding, God has
concluded thee with the wicked Persecutors, for the Judgment of his great Day
O Baxter: But hold Baxter, thou that art thus hot, and without all fear in
pleading for the Devil's Kingdom: I say when the Lord bids us, and we obey him
in separating from the Wicked; is this all one with the Sin of Persecution: Oh
thou unjust man, the Lord will be terrible to thee in the day of his Wrath,
which is nigh at hand to come upon thee, for all thy Villainy against him, and
for all thy daubing deceitful words, in the beginning and end of this
Direction; the Lord sees thee to be a Fighter against him, and thy Reward will
be according to thy Works, as he has said, and all the Rocks and Mountains of
the wicked World, for whom thou pleadest, shall not hide thee from his struck:
As testifies the good Spirit of the Lord Jesus, in his Servant.

Some more of the bad, and strange sayings of this Baxter in his Book.
Page 219. GOdly men are much liker to be in the right, then Ungodly men.

Answ. This shows what a Stranger he is to the certainty of Godliness.

Page 220. Sometimes the worser sort of men, may hold fast the Truth.

Answ. This is a gross Lie; for the bad cannot hold fast the good, unless in
Prison, or so.

If any better Persons deny Infant Baptism, the worser Sort of People would be
all against them, and yet be in the right.

Answ. Thus sprinkling of Infants, for which there is no Scripture, must needs
be wrong whosoever hold it; and the corruption of it appears so much the more,
because the worser Sort are so much for it.

Many do take a Form of Prayer, or Liturgy, to be unlawful, merely because the
most of the worser Sort are for it.

Answ. What deceit is this? If thy Hearers so badly taught by thee do such
things; yet those that are taught of God, deny things, because they know them
to be evil in themselves; but what Form, or Liturgy is that, which the most of
the worser Sort of the People are for, even that which speaks peace to the
Wicked, by telling them they were Regenerated by sprinkling a little Water on
their Faces, or the like, when Infants? And that they shall be saved, though
they continue in sin all their lives long: but the Hour comes, and now is,
that neither in the invented Forms of the Hypocrite's long Prayers, nor in the
short invented Forms and Liturgies of the Profane, but in Spirit and Truth, as
the Lord Jesus enables them, will God be worshipped, and served by his People;
for the Day is dawned, and Shaddows (...); and as the Day does more and more
arise in its Glory, with all the things of vain Men pass away, so be it.

Page 221. The some of his 44. Direction by his own setting down runs thus.

Ye take the Examples of religious Men, to be one of your most perilous
Temptations; and therefore labor to discover, especially what are the sins of
Professors, in the Age that you live in, that you may especially watch and
fortify your Souls against them: [And adds] That sometimes the strictest Sort
run in a Gang after one Opinion, and sometimes after another.

Answ. Here I appeal to that of God in all that fear his Name, and are alive to
Truth, whether this do not wholly tend to the hardening of Pharaoh's Heart,
against the People of God in these days, who are in the Truth it self, and not
in Opinions, as the Hypocrites are? for though such as are begotten into Forms
of (Religion without the Truth) by the Hirelings, do never cease from erring,
yet the truly Religious, who are begotten to God by Christ, walk in the Way
undefiled, which the Fools, who are upright in Heart cannot err in.

But this his telling of running in a gang, is a filthy and reproachful Speech,
wholly of Ashdod, and the Lord will judge thee, O Enemy, for thy work R. B. and
therefore let all that fear God, take heed of this Baxter's Soul-defiling, and
Heart-hardning Doctrine; for out of the dark, and wicked Kingdom, wherein he
and all such live, is the Lord calling his People.

And to conclude, If any would see this Harlot in its fine dress, and the
crooked Serpent in its glittering color on the Head which must be bruised, and
yet with his Sting in his Tail, which is full of Venom, let them consider that
44. Direction, which runs thus. Desire the highest Degree of Holiness, and to
be free from the corruptions of the Times, but affect not to be odd, and
singular from ordinary Christians in lawful things; for instance, If it were to
go in a meaner Garb then others, and as the Quakers, not to put off the Hat; or
with the Friars, to go bare Foot, or in a distinguishing Habit, that all men
may see, and say; This is a singular Person in Religion: it is easy to see how
this gratifieth Pride.

Answ. But now that the Lord is arisen according to his Promise, Isa. 27.1.
which says, In that day the Lord with his sore and great and strong Sword
shall punish Leviathan the peircing Serpent, even Leviathan that crooked
Serpent, and he shall slay the Dragon that is in the Sea. Therefore I say it is
that the Dragon is so wrathful to pour forth his Floods of Persecution after
the heavenly Woman, and her Man-child: and therefore it is that the crooked
Serpent in such men (as this Baxter is) is so at work, every way seeking with
their cunning and crafty deceitful Doctrines to pierce the Heart, the Life of
Truth, by their Darts; and so with their fair colorable words, as the Apostle
speaks, To deceive the hearts of the Simple and Ignorant People, but the Lord
takes, the Wily in their own craftiness, and the Pit they digg for others,
themselves fall into, and the Lord's Spiritual Sword of Truth pierces through
all their lives; and dead in the great Sea and Puddle of their own Iniquities
before the Lord, and his Saints, this day they lie: Glory to his Name the
mighty God over all who is worthy.

For what more glistering and fair seeming words can the Serpent give, then to
say: Desire the highest Degree of Holiness, and to be free from the corruptions
of the Time: But that this Baxter intends no such thing, no nor believes that
any shall ever attain to any such thing, whilst on the Earth, is most manifest
by the whole current of his Doctrine; for not only in his former Books, where
he has publicly declared, That sinless Perfecttion, is the Doctrine of the
Devil, hatched in Hell, etc. But even in this very Book, it fully appears what
an Enemy he is, not only to the highest Degree, but even to Holiness it self,
where amongst his other Unholy Doctrines he says, as is before mentioned, from
page 195. That there is no man alive, that worshippeth God without some sin,
(and adds) Do you ever pray your selves in secret, or in your Families without
sin: And a better State then this he does not believe, that any shall here come
unto; and for being free from the corruption of the Times; What have thou to do
O Baxter to talk of this, who art one with the corruptedst of Times, pleading
for conformity, even with the Persecutors of Godliness it self? Yea, seeking by
all means to make such, as good and excusable before the Lord in their
Persecutions of the Godly, as the Godly themselves are ^ who in obedience to
God, do separate from them: What is praying to God with sin in your Hearts, the
highest Degree of your Godliness? Oh Hypocrites, yea it is; And is your
Conforming to the Worship-Actions of the Persecutors, who take God's Name in
vain, when ever they mention it in that State, no corruption? And not only so,
but your Oneness with the Times in many of their corrupt Customs of daily
conversation, as every Eye sees, no corruptions? But above all, corruption is
gone forth over all the Land, even from the Teachers, such as this Baxter is,
who in words can tell others of forsaking it; For what greater corruption, then
for the Priests to love to be called of men Masters, and to preach for Hire,
and divine for Money, and to cry peace, peace to the Wicked; especially such as
put into their Mouths: but if any put not into their Mouths, then they
prepare War against them, as both in Oliver's time and since they have done all
England over, to the impoverishing and spoiling them that fear God of their
Goods, and imprisoning several to death upon the same account, What would
Christ ( Mat. 23.) and the Prophets, Jeremiah, and Isaiah, and Micah, and the
rest, have cried so vehemently against such things, if they had not been
grievous corruptions of the Times? see Jer. 5.30, 31. Isa. 56. Micah 3.5. etc.
And so when the Priests are proud, and covetous, and cruel; What can their
Followers be, but like them? It is not the Priests telling People, they must
desire after Holiness, and forsake the corruptions of the Times, that will do
any good, so long as the Teachers themselves live in Unholiness and
Corruptions, and smite with the Fist of wickedness; for does not that in the
Conscience say to such? Thou that teach another; why do not thou teach
thy self: But they have run, and God has not sent them, therefore (they are
such Briars, and Thistles, and) cannot profit the People at all, Jer. 23. And
they say to every one that walks after the Imaginations of their evil Hearts,
ye shall have peace: But for these things, the Lord has, and yet will severely
judge them, Head and Tail, Root and Branch, in his great Day.

And now to that which he says to his Disciples: Be not odd and singular from
ordinary Christians in lawful things; if it be to go in a meaner Garb then
others, or not to put off the Hat, or to go bare Foot, or in a distinguishing
Habit, or so; this gratifieth Pride.

Answ. To this I may say; Woe be to them that call Evil Good, and Good Evil,
that account keeping on the Hat in simplicity of Heart to God, as we do our
other Garments without contempt to any, I say that account and call this Evil,
and yet account putting off the Hat, in honor to proud Flesh, Good; the
Apostle James says, He that has respect to Persons commiteth sin, and is
convinced of the Law as a Transgressor. Jam. 2.9. but Baxter in this his
pleading for the Hat, says [it is lawful] but to keep Christ's Commands, in
having respect to Christ, and not to the Persons of Men [oddness and
singularity] and so, though this Baxter, and his Fellows, condemn us for this,
yet Christ justifies us, and so we have peace with God: And for going in a
meaner Garb then others; whosoever he intend by this, we know that Baxter, and
all such proud masterly Teachers, are far enough from this, for they are quite
out in the other extreme; for if you will find Pride and Prodigality, who more
notorious in the Land then the Priests and their Families, who live in Pride,
Idleness, fullness of Bread, the sins of Sodom? and the poor People see it,
though they are forced to labor and drudge for them, as the Israelites in
Egypt: And so they spend their Money, for that which is not Bread, and their
labors, for that which satisfies not their Souls, as the Prophet of Old
complained, and that which is most sad, they must do it by force; for if the
People do see them to be totally void of Grace in their lives, yet according to
Baxter's Doctrine, they must not take them for no Ministers, how ever they must
be at cost with them, to maintain them in their Pride and Idleness, or else
look for a Prison, or spoiling of their Goods, and the like; but the Lord has
shaken his Hand at such dishonest Gain. But as for a distinguishing Habit,
which this Baxter charges upon the Friars; How is it that he could not see
himself, and his Brethren, in their distinguishing Habits of black Gowns, black
Clothes, Tippets, Hoods, Surplices, and the like? Oh, these unjust men, who
are all eye abroad, and none at home; but this was ever the nature of such as
were out of Christ's Doctrine. Also whereas this Baxter by these words [That
all may see, and say, this is a singular Person in Religion] does endeavor to
make People believe, that, our not putting off our Hats (which we do merely in
obedience to God, who commands us not to honor proud Flesh) is done for a
selfish end, and in our own wills, or so, to get a Name, is such a piece of
haughtiness and foolishness in him, that nothing but mere Envy could have
taught him such a piece of unreasonableness; for who is there, that sees not
the contrary effect to come of our not putting of our Hat, to what Baxter here
sets down? For it is so far from getting us a Name of being religious amongst
men, that they do as it were with one Mouth cry out against us, unmannerly
Fellows, and the like, for it: And truly, but that the pure fear of God
strengthens us, it were impossible for us to bear the Reproaches, Fineings, and
Beatings, and daily cross that attends this very same thing; so that to cross
proud Flesh in this one thing, exposes the poor Creature to great Trials in
these degenerate Days, even amongst them that profess Christ (who made himself
of no reputation in this World) from whom one might expect better usage, for so
harmless a thing: But as Christ and his Apostles, and Disciples found, no
better usage amongst the professing Jews of those days, for doing the Will of
God: So we are even made content to undergo all things for the Truth's sake
from our own Country Men and Professors in these days, even from all who
profess the Letter, and want the Life and Virtue of what they do profess: And
praised be God for ever, who through his Grace gives our Souls the Victory; but
as for this Baxter and his Followers, who are so full of that earthly fallen
wisdom, which receives honor of men, and judges of things according to the
Flesh; I say, for them to seek God's Honor, and glorify him in such low
contemptible things, as this is, is at present far from them; but to put off
the Hat in honor to proud Flesh, And to love greetings in the Markets, and to
go in long Robes, as the old Pharisees did, and to be called of men Master, and
the like, which gets praise and applause of the World, though Christ forbid it
never so much, I say these things they like better, the more is the pity; see
Mat. 23. and so it appears who are in the Selfishness, Pride and Hypocrisy,
and who are not, and so is the Scripture fulfilled which says, In that day it
shall be seen, who are they that fear God, and who not; Glory to God for his
unspeakable Gift, and not unto us, but to thy Name be the Praise O Lord.

What would this Baxter (if he had been in those days) have said of Christ, of
whom it was said, That he taught the Way of God truly, and regarded not the
Persons of Men, (then surely he put not off his Hat in honor to proud Flesh,
as ye do) I say, would not this Baxter have called him some odd conceited
singular proud Fellow, as his Predecessors the Pharisees of those days ( Who
received Honor one of another) did? no question but he would; for if he do
thus to us his Servants, What would he have done to him our Lord and Master?
but happy are all they in this day, who choose rather to suffer the Affliction
and Reproach with Christ and his People, then to enjoy the Pleasures of sin,
which are but for a Season; so be it.

ALso because this R. Baxter in page 27. of his Preface says, That People are
far more averse (that is contrary or against) to Communion or Concord with the
Parish Churches, then the conforming Ministers are; and yet he seems in his
Epistle to Bryan's Book, to be unwilling that People should think he has
conformed, though he has pleaded for it, and against separaing from the Parish
Assemblies and Worships, as now managed, and also seeing that Bryan, as he
says, is, or was silenced for nonconformity himself: I desire all that reads
these Lines, to take notice of what a strange uneven and unrighteous Spirit
these men are of in their creeping, and twisting, and twining to and fro; yet
the Eye of the Lord, and his Blessed Spirit in his Children this day does
easily spy them out: Sometimes they are all for Conformity, and against
Separation by any means, and plead the Common-Prayer-Peoples Cause with all
their might, as it were; and yet presently they are all on a fire against any
that shall think they are Conformists: Nay, says Baxter, How can any judge him
to be a Conformists, who is silenced for Nonconformity? But if this Baxter
(sometime a Head to those called Presbyterians at and about Kidderminster) and
Bryan of the same nature, sometimes a Teacher at Coventry, be not conformed, or
be not yet Conformists, as well as others of their Brethren, who have long
since licked up their Vomit, the old Common Prayer Service, which they vomited
up in Oliver's time, because it hindered them then from swallowing the Peoples
Labors; and seeing they plead so shamelesly for it, and also seeing this
Baxter, in express words confesses, That they are not so much against
Conformity with the Common Prayer Service, as the People are; What may be the
Reason of this strange thing, to wit; That they do not in all things conform;
to wit, in Deed and Practice, as well as in words, save only, as is plain to
me, this; to wit, because they judge that their Admirers are not yet
sufficiently wearied out with keeping off, nor sufficiently molded and fitted
in their Minds for coming in; and therefore they have lingered, and may do yet
linger a while longer before they do openly, and before all appear Conformists,
desiring if possible to see the People in before them; for these two chief
Presbyterian Priests, so called, are wholly already in the Parish Stuff, in
their Judgment, and with their Minds and Hearts already, or at lest would be
thought so to be by the wicked World, of whom they are Lovers: Yet they see not
how to vend their flattering Doctrines, if their Admirers conform not, and come
not in with them, or rather be not in the Pit before them; so weak and wretched
a thing is man, yea, the best seeming of the Sons of Men, out of the Truth; oh,
how truly fulfilled by these men, are those words of the Apostle, where he
speaking of the false hypocritical out-side-Teachers of that Time, says, With
good words, and fair speeches, they deceive the Hearts of the Simple? Therefore
ever praised be Christ, who has opened our Eyes to see, and persuaded our
Hearts, to avoid such Wolves in Sheeps-clothing, as this Baxter, and Bryan are;
For, what finer, and higher Talk, or Skin, or Clothing can the Wolf get, then
to make Sermons of dwelling with God, and the like, as this Bryan does? when
its manifest, he neither knows God, nor his Way, nor his Dewlling Place; but is
inwardly ravened, from that good and Blessed Spirit of Truth and Honesty which
should commend him to God. The Wolves nature in R. Baxter is already in this
Writing set down and manifest; and now I come in the Light of the Lord, to make
manifest some of his Brother Bryan's. And first shall set down that blasphemous
Passage of his, in p. 291. and 292. of his sixth Sermon, in that Book of his
entitled dwelling with God, etc. where he says, I am not ignorant, that many
of you, whose Habitation, I question not but the Lord is; who have your
Habitation in several Countries of this Kingdom, have drunk a deep Prejudice,
against all the Parochial Congregations; whereof you are legal Members, and
where all you were baptized, and thereby were made the Members of Christ, the
Children of God, and Heirs of his Kingdom: I fear some of you will startle at
these expressions, found in the Common Prayer: But if you consult the Holy
Scriptures, you will find them warranted in a sacramental Sense; and your
prejudice has so far wrought upon you, that you have forsaken the assembling
of your selves together with your Neigbours, in the public Meeting-places;
thus far this Bryan.

Answer, But ever praised be the Lord, who has delivered us from the mouths
of such manifest Wolves, as these are, who in times past were hidden, but are
now fully seen, (who, though his Brother Baxter says, his Mouth was stopped, or
silenced for not conforming, yet here it seems it is wide open still, according
to his and their custom, to manifest his folly and wicked-inside against the
Truth; and for deceit) that the Simple-hearted might forever be warned, from
following such any more; for who would have thought, that ever (him called)
Doctor Bryan of Coventry, and Richard (called Mr.) Baxter of Kidderminster, who
were so promoted in Oliver's time, for conformity to Oliver's Laws, and
Religion, in opposition to the Prelates, and their Common Prayers, should now
with a little blast of men's Breath, be silenced (as Baxter's Epistle to his
Book says) for a time, and so shattered, and confounded with the fall; that
when they awaked, and got a little Breath, that they should for fear of men, be
so transformed into other shapes, as not to be ashamed, to get into their
Mouths blasphemous words [of making People Members of Christ, Children of God,
and Heirs of his Kingdom] by having a little Water sprinkled on their Faces by
a manmade-Priest; when they were Infants, and understood nothing; then which
passage, there is not any passage in the Liturgy, or Common-Service-Book, nay,
nor in any Book in the World whatsoever, more contrary to the Scriptures of
Truth, as all sober Minded People well understand; yea, and this Bryan himself
knows in his own Conscience, that they are not sound words, though he most
notoriously, and falsely say, to please the present Evil World [with all that
the holy Scriptures warrant them in a sacramental Sence] But I desire that all
People, who fear the Lord, would take heed of such dangerous Heresies; for the
Scriptures of Truth, do not allow of Falsehood, in any Sense at all, for its
absolutely false in the sight of God, and to all good Men, that Infants by any
such outward sprinkling, or doing (as they call Baptism) are made the Children
of God, Members of Christ, Heirs of his Kingdom: seeing the Scripture no where
commands any such thing; but says, That except People be born from above, they
cannot see the Kingdom of God: But the Day is dawned, that makes all things
manifest, praises to God: And therefore People consider what a wretchedness
those are under, who follow such blind Guides, as turn and change with every
Time; and can be any thing, or nothing in appearance, so that they can but keep
up their Name amongst men? What was the Common Prayers, and such things, so
odious and damnable a thing in the Eyes of these Priests in Oliver's Time? And
is it now, yea the worst part of it, became such an Idol in their Eyes, as that
those that dwell in God, must be condemned of deep prejudice for not conformity
to it; What will not that spirit that climbs over the Door, and never was sent
of God to preach the Gospel say, or unsay, so as it can but please the present
Times? But Oh thou, blasphemous Bryan, the Accuser of the Brethren; can those
that dwell with God deny to conform to that Worship or Service which is of God:
And therefore it is safely and truly concluded, that the Parish-Service thou
pleads for, is not of God, because for conscience to God, with whom they dwell,
they cannot conform to it: but, Oh how the Serpent creeps upon his Belly to do
mischief, by seeking to persuade the conscientious People, That by their not
joining with the Parish Worships, and Assemblies, they open their Mouths wide
to cast a Scandal upon their Persons, as profane, and upon the strict
Profession of walking precisely according to the written Word, which they think
(says this Bryan, in that page 292. of his Book) gives you no warrant for your
Separation, etc. And then down upon his Belly he goes, saying, My humble and
earnest request to you is, to lay aside your prejudice, and examine by the good
Word, whether your separation be not sinful?

Answ. To which I answer in the Word of the Lord; Blessed for ever, that we,
who for the Work and Word of the Lord in our Hearts and Mouths, are by the
sinful Parishes of England, and elsewhere, disdained, and scornfully called
Quakers, are not separated from them because of any prejudice, or the like,
against them; but God who by his Everlasting Light of Truth has showed us the
Evil of their Doings, and of our own, when we worshipped we knew not what
amongst them; he, I say, has separated us from them, and joined us to himself
in Christ Jesus, where, with him our Dwelling is indeed, (though Bryan think
not so) praised be the Name of our most holy Lord God for evermore: And so we
are not yet to examine, whether our separation be sinful, or nay; for that is
done, and we do know it to be good, according to the good Word from the
beginning, most certainly: And so the offense which the Parish-worshippers
take, is offense without all cause on our parts given; and so it is no other,
then the Unbelievers took in all Generations, against them that feared God; as
the Jews were offended at Christ and his Apostles, yea, and all Christians in
those days, because they could not worship with their Neigbours in their
Superstitions, as this Bryan would have us; and not only so, but they killed
Christ, and his Apostles, and grievously persecuted the Christians for their
separation then, as they do us at this day; and so the reproach of Christ, is
to us great Riches, and the Persecutors God will examine, and judge: And as
Moses did choose rather to suffer Affliction with the People of God, then to
enjoy Egypt's Glory for a Season, so blessed are all, that with us are
persuaded in their Hearts, to follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes, not heeding
what the Wicked say, or judge of them; but as the Apostle exhorts, looking at
Jesus the Author, and Finisher of our Faith, who for the Joy that was set
before him, endured the Cross, and despised the Shame; and so through all the
Trials and Persecutions of this World, enter into God's Glory, where none can
come to make afraid.

But if there be any, who through prejudice (as this Bryan speaks) and not by
the Spirit of the Lord, are separated from the Parish-Worship; it is necessary
for such, to see to themselves, and consider, lest their return be as shameful,
as their separation was sinful, (like this Bryan and Baxter) who it seems all
this while, have been no real and true Separatists to God; but have been only
in the self-separation according to the will and force of Times: For though the
poor deceived Followers of such men be at present more averse from joining with
the Superstitions of the Times, then your Hearers are (as Baxter says) yet if
you grow not out of their rotten Root, into the Root Christ Jesus, you will be
weary, and faint in your Way, before the end: but let all know, that these
self-separatists, who have not their Birth of God, are no real Dwellers with
God, though this Bryan its like had an Eye especially to such in his words, and
to whom its like in a special manner he applies his fawning flattering words
and desires; But what is the Reason, may we say again, that these nonconforming
Ministers by Baxter's report, are not so much against the Parish-Way of
Worship, as now managed, as their Hearers are, save only their gross
Hypocrisy, and self-seeking nature, and double mind, as was hinted before? for
they have carried the People in hand, that they would suffer; yea, what would
they not suffer, rather then conform; and now behold how this Teacher of
Teachers ( Baxter) has bewrayed their Nakedness: O People, People, who have
been long deceived by such double-minded-ones (who are unstable in all their
Ways) that you would turn your Minds from them, to the true Light of Jesus
Christ in your Conscience, that with it you might first see your selves, and so
growing up in that true Light, you might come to see Jesus Christ, who never
fell, nor never changes, to be your Teacher and Minister; and so come from off
the Barren Mountains, whether these, and the like, deceitful men ( Baxter and
Bryan) have led you, and left you; for now is the Lord making unto all People a
Feast of fat Things, of Wine on the Lees well refined, ever praised be his Name
for it. And now, if after all the Light that the Lord has set up in this day,
you will not be warned, to come into the Liberty of the Sons of God, and so
accept of God's Freedom in his Son freely tendered you; what remains? but if
you be fastened more in the Pit of Darkness with all Unbelievers, it is just.

But whereas this Baxter tells of his Brother Bryan's silencing formerly for
not conforming, it had been well for him, that he had been silent still, rather
then have opened his Mouth thus to the dishonor of God, and strengthening
Deceit in the Deceitful, and so to the everlasting Shame and Confusion of his
own Face; and all his raking up something here and there, as he could get hold
of it in his dark Imaginations, for Parish conformity, it is so nothing to the
purpose, and so well seen to be so, by all that are not wilfully blind, that it
serves only to discover his own nakedness, and rotten inside, as not only by
what has been already said, but by what also now follows does further appear,
as in page 295. is set down, where he says:

It is no sufficient warrant to separate from a Church, because it is guilty of
such Sins and Corruptions as deserves God should forsake, and for which he has
threatened in his Word, that he will forsake it (here by the way take notice,
that this Bryan here considered not, that he fully makes manifest the
Hypocrisy of his Brother Baxter, who talks of his Hearers forsaking the
Corruptions of the Times, and yet is one with this Bryan in persuading them to
join with such a Body, as is so corrupt, that deserves that God should, yea,
and has threatened that he will forsake them) but to go on, Bryan says, Yet
People should not forsake that bad Company, till it appear that God has put in
execution, that which he justly threatened, we ought to acknowledge it, and
receive it as his House, and not refuse to dwell with him in it; for shall man
be holier then God? And hate corruption more then he? And we may not
communicate with it, by consenting to any Corruptions that are or shall be
detected, or proved to be in it.

Answ. To which strange Doctrine of this Bryan, to which Baxter in his Epistle
says, Amen; I say, in the first place, it is absolute Blasphemy against the
Holy Name and Nature of God, either to say, or imagine, that God dwells with
such a People as are guilty of such Sins and Corruptions, as this Bryan here
speaks of; and how far unlike this Bryan's spirit is to the spirit of the
Prophets, who said, God is of purer Eyes, then to behold Iniquity; and your
sins have separated betwixt you and your God: and the Apostle says expressly,
That those that would have God to dwell in them (and its certain God dwells
with none, but as he dwells in them) they must be separated, and touch no
unclean them 2 Cor. 6.16, 17, 18. And does the Lord command us, to come out
from amongst the Unclean? And will he himself, the holy One of Israel dwell
with the Unclean, yea with such as are guilty of such Sins and Corruptions as
deserve, that God should forsake them for them; yea for which God has
threatened in his Word, that he will forsake them? And certainly there can be no
Way, nor Means to stay or hinder the Execution of God's Judgments threatened
and deserved, but by forsaking those Sins, and Corruptions, which such People
are guilty of, which the People of England (that this Bryan) would have us, and
others to join with, are far from; for, O England, England, thou and thy
Parishes are they that will not come to Christ, that they might have Life; but
persecutes them (with all unreasonableness, and cruel usages) that the Lord
has raised up, to forewarn thee of his Judgments: and so thy House being left
desolate of God, and goodness, we are not more holy then God, nor hate
Corruption more then he, in our separating from thee, as this wicked man Bryan
would have thee falsely believe; but in our separating from thee, we do the
Lord's Command, and follow his blessed Example; and so we cannot receive that
for God's House, which he dwells not in: And so thou art a false Witness, O
Bryan, and a Blasphemer of God and his Tabernacle, for the Temple and
Tabernacle of God is holy; which Temple are his holy Members and Body the True
Church; not Babylon, the False, Sinful and Corrupted Church, which Baxter, and
Bryan pleads for: and if any defile the Temple of God, says the Apostle, him
will God (not call his House, and dwelling place, but) destroy, 1 Cor. 3.17.

Again, How shall this gross Contradiction, which this twisting twinding
Serpent makes, be salved? For this Bryan one while says, Its to be holier then
God, to separate from such a sinful corrupt Sort, as deserves God's Judgments:
And yet with the same Mouth says, We may not communicate with them, by
consenting to any Corruptions that are, or shall be detected, or proved to be
in such a People; What join with a manifest Corrupted Body, whose very Prayers
(by their own confession) are not without sin, and not so much as consent to
any of their Corruptions? What a joining is this, when it must not be a
joining; no, not so much as in the consent; What gross dark Contradiction is
here (and now to bring this a little home to the business of England) a Docter
(so called) and Pleader for Conformity and Communion with the
Parish-Worshippers of England, which are detected, and manifestly proved; yea,
and not only by their words, but by their own Confession also, to be miserable
Offenders against God; yea, so guilty, and full of sins and corruptions, from
the crown of the Head, to the Soles of their Feet, as that they have no Health,
nor Soundness at all in them, would have us conform to them; and yet he says,
We may not communicate with them, by consenting to any of their proved
Corruptions: Then I say, If we may not have Fellowship with them in their
Corruptions, no, not so much as by consent; then we must not have Fellowship
with them at all, for they and their Corruptions are one; for says Christ, Ye
are of your Father the Devil, for his Works ye will do: But says Bryan, Christ
was a Member of this Church (as he calls it) of those wicked Jews; because he
was circumcised, and frequented the Temple, and eat the Passover, or so; then
which saying of this Bryan, nothing can be more false and blasphemous; for
what, though Christ was circumcised, and went sometimes into the Temple, and
eat the Passover, or so, which had been Ordinances of God for their time, and
were Shaddows of good Things to come; what is that to prove Christ a Member of
that Body, whose House was left unto them desolate, and who were headed by the
Devil, which at length put them on to murder him? O sad, that ever People in
their love of the World should be so blind! but what is Christ's conforming to
the Shaddows of the Law, which God gave for that time, and by him to be
fulfilled, and so ended, to your requiring us to conform to you in that, or
those Things which God never ordained? as sprinkling of Infants; and not only
so, but teaching for Doctrine, that you make them thereby the Children of God,
Members of Christ, and Heirs of his Kingdom; and also your giving David's
Psalms in Rhyme and Meeter, to the wicked World, to sing to God's dishonor:
And to hear a proud Man, and covetous man (who is an Idolator) preach and pray,
whom God never sent; yea, and to maintain him in his sins, contrary to all
Reason and Religion; also how can we conform to you in your corruptions of
respecting Persons, and of having men's Persons in admiration because of
advantage? contrary to the express Doctrine of the Apostle, which says, Jam.
2.1. etc. Have not the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ the Lord of Glory, with
respect of Persons: yea, and plead for their Transgressions; yea, how can we
conform to such, as under the Name of Christians, do live manifestly in the
sins of the Heathen; as Fornication, Covetousness, Idolatry, Drunkeness, and
are Railers, and Extortioners, and lovers of Pleasures more then lovers of God:
from whom the Apostle bids us turn away? 2 Timothy 3. and 1 Cor. 5.11. etc. with
whom he forbids us to eat; and yet with such, both Baxter and Bryan, for all
their former seeming hypocritical zeal, would now have us to communicate, yet
not so much as consent to their Corruptions, neither as their daubing
contradicting Doctrine seems willing to have: then I say, we must neither have
fellowship with them in their Worship-Actions, (as Baxter calls them) nor in
their ordinary Conversation, for all is corrupt; for what greater assent or
consent can we give, then by joining with them, or practicing such things
openly: but its better to obey God then Man, both in this, and all things, and
as the Lord said to Jeremiah, so in this case has he said to us: Let them
return to thee, but return not thou to them; for what fellowship has Light
with Darkness, or the Temple of God with Idols?

And now I come a little to set before you poor People, who have been deceived
by such men as this Baxter and Bryan are, something of the answer they give to
the Arguments of the zealous People of old (called Brownists, or so) who could
not for Conscience sake conform to their Common Prayer, etc. Their Objection
says Bryan, in page 297. of his Book was this, to wit.

That the People of England were never rightly called; for in the beginning of
the Queens (to wit, Elizabeth's) Reign, they were by her Command and
Proclamation compelled to embrace the Protestant Religion, and to conform to
God's Worship: whereas in the new Testament we have no Example of People
compelled to the Service of God: Christ commanding Fishermen to convert Souls
by preaching, not Princes to make Disciples by compulsion; therefore the Church
of Christ ( England he should have said; for who ever denied the Church of
Christ) had no right constitution?

But now see the wretched Answer of this Bryan to the said Objection of the old
Non-conformists.

If we speak (says he) of a Church first planted; the People of such a Nation
are first called by the Word, before they come to be a Church: but it is not so
(says he) of a Country, where for a long time true Religion has been
professed, which is our case: and as to that part of the Objection; that there
is no such Example in the New Testament.

First, The Magistrates were then Enemies to the Christian Religion.

Secondly, (says he) It suffices that we have Examples in the Old Testament,
2 Kings 23.21.2 Chron. 15.13, and 33.16. and 34.33. nor have (says he)
Christian Princes less Power in their Dominion to abolish Idolatry, and by Laws
and Penalties, to compel their Subjects where there is a parity of Reason.

And after this, Bryan having wearied himself, with setting down several words,
to and against, both what the Conformists said for, and the Non-conformists
said against these Things: he takes breath, and says, he returns to satisfy
the Objection, to wit, the Objection before mentioned about Separation, with
such words as these.

It is not necessary and generally true (says he) of all the Members of the
Visible Church, that they be called by the Word.

Answ. To which I answer on behalf of Truth: That it is the great Love, and
tender Mercy of God to our Souls, that he has delivered us from under such
men, as this Bryan and Baxter are, who know nothing as they ought to know; but
professing themselves to be wise, are become most foolish and brutish in their
minds and words, by such false, and soul-destroying Doctrines as these;
affirming, that People may be called into the visible Church without the Word;
and if one ask him, if not by the Word; by what then? His answer is, by
sprinkling, when Infants, or for fear of Man: But what, are these Calls into
the visible Church? A strange Church must that needs be for certain, where
People are called into it without God's Word; for certain its none of God's
Church, into which People are called, without his Word: Its the visible Company
of such as know not God, thou should have said: for God's Church are the
Faithful; and their Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God,
and not without it: But, oh the Desolation that such Doctrine as this of Bryan
and Baxter has made amongst the poor People, whose Eyes are not fully opened
to see their deceits.

Also this Antichristian Doctrine being laid as a Foundation in their House, it
is no wonder to hear this Bryan say, page 301. That Ignorant and Profane
Persons have always been in the Church, and ever will be, at lest, till Christ
comes the second Time.

But by all these unfound, unchristian and ignorant sayings, it fully appears,
that this Bryan is one of them, who have neither seen nor known Christ; seeing
he would bring in the Heathen into the Temple without the Word: and so, who is
more ignorant and profane, then this Priest Bryan himself, as also his Brother
Baxter, who is not ashamed to make such a one a Tutor, or Father of Ministers,
who is ignorant of the very Door and entrance into the Church, and of Christ's
second coming? nay who is ignorant of his first appearance, which was for
Judgment, even to whip the Buyers and Sellers, and all profane Ones out of his
House, as he said himself, For Judgment come I into this World: And so, What
Pastors or Teachers can such Tutor, as are so ignorant of Christ's Kingdom; and
so admit the Ignorant and Profane into their Church, (or Cage of unclean
Birds) for the Church of Christ, which is visibly seen, and known by the
Spiritual Eye to be his Body, is holy, and unto it can no unclean thing enter,
as says Scripture, Revel. ^1.27. but into the World^s-Church may, both
ignorant and profane enter and dwell; but at such dishonest Gain, as is gotten
by such Doctrines as this of Bryan and Baxter, has the Lord long shaken his
Hand; Is this your Ware that you sell to the People at so dear a rate? Is this
your Straw and Stubble, that you feed them with? But no man of any
understanding in venly matters, will buy any more of your Merchandise forever.
For God is come to teach his People himself, and the Spirit of God is felt and
witnessed amongst us, praised be God; yea, and in our very Hearts to teach us,
and by which we feel Christ come again the second Time without sin to
Salvation, according to his holy Promises, and by whose all powerful Word of
Faith and heavenly Presence in us, are we joined together unto him, in one holy
Body; glory to his Name over all, for he is worthy, so be it.

And for that saying, That Christian Princes have not less Power to abolish
Idolatry, and by Law and Penalties, to compel their Subjects in matters of
Religion, where there is a parity of reason, then the Jewish Kings under that
Law had.

I Answer, and say, That all are not Christians, who are so called; and this
crying up the Worldly Magistrates Power in matters Spiritual, is the only in
let into Persecution of the tender Hearted People of God, who cannot bow to
every thing the World sets up; yea, though it come under the name or show of
Christian Religion; and if the Image be of Gold never so goodly, yet wanting
Life and Power, they cannot bow to it. I say, they who preach up the wordly
Princes under what Name soever, to have power over the Consciences of People in
matters purely Spiritual (as the whole Body of Christian Religion is) are
Antichristian, and the great Enemies of that Liberty which Christ has
purchased for his People, and which the Apostles sealed unto with their Blood,
saying in such cases, Let every man be fully persuaded in his own Heart: And
who art thou that judges (much less force^ and compellest as Bryan and Baxter's
Doctrine would have it) another? to his own Master (10 wit, God the Judge of
all) he stands or falls, see Romans 14th. at large; but what account will
these Daubers give to the Lord for all the Innocent Blood they have caused to
be shed these many hundred Years? is sad to consider: For though such
Magistrates as are evil inclined, are not free, yet the false Teachers, who by
their Lies stir up, yea, and bring forth that evil inclination into real
actings against the good, shall receive the greater Condemnation: and yet
notwithstanding all the evil, both in the one and in the other, the Lord will
certainly carry on his great Work to his own praise, which he has begun, glory
to his Name for ever: And the Beast, Whore and false Prophet, shall alive
together be cast into the Lake prepared for them, and into the Pit which they
had dug for others, so be it.

Also whereas he says, That it suffices, that we have examples in the old
Testament for the Magistrates Power in Church matters; though none in the new
Testament, or so. I say, it is no more true, then if we should reason for an
outward worldly Temple, and Sacrifices, and Circumcision now, because there is
examples of these things in the old Testament; and for revenge and retaliation
now, because it is mentioned in the old, just contrary to Christ; For though it
has been said of old (says Christ) an Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a
Tooth; yet I say to you, my Disciples, under the New Covenant: If any Man smite
you on the one Cheek, turn to him the other; and the Apostle says, Dearly
beloved, avenge not your selves; but if thy Enemy hunger, feed him, etc. and so
Christ being come, and all Power in Heaven and Earth given him; Is not he in
these Spiritual matters relating to the very Soul and Conscience, the only
Lord, Lawgiver and King, and Supreme, and ought of right to rule in his own
House and Temple, which is in Man, and those that will not that he should rule,
must bow before him, and be ashamed before his Face, as says Scripture, 2
These. 2.

So that now the Son of God being come, and seated by right of Inheritance, the
true King and Heir upon David's Throne, to rule in Righteousness forever in the
Hearts of his Children, he commands the true Seed of Israel, to obey his
heavenly Voice, Law and Doctrine, spoken and written within, as those outward
and typical Kings did, command the fleshly Seed of Abraham to keep Moses's Law,
written without: and as those that obeyed not that outward Law of Moses, were
liable to the punishment of that Law; so they n^w that obey not Christ's
Spiritual Law written in the Heart and Conscience by his holy Power, are liable
to the Eternal Judgment of Jesus Christ, the Judge of Quick and Dead, as he
says, The Father judges no Man, but has committed all Judgment to the Son:
and as for the worldly Magistrate, he is to rule in outward things, betwixt man
and man, to see that every one, as to the Body and outward Estate, be well
beheaved one toward another, and not to bear the Sword in vain, as has been
too much in use, even amongst them called Christian-Magistrates, as well as
others; from whence it has come to pass, that for the sake of the Poor, whom
the worldly Powers have oppressed, as well in Temporals as Spirituals, the Lord
has overturned them, one Sort after another, as they were found in the abuse
of that Power and Trust, which was put into their Hands, for the protection of,
and encouragement and praise of the Good, and punishment of the Evildoers; but
not the contrary; according to that of the Prophet.

I will overturn, overturn, overturn, till he come, whose Right it is: And so
until Truth, Righteousness, Goodness, Equity and Justice rule, both in the
Hearts and Lives of the Children of Men, there will neither be Peace, nor
Establishment of any thing; but as a Wheel will the whole Earth be, from
Generation to Generation, says the Spirit, who is the sweet Orderer in all
things, for the holy Seed's sake: glory to his Name forever.

And so in the Love and Kindness of the Lord God, have I been thus enabled for
the Truth, and the poor People's sake, to lay open something of the Deceits,
and gross Hypocrisy of these two Men, called Baxter and Bryan, who have long
under a Cover or Vizard of Holiness, deceived the unstable Souls of many: but
now the Covering being rent off; their Wolfish nature is fully manifest; glory
to the Lord, the good Workman over all forever, so be it.

T. T.

THE END.

