A TRUE RELATION OF AN Apparition, Expressions and Actings, OF A SPIRIT, Which
Infested the House of Andrew Mackie in Ring-Croft of Stocking, in the Paroch of
Rerrick, in the Stewartry of Kirkcudbright, in Scotland. By Mr. Alexander
Telfair, Minister of that Paroch: and Attested by many other Persons, who were
also Eye and Ear-Witnesses.

Ephesians. 6.11. Put on the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to stand
against the wiles of the Devil.

Verse. 12. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
Principalities, and Powers, etc,

James 4.7. -- Resist the Devil and he will flee from you.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by GEORGE MOSMAN, And are to be sold at his Shop in the
Parliament Closs, 1696.

TO THE READER.
I Assure you It is contrare to my Genius, (all Circumstances being considered)
to appear in Print to the View of the World, yet these Motives have prevailed
with me* to publish the following Relation (beside the satisfying of some
reverend Brethren in the Ministry, and several worthy Christians) As 1. The
Conviction and Confutation of that prevailing Spirit of Atheism* and Infidelity
in our time, denying both in Opinion and Practice the Existence of Spirits,
either of God or Devils; and consequently a Heaven and Hell: And imputing the
Voices, Apparitions and Actings of Good, or Evil Spirits, to the Melancholic
Disturbance or Distemper of the Brains and Fancies of those, who pretend to
hear* see, or feel them: 2. To give occasion, to all who read this, To bless
the Lord, who has sent a stronger (even Christ Jesus) than the strong Man, to
bind him, and spoil him of his Goods, and to destroy the Works of the Devil,
and even by these things whereby Satan thinks to propagate his Kingdom of
Darkness, to discover, weaken and bring it down* 3* To induce all Persons,
particularly Masters of Families, to private and Family Prayer; lest the
neglect of it prov^ke the Lord, nor only to pour out his Wra^h upon them
otherwise: But to let Satan loose to haunt their Persons and Families with
audible Voices, Appa^ition^, and hurt to their persons and Goods* 4* That
Minist^rs and Congregations, where the Gosp^l is in any measure in purity and
power, may be upon their guard, to wrestle according to the Word of God,
against these Principalities and Powers, and Spiritual Wickednesses, who still
seek to ma^r the Success and Fruit of the Gospel, sometimes b^ force, and
sometimes by fraud, sometimes secretly* and sometimes openly* ( Tunc tua res
agitur, paries cum proximus ardet) And for th^se Ends learn to know his Wiles,
and put on the whole Armor of God, that they may be able to debate wi^h him
And 5* That all who a^e by the goodness of God ^re^ from these audible Voices,
Apparitions or Hurts from Satan, may learn ^o ascribe Praise and Glory to God,
who leads them not into Temptation, but delivers them from Evil: And that this
true and attested Account of Satan's M^thods in this Place, may carry the
foresa^d Ends, i^ the earn^st Prayer of

An weak Labourer in the Work of the Gospel in that Place, and Your Servant for
Christ's sake ALEXANDER TELFAIR.
Edinburgh, December. 2^, 1695.
A true Relation of an Apparition, Expressions and Actings, of a Spirit, which
Infested the House of Andrew Mackie in Ring-Croft of Stocking* in the Paroch of
Rerrick, in the Stewartry of Kirkcudbright, in Scotland.
WHereas many are desirous to know the Truth of the Matter, as to the Evil
Spirit and its Actings, that troubles the Family of Andrew Mackie in
Ring-Cro^t of Stocking, etc. and are liable to be misinformed, as I do find by
the reports that come to my own Ears of that matter. Therefore that
satisfaction may be given, and such mistakes may be cured or prevented: I the
Minister of the ^a^d Paroc^ (who was present several times, and was Witness to
many of its Actings, and have heard an Account of the whole of its Methods and
Actings from the pers^ns present, toward whom* and before whom it did act)
have given the ensuing, and short Account of the whole Matter: which I can
attest to be the very Truth as to that Affair and before I come to the Relation
it self, I premise these things with respect to what might have been the
occasion and rise of that Spirits appearing and acting.

1. The said Andrew Mackie being a Meas^n to his Employment, it is given out,
that when he took the Meason-word, he devouted his first Child to the Devil:
But I am certainly informed, he never took the same, and knows not what that
Word is. He is outwardly Moral, there is nothing known to his Life and
Conversation, but honest, civil, and harmless* beyond many of his Neighbors,
does delight in the Company of the best; and when he was under the Trouble of
that evil Spirit, did pray to the great satisfaction of many. As for his Wife
and Children, none have imputed any thing to them as the ri^e of it, nor is
there any ground, for ought I know* for any to do so.

2. Whereas its given out that a Woman sub mala fam^, did leave some Clothes in
that house* in the Custody of the said Andrew Mackie, and died before they were
given up to her; and he or his Wife should have kept some of them back from
her friends: I did seriously pose both him and his Wife upon the Matter, they
declared they knew not what things were left, being bound up in a Sack* but did
deliver entirely to her Friends all they received from the Woman* which I am
apt to believe.

3 Whereas one Macknaught, who sometimes before possessed that House, did not
thrive in his own Person, or Goods: It seems he had sent his Son to a
Witch-wife, who lived then at the Routing-bridge, in the Paroch of Iron-gray,
to enquire what might be the cause of the decay of his Person and Goods: the
Youth meeting with some Foreign Souldi^rs, went abroad to Flanders, and did
not return with an Answer. Some years after there was one John Redick in this
Paroch, who having had occasion to go abroad, met with the said young
Macknaught in Flanders, and they knowing other, Macknaught enquired after his
Father and other Friends; and finding the said John Redick was to go home,
desired him to go to his Father, or who ever dwelt in the Ring-croft, and
desire them to raise the door-threshold, and search, till they found a Tooth,
and burn it* for none who dwelt in that house would thrive till that was done.
The said John Redick coming home, and finding the old man Macknaught dead, and
his Wife out of that place, did never mention the matter, nor further mind it,
till this trouble was in Andrew Mackie's Family; then he spoke of it, and told
the matter to my self Betwixt Macknight's death, and Andrew Mackie's Possession
of this House, there was one Thomas Telfair, who possessed it some years; what
way he heard the Report of what the Witch wife had said to Mack^ight's Son, I
cannot tell; but he searched the door-threshold, and found something like a
Tooth, did compare it with the Tooth of Man, Horse* Nolt and Sheep (as he said
to me) but could not say which it did resemble, only it did resemble a Tooth:
he did cast it in the fire, where it burnt like a Candle, or so much Tallow;
yet he never knew any trouble about that house by night or by day, before or
after, during his Possession. The^e things premised, being suspected to have
been the occasion of the Trouble; and there being no more known as to them,
than what is now declared, I do think the matter still unknown, what may have
given an arise thereto. But leaving this I subjoin the matter as ^ollows.

In the Month o^ Feb^uary, the said Andrew M^ckie had some young Beasts, which
in the night time were still loosed, and their Bindings broken: he taking it to
be the unrulyness of the Beasts, did make stronger and stronger Bindings of
Withes and other things, but still all were broken: at last he ^uspected it to
be some other thing, whereupon he removed them out of that place, and the first
night thereafter, one of them was bound with a Hair-tedder to the balk of the
hou^e, so strait that the feet of the Beast only touched the ground, but could
not move no way else, yet it sustained no hurt. An other night, when the Family
were all sleeping, there was the full of an back-creel of Pee^s, set together
in midst of the ^ouse floor, and fire put in them, the smoke wakened the
Family, otherwise the house had been burnt; yet nothing all the while was
either seen or heard.

Upon the 7 th. of March there were stones thrown in the House, in all the
places of it, but it could not be discovered from whence they came, what, or
who threw them: After this mann^r it continued till the Sabbath, now and then
throwing both in the night and day, but was busiest throwing in the night time.

Upon Saturnd^y, the Family being all without, the Children coming in, saw
something, which they thought to be a body ^itting by the ^ire-side with a
Blanket (or Cloth) about it, whereat they were af^raid: The youngest* being a
boy about 9 or ^0 years of age, did chide the rest, saying, why are you feared?
let us ^aine (or bless) our selves, and then there is no ground to fear't: he
perceived the blanket to be his, and ^aining (or blessing) himself, ran and
pulled the blanket from it, saying, be what it will, it has nothing to do with
my bl^nket; and then they found it to be a four footed Stool set upon the end*
and the blanket cast over it.

Upon the Sabbath, being the 1^ ^h. of March the Crook and Pot-clips were taken
away, and were a wanting four days, and were found at last on a ^o^ft* where
they had been so^ght ^everal times before. This is atte^ted by Cha^les
Mack^ela^e of Colline, and John Cairns in Ha^dhills. It was observe^ that the
Stones which hi^ any person, had not half their natural weight, and the
throwi^g wa^ more frequent on the Sabbath, than at other ti^es: and especi^lly
in time of Prayer* above all other times, it was busi^st* then throwing most at
the person praying. The said Andrew Mackie told the matter to me upon S^bbath
after Sermon; upon the Tuesday thereafter I went to the house, did stay a
considerable ^ime with them, and prayed twice, and there was no trouble: Then I
came out with a resolution to leave the house, and as I was standing, speaking
to some men at the barn end, I saw two little stones drop down on the Croft at
a little distance from me; and then immediately some came crying o^t of the
house, that it was become as ill as ever within: whereupon I w^nt into the
house again, and as I was at Prayer, it threw several stones at me, but they
did no ^urt* being very small; and after there was no more trouble till the 18
day of March: and then it began as before, and threw more frequently, greater
stones, whose str^kes were sorer where they hit: and thus it continued to the
21. Then ^ went to the hou^e and stayed a great part of the night, but was
greatly troubled; stones, and several ^ther things were thrown at me; I was
struck several times on the sides, and ^houlders, very sharply with a great
staff, so that those who were present heard the noise of the strokes: that
night it threw off the bedside, and rapped upon the Christ's and Boards, as one
calling for access: This is attested by Charles Macklelane of Colline* William
Mackminn, and John Tait in Torr. That night, as I was once at Prayer, leaning
on a bedside, I felt something pr^ssing up my arm, I casting my eyes thither,
perceived a little white Hand and Arm from the elbow down, but presently it
evanished. It is to be observed, that notwithstanding of all that was felt and
heard, from the first to the last of this matter, there was never any thing
seen, except that hand I saw, and a Friend of the said And^ew Mackie's said he
^aw as it were a young Man, red faced, with yellow hair, looking in at the
Window; and other two orthree Persons, with the said Andr^w his Children, saw
at several times, as it were a young Boy about the age of 14 years with gray
Cloths, and a bonnet on his head, but pre^ently disappeared; as also what the
three Children saw sitting by the ^ire-side.

Upon the 22 the Trouble still increased, both against the Family, and against
the Neighbors who came to visit them, by throwing stones, and beating them
with staves; so that some were forced to leave the house before their
inclination: This is attested by Charles Macklelane of Colline, and Andrew Tait
in Torr. Some it would have met as they came to the house, and stoned with
stones about the yards, and ^n like manner stoned as they went from the house;
of whom Thomas Telfair in Stocking was one. It made a little Wound on the said
A^^rew Mackie's brow* did thrust several times at his shoulder, he not
regarding, at last it gripped him so by the hair, that he thought something
like nails of fingers scratched his skin. I^ dragged severals up and down ^he
house by the Clothes: This is atte^ted by Andrew Tait. It gripped one John
Ke^ge Miller in Ach^ncairn so, by the side, that he entreated his Neighbors to
help, and cried, it would rive the side from him. That night it lifted the
Clothes off the Children, as they were sleeping in bed, and beat them on the
hipps, as if it had been with ones hand, so that all who were in the house
heard it. The door-barr, and other things, would go thorrow the house as if a
person had been carrying them in their hand, yet nothing seen doing it: This is
attested by John Telfair in Achinle^k, and others. It rattled on the Chests and
Bed sides with a staff* and made a great noise; and thus it continued by
throwing stones, stricking with staves, and rattling in the house, till the 2
d. of Apr^^, at night it cried Wished, Wished, at every Sentence in the close of
Prayer; and it Whi^^^ed so distinctly, that the Dog barked, and ran to the
door, as if one had been calling to hou^d him.

^p^^l^ 3. It whisled several times, and cried wished, wished, this is attested
by A^drew Ta^^. Upon the 4 th* of Apr^l^, Charles M^cklel^ne of Collin
Landlord, with the said Andrew Ma^kie, went to a certain Number of Min^ster^
met at Buttle, and gave them an Account of the matter; where upon these
Ministers made public Prayers for the Family, and two of their Number. viz.
Mr. Andrew Aeva^t Minister of Kells, and Mr. John Murdo Min^ster of C^rsmich^el
came to the House and spent that Night in fasting and praying: But it was very
cruel against them, especially by throwing ^r^at Stones some of them about half
an stone weight: It wounded Mr* Andrew Aewart twice in the Head* to the
effusion of his Blood, it pulled off his Wigg in time of Prayer, and when he
was holding out his Napkin betwixt his hands, it cast a Stone in the N^pkin,
and therewith threw it from him: It gave Mr. John Murdo several sore strokes;
Yet the wounds and Bruises received did soon cure: There were none in the House
that Night escaped from some of its fury and cruelty: That Night it threw a
fiery peet amongs the People; But did no hurt, it only disturbed them in time
of prayer: And also i^ the dawning, as they rose from Prayer* the Stones poured
down on all who were in the House to their hurt* this is attested by Mr. Andrew
Aevart Mr. John Murdo, Charles Macklelane, and John Tait.

Upon the 5 th. of Aprile: It set some Thatch-straw in fire which was in the
Barn yeard: At night the House being very throng with Neighbors, the Stones
were still thrown down among them; As the said Andrew Mackie his Wife went to
bring in some peets, for the fire when she came to the door, she found a broad
Stone to shake under her foot, which she never knew to be loose before: She
resolved with her self to see what was beneath it in the morning there after.

Upon the 6 th. of Aprile, when the House was quiet, she went to the stone, and
there found Seven small bones, with Blood, and some Flesh, all closed in a
piece of Old suddled Paper, the Blood was fresh and bright: The sight whereof
troubled her, and being afraid, laid all down again; And ran to Colline his
House, being an quarter of an Mile distant: But in that time, it was worse then
ever it was before; by throwing Stones, and Fireballs, in and about the House,
but the fire as it lighted did Evanish: In that time it threw an Hot-stone into
the bed betwixt the Children, which burnt through the bed clothes; And after it
was taken out by the Man's Eldest Son, and had lain on the floor more nor an
Hour, and an half; the said Charles Macccelan of Colln^ could not hold it in
his hand for he^t: this is attested be Charles Macklelan* It thrust an Staff
thorrow the Wall of the house above the Children in the bed, shook it over
them, and Groaned. When Colline came to the house, he went to Prayer before he
Offered to lift the Bones; all the while he was at Prayer it was most cruel;
But as soon as he took up the Bones the trouble ceased. (this is attested be
Charles Macklelane) he sent them presently to me; upon sight whereof I went
immediately to the house: while I was at Prayer, it threw great Stones which
Hitt me: But they did not hurt: Then there was no more trouble that Night.

The 7 ^h. Aprile, being the Sabbath it began agai^^ and threw Stones, and
wounded Wil^^am Macminn a Blacksmith on the Head, it cast a Plough-sock at
him, and al^o an Trough-^^one upwards of three stone Weight, which did fall
upon his B^ck, yet he was not hurt thereby. Attested by William Macminn, it set
the house twice in fire, yet there was no hurt done in respect some neighbors
were in the house, who helped to quench it, at N^^ht in the twilight as Jo^n
Mackie the said Andrew M^akie his Eldest Son was coming home, near to the
house, there was an Extraordinary light fell about him, and went before him to
the house, with a swift Motion. That night it containued after its wonted
manner.

Aprile 8 th. In the morning as Andrew Mackie, went down the Closs he found a
Letter both written and ^ealed with Blood; it was directed on the back thus. 3
years tho shall have to repent a net it well And within was written: Woe be to
the Cotlland Repent and tak warning for the door of haven ar all Ready bart
against the I am sent for a warning to the to fllee to god yet troublt shallt
this man be for tuenty days a 3 rpent repnent opent sc^tland or else tow shall.
In the middle of the day, the Persons alive who lived in that house since it was
Built, being about 28 Years: were conveined by appointment of the Civil
Magistrate, before Colline my self and others and did all touch the Bones, in
respect there was some Suspicion of ^ecret Murder committed in the place: But
nothing was found to discover the same.

Upon the 9 th. of Ap^ile, the Letter and Bones were sent to the Ministers who
were all Occasionally met at Kirk^^^brugh, they appointed five of their numbe^
viz* Mr. John Murdo, Mr. James Monte^th, Mr. John Mackmil^an, Mr. Samuel
Spalding, and Mr. William Falconer with me to to go to the House, and spend so
much ti^e in Fasting and Praying as we were able.

Upon the 10 of Aprile We went to the house, and no sooner did I begin to open
my Mouth; but it ^hrew stones at me, and all within the House, but still worst
at him who was at Duty: It came often with such force upon the house that it
made all the house Shake, it brake an hole thorrow the Timber and Tha^ch of the
House, and poured in great Stones* one whereof more then an Quarter weight fell
upon Mr. James Mo^teith his back, yet he was not hurt, it threw an other with
great force at him when he was praying bigger t^en a Man's ^ist which hitt him
on the Breast yet h^ was neither hurt nor moved thereby; ^t was ^hought ^it
that one of our number, with an other person* should go by turns; and stand
under the hole in the outside: ^o there was no more trouble from that place*
But the Barn being joined to the end of the House* it brake down the Barn
Door and Mid-wall and thr^w stones up the House; But did no great hurt: ^t
Gripped, and Handled the Legs of ^ome, as with a Man's hand; ^t Hoised up the
feet of others while standing on the ground, thus it did to William Len^^x of
Mill-house, my Self and others, in this manner it continued till Ten a Clock at
night; But after that there was no more trouble while we were about the house
this is Attested by Mrs. James Monteith, John Murdo* Samuel Spalding, Mr.
Falconer William Lennox, and John Tait, The 11.12.13. ^t was worse then ever it
was before; for not any who came into the House did escape heavy stro^ks; There
was one Andrew Tait in Torr, as he was coming to stay with the Family all
night, by the way his Dog Catched a Thu^mard, when he come in he cast it by in
the house, thereafter there were other three young Men who came in also: And
when they were all at Prayer the Evil Spirit beat them with the dead Thulmard,
and threw it before them; The three who knew it not to be in the house were
greatly affrighted, especially one Samuel Thomson a Chap-man, whom it also
gripped by the Side and Back, and thrust as if it had been an hand beneath hi^
Clothes, and into his Pockets, he was so affrighted that he took Sickness
immediately, this is Attested by Andrew Ta^t.

The 14 th. being the Sabbat^, it set some straw in fire that was in the
Barn-yeard, and threw stones while Ten a Clock at night, it threw an Dike-spade
at the said Andrew Mackie with the Mouth toward him; But he received no hurt,
while an Meal-^ive was to^sed up and down the house the said Andrew Mackie
takes hold of it, and as it were with difficulty gets the grip kept; At last
all within the Rim is torn out, thereafter it threw an hand^ul, of the Sive
Rolled together at Thomas Robertson i^ Airds, who was Witness to this, yet in
all their Actings there was never any thing seen but what I mention^d* before.

Upon the 15 th Aprile William Anderson a Drover and James Paterson his Son in
Law, came to the house with Colline in the Evening, Colline going Home a while
within night, the said A^^rew Mackie sent his Sons to conv^y him: As they
returned, they were Cruelly stoned, and the stones Rolled amongst their Legs
like to break them: Shortly after they came in, it wounded William A^derson on
the Head to the great Effusion of his Blood, in time of Prayer it Wh^sl^d,
Gr^^^ed, and Cried Whisht, Whisht, this is Attested by John Cair^es.

The 16. It continued Whi^^ing* Groaning, Whisling, and throwing stones in time
of Prayer, it cried b^, b^, and Kick, Cuck, and shoke men back and foreward,
and Hoised them up as if it would lift them off their knees, this is Attested
by Andrew Tait*

The whole Family went from the house, and left five Honest neighbors to wait
on the same all night but there was no hurt done to them nor the Family where
they were, nor to those neighbors who stayed in the said Addrew Mackie his
house, only the Cattle were cast over other to the hazard of killing them as
they were bound to the Stakes; and some of them were loosed, this is Attested
by John Cairnes*

Upon the 18. They returned to their House again* and there was no hurt done to
them nor their Cattle that night except in a little House where there were some
Sheep, it coupled them together in paires by the Neck, with Straw Ropes, made
of an Bottle of straw, which it took off an Loft in the Stable, and carried to
the Sheep-house, which is three or four pair of Butts distant, and it made mo
Ropes than it needed for binding the Sheep which it left beside the straw in
the Sheep-house, this is Attested by Andrew Tait*

Upon the 19. it fired the straw in the Barn, but Andrew Mackie put it out
(being there Threshing) without doing any hurt: it shut Staves thorrow the Wall
at him but did no hurt.

The 20. it continued throwing stones, Whisling and Whis^ing with all its
former words, when it hit any Person, and said, take you that till you get
more, that person was sure immediately of an other, but when it said take you
that, the person got no more for a while, this is Attested by John Tait.

The 21.22.23. It containued casting Stones, beating with Staves and throwing
Peet-mud in the f^ces of all in the House, especially in time of Prayer with
all its former Tricks.

The 24* Being a day of Humiliation appointed to be kept in the Parish for that
cause; all that day from Morning to Night* it containued in a most fearful
manner without intermission, throwing Stones with such cruelty and force that
all in the House feared lest they should be killed.

The 25 th. it threw stones all night* but did no great hurt.

The 26 th. it threw stones in the evening, and knocked on a Chi^t seve^^l
times, as one to have access; and began to speak, and call those who were
sitting in the house Witches, and ^^kes, and said it would take them to Hell.
The People then in the house said among themselves, if it had anyto speak to
it, now it would speak. In the mean time Andrew Mackie was sleeping, they
wakened him, and then he hearing it say, Thou shall be troubled till Tuesday,
asked, Who gave the a Commission? To whom it answered, God gave me a
Commission; and I ^m sent to warn the Land to repent; for a Judgment is to
come if the Land do not quickly repent, and comm^nded him to rev^al it upon his
perr^l^; and if the Land did not repent, it said it would go to its Father, and
g^t a Commission to return with an hund^ed worse than it self, and would
trouble every particular Family in the Land: Andrew Mackie said to those who
were with him, if I should tell this, I would not be believed. Then it said,
Fetch betters, fetch the Minister of the Paroch, and two hon^st men upon
Tuesdays night, and I shall declare before them what I have to say. Then it
said, Praise me, and I will whist^e to you, Worship me, and I will trouble you
no more. Then Andrew Mackie said, The Lord, who delivered the three Children
out of the fiery Furnace, deliver me* and mine this night, from the Temptations
of Satan: Then it replied, You mi^ht as well have said, Shadrah, Meshah, and
Abed-nego* In the mean time while Andrew Mackie was speaking, there was one
James Te^fair in Buttle, who was adding a word* to whom it said, You are basely
bred, meddling in other men's Discourse, wherein you are not concerned. It
likewise said, Remove your Goods, for I will burn the house* He an^wered, the
Lord stop Satan's Fury, and hinder him of his Designs. Then it said, I will ^o
it, or you s^all g^ide well: All this is attested by John Tait in Torr, and
several others who cannot subscribe.

Upon the 27 it set the house seven times in fire. The 28, being the Sabbath,
from Sun rising to Sun setting, it still set the house in fire, as it was
quenched in one part, instantly it was fired in an other: and in the evening,
when it could not g^t its Designs fulfilled in burning the house it pulled down
the end of the house, all the stone-work thereof, so that they could not abide
in it any longer, but went and kindled their fire in the stable.

Upon the Sabbath night* it pulled o^e of the Children out of the bed* gripping
him as he thought, by the craig and shoulders, and took up the block of a tree,
as great as a plough-head, and held it above the Children, saying, if I had a
Commission I would brain them: thus it expressed it self, in the hearing of all
who were in the house: attested ^y William Mackminn, and John Corsby.

The 29* being Monday, it continued Setting fire in the house, the said Andrew
Macki^ finding the House so frequently set in fire, and being weary quenching
it, he went and put out all the Fire that was about the House, and poured water
upon the Hearth; yet after, it Fired the House several times, when there was no
Fire within an quarter of an Mile of the house: this is Attested by Charles
Maclelane and John Cairnes. In the midest of the day, as Andrew Mackie was
threshing in the Barn, it whispered in the wall and then cried Andrew, Andrew,
but he gave no Answer to it: Then with an Auster* Angry Voice as it were, it
said Speak: Yet he gave no Answer; Then it said, be not troubled, you shall
have no more trouble, except some casting of Stones upon the Twesday to Fulfill
the promise, and said take away your Straw, I went to the house about Eleven a
Clock it Fired the house once after I went there, I stayed all Night till
betwixt Three and Four in the Twesdays morning, dureing which time there was no
trouble about the House, except two little stones droped down at the Fireside
as we were siting down at our first entry; a little after I went away, it began
to throw stones as formerly, this is Attested by Charles Mackleland and John
Tait.

Upon Tuesdays night, being the 30 of April, Charles Macklelane of Colline,
with several Neighbors, were in the barn, as he was at prayer he observed a
Black thing in the corner of the barn, and it did increase, as if it would
fill the whole house, he could not discern it to have any Form; but as if it
had been a black Cloud, it was affrighting to them all; and then it threw
Bear-chaff, and other mud upon their faces, and after did grip severals who
were in the house by the middle of the Body, by the Arms and other parts of
their Bodies so strait, that some said, for five days thereafter they thought
they felt these gripps: after an hour or two of the night was thus past, there
was no more Trouble. This is attested by Charles Macklelane, Thomas Mackminn,
Andrew Paline, John Cairns, and John Tait.

Upon Wednesdays night, being the 1 of May, it fired a little Sheep-house the
Sheep were got out safe, but the Sheep-house was wholly burnt. Since there has
not been any trouble about the House by night nor by day. Now all things
aforesaid being of undoubted Verity, Therefore I conclude with that of the
Apostle, 1 Pet. 5.8, 9. Be sober, be vigilant, because your adversary the
Devil, as a roaring lion walks about seeking whom he may devour: Whom resist
steadfast i^ the Faith:

This Relation is attested, as to what they particularly saw, heard, and felt,
by* Mr. Andrew Aewart Minister at Kells* Mr. James Mon^eith Minister at Borg.
Mr. John Murdo Minister at Corsmichael. Mr. Samuel Spalding Minister at Partan.
M^. William Falconer Minister at K^ltoun* Charl^s Macklelane of Colline*
William Lennox of Millhou^e. Andrew Tait in Torr. John Tait in Torr* Joh^
Cairns in Hardhills* William Mackminn. John Corsby. Thomas Mackminn. Andrew
Paline, etc.



