A HISTORY OF THE UNION Between the PRESBYTERIAN AND Congregational Ministers,
In and about LONDON; AND THE CAUSES OF The BREACH of it.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCXCVIII.

TO THE READER.
HISTORY is of Great Use to Mankind, when it gives a Faithful Relation of
Things as they are, because it is then the Repository of Truth, and transmits
to the following Generations the Knowledge of what was done in the preceding
Ages: But when it is False, it perpetuates the Belief of Untruths, so long as
it is in being, and gains any Credit with Men. It is a Sincere, and Impartial
Regard to Truth, together with an Hatred of Falsehood, that has given Birth to
the following History.

THE Author of the Faithful Rebuke, gives such a Description of the
Independents, as cannot but prevail with any who know their Principles and
Practices, to give a Testimony concerning them, so far as they are Innocent.

THE Language wherewith he treats them, is such, as one would think, none could
justify, who have not broke through all the Bounds of Common Civility; and yet
his Faithful Rebuke was so acceptable to The Meeting of the Ministers at Little
St. Hellens, that it was only the Modesty of the Author, that prevented his
having the Thanks of the United Ministers, for a Book, wherein he dresses up
his Brethren, as if he were imitating the Spanish Inquisitors, when they are
about to present the Heretics to the Devouring Flames. He condemns the
Congregational Brethren by Wholesale in his Faithful Rebuke; and although he would
mince the Matter in the Vindication of his Faithful Rebuke, yet every one that
minds what he says of them, in his first Book, will see that he Censures them,
as a Party of Men without Discrimination. Not only the Congregational Ministers
come under his Lash, but the Lay Brothers among the Independents (as he calls
them) must feel his Biting Jeers. After the Rebuker had Discharged a whole
Volley of Reproaches upon the Independents, there came forth another Book
bearing this Title; The Answer to the Report, which the United Ministers
appointed their Committee to draw up. This Book (abating something of a
Formality) came forth Armed with the Authority of The Meeting of the Ministers
at Little St. Hellens: For Mr. Williams tells the World, That the Reason why it
was not published in the Name of the Body of the United Ministers, was (as he
speaks) because the Confirmation of it by a Second Reading, was suspended; and
only so. Mr. William 's Preface to the Answer to the Report, etc.

AFTER this full Assurance given, that the Reason why it was not Published in
the Name of the Body of the United Ministers, was only because the Rereading of
it was Suspended; it will be no Wrong to look upon it as that which speaks
their Common Sense and Judgment, till they publicly disown it.

THIS Book is not filled with Raillery, as the Faithful Rebuke is, and the
Charges which are brought in it against the Independents, are not so extensive:
But the Gentlemen of the Committee (so far as they play the Historians) fully
agree with the Rebuker; for they, as well as he, either mistake, as to every
instance of Matter of Fact, that they meddle with, or they conceal some
considerable Circumstances belonging to it.

THE History of the Committee, as well at that of the Rebuker, is so partial,
and void of Truth, that in some Respects it is become necessary (for the
Vindication of the Congregational Ministers, from the Unjust Accusation that
they are laid under) to set things in a true Light, which is the Design of the
ensuing History. Several Original Papers might have been inserted in this
History, to render it more full, which at prsenet, for the sake of Brevity, are
omitted: But if this be a Defect, it may be supplied, if any Occasion be given
for it hereafter.

WHEN the Ministers at Little St. Hellens, are called Presbyterians, it is not
by way of Contempt, but only for Distinction, and the Reason why they are not
always styled, The United Ministers, is because such a Denomination does not
strictly and properly belong to them since their Breach of the Union.

THE Intention of this History is only to rescue the Truth from the Little
Tricks of some Unquiet Spirits: But not to Quarrel with the Presbyterian
Brethren, among whom many deserve a General Esteem for their Exemplary Piety,
Great Learning, and Undoubted Orthodoxy in the Faith.

IF there be any thing said in this History, that may justly come under
Correction, as to Matter of Fact, when the Contrary does appear, the
Information shall be received, and the Fault shall be acknowledged: but if any
will Cavil about Niceties, Modes Expression, and Things that are Inconsiderable
only, or if they will Answer in the Scurrilous, and Offensive Dialect of the
Rebuker, or with an Impotent Malice as Mr. Williams does his Adversary, then
they shall be passed by with Pity and Silence.

UNION, when it is Founded in Truth, and in Love unfeigned, is no small
Blessing in it self, and is the greatest Ornament to Religion; when on the
contrary, Dissension among Christians brings Reproach on the Profession of the
Gospel, and proves a Stumbling Block to many. It was a Desire to remove the
Scandal that arises from Division, that stirred up some Ministers several Years
ago, to attempt something toward the Healing of the Differences between the
Brethren of the Presbyterian and Congregational Persuasion, in Matters of
Discipline, but before they could bring their laudable Enterprise to any
Ripeness, a stop was put to their Pious and Peaceable Undertaking, by the
Persecution raised against them in the Year 1682, and continued for some time
afterward by the Influence, and prevailing Interest of the Duke of York, who
when he came to change the Character of a Subject for that of a Crowned Head,
was cried up by his Friends and Flatterers as a great Patron for Liberty of
Conscience. While the Dissenters were under the Smart of their Enemies Rage,
there was no need of Conciliatory Methods to promote Peace, because the
Increase of their Fraternal Affection to one another, was the Cement of a close
Union amongst them, and it continued to be so all the time of their Restraint
and Hardships.

AFTER the Liberty was given to the Dissenters by the Late King James, the
former Expedient for Agreement was set on foot again between the differing
Parties. When the Congregational Brethren were beginning to Debate among
themselves upon the Articles proposed for Union, it was Suggested to them, That
the Work would not be grateful to King James 's Court, and so it was dropped.
This was no Valid Reason to many of them, yet they fell in with it, because
they did then foresee that no Union could be effected between the two aforesaid
Parties that would hold long, and that when they sought to Agree they would
fall out. Although little regard was had to the Pleasure of the Late King James
in desisting from this Affair, yet it must be owned that he might have expected
greater Things from the Dissenters, if he gave any Credit to the Reverend Mr.
V. Alsop, in a Speech which he made to him upon the Address which he and
several of his Brethren presented to him. After he had wished, That there was a
Window in their Breasts to render their Bodies transparent, that their
Sovereign might have a full view of their Hearts, he assures him in the
following Words, We now (Dear Sir!) Silently wait for some happy Juncture to
give Your Majesty some essential Proofs of our Loyalty, and the Sincerity of
this our Humble Address, as may demonstrate that the greatest Things we have
been able to express, and promise in this poor Paper, is the least we shall
cheerfully perform for Your Majesty's Service and Satisfaction.

IT cannot be said that this Gentleman, after such profuse Promises of doing
great Things for the Service and Satisfaction of his Celebrated Patron, whom he
Styled, The best of Princes, went farther in Performance than in Praying for
him; and it is Reported that he did this till he was almost come to the time of
his Abdication. Whether he did long follow his admired Benefactor with his good
Wishes, after his timorous Flight, is best known to himself; but this is
certain, that although he will not venture far in Defending the Titles of
Princes, yet he can handsomely Caress them as they fall in his way, and
therefore he has bestowed on King William, a share of his teeming Rhetoric, in
his Thanksgiving Sermon for the Taking of Namur. If this Gentleman did hearken
to the Rebukes of his own Conscience, and if he did seriously consider how he
himself has acted, both in Divinity and Politics, as if Mutability was his
Perfection, he would then learn to be more Moderate in Censuring others as
Changelings, but he would not easily forgive himself.

When all true Englishmen were freed from the dismal Fears of the return of
Popery, by the Happy Revolution which was brought about by the coming of our
present King, and when the Grave and Prudent Senate of the Nation had Confirmed
to the Dissenters their Liberty by Law, the Endeavors for a nearer Coalition
between the Presbyterian and Congregational Brethren were Revived; Select
Persons were Deputed by both sides to treat upon Terms of Union, and their
Debates issued in the Heads of Agreement, which were Published about the
beginning of the Year 1692.

THERE were some of the Congregational Ministers that never joined in this
Agreement, not from any opposition to Peace, for they knew it was their Duty,
not only to embrace it where it can be had, but to follow after it with all Men
so sar as is possible without Sin; but they were not satisfied about the
Agreement.

1. THEY could not but observe how some of the Prime Promoters of this Union
were such as in the time of Persecution had by their Compliance deserted the
Cause of the Nonconformists, and tempted the People of the Nation to think that
their Separation was only from a stubborn Humor, and not from a tender
Conscience. They could not but consider that in uniting with such Pastors and
their Churches, who were for a Complete Union with the National Church, they do
condemn their own Separation as Sinful and Schismatical, which they would not
for the whole World be guilty of, if they thought it to be so. The Chief
Leaders in the Union begin now to speak freely in this Business, and declare to
this Purpose: That it was the intendment, of the Union to comprehend and
include such as were for Sacramental Communion with the Church of England. This
is that which is disallowed generally by the Congregational Brethren, who say
that they who have this Liberty ought not to separate from the National Church.

2. SOME Busy Actors in framing the Union had not only given just Suspicions
of their Heterodoxy in Points of Doctrine, but had discovered a prejudiced
Spirit against the Government of the Congregational Churches, and the Order
wherein they walk. The Temper of Mr. Daniel Williams was remarkable upon this
Account; He did not fail to seek with great Industry to be chosen Pastor in a
Congregational Church, and gave sufficient Proofs that he would never be under
any Temptation of falling into the excess of Self-denial and Humility, which
was in some Persons in the First Ages of Christianity, who stuck not to
dismember themselves to prevent their being Elected Bishops: But when he was
frustrated in his Expectations, he took a great Freedom to speak with
Bitterness and Contempt of them that were for the Congregational Discipline.
When he and others of his own Size were noted Managers in the Union, it could
not but give some Umbrage of Jealousy and Fear, that no Good was intended by
it for the Congregational Churches.

3. THEY were dissatisfied about the Union it self, because they thought of it
in the General, that it was no more than a Verbal Composition, or a number of
Articles industriously and designedly framed with great Ambiguity, that Persons
retaining their different Sentiments about the self same Things might yet seem
to Unite; only, because they agreed to express themselves in aequivocal and
comprehensive Words. They that Dissented from the Union durst not recommend,
and hold this out, as a real Agreement when they did believe it to be no such
Thing.

1. IT looked too like a want of Sincerity among the Non-Conformists
themselves, as if they went about to supplant and deceive one another.

2. IT had too much of the appearance of putting a Cheat upon the World, as if
the Presbyterian and Congregational Brethren were agreed, when both sides were
resolved not in the least to recede from their former Principles and Practices.

3. THEY feared that this Union not having a firm and solid Foundation, would
be a Mischievous Engine to widen former Breaches, and to multiply new
Divisions: They could not but look back upon some Treaties for Concord managed
between the Lutherans and Calvinists, which served only to increase the
bleeding Wounds of the Church, because the contending Parties did strive to
out-wit and overreach one another, or to conceal their Differences rather than
heartily to Unite. They feared such Effects from this Union, and time has
showed that their Fears were not ungrounded. It has been so far from being a
Medium of that Peace which all ought to press after, that it has been followed
with such Broils and Contentions as have wounded the Spirits of Many, who would
rather have their Thoughts swallowed up in the Meditations of Heaven, than hear
of the Quarrels of them who are in the way to it. It was for the aforesaid, and
many other Reasons that some Congregational Ministers did never Consent to the
Union; and they could say, that it was a fear least they should offend God in
going against their own Lighr, that fixed them in their Dissent, and therefore
they could not but reckon it hard Measure to be traduced and reproached by some
of the Presbyterian Party, as if they had been Lovers of Contention, and
Enemies to all Union, because they did not subscribe to that Verbal Union,
which they always suspected to be no better than a Feigned Thing. They had the
Testimony of their Consciences, that they could sacrifice the dearest Worldly
Interests, for that Union which the Holy Scriptures commend to all Christians,
but they were sensible of the severe Treatment, which they met with when they
were reviled, and aspersed for not Signing a Wire-drawn Agreement composed by
their own Brethren, who were upon a level with themselves, when at the same
time they were freed from the Impositions of the National Church by the
Exemplary Moderation of King William, and the Wisdom of the Parliament.

THE Congregational Brethren who refused to come into the Union were but few,
and are said to be no more than three by the Narrative of the Ministers at
Little St. Helens, whether their number was so small is not a thing of that
Moment to deserve a strict Enquiry: All the other Brethren of that
Denomination, who had favorable Thoughts of the Union entered into it, and as
they had Satisfaction in what they did, so it is not to be questioned but they
had innocent Ends, and Designs to Guide and Govern them in it. They had not
been long engaged in this new Alliance, but some things made them uneasy.

1. THEY took Notice how some Aspiring Tempers of the Presbyterian Party began
to drive at a Jurisdiction over other Churches, and were busy to bring the
hearing of such Cases before themselves as were more proper to be laid before
Neighboring Ministers in the places where Matter of Fact was more fully known,
than it could be to them who lived at a Distance.

2. THEY perceived that there was a Design to discountenance the Congregational
Churches up and down the Nation.

THEY Thought the Instances of Sandwich and Marlborough amounted to a
Presumptive Evidence of this.

AT Sandwich one Mr. Benson entered into a strict Engagement with the Church,
there to Act as their Pastor consistently with the Principles and Practices of
a Congregational Church, but he did afterward violate his solemn Engagement,
set up another Meeting, and fell in with a Party whose Latitude in Practice was
Offensive to the Church. When this was brought before the Ministers of the
Union, the Church was discouraged, and Mr. Benson instead of receiving a
Reproof, had a Principal Person of the Union some little Time after to move at
the Fund, that he might have from it some allowance toward his Maintenance,
although he went on to uphold his Separate Meeting from the Church.

At Marlborough Mr. Pemberton having parted from the Church, and set up a
distinct Meeting, upon his Decease, Mr. Goffe was called from his Work of
Preaching to a Numerous Auditory to keep up this Schism, and upon his own
Representation of things it was strenuously pressed in the Union by Mr.
Williams, That Mr. Goffe might be Justified in what he had done, without any
Consideration to what the Church could say. There was a likelihood that a Vote
would have passed for the clearing of him, if Mr. Chancey had not Interposed,
and desired to have his Protest against it Entered, if they acquitted Mr. Goffe
from all Blame without First Hearing the Church.

It was for such, and other Carriages of the Leading Men of the Presbyterian
Party in the Union, that the Congregational Brethren were troubled, yet bearing
with Patience what they could not redress, they kept their Station, and albeit
they had some Meetings among themselves in Reference to things belonging to
Congregational Churches, which were not proper and advisable to be debated in
Conjunction with the Presbyterian Ministers, yet they did not in the least
judge themselves hereby to be guilty of making any Infractions upon the Union,
because the Congregational Brethren do to this Day aver, That they never
consented to the Preface that is set before the Heads of the Agreement, as any
part of the Articles of the Union. This being so, it is to be wondered how the
Meeting of the Ministers at Little St. Helens could be so forward to say, That
by the first thing in the Agreement, they thought all opposite Meetings had
been prevented; when that which relates to such Meetings as they will call
Opposite, was never a part of the Agreement. The Answer to the Report by the
Committee of the United Ministers, Page 2. when there is such a Trip in the
very Threshold, What Impartiality can be expected in their following History?

The Congregational Brethren were offended at several Managements in the Union,
but never Deserted it till that happened which forced them at last to leave it.
It was this: Mr. Daniel Williams Published a Book against Doctor Crisp's
Opinions, and with the Confutation of the Doctor's Opinions, he did interweave
several Notions of his own, which have been reckoned contrary to the Received
and Approved Doctrine of the Reformed Churches. To speak the least of the Book,
it goes as far from the Doctrine of the First and Best Reformers, as the New
Method, or the Amyraldian Scheme does, if it does not take some steps farther.
The Book is written with little Learning, but great Artifice, and as if the
Author studied by his Obscurity, to hide some things that will not as yet go
well down, and it may be thought he was not without his Vmbrae Assistentes in
the Composing of it, because the Style of it is more Polished, and there is a
better Grammatical Connection in it, than is to be seen in his following
Writings.

THIS Book could not but give Offense to them who were Zealous for Ancient
Truths against new and old Errors; yet it would have been passed by, as many
other Exceptionable Prints are, if it had not been for the Attestation given to
it by several Presbyterian Ministers of the Greatest Figure, wherein they
express themselves so far in favor of the Book, that none who take their Words
in the full Sense and Meaning of them, can think but that they give it the
highest Approbation. There were Sixteen concerned in the First Testimonial, and
although the Presbyterian Brethren could not but be sensible that this gave
great Offense, and was like to produce a woeful Rupture, yet in the Re-Printing
of the Book the List of Names was increased from Sixteen to Forty Nine of the
Union, which was by far the Majority of the Presbyterian Party, that were in
it. It occasioned much grief of Heart to the Congregational Brethren, to see
the far greater part of the Union to set themselves to Midwife into the World,
by the Authority of their Names, such palpable Deviations from the Truth as
were in Mr. Williams's Treatise. It was not for Doctor Crisp's Opinions that
they were concerned, as the unthinking Vulgar are made to Believe, by the
Invidious and Uncharitable Reports of some, who stick not to say any thing when
it will serve their Interest: but that which raised Displeasure in them, was,
because the great Truths of the Gospel taught by the First Reformers, were
craftily Undermined by one Man, who had the chief of the Presbyterian Party, to
step in as his Seconds, to Abett and Support him in his Quarrel.

THE Congregational Brethren laying this to Heart, and remembering how they were
bound as Ministers to Defend the Truth, did resolve to bear Witness against the
Errors of Mr. Williams. There were Six of them that joined in a Paper of
Exceptions against Mr. Williams's Book, whose Names have been more than once
seen in Print, and the rest of the Congregational Brethren were so far
concurring with them in what they did, that they thought something was
necessary to be done to stop the Torrent of Error that was then running down.
This Paper of Exceptions was carried to the Meeting of the United Ministers,
October. 17. 1692. by Mr. Chancey, after he had given the Reasons why he looked
upon the Union to be broken, and Perverted from its right End, and therefore
would be no longer a Member of it; He delivered in the aforesaid Paper, and
took his Final Leave of them.

IT is here needful to Correct the Error which is in the Narrative emitted, as
that which was Approved by the Meeting of the Presbyterian Ministers at Little
St. Helens. Mr. Chancey (say they) in a Meeting of the United Ministers, after
many warm Expressions, declared, He would leave their Meetings, and break off
from their Union, the Cause he alleged was our taking no notice of a Paper of
Objections against Mr. Williams 's Book. The Answer to the Report by the
Committee of the United Ministers, Page 3. This is so far from being true, that
it is impossible it should be so, because Mr. Chancey could not complain that
no Cognizance was taken of the Paper of Objections before it was delivered, and
this was the very time when he did deliver it, and not till he had first given
the Reasons of his withdrawing from them, and since that time he was never with
them. When there are so many Discerning Heads in the Meeting of Presbyterian
Ministers, as one of themselves gives out, it is a pity they have not more Love
to Truth, than to a Party or Faction; for if they had, they would not be so
ready as they are to Palliate the Imposthumated Sores of one of their Members.

AFTER this Mistake in their Narrative, they say, There were many Reasons why
they should take small Notice of the Objections of the aforesaid Paper.

1. THREE of the Six Objectors were not of the Union: This is also noted as a
strange thing by the Author of the Rebuke to the False Report, Page 18. and he
gives the Reason why it was so to him, Because one Moiety of them were never of
the Union. To this it may be Answered. The Three Brethren who never were of the
Union, although they joined with the other Three who had Reason to Complain of
the Breach of it, yet bore no share in this Particular relating to the Breach
of the Union, but thought they might very well make their Application to the
Ministers of the Union, not only because many of them were approved for their
known Orthodoxy, but because some of them, as Mr. V. Alsop, and others, who
were Subscribers to Mr. Williams's Book, had written in Defense of some of the
very Truths that Mr. Williams Opposed. They could not but in Justice expect
from such, that they would either stand by the Truths that they themselves had
publicly Asserted, and not be Self-contradicting Vouchers to Mr. Williams's
unsound Opinions, or else disown what they formerly held. When the Famous
Rebuker weighs this, without the heat of a Transporting Passion, it may abate
his Admiration, and may move him to give a better Answer to it than once he
did, when he said upon his being urged with it, That it was not fit to tell a
Man of a Book he had written several Years ago. This was Surprising when it was
heard, because if what he has Written be False, he ought to Retract it; but if
it be True, it is not the worse for its Age.

2. IT is said, The Material Objections were ungrounded. To this it is
Answered. If they be indeed so, then it would have been easy for the Reverend
Ministers of the Union to have Proved this against the Objectors for the
Confounding of them, and therefore they should, for the Credit of Mr. Williams,
have entered into a Debate with the Objectors, which they never did.

IF it be said, This was left to them who were Appointed to consider the
Objections. It is Answered, None of them did ever say the Objections were
ungrounded. The Five Subscribers to the Book, who were of the Number to whom
the Work was committed, did always either refuse to give their Sense of the
Book, or pleaded that they never read it. One of the Five, who is deservedly
esteemed Equal (if not Superior) to any of them for the Strength of his
Intellectuals, said he never had, and he did not know that ever he should read
it. How then could they discern whether they were Grounded or Ungrounded? The
Meeting of the Ministers at Little St. Helens must not imagine their bare
saying a thing is so, will make it to be as they would have it. It will be no
difficult Task, when it shall be thought fit, to prove against them, That the
Objections are not without ground.

3. IT is said, The Objectors recited, as Mr. Williams 's Words in his Book,
what the Meeting of the Ministers in Little St. Helens found quite contrary to
the Letter of his Expressions. This is a heavy Charge, and when it comes to be
sifted, it will then be seen, whether the Ministers have done right to their
own Understandings, and have avoided the blame of Partiality, in being Mr.
Williams's Echo, in renewing the Accusation against the Objectors.

IN a Prescript to a Book, Entitled, Man made Righteous by Christ's Obedience,
Mr. Williams has the following Words, In a Paper Signed by Geo. Griffith, Tho.
Cole, Nath. Mather, Isaac Chancey, Robert Trail, and Rich. Tailor, and since
Printed, they Charge me. He Teaches, That the Righteousness of Christ is
Imputed only as to the Effects, with a Purchase of a Conditional Grant, viz.
this Proposition, He that believes shall be Saved. Gospel Truth Stated and
Vindicated, Page 39. My Words there (says Mr. Williams) are these. The
difference is not whether Christ, by his Righteousness, Merited for all the
Elect, that they should in his Time and Way, be certainly Partakers of its
Saving Effects, and did not only Purchase a Conditional Grant of those Effects,
viz. that Proposition, He that Believes shall be Saved; nor whether besides
these Effects being made ours, the very Righteousness of Christ is Imputed to
True Believers, as what was always undertaken and designed for their Salvation,
and is now effectual to their actual Pardon, and Acceptance to Life; yea, is
Pleadable by them, as their Security, and is as useful to their Happiness, as
if themselves had done and suffered what Christ did, all these I affirm, Page
39, 40. Can any thing (says Mr. Williams) be more contrary? They say I Assirm
what I expressly Deny, and that I Deny what I expressly Affirm. In Answer to all
this it may be said, If this could be Proved upon the Objectors, they would be
Men as void of Sense as of Honesty; but if Mr. Williams's own Words be narrowly
Scanned, it will appear, That the Objectors have not wronged him.

1. HE says, they charge him with Affirming what he expressly Denies, viz. That
Christ has purchased a conditional Grant, He that believes shall be saved;
this is that which Mr. Williams says he Denies. If he would read over his own
words, he may then judge whether he does not affirm what he says he denies; if
he will not do it himself, it is hoped the Unbyas'd Reader will do it for him.
Does he not say, Christ did not only Purchase a Conditional Grant of those
Effects? as this implies that he purchased more, yet it is a plain affirmation
that he purchased a conditional Grant. This is that which the Objectors said he
affirmed, and that he did err in it, because Christ purchased absolutely, and
not conditionally; he purchased Persons and Things, and not Propositions.

2. HE says they charge him with denying what he expressly affirms, because they
say, he Teaches, That the Righteousness of Christ is Imputed only as to the
Effects. The Objectors did not say, that he never mentioned the imputation of
Christ's Righteousness; but that he held, and Taught the Imputation of it only
in the effects of it. If two things be done, the supposed Falsehood of this
Charge will vanish, and it will stand good against Mr. Williams.

1. IF it be considered, what the imputation of Christ's Righteousness is, Quoad
Formam, as it is generally received by Protestants.

2. IF Mr. Williams's words be examined.

1. IF it be considered, what the imputation of Christ's Righteousness is Quoad
Formam, as it is generally received by Protestants. The imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, Quoad Formam, in a Protestant sense is this, That which Christ
did and suffered as the Mediator and Surety of the Covenant in obedience to the
Law, in the stead and place of the Elect, is imputed to them for their
justification before God. Christ's active and passive Obedience, is the material
cause of the justification of Believers, and the imputation of it to them is
the imediate formal cause of their being justified before God. This is that
which is universally received by all sound Protestants, and the dissent of
Piscator, and a few more about the active Obedience of Christ, does not hinder
it from being the common Faith of Protestants. It is the imputation of Christ's
Righteousness it self, that all such plead for, who have not warped from the
Protestand Faith. This is that which Limberg says is the Opinion of the
Calvinists, and he charges them with Absurdity, for Teaching, That Believers
are Clothed with the Righteousness of Christ, even as Jacob was Clothed with
the Garments of his Elder Brother. Limberg Lib. 6. Cap. 4.

2. IF Mr. Williams's words be examined, as they are laid down in the forecited
place, it will be found that he does not assert the imputation of Christ's
Righteousness in a Protestant sense, but only in the effects of it. Although,
he says, the very Righteousness of Christ is imputed to Believers, yet when he
comes in the following words to explain and show how it is imputed to them, he
contradicts what he had said, and makes the imputation of it to lie only in the
Effects of it, and carrys it no higher.

1. IT is imputed (says he) to Believers as what was always undertaken and
designed for their Salvation. Will any say this is more than the imputation of
Christ's Righteousness in the effects of it, or as it is for the good of
Believers, as all his Undertakings were?

2. IT is (he says) effectual for their actual pardon and acceptance unto life.
How is any thing effectual, but in it is produced effects?

3. He says, It is pleadable for their security, and useful for their
Happiness. What is this still to Imputation? Security and Happiness are the
greatest Blessings, but they are no more than the effects of Christ's
Righteousness, as it is imputed to Believers and received by Faith.

Mr. Williams, either understands not what Imputation is, or he seeks to
overthrow it in a Protestant sense. The Objectors fairly gathered up the
natural sense of his words, but were not bound to reconcile his
Inconsistencies, and Contradictions. There are other places in his Writings,
where he speaks out his Opinion more freely about the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness only quoad Effecta, but it would not agree with the Design of a
History to stand upon the Examination of them.

AFTER all the Invitations given Mr. Williams to speak out, by Mr. Humphrey,
(whose great Integrity draws a Veneration to his Person, from them who differ
from him in Judgment) and after all, that Mr. Chancey and Mr. Lobb have said to
prove, That he does not hold any Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, but only
in the Effects of it; If he will still hide himself in the Thickets of Cloudy
Doubtful Expressions, that he may beguile the Common People in seeming to
Affirm what he Denies, and if he be strengthened in this Delusive Method, by
the Meeting of the Ministers at Little St. Helens, then there is reason to
despair of the end of Controversies.

WHEN the Six Ministers (who have been Named) had complained to the Meeting of
the United Ministers of Mr. Williams's Book, and of some Errors in it, it was
thought fit by the aforesaid Meeting of the Ministers, to desire that some who
had never Subscribed the Book, (together with Five of the Noted Subscribers to
it) might meet with Five of them who had Objected against the Book, (Mr.
Chancey being left out) to consider of some way to put a stop to the
Controversy that was now begun, and to give Satisfaction to the Complainers.
The Ministers who were of the Meeting, and who never Subscribed the Book were,
Matthew. Mead, Sam. Annesley, Edward Veale, John James, Stephen Lobb. Mr. Barker
was also appointed to be one, but seldom met with them. The Five Subscribers
were, Jo. How, Geo. Hammond, Vincent Alsop, Richard Mayo, and Sam. Slater. The
Non-Subscribers, and the other Ministers, did often meet together. The
Subscribers to the Book would never directly enter upon any Debate about it,
but did always (as has been said before) either deny that they had read the
Book, or refused to give any Judgment of it; yet not above One or Two of them
expressed any Concernment for the Book, but as then appeared, would readily
have disowned it, if they could have done it without Impairing their own
Reputation.

MANY Meetings were held to little or no purpose, than to Demonstrate how
difficult a Work Retractation is, and how little Men will do, either for Truth
or Peace, when their own Interest must be denied.

WHEN there was reason to fear that all the Meetings would have had no good
Issue, and when the Subscribers and Objectors were like to have parted, with
their Spirits more Exasperated than before, there was a Proposal made, which
promised a Calm after a rough Storm of Contention. The Proposal was this, That
a set Number of Articles should be gathered out of the Assembly's Confession of
Faith, and the Larger and Lesser Catechisms, which might be a good Fence
against the Extremes of Arminianism on the one hand, and Antinomianism on the
other; and there should be a Preface to the said Articles, wherein the
Subscribers to Mr. Williams 's Book were to declare, That they only gave their
Hands to the State of Truths and Errors in the said Book, but not to the
Preface, Explications, or Proofs of the Book.

THIS was as soft and gentle as could be, because by this the Subscribers only
declared how far they approved Mr. Williams's Book. The Articles were pitched
upon, and the Preface was drawn up, and not only Agreed to, but Signed by all
that were then present. Some of the Subscribers to Mr. Williams's Book may
remember what Satisfaction they declared in this Agreement. There was such
Rejoicing in it, that in all haste Mr. Williams and Mr. Chancey were sent for,
that they might be included in this happy Treaty of Peace. Mr. Williams could
not be found, but Mr. Chancey immediately came: When he was pressed to
Subscribe, he modestly Hesitated for a while, not because he scrupled the
Articles, but because he suspected some After-clap about the Preface; at last
he consented to what was urged upon him. This Agreement filled the Brethren
with Joy, and before they parted, they appointed another Day, which was the
26th. of December, 1694. to meet together again, with the Persons Absent, and
Mr. Williams; That what had been Agreed to, might be Consirmed by all. When the
Day was come, and the Brethren were met together, and also Mr. Williams, (who
never was at the Meeting before) they that pleased themselves with the
Expectation that the aforesaid Agreement would have met with a Renewed, and a
Cheerful Approbation, were Astonished when they heard one of the Chief
Subscribers to Mr. Williams's Book say, That the Preface to the Agreement
(although he had given his Hand to it at the Meeting before) was no more than a
foul Paper, to be farther considered of, and therefore he did earnestly, and
with great Heat press, That it might be Altered in that part of it wherein it
was declared how far the Subscribers to Mr. Williams 's Book approved of it.

WHEN this was heard, it Imbroiled all with new Disputes, and made such (as had
no other Ends than Truth, and Peace) Repent that ever they had spent so much
time in Meetings that were like only to afford new Fuel for the Fire of
Contention.

THIS open Recession from what had been unanimously agreed to, was so provoking
and gave such Cause to the Congregational Brethren to suspect unfair Dealing,
that they were tempted to think themselves no longer obliged to Treat with Men
who would agree to a thing at one Meeting and disown it the next. When all were
ready to depart without doing any thing, it was moved that the Gentleman who
had blown up this new Flame, together with Mr. Cole and Mr. Mather, might go
apart by themselves, to try what might be done to take occasion from any to
say, that the Ministers were not yet weary of Wrangling. In a little Time, the
Gentleman who had showed his overgreat Tenderness to Mr. Williams, returned
like the Philosopher who leaped out of a Bath in a Transport, and when the
Reason of his elevated Joy was understood, it was because he had got Mr. Cole
and Mr. Mather to Consent to have something added to the Preface to the
Agreement, in Favor of Mr. Williams. In the Preface that had been agreed to
before, it was declared, That the Subscribers to Mr. Williams 's Book had not
by their Subscription delivered their Sense of the Preface, Explications, or
Proofs of the Book, but now it was added, That this Declaration was not to be
esteemed as a disapproval of the said Preface, Explications, or Proofs of the
Book. This Addition was designedly inserted, that the Authority of the Book
might not seem to be weakened.

WHEN this additional Alteration was brought in and read, it troubled not only
the Objectors against Mr. Williams's Book, but also others who perceived the
Factious and Partial Drift of it, and it was consented to by them not without
great Reluctance. It may be thought strange that Mr. Cole and Mr. Mather, (who
were Persons of piercing Judgments) would ever give way to this Addition, but
the Reason why they did it was this, they had been blackned by Mr. Williams's
Friends as utter Enemies to Peace, and therefore to remove this Scandal, and to
Confute their Slanderers, they did here stretch their Charity beyond their
Judgments.

IT was the same Reason that prevailed with others to yield, and they did also
Hope that what was now done might have been a Medium for Pacification and
Forbearance among Brethren. This was what they expected, but the Ministers at
Little St. Helens did soon Convince them that their Hope was in vain, for when
the Agreement was laid before them December 19. 1694. They gave a gentle stroke
to Mr. Williams for his Service, but clapped a Tacile Condemnation on Mr.
Chauncey, by a Clause which they added to it; wherein they declared, That as
the united Ministers collectively considered, and as such, had not been desired
to approve of Mr. Williams 's Book, so in like Manner, they did not, by any
Thing in this Agreement, imply an Approbation of Mr. Chauncey's Writings. This
was the Reward that Mr. Chauncey had for his sudden Subscription to an
Agreement and Compliance for Peace sake, when it was altered from what it was
when he first subscribed it.

When he was ready to pass by all, the Ministers at Little St. Helens were
resolved to let him feel the Effects of their deep Resentment, because he had
ruffled one of their useful Members.

When the Congregational Brethren, (and especially such of them as had Objected
against Mr. Williams's Book) saw what was done, they could not but Judge the
Ministers at Tittle St. Helens to be Breakers of the Agreement as soon as it
was made, and they now plainly Perceived what they before Suspected, That it
was the firm purpose of the Governing Party of the United Ministers, to Uphold
and Justify Mr. Williams in his Errors. It could give no Satisfaction to any
who were not of Mr. Williams's Party, to hear the Ministers at Little St.
Helens declare, That they had not been desired, as the United Ministers
Collectively considered, to Subscribe Mr. William 's Book, when Forty Nine of
them had done it, and would not Recede from what they had done. If they would
uphold Errors in their Personal Capacities, it signified little what they did
in their Collective Capacity, as they were the United Ministers. It were easy
to expose the Weakness, as well as the Insincerity of this Distinction, in the
Case wherein it is applied, if Regard to the Common Interest of Christianity
did not forbid.

The Objectors were now Convinced, That they had Complained of Mr. Williams's
Errors, to Men who would give them no Reason to think they were Impartial, and
from this time Congregational Brethren grew weary of the Meeting of the
Ministers at Little St. Helens, and did in a manner wholly withdraw from it.

THE Rebuker had no Reason to think (as he jeeringly and floutingly says) That
the Two Sticks were now once more made One. Faith. Rebuke, Page 20. When the
Offense was increased, and not removed, he could not expect that the offended
Persons could be satisfied, unless he thought that the Congregational Ministers
had Exchanged their Faithfulness to God for a hateful Stoicism, so as to be
altogether insensible of the Design of them that were Undermining the Truth. He
Censures them as Men of Intrigue, who were employing their Spies to bring them
Intelligence, when the poor Innocent Presbyterians (as he calls them) were
seriously consulting the Honor of their Lord, and were Promoting the Interest
of Religion, without respect to Party or Faction.

THE Congregational Ministers would not only be illnatur'd Men, but a sort of
Perfidious Villains, if what he says here, and elsewhere, of them were True;
but as they themselves know the Falsehood of his Charge, so they doubt not but
all others, who are not willing to be deceived, will refuse to follow the Ignis
Fatuus of this Mercurial Author, who is so pleased with the Air of a Romance,
that he has no regard (as a Faithful Historian ought to have) to the Standard
of Truth. When he speaks of the Independants, his Pen is dipped in the Poison
of Asps: But when he mentions his own Party, he is so Transported with his own
likeness, that his Charity, (like a Monk's Cowl) covers all Faults. Whatever
Recreation the Sallies of his Smutty and Profane Wit, may Administer to Men of
Froth and Levity, yet they who are not taken with empty Sounds, must pity his
Weakness and Folly, that he should in his Old Age be so fond of the Work of a
Fulsom, Fleering Satyrist, or a Merry Andrew, when his Thoughts should be
Employed in preparing for the great Audit-Day, and not in providing a
Common-Sewer, in which the Enemies of all Religion, and the very Drunkards upon
an Ale-Bench, may find Dirt enough to throw upon the Professors of the Gospel,
when both he, and they whom he Abuses, are gone out of the World.

WHEN the Ministers at Little St. Hellens by the Clause which they added to the
Agreement in 1692. had discovered how ready they were to improve all Occasions
to the Advantage, and Countenance of a Party, Distances and Dissatisfactions
were not only continued, but increased between the Congregational and
Presbyterian Brethren, and in the Year, 1694. there did something fall out in
Reference to the Pinners-Hall Lecture, which more manifestly than ever showed
the stiff addictedness of some of the Presbyterian Persuasion to Mr. Williams's
Opinions, and Interest. In the Life Time of the Reverend Mr. Baxter, Mr.
Williams Preaching occasionally at Pinners-Hall, did there give such a Taste of
his Spirit, as made some fear that he was not a Son of Peace, but ambitious of
being reputed the Head of a Party. It was for this, and other Things, that his
Election upon Mr. Baxter's Death to be one of the Lecturers did not pass
without a struggle. When he was Settled as one of the Lecturers, he had a great
Influence, in length of Time, to make the Pulpit, in that Noted Lecture, the
Stage of Controversies, by Provoking the Reverend Mr. Cole openly to Confront
his unsound Opinions. This made such uneasy, who were not willing to hear one
Minister inveighing against another, when they came to Hear that which might be
Food for their Souls.

The Reverend Mr. Cole, who could not forbear to give a Vigorous Opposition to
Mr. Williams, because he was persuaded that he had Truth on his side, yet being
sensible what a Disadvantage and Reproach it was to the Dissenters, to have
that Ancient Lecture made the Place of Contention, desired that he might be
Dismissed from the Lecture for Peace sake. Several Gentlemen who were concerned
in upholding the Lecture, thought it might be Prudential to accept of Mr.
Cole's Request, and to desire of Mr. Williams, that he would likewise
Relinquish the Lecture, that other Two Lecturers might be chosen in their Room.
When their Desire was made known to Mr. Williams, the Answer which they
received from him was to this Effect: That when he was sensible that the
Majority of the Subscribers desired his Dismission from that Lecture, he would
consider what to do. This gave Occasion for having a General Meeting of the
Subscribers, wherein it was carried by the Majority of Votes, That Mr. Williams
should be Requested for the Good and Peace of the Lecture at Pinners-Hall, to
Desist from the Exercise of his Ministry in that place.

THIS was the Vote of the Major Part of the Meeting, but the Gentleman who
Presided, would not declare it, because of the Passionate Respect he bore to
Mr. Williams; and so the Meeting ended abruptly.

THIS General Meeting having had no Peaceable Issue, some Friends of Mr. Cole
and Mr. Williams, with other Persons who Professed Indifferency, and Interposed
only for the Healing of the Breach, met together, and after several Conferences
and Debates, came to this Agreement, That Mr. Cole 's offer to Decline the
Lecture should be accepted, and that Mr. Williams should also be desired to
leave it. This was agreed to by both sides, as that which was fit to be
Proposed in a General Meeting of the Subscribers, which was hereupon called:
but when the Subscribers were met, not one of Mr. Williams's Friends would
either own, or stand to what they themselves had agreed to before in the
Private Meeting; and when that which they had agreed to, was made known, by one
of Mr. Cole's Friends, they would not Consent to it, but insisted on nothing
less than Mr. Williams's Continuance in the Lecture. When they saw they could
not obtain this, they not only broke off from the Pinners-Hall Lecture, but set
up a Lecture at Salters-Hall the same Day, and the same Hour, with that at
Pinners-Hall, and made Choice of, for their Lecturers, the Reverend Doctor
Bates, Mr. How, Mr. Alsop, Mr. Williams, Doct. Annesley, and Mr. Mayo.

THE Gentlemen who supported the Pinners-Hall Lecture, Prevailed upon Mr. Cole,
and Mr. Mead, not only to Preach in their own Turns, but to supply the place of
them that were gone away; and that they might leave the Dividers and
Seperatists without excuse, as to this Rent, they staid from the 7th. of
November to the 15th. of February following, before they filled up their
Vacancies, to see whether length of time would bring any of the Dividers to a
more Peaceable and Uniting Temper: but they waited to no purpose, for the
Return of them, who showed themselves to be Men of more Stiffness than to
Re-call what they had done, when it was for the sake of a Party. This
inflexible Temper was the more to be blamed in some of the Deserting Lecturers,
because they had given Encouragement to the Subscribers to hope that they would
not leave the Pinners-Hall-Lecture: but they disappointed the Expectations of
them who thought they would not join with the Author and Promoter of a
Scandalous Schism. This showed, that as most of the Ministers at Little St.
Helens, had approved Mr. Williams's Book, so the Chief of them would not
forbear to stand by and encourage him in his Contentious Managements.

IT is said in the St. Helens Narrative, That Four of the Lecturers were
necessitated to leave Pinners-Hall. The Answer to the Report, etc. Page 9.

THERE is no Truth in this as to Doctor Bates, Mr. How, and Mr. Alsop, unless
the Composers of the Narrative mean, That Doctor Bates, Mr. How, and Mr. Alsop,
who were all Entreated and Courted, with great Importunity, to stay at
Pinners-Hall, thought that their Concurring with Mr. Williams, in the
Anti-Lecture, was so Momentous and Important, that it made their departure from
Pinners-Hall necessary.

IN January, 1694. A Paper of Articles was sent from the Ministers at Little
St. Hellens, to the Congregational Ministers, as a Test against Arminianism,
and Antimonianism. This Paper was never publicly Read in the Meeting of the
Congregational Ministers, and it was so far from being considered by them, that
upon enquiry it cannot be found that above Two or Three of them have any
remembrance of it, when it was sent. Both the Rebuker, and the Contrivers of
the St. Hellens Narrative make a great Noise about this Paper, and with great
confidence endeavor to fasten upon the Congregational Brethren the Charge of
Antinomianism, because they were Silent about it: but this Accusation is as
groundless, as it is uncharitable. It was not any affection to Antinomianism
that kept such of the Congreagational Brethren, as knew any thing of the Paper,
from considering it, but it was for other Reasons, that they could not press
their Brethren in general, to take any notice of it.

1. THEY did not think the Articles were Worded so fully, and so clearly as
they ought to be, but were either Couched or Defective in some things.

2. THEY did not reckon, that the Congregational Brethren were under any such
obligations, to Purge themselves from the Suspicions of Antinomianism, as most
of the St. Hellens Brethren (whose Names stood to Mr. Williams's Book) were
under, to clear themselves from Errors too near a Kin to Arminianism, because
the Congregational Brethren could not be Charged with Subscribing any
Antinomian Book.

3. THERE was no mention made in this Paper of any dislike of the Errors of Mr.
Williams, and therefore such of the Congregational Brethren as saw this Paper
of Articles, waved it as that which was no sit Expedient for Peace, when it
said nothing of the standing Offense. This is a true Account of the aforesaid
Paper, and when the Reader considers it, he will then see that the Rebuker, and
the Framers of the St. Helens Narrative, Blacken the Innocent to hide their own
Deformitys, and falsely Charge others with Antinomianism to cover their own
Retreat toward the Tents of the Arminians.

WHEN most of the Ministers at Little St. Helens had upon every new Trial given
pregnant Proofs of their liking to Mr. Williams's Errors, and when the chief of
them kept up their separate Lecture at Salters-Hall, all proposals for Peace
would have been laid aside, if the Industry of some had not surmounted the
Difficulties which lay in their way, and if they had not in the beginning of
the Year 1695. got a few Ministers to meet together to try if they could find
out any proper Means to heal the Breaches that were daily made wider. When they
had met together Twice, the old Request at a Third meeting was urged, That some
of the Noted Subscribers to Mr. Williams 's Book would withdraw their hands
from it. They were pressed to do this, as that which was necessary for them to
do, otherwise they would weaken the Authority of their own Writings. It was
then desired of Mr. Lobb, that for the Refreshing of their Memories, he would
draw out of their Writings some things that were Contradictory to Mr.
Williams's Assertions, which he did, and was drawn to Publish them before there
was another Meeting, because of the following occasion. Mr. Humphrey having got
a sight of Mr. Lob's Paper, did Print some part of it with his own Remarks, to
which Mr. Williams Answered. This made Mr. Lobb address himself in a Printed
Letter to the Reverend Dr. Bates, wherein he made it evident that the Reverend
Dr. was under a necessity either to withdraw his Subscription from Mr.
Williams's Book, or to disown what he himself had Written.

This and other weighty Reasons, brought some of the Chief of the Presbyterian
Brethren, after much time spent in Mature deliberation, to agree upon a
Pacificatory Paper, wherein they meddled only with the bare state of Truths and
Errors in Mr. Williams's Book, because they said they never set their Hands to
any more of the Book. The Paper which they sent to the Congregational Brethren
is as Follows.

WWHER AS Some unhappy Differences have arisen amongst us, principally about
the Doctrine of Justification, occasioned by a Book, Written by Mr. Williams,
Entitled, Gospel Truth Stated and Vindicated, to which some of our Names were
prefixed, and against which several Exceptions were made by Mr. Griffith, Mr.
Cole, Mr. Mather, Mr. Chauncy, Mr. Traile, and Mr. Richard Tailor, which if
continued, amongst the Ministers of Christ, may be much to the Dishonor of
God, and Danger to the Souls of Men.

'For the Composing whereof, as we formerly expressed our Approbation of the
Doctrinal Articles of the Church of England, or the Confession of Faith,
compiled by the Assembly at Westminster, or that at the Savoy, as agreeable to
the Word of God, unto that Approbation we still adhere: Declaring further, that
if any of us shall at any time hereafter be apprehended to have expressed
himself disagreeing thereunto; we will with Brotherly Candor and Kindness,
mutually endeavor, to give, and receive just Satisfaction herein; Bearing with
one another Infirmities, and different Sentiments about Logical, or
Philosophical Terms, or merely Humane Forms of Speech, in matters of lesser
Weight: Not thinking it reasonable or just, to Charge upon any Brother such
Consequences of any Expression, or Opinion of his, which he himself shall
Disown.

And We do further Declare, with respect to the special matters in Difference
amongst us; that, Although Regeneration, Repentance toward God, Faith in our Lord
Jesus Christ, and Holy Conversation are by Gods express Word manifestly
necessary to the Salvation of a Sinner; yet that none of these, or any work
done by Men, or wrought by the Spirit of God in them, is under the Nation of
Subordination, or under any Denomination whatsoever, any part of that
Righteousness for the sake, or on the account whereof God does Pardon,
Justify, or Accept Sinners, or Entitle them to Eternal Life; that being only
the Righteousness of Jesus Christ without them, Imputed unto them, and received
by Faith alone.

And whereas, in the above mentioned Book it is said, [There is no Change of
Persons betwixt Christ and Believers] (Page 37, 40, 41.) which the Learned H.
Grotius, and the Reverend Dr. Stillingfleet, now Bishop of Worcester, do not
only Assert, but Irrefragably Prove, in Concurrence with the Common sentiment
of Protestants; in as much as we conceive the Doctrine of Justification, and of
Christ's Satisfaction, on which it depends cannot be duly Explained and
Defended, consistently with the Denial of any Commutation of Persons between
Christ and Believers.

WE do therefore Declare our Disallowance of that Proposition in the general
Sense thereof, giving our Sense thus. That as it is Apparent, this cannot be a
Physical Change, by which Christ and Believers do in Substance become one
another: Nor again a Moral Change, whereby Christ should become inherently
sinful, and Believers become immediately thereby Innocent and Sinless: So, we
doubt not, there is a Commutation of Persons in a Legal Sense, Christ by
Consent, between the Father and Him, Putting on the Person, and coming into the
Room and Stead of Sinners; not to Repent, or Believe for them, which the Gospel
requires (tho He has undertaken the Elect shall in due time be enabled
thereunto) but to Answer for them the Obligation of the violated Law of Works,
being made Sin for them, tho he knew no Sin, that they might be made the
Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. And what is contrary hereunto, we
Judge Erroneous and False.

AND as there is a Change of Persons betwixt Christ and Believers, so the Guilt
of our Iniquities being laid upon Christ, the Father was displeased with him.
Not that He was ever moved to any Passion against Him, which in the General,
the Perfection of the Divine Nature admits not, on any account whatsoever; nor
that he was in any Sense offended with him, much less abhorred him, considered
as He was in himself, for so he was most perfectly sinless; but considered in
Relation to us, as our Surety, bearing our Sins in his own Body; so, if by
Displeasure, or Wrath, be only meant [a Dispassionate Will to Punish] the Lord
Christ did Feel, and Bear the Displeasure of God, and the weight of his Wrath,
in the Punishment of our Sins, transferred upon Him; for it pleased the Father
to bruise Him, having laid upon Him the Iniquities of us all. And we do further
Declare, That whosoever shall be found to express themselves in their Preaching
or Writings agreeably hereto, and the mentioned Articles, and Confessions, we
shall esteem them to deliver the Sincere Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. And it shall be remote from us to oppose, or reflect upon: But we shall
to our uttermost Encourage and give Countenance to one another Ministry herein.

If therefore Mr. Williams shall concur with us in what we have declared
touching the Doctrine of Justification, and in the Sense we have given of a
Change of Persons between Christ and Believers, and of Christ's Enduring the
Displeasure of the Father for our Sins; and shall give Satisfaction about any
thing else that any Brother excepts against in the rest of his Writings,
agreeably to the abovesaid Articles and Confessions, We shall so far acquiesce
therein, as not to make them the Matter of further Public Contest or
Altercation amongst our selves.

We whose Names are Prefixed to that Book do hereby declare, They were
generally given only to a short Abstract of Truth and Error, which we had seen,
(and now since is much enlarged) and not to the Book it self, which we had not
seen, and did not thereby intend to signisie our Approbation of every
Expression or Opinion therein contained, any farther than as they should be
found to agree with the Articles and Confessions beforementioned.

THIS Paper needs none to Praise it, but it will speak for it self, with them
who are neither Heterodox, nor Partial. It was Sent and Recommended to the
Congregational Brethren, by a Letter from Seven of the Presbyterian Brethren,
which is here Inserted for the Reader's Perusal.

Reverend Brethren,
WE have Long and Earnestly Desired and Endeavored the Renewing of that Union
among us, which was formerly Agreed unto upon the most weighty Reasons, as
being plainly Required by the Gospel Rule, to which we all Profess Subjection,
as conducing manifestly to the Glory of God, to the Reputation of Religion, our
Mutual Comfort, Helpfulness, and Success in our Ministry, and the Common
Edification of the Churches of Christ under our Care; and which we conceive
cannot be discontinued without much Sin and Prejudice in all these Respects.
We have Enquired into the Causes or Occasions of that Rupture of our Union,
which has been too Notorious, and which we had rather Lament and Heal, than
Represent, or aggravate the Sinfulness, and Pernicious Consequences of it. And
no other Reason has been alleged to us, than that our Names stand Prefixed to
a Book of our Brother Williams, Entitled, Gospel Truth Stated and Vindicated,
whence it was apprehended we differed from your selves, and other Brethren, in
some very Great and Momentous Doctrines and Points of Religion. We do
therefore offer to your Perusal the Enclosed Paper, that you may consider
whether the Publication thereof, with your declared Approbation, will not be
sufficient to clear this Matter to our Brethren through the Nation, as well as
our own Mutual Satisfaction, and to the Reunion of such as were United. And we
desire your Opinion, and Advice, what may be Requisite to render an Union
facil, and acceptable to our worthy Brethren, who have hitherto not United with
us, and your Concurrence with us in such things, as may render our Union for
the Future Entire, Useful, Permanent, and Practical, by Mutual, Alternate
Presence and Countenance of each other in the Use of all the Ordinances of
Worship in our several Churches and Congregations, and in the Endeavor that
Meetings of distinct Parties for the Maintaining of one Party against another,
or the Exercise of Jurisdiction over one another, and the very Distinguishing
Names of Parties may cease, and be Abolished. Moreover, we desire you to take
into your Serious Consideration, what may be Pre-requisite to our Appointing a
Day of Solemn Fasting and Humiliation for the United Pastors of Churches,
wherein we may, without Mutual Crimination of one another, each one Humble
Himself, to Lament our Late Divisions, and Implore a Blessing, and the Copious
Pouring down of the Spirit of God upon our selves, and upon the Churches
Committed to our Charge, and that this may be accelerated as much as is
possible, we crave your Sense upon these Things with all convenient Speed, and
recommending you to the Lord, remain your Affectionate and Respectful Brethren,

Will. Bates, Samuel Slater, John How, Vin. Alsop, Rich. Stretton, Daniel
Burgess, John Shower,

March 25. 1696.
This Letter was Directed, To the Reverend Mr. Geo. Griffith, Mr. Matthew. Meade,
Mr. Thomas Cole, Mr. Nathanael Mather, Mr. Isaac Chancey, Mr. John James; and
to such as they shall think fit to Communicate the Contents.

ALL the Congregational Brethren to whom the Paper was sent, approved of it,
except Mr. Cole, and Mr. Mather. The Reason why Mr. Cole and Mr. Mather
Concurred not in the Approbation of the Paper, was not because they were
dissatisfied with it, but because Mr. Cole desired, That before he set his Hand
to it, a Word might be added to the Declaration in the Paper about Mr.
Williams; and Mr. Mather refused to Sign it, because he said, The Presbyterian
Brethren would not stand to what they themselves had done.

WHEN all the Congregational Brethren had either Signed this Paper, or were
ready to Sign it, (except Mr. Cole, and Mr. Mather) and after they had a long
time expected to hear of its meeting with a General Approbation among the
Presbyterian Brethren, they received a Letter, and that which is called A Third
Paper, (being a Composition of the First, and of a Second Paper) from the
Meeting of the Ministers at Little St. Hellens. In this Third Paper the whole
Meeting of the Ministers take upon them to Acquit Mr. Williams from that,
wherewith he had been Taxed in the First Paper, which some of themselves had
Recommended and Approved. The Congregational Brethren made but a short Answer
to the Letter sent with this Third Paper, because they did not intend to be
concerned with it. They had either given, or were ready to give their Names to
the First Paper, which had been sent to them by some Principal Brethren of the
Presbyterian Persuasion, whom they thought were bound in Honor and Conscience
to Act Consistently with their own Engagements, and not to bring themselves
under the Censure of Inconstancy: But when the Congregational Brethren saw how
shamefully they who had been the Approvers and Recommenders of the First Paper,
either fell in with the Third Paper, or left the First Paper to be trampled
under Foot by Mr. Williams, and his Friends, They then laid aside all
Expectations of Success from the Paper-Accommodations of some Persons, who make
use of them only as Trials of Skill, to see how far they will please all sides,
but not how they will Secure the Truth.

BEFORE this unpleasant History be shut up, a few things may be observed, and
gathered together.

1. IT is too evident that the most stirring and leading Men of the Meeting at
Little St. Helens, are no hearty Friends to the Doctrine of the first
Reformers; otherwise they would never have stuck so close to Mr. Williams as
they have done, to the prejudice of Truth, and Peace. It would be to frame a
mean and low Idea of the great Wisdom and Learning of some of them once to
suppose that such a man as Mr. Williams could be so Valuable to them as he is,
if they did not think him a Person Qualified to make a bold Attempt for the
sake of some Darling Notions, and to engage in a Work wherein men of a greater
Reach are not willing to lead the way, or to be seen standing in the Forefront.

2. It may Astonish unbyas'd Persons when they hear how the Innovating Party of
the St. Helens Meeting, take such a freedom as they do, to Cry up Catholicism,
or Universal Love, when yet they give visible Proofs, that their Charity (as
much as that of any Sect whatever) is confined to the narrow Circumference of
their own Faction. When they speak against Parties, yet none more partial than
themselves. The Motes in another Man's Eye must be swelled up to Mountains, but
the Beams in their own Eyes must be shrivelled into Nullities. If their Charity
be not larger for the Future than now it is, they will not be able always to
Impose upon the world, but will discover themselves to be far from being Men of
a True Catholic Spirit.

3. THE Union which they Appland so much, has been from first to last improved
to gratify the Inclinations of a Party, and to serve private Designs, and the
Reader will be able to Judge by what has been said, who were the first Breakers
of it.

4. IT is so far from being true, as is said in the Preface to the answer to
the Report, That the Ministers at Little St. Helens sought to prevent the late
unseasonable Dissentions, by their utmost Compliances; That it must be said,
that they never yet yielded to any thing, but they had either some selfish
drift in it, or they went off from it, when it would not serve their own Turn.

5. THE Rebuker would do well to Reconcile himself to the Reverend Mr. Alsop.
The Rebuker demands Justice of the Independents, for doing that, which the
Reverend Mr. Alsop either had a hand in doing, or consented to the doing of it,
viz. The Framing the Declaration in the first Paper, where it is said, The
generality of Subseribers had given Names to a short Abstract of Truths, and
Errors which they had seen (and since is much enlarged) and not to the Book it
self, which they had not seen. Rebuke to a false Report. Page 62. The Reverend
Mr. Alsop was one of the seven who sent the first Paper, wherein is the
aforesaid Declaration, with a Letter full of Pathetick and Affectionate
Language to the Congregational Brethren, and yet the Rebuker would have Justice
done upon the Independents for it, to whom it was sent. If the Rebuker and Mr.
Alsop be not at Variance, here is a wide stride taken beyond Truth. When the
Rebuker awakes out of his Dream, and finds that the History of his Dear and
Beloved Daniel is so far from being Canonical that it has led him out of the
way, He will Recover himself, and will neither stumble upon Falsehoods for the
Sake of his new Friend, nor be so injurious to himself, as to bid Good Night to
John Calvin, after he has Traced his safe, and wary steps for many years.

6. IT may be given as seasonable Advice to both the Congregational and
Presbyterian Ministers, that they would press more after Union in Affection,
and that they would be more found in the Exercise of Mutual forbearance. The
Liberty which is now too often taken by some Ministers to Rail against their
Brethren behind their backs, and to bring them into Contempt in private
Conversation, may please a sort of Licencious Professors: But as it does great
mischief to the Power of Godliness, so it grates upon the Spirits of them who
are skilled in the Practical part of Religion. The more Grace Persons have, the
greater Tenderness they will have for others, and the farther they will go in
joining in Affection with such Christians with whom they cannot, in all things,
agree in Judgment. When the Nation has Peace with it is Enemies, it will be a
bad Symptom, if Men fearing God keep up a War among themselves. They must not
Deny the Doctrinal Differences, which they have among themselves, or represent
them to be only in words when they are Real, because this would be Hypocrisy,
and the way of Christ stands in no need of any Pious Frauds: but they ought
Cordially to Love and Pray for one another, and to walk together so far as they
are agreed. If they would sincerely apply themselves to a diligent search after
Truth, in the things wherein they differ, and if they would with a Spirit of
Meekness, and Sobriety weigh what can be said on both sides that their Debates
might be managed by way of a Friendly Collision; and not of a Fiery, Provoking
Contention; Then the Light of Truth would break forth, and Peace and Holiness
would be promoted.

FINIS.

