A SERMON Preached at the CATHEDRAL CHURCH OF St. CANICE KILKENNY, Feb. 27.
1669.

BY JOSEPH TEATE, Dean of St. CAN. KILKENNY.

DVBLIN, Printed by Benjamin Took, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent
Majesty, and are to be sold by Mary Crook, in Castle-street. 1670.

Imprimatur,

P. M. Archiepiscopo Dubliniensi a Sac. Domest.
July 19. 1670.
To the Right Honorable Lady, EMILIA, Countess of OSSORY.
MADAM,
THe Divine Law that constitutes Tribute the due of Princes, has consigned
Honor the due of Nobles: which by the Learned is distinguished into Civil,
which is a Descent from worthy Ancestors: Moral, whose Spring is Virtue: and
Christian, which consists in a New Birth, whereby we are Coheirs with Christ,
and the Offspring of God.

Madam, I judge my self as insufficient, as Envy can do impertinent, to think
by Elogies of your Merit, to add Luster to your Name; your Ladyship stands upon
such a Theater, that every Scene of your life is exposed to Public View, and
therefore if I should give flattering Titles, the Suffrage of men would soon
condemn me; but where God has made me a Debtor, it is but just to make Payment
in conscience to the highest Sanction, and Sense of my own Obligation of
Gratitude. How your Ladyship is enobled by Birth, I shall relate in the words
of the Learned Vossius, who in his Book of the three Creeds, Dedicated to
William Prince of Aurange, tells us, that his Descent was from Adolphus of
Nassaw Caesar in the twelfth Century, so that Madam, by your Blood, and Allies,
you are a Branch circling from an Imperial Stem of Majesty.

But Madam, the Nobility of your Descent, only enrolls your Name in the
Catalogue of the Great, is Secular and Transitory, Calculated for this World;
but it is your Grace and Virtue that writes it in the Book of Life, and Embalms
it to Immortality; the Wreaths of civil Honor are withering, Grandeur is
fugitive, but Godliness is a Crown that fades not away: which consists in a
great Humility, constant Devotion, and a diffusive Charity, which were the
Amabilities of your Ladyships Conversation among us; so that you have left
behind you a Good Name, and carried with you a good Conscience.

To digest just praises, is a tender, and discreet Virtue, that therefore you
may give the Glory to God, I shall turn a Panegyric into a Prayer, That your
Soul may be precious in the sight of God, as the Apple of his Eye, the Signet
on his Right hand, and be made up among his Jewels, That the Losses of your
greatest temporal Blessings may be borne with Patience, and what God has
spared, may be enjoyed with Moderation; that your mind may be equal, and fixed
in the great Accidents, and Vicissitudes of humane Life, that the Kingdom of
Ireland may prove to your Ladyship a Fortunate Island, by becoming what it once
was called, an Island of Saints.

This Sermon had been sooner made public, but that it was retarded by a
tedious sickness; when it was preached, it was consecrated to God, and now its
printed, its dedicated to your Ladyship, by the obedience of,

Madam, Your Ladyships most humble Servant JOSEPH TEATE.

2 TIMOTHY 3.5. Having a form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof.


SAint Paul who was not a whit behind the chiefest Apostles in Languages,
Labors, Gifts of healing, Visions, Ecstasies, and Prophetic Inspirations,
foretells us, what monstrous impieties the Womb of time should travel with
under the dispensation of the Gospel; He foresaw the wickedness of men flying
on, as fast as the wings of time could carry it: That as the Dew of Heaven, and
Showers of Divine blessings should descend in plenty and abundance, so the
Inundation of iniquity should rise higher to deluge and overflow the world,
that times should be as perilous, as sins were exceeding sinful: Therefore as
a good Soldier of Jesus Christ, not ignorant of the devices and stratagems of
his spiritual enemies, he presents us with a List of their Legions; such a
Catalogue of Vices that may exercise our patience to recite, as well as resist
them: where self love leads the Van, and Hypocrisy in Religion brings up the
Rear; And prefixeth this Asterisk (...) do thou turn Gnostick in this, Son
Timothy, and know that the last days shall be evil, for men shall be Traitors,
Truce Breakers, Heady, High-minded, Lovers of pleasures, more then Lovers of
God, having a form, but denying the power of Godliness. The Ages subsequent to
the Apostle have given a completion to his Prophecy, that no Fraud is so
insinuating as that which is pious, no Error so infectious as that which is
formal, when the Devil tells Lies in Hypocrisy from under the Mantle of a
Prophet, they are credited as the Oracles of God, and men think they entertain
Celestial Immissions, when he suggesteth things that seem to savor of piety as
an Angel of light. Valentinus preached zealously, Arius repented publicly,
Pelagius lived piously; yet they were a Triumvirate of the most pernicious
Heretics that ever troubled the Church, when a man of Parts, and Eloquence,
who designs Schism in the Church, and sedition in the State comes up into the
Pulpit with a glorious Profession, magnifies his industry in the conversion of
Souls, and seems himself to be in an Agony, when he talks of our Savior; his
mortified countenance enlivens his Projects, his Person is had in admiration,
his Discourses received with credulity, as the Babilonians entertained Zopyrus,
who by showing them his mangled members made himself Master of their
Affections, and soon after Darius Lord of their City.

So sad is the Truth, that as the most poisonous pills may be gilded, so the
vilest impieties may be garnished with a show of Religion: as may appear from
those the Apostle mentions verse 2. Covetous, Boasters, Proud, Blasphemers etc.
A man may be Covetous in his charity, Judas may ask why the Ointment was not
sold and given to the poor, not that he cared for the poor, but because he was
a Thief, a man may be a Boaster in his self-denial, with the Philosopher write
a Treatise against Vainglory, and subscribe to it with his own Name; Proud in
his humility, like Diotrophes preach the Gospel and affect Pre-eminence, or
Diogenes revile the Grandeur of Princes with greater insolence, a Blasphemer in
his prayers crying as the Pharisee, God, I thank thee, that I am not as other
men are, and for all that be worse, and take his name in vain: There has not
been an irreverend Person in the Assembly, a disloyal Person to Authority, a
schismatical Seperatist from the Church: no, not the Murder of Gods Prophets,
and Gods Anointed, nor any sacrilegious Alienation of their Estates, and
Maintenance, nor the Blasphemies of Quakers, Ranters, and Familists, but have
been ushered in with the hideous outcries of Repentance and Reformation: there
is not a sinner in the Catalogue, but may have the form of Godliness, and deny
the power thereof.

The terms of the proposition to be explained are four: Godliness, the Form of
Godliness, the Power, the Denying the power under the Form of it.

Godliness, if we consult the Etymon, the Hellenists will tell us, is derived
from a verb that signifies to worship, and imports that solemn Reverence a
Creature owes his Maker, and that in the days of Moses he was called a Godly
person, that was a Proselyte of the Gate, acknowledged and adored a Deity,
observed the seven precepts of the sons of Noah, with Cornelius, and the
Ethiopian Eunuch. But the Essence of it consists in the Latitude of Holiness,
the Rectitude and Conformity of the heart, and life to the first and second
Tables of the Law; Godliness is profitable to all things, that is obedience to
that Law that is holy in its Precept, just in its Penalties, and good in its
Rewards. Yet in other places of these Epistles to Timothy, it is to be
understood in a more limited sense, sometimes for the Systeme of fundamental
truths, called the Doctrine according to Godliness, the Symbol of which the
Apostle gives us, when he says, Great is the mystery of Godliness. God
manifested in the Flesh, etc. Sometimes for the Duties of Religion, distinct
from the Moralities of honest men, so we are exhorted to live peaceable, and
quiet lives in Godliness, and honesty, but here being opposed to a Form, an
External Pomp and Pageantry, it is the inward Purity and Devotion of the heart,
whereby God is worshipped in Spirit without Carnality, and in Truth without
Hypocrisy.

The form of Godliness, is its Scheme; and external Similitude, a Fashion, and
resemblance, or appearance of that which is not real and intrinsical. As
Jupiter among the Poets was metamorphosed into the shape of a Beast, though he
pretended to be a Deity; so these men would pretend to be Deities, when they
are but Beasts, the word beings (...) not (...) the Essential Form cannot be
here intended, which is so far from the denial of Godliness, that it gives it
Difference and Operation, as the Reasonable Soul is the form of a man, whereby
he discourses, and is distinguished from all other Ranks of Beings, so the
Image of God is the Form of Godliness that gives it Power, and Distinction from
all things that are not homogenial to it. But that form which consists in a
Cumulation of accidents, and is the more Vain and and void, as the Text is
excellent, on which it is a Gloss, and Paraphrase: so Esau who was under the
Curse of the Creation to bring forth Briars, and Thorns, being an hairy and
rough man, in the form and apparel of Jacob, seemed a Paradise, and smelled
like a Field which the Lord had blessed: so a common person in a Comedy may
represent the Majesty of a Monarch. But then these Forms are like the Idea's of
Plato, wholly abstracted from matter, and destitute of the power of Godliness.

This power of Godliness is, when the Habits of Grace send forth the vigorous
and vital Actings of holiness, as the Fountain does Streams, and the Sun Rays
and Emanations of light, as will appear in the sequel of this discourse.

Men deny the power under the form of Godliness when they seem to be Pious,
because they are Politic, and profess themselves Christians because Subjects
to a King that is the Defender of the Faith; yet think, that the exquisite
Holiness of the Law, is but the Severity of Melancholic Men, who have
represented Christ to be an hard Master, and therefore although they invocate
his Name are disloyal to his Commands, profess they know God, but in works Deny
him; ingeminate an oral Loyalty, crying Lord, Lord, but do not his will: and so
think to palliat the Atheism of their lives by the Religion of their Language:
Thus the Emphasis and Important Terms of the Proposition are explained.

We might justly expect, when an Apostle is giving us the Kalander and
Ephimerides of the Times of the Messiah; that the first Prospect in the
Firmament of the Church, would be an Horizon of hope, the dispensation of the
Gospel being so bright and blessed, When the Sun of righteousness did appear
with healing in his wings; yet he presageth nothing, but Clouds, and Darkness,
Eclipses of that light that should shine before many, glaring, and portentous
Phainomena's, and the Signs of Heaven without Celestial Influences: in the
last days perilous times shall come, Last days they are in regard of the
administration, that does succeed, and exceed that which was Levitical, Christ
being a better Prince then Moses in his Sanctions, a better Priest then Aaron
in his Sacrifice, he was not only an High Priest, but an Apostle, that was
sent out of the Bosom of the Father, to bring glad tidings, yet when the
Plenty of Grace was most of all dispersed, the Power of Godliness was most
despised, so that men were efferated by clemency, enraged by meekness,
impatient by forbearance, wax wanton in the most goodly Heritage; and live as
if Christ were an hard Master in the Largess of his Bounty. For in the last
days, men shall be Lovers of themselves, having a form of Godliness, but
denying the power thereof: So that first the Form, and then the Power, are the
Arguments of my present Discourse.

A Form may be considered as a Virgin, or a Prostitute, as abstracted from, or
concomitant upon the powers of Religion, as Diana was in Heaven a star, but in
Hell a firebrand, and Consort of Pluto; so a form flowing from the power of
Godliness, is Angelical, but divested from it, Diabolical.

For when our Works of Darkness appear as Angels of Light, we mock God, by
honoring him with our Lips, and dethroning him from our Hearts, we crucify
the Lord of Glory; and, as the Soldiers, put a Crown on his Head, and Robes on
his body, and salute him with an Irony, Hail King of the Jews; we worship the
true God, as if he were an Idol, that had eyes, and saw not, not considering
his great Attribute of searching the heart; we make God abhor his own
Institutions, and reverse his Laws, bring no more vain Oblations, incense is an
abomination to me, as if he would receive no Honor from the Services of
Hypocrites, but what he distrains for by his public Judgments; Thus a form is
a desperate Incentive to, and a plausible Engine of the greatest Villainies;
Cain first Sacrificed to his God, and then slaughtered his Brother; Jezabel
institutes a Fast, and then thirsts for the Blood of Naboth. The strange Woman
paid her vows with Peace Offerings in her hands, and then managed the
Artifices of an Adulteress, and entered into Obscene Dialogues of defiling her
husbands Bed. The Jews consecrated Gifts to the Treasury of the Temple, and
then cried, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are we, but the
Corban turned Bethel the House of God, into Bethaven an House of Affliction, to
their indigent, and unrelieved Parents. Thus a Formalist makes the Rites of
Religion, a Gloss for sin, sollicits wickedness in the external glorifications
of God, and is like those sort of Meteors, that shine only in their fall from
heaven.

But a Form, in conjunction with the Power, is an Ornament of great Price in
the sight of God; St. Paul does not discourage a form, that is modest in
Complexion, grave in Gesture, discreet in the Expressions of it self; that
waits on the Power of Godliness, as a Disciple on his Master, or a Servant on
his Lord; as he says in the first Epistle, Good works become women, professing
Godliness; Religion is not to be like those mineral mountains that appear
barren, when the Veins of Gold lodge in their Bowels, but as the Kings
daughter, all glorious within, yet her Raiment is of wrought Gold. Can a Maid
forget her ornaments? or a Bride her attire? or the Spouse of Christ her
Raiment of Needle Work? as David invited all his faculties within him, so his
Glory, his Tongue, to join in the Chorus, as the most natural, proper, and
musical Instrument, whereby an heart, Big with the Burden in the songs of
Praise, could best deliver it self; our Lights are so to shine before men, that
they seeing our good works, may glorify our Father which is in heaven.

The corruption of this form, is either Gross, and Pharisaical, when men are
Zealots for the first Table, for the Temple, and Invocation, for Sacrifices and
Altars, for Incense, and Oblation, Sabbaths, and solemn Feasts; but break in
pieces the second, neither sparing their neighbors Wives in Lust, nor their
Lives in their Anger, nor their Estates in their Avarice, nor their Good Names
in their Ambition; as if the two Tables were as the two Principles, and Gods of
the Manichees, the one Good, and the other Evil; the first Table a Sacred
Edict, a Royal Promulgation to be kept, the second to be violated as a Snare,
and Tyrannical Exaction.

The other corruption is Subtle and Moral, when a Form of Godliness, and
Honesty do meet together and Kiss each other; A man may be born in the Pale of
the Church, baptized into the most holy faith, instructed in her Catechismes,
and Homilies, And only be a Patriot of Virtue in the profession of Faith: he
may stand up at the recitation of the Creed, and say Amen to every Article, and
yet be just in his actions, temperate in his life, generous in his spirit, upon
no other principles then Socrates or Seneca might be, his Religious Duties are
all Moralities, he reads the scripture and entertains them with an humane
Faith, as the stories of Zenophon, or Plutarch, he gives to the Poor and calls
it Charity, when his Alms are the Issues of a natural Compassion, and
Benignity, what he does is from the Dictates of Reason, which are perfective of
the humane nature, not from an assent to a divine Revelation, or Obedience to
the will of God: Now Virtue in a Profession of Godliness is the highest
semblance of Grace, I cannot persuade my self that the light of nature that
convinces Atheism, and contemplates on the Omnipotence and Wisdom of God is an
ignis fatuus; or that the Law of Nature that God has written in the Sacred
Scriptures, as well as the hearts of all men is a Throne of Iniquity, or that
Honesty, Temperance, Chastity and Justice are glittering sins, but rather
believe that they are Rudiments of our Creation, not wholly Obliterated by the
fall of man though they do not please God in that way of Complacency that faith
does; they may be Strictures, and darker Shadows, though Graces are the
Bright and Orient Colors in that Soul that is created after Gods image: To
apply all this, if a man professes himself a Christian, and is only Chaste as a
Brave Roman, out of Glory, or a Mind cultivated by Reason, none can resolve
the Sophism, and say that his Virtue does not flow from the influences of
faith, but the infallibility of Heaven, and his own Conscience. The Forms of
Godliness being then skillful to deceive, I shall absolve my discourse in two
particulars. First in showing Reasons why Godliness will express it self in a
Form, then Rules to direct the Form by the Power.

Reasons why Godliness has a Form:
The nature of Graces is to be active in the Discovery of it self; The Spirit
of God is no where more Rhetorical then in the Variety of Metaphors on this
Subject, He calls it a Light that must shine before men, that may as easily be
suppressed in its Heat, as concealed in its Brightness; He compares it to the
vital moisture of a Tree planted by the Rivers of water, that sends forth its
Blossoms and Fruits in due season; to Leaven, whose Fermentation continues till
it has Leavened the whole Lump: to perfumed Garments; the smell of Lebanon; and
the Powders of the Merchants; such an Impulse there is in Grace to display its
own Glory; So it was with St. Paul who was to bear the name of Christ before
Kings, says he, I believed, therefore have I spoken and in St. Peter who bare
the name of Christ before the Sanedrim; we cannot but speak the things we have
seen, and heard. when David mused, the Fire burned, but it flamed forth when he
spoke, out of the Abundance of his heart; with the heart a man beleiveth unto
Righteousness, and with the tongue Confession is made unto Salvation.

The sense of those great Privileges, and divine Relations we have by
Godliness excites us to it, if we are a chosen Generation, a Royal Preist-hood,
a Holy Nation, and Peculiar People; it is to show forth the Praises of him that
called us; so David that was a chosen Prince, a Royal Prophet, a Peculiar
Person did; Come and hear all ye that fear God, and I will tell you what he
has done for my Soul; it is not proper for that Soul that is Loud in begging
mercyes, to be Silent, when it receives them: God has delivered my Darling
from the Paw of the Lion, redeemed me from sin, rescued me from Satan, ransomed
me from the Bottomless Pit, and with a greater depth of Love, has invited me
with glorious Liberties, made me a member of his Son, equal to the Angels, an
Heir of his Kingdom, and if I am still silent, I must implead his goodness,
because it is unutterable, and my own joy that is unspeakable, and full of
glory.

It is Gods end in giving Graces, that their intrinsic Worth and Luster may
shine forth, to his own Glory, and the Good of others, we are filled with the
fruits of Righteousness, to the praise, and glory of God; and hereby is the
Father glorified, if we bring forth much fruit: Grace loses that advantage of
its Influence, and Exemplarity, when it is a candle put under a bushel, which
it has, when all the Graces shine as a Branch of lights to the whole house:
when faith leads a Monastic Life, is an Hermit in Solitudes, and agitates
devout meditations in a private Bosom; it is an enclosed Garden in a
Wilderness, it gives pleasure to a contemplative Life; but it seems not to work
by Love in the feeling of Communion, by casting Beams on the Members of that
Body, whose Head is Christ: a Form then is acceptable to God, being serviceable
to the Communion of Saints, and instrumental to the Honor of his own Name.

God requires the service and subjection of the whole man, the Life and the
Language, the Mind, and the Mouth, the Faculties of the Soul, and the Organs of
the Body to glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Gratitude to God, and Charity to our Brother, engage us to a Form of
Godliness; the first makes us speak Honorable things of God, the second thing
Necessary for Man; Instruction to the ignorant, Reproof to the vicions,
Comfort to the disconsolate, when the Channels of the divine spirit are as
open, as the Fountain is free and Festival; As the Beneficence of God to the
body and soul requires the integrity of the whole man, who has created and
blessed both; So he has created and blessed the Body in that Dependence on,
and Communion with the Soul, that while there is Humility in the Heart, it will
bend the knee in adoration; where there is desire in the Reins, it will lift
up the Hands in uncessant Supplications; where there is Joy in the Mind, it
will open the Mouth to show forth its praise.

Our Baptismal Vow does oblige us to confess the Faith of Christ crucified,
which in the days of Persecution was an eminent act of Fortitude and
resolution, Christ crucified was to the Jews a Stumbling Block, and to the
Greeks foolishness; yet Lactantius tells us that the Primitive Christians had
the sign of the Cross drawn on their Foreheads in most orient Blood, to
persuade Infidels to believe that they were built upon the Jewish Stumbling
stone, and dignified with the Grecian obloquy. The beauty of a Form is
commended to us by these Persuasions; as the Glorious Attire of Godliness; yet
this Attire is to be fitted and adapted to the power; I shall therefore
superadde.

Rules to direct the Form by the Power.
Have no collateral Respect, or Sinister Design at thine own honor, advantage,
or reputation in thy Professions, and Forms of Godliness; It is an Argument of
a low, and a loose, a mercinary and a disingenuous spirit, for a man to pretend
Gods Glory when he intends his own; God will have it all to himself, that no
flesh should glory in his presence; we are to lay down our Carnal Excellencies,
when we take up a Spiritual Profession. St. Paul gloried not in his own
Labors, but in the Love of God, I labored more then they all, yet not I but
the grace of God that is in me; I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me:
much like that Expression when he tells us, that when he does what he hates, it
is not I, but sin that dwells in me; So that as to his personal condition,
when the sum total is cast up as to Grace, and Concupiscence, it amounts but to
two Ciphers set one against another, as he does justly excuse his Infirmities,
so he does modestly refuse the honor due unto his Graces.

Avoid all conceited Tones, affected Accents, and Antic Gestures in thy
Profession, and Form of Godliness; these Ridiculous things are sufficiently
confuted by a mimical Derision; for there is a Behavior becoming Holiness;
when we Profess as Saints, we should Act as Men; some move in an higher Sphere,
and place Religion in the frequent Repetitions of Jesus Christ, and the holy
Spirit of God, when they have lusciously ingeminated these names, which are
only to be mentioned with Reverence, and Trembling, they think they have
witnessed a good Confession; but some are paramount, and vilify all things
that are not a pretense to Revelation, and a Lofty Language, as the
Valentinians, in Irenaeus, despised the usual Dialects of other men, using
Exotic Idioms, the bold, and boasting phrases of Barbarians; such we meet with
in the discourses of Jacob Behman, and Van Helmont; in the inscriptions, and
pages of the books of Quakers, which they call the bosom of God, the outward
openings of inward shuttings, Godded with God, Christed with Christ, beams of
approaching glory. These swelling words of vanity are unknown to the Scripture,
and contrary to the simplicity that is in Christ.

Let not the Form exceed the Power, or be as the Shadows of the Evening, Longer
then the substances on which they do depend. Virgil gives several signs of an
approaching night, That then the Toads begin to croak, and crawl about; The
Shepherds return home, and the Shadows of the Mountains grow Long. Have we not
had these ill Symptoms, that our day is far spent? do not Sectaries meet
together in Numbers? Are not some Pastors suspended from executing their
Charge? is not the Kingdom of Darkness highly advanced? we may guess it to be
Midnight by the Dreams and Illusions, and pretended Visions of some
Enthusiasts. Our Savior condemned the Generation of the Pharisees, that
curtailed the Law, and made broad their Phylacteries; who when they Fasted,
disfigured their faces by distorted Mouths, and pensive Countenances, as if
deformity were the Form of Godliness. Suffer not the form to be of equal
Extension with the power, because it is apt to Degenerate, and become
Excessive. There are some eminent Devotions, that are as the Sun in the
Meridian, the Shadows are small; and they enter into a Closet, as a Recess from
humane Observations, and there are Humiliations, wherein we are to anoint our
Faces, to make them Shine, and when they shine, as Moses did, we are to veyl
them, though it be by an Irradiation from God. We are instructed to this by the
Windows of Solomon's Temple, that were narrow outward, but broad within, and
Receptive of light, by the Temple it self, that was conspicuous indeed without,
but the Guildings and Magnificences were internal, by the Sanctuary that was
Veiled, but within were the Altar, and Oracle, the Propitiatory and Mercy-Seat,
the Cherubims, and God that dwelt between them; by the Heavens, whose
Appearance to the Earth is an azure Canopy, emboss't with Clouds, and
glittering stars, but within there is God, and Jesus the Mediator of a new
Covenant, an innumerable Company of Angels, and the Spirits of just men made
perfect, that reign with him in immortal, and everlasting Glory.

Let thy form keep a constant Tenor in heavy, as well as Halcion days; when
Jerusalem flourished in the days of Alexander, the Samaritans worshipped at
her Temple, and came to warm themselves at the High Priests fire; but when
Antiochus had Ransackt the City, and Sacred Treasuries, then they blessed
themselves at mount Gerizim in the Denial of the God of Israel: when Christ
multiplied the Loaves he multiplied his followers, who would have taken him by
force and made him King; They thought his Territoryes would be Opulent, his
Feilds and Vineyards fertile, that his Jewish Subjects needed not to travel to
Egypt in the days of Famine, but that his Monarchy would infinitely exceed
that of Solomon's in Peace and Plenty; They thought that the Roman Eagles would
be gathered as Chickens under his Wings, and that his Gleanings would be better
then the Vintage of all the Kingdoms upon Earth; But when he told them, his
Kingdom was not of this World; that his Crown must be of Thorns, how few did
bear his reproach to follow him without the Camp? to honor him in the
indignities of his passion? What is this but the Artifice of filthy Lucre, to
make a Gain of Godliness to assemble for Corn, Wine, and Oil, to bake Cakes to
the Queen of heaven, not to be consumed with famine; to court the Kings
Daughter because she is an Inheritrix of temporal Blessings, and not for the
Beauties of her Holiness; but they that are afraid, or ashamed of the
Profession of Godliness before Tyrants, Tribunals, Flames, and Faggots, of them
will the Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes in the glory of the Father, with
all his holy Angels.

Let thy Form have such an inviting Modesty, as to allure others to a Love and
Participation of the Power of Godliness. Musicians observe in the Sympathy of
sounds, that if two Viols be tuned to a Consonancy, and the String of one be
struck, the same string of the other will sound, though laid at a Distance;
such an Harmony there is of Souls, that if a well-tuned Heart be struck with
the Finger of God, it will send forth such a Melody that will work in others,
an Unison, and Concord with it self; David went up with the Tribes to worship,
Andrew brought Simon, Philip Nathaniel, the woman of Samaria the City of Sychar
to the presence of the Messiah.

The Apostles did triumph in the Myriads of the Jews, the Kingdoms of the
Gentiles, the Numberless Accessions of the World to the little Flock of Christ.
A Form well ordered in all things by a sweet and gracious Conversation, does
powerfully and placidly insinuate it self to produce this Effect; which I shall
demonstrate thus. The Word is the great Instrument of Faith; it has a Moral,
and Suasive Power to propound Arguments to the Understanding, and Objects to
the Will, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. But this
Cause is not irresistible, for we find the Apostle taking up the Complaint of
the Prophet, Who has believed our report? But where the Word is deficient, the
Form of a good Conversation may be Efficient of Faith in Christ. St. Peter
exhorts Wives to be in subjection to their own Husbands, that if any obey not
the Word, they may without the Word be won, with the conversation of their
Wives, while they behold their chastity coupled with fear. It seems the Eye is
a better Organ then the Ear, sometimes to conveigh Light and Happiness to the
Spirit, and good Works are better Orators then good Words; For so we read in
Story, that Theodolinda, Queen of the Longobards, converted both her Husbands,
the First from Gentilism, the other from Arianism, an auspicious Lady, to
espouse them both to the great Bridegroom of Souls; but the Story is still Big
with greater Wonder, for her Virtues were so Exemplary and Eminent, that they
executed an Apostolic Office, and converted the Nation of her Subjects to be
baptized into the Catholic Faith.

If thou see a beauty in the Form of Godliness, and would preserve it from
decay, avoid the sins mentioned in the Catalogue. The Enemies of a form, are
those of her own house, no Sins make her more Odious, then those that are
Shrouded and Sheltred under her Protection.

All sin has such an abhorrence to the powers of holiness, that they hate the
Form, and Fringes of her Garment (as is commonly observed of the Panther, that
he so abhors the person of a man, that he tears in pieces his picture) For a
Form extorts, from Seducers, and Sectaries, those Actions that are against the
Bent and Inclination of their hearts; They are Covetous, and yet the false
Apostles at Corinth, preached freely to get Occasion of Glory, and disgrace St.
Paul; who was there forced to live by his Mechanic Labors, that he might not
be Burdensome, or Chargeable to that Opulent and Censorious City.

They are Self-lovers, in their Benificence and Good Will toward men. I need
not mention anymore, seeing Self-love is so Prolifical a Parent of all the
other Sins, that they must have a Commixture and Co-incidence with it, as
Branches in the Stem from whence they grow: So that the Form is a Restriction
to, and Contradiction of their Villainies, though they use it as an Artifice to
palliate their sweet and secret Sins, and to make way for an open Dissolution;
The sixth verse calls them Creepers, while they creep into houses unawares, and
privily sow their Tares, and are Despicable; they insinuate themselves with
Pretenses of Strictness, and a Tender Conscience, of Modesty, and Meekness, of
Condescentions, and Philanthropy; but when the Creeping Party becomes
prevailing, they soon forget their formal Complements, and break the Bonds of
their former Restrictions asunder, and cast away their Cords from them; they
are Blasphemers, and fill heaven with Reproaches; Traitors, and fill Kingdoms
with Seditions, the Tender Conscience soon betrays it self in Searedness, and
unnatural Affection, is incontinent in all Excesses, and fierce in all Errors,
with a Rage reaching up to heaven: how contrary is this to the Light of the
Gospel, that is altogether Serene, and Pacifical; to the Tongues of Fire that
descended on the Apostles, that by all-powerfull words did create those
Miracles that were all like his that sent the Comforter, the instances of
mercy: new light soon turns into Wildfire, and the Tender Conscience Ravens as
a Wolf, to make havoc of the Church; The Arians, and Donatists of old, and
Anabaptists in Munster, and Sectaries of England of late have been sufficient
Arguments to make this manifest to all men, and Alarms to Princes whose
security consists in the Preservation of Religion; In this vigilance Babylon
exceeded Zion, for Nebuchadnezar made a Decree, that what ever Nation spoke
against the God of Shadrach, should be made a Dunghill, but of Judah where God
was known the Prophet complains, according to the Number of thy Cities, so are
thy Gods O Judah: to return, An Hypocrite Loves not freely, and heartily his
Reigning Sin, because it exercises a Tyranny and Co-active Power over him; it
restraines him from swallowing the sweet Morcels he tacitly hungers after,
therefore he Dethrones it, and takes away the Scepter of Authority from it,
when he can have his other Lords to Reign over him; and exposes his Form when
he has cast of its Yoke to the greatest Odium and Contempt; what cheap
thoughts must men have of a Form of Godliness when it is infected with
Dishonesty, the feigned Saint is manifestly a real Knave, and all his
Humiliations and Prayers, wherein he deprecates the Evils of Covetousness, are
apparently but feigned words to make merchandise of the Inheritance of Orphans,
the Houses of Widows, the Patrimony of the Church, and the Rights of his
Brother? how infamous must the way of Balaam be in the opinions of men? who
said he would not curse Israel for an house-full of Silver and Gold; crying
out, how good are thy Tents O Jacob, and thy Tabernacles O Israel; Praying that
there might be no Divination against Jacob, or Enchantment against Israel; yet
all this holy Discourse and heavenly Resolution was but a Varnish to a
deceitful heart that was Bribed with filthy Lucre, and the Wages of
unrighteousness: can a Dogs neck more desecrate an Altar? or the image of an
Adonis a Temple? then for a man to fling out his Invectives against sin, and
yet to indulge those that are contributary to his Lust, and Avarice? what are
the Prayers of these men but so many Practical Lies told to heaven, who while
they pray, with a tacit Blasphemy defy God, and when they sin, by open
Atheism deny him, and the Votaries are as certainly the Captives of the Devil,
as they are the creatures of God.

Avoid those sins that are inconsistent with a Form of Godliness, which may be
reduced to a tripartite Division; Some hinder the Assuming of a Form, others
Blast it, whilst it is Professed; and others do Renounce it, and Cast it off.
The sins that hinder the Assuming of a Form, are Prejudice, and Fear.

Prejudice against the Precepts, that command us to cut off the Right hand,
which is interpreted the Mutilation of the Body; as Fervency of Spirit is the
Calenture of the Soul, the Communicating and Doing good, the Wasting the
Estate, and being Evil spoken of for the Name of Christ, the Wounding the
Reputation, these are the Grievous Commandments of an Hard Master, to which, in
stead of Binding them to men's Fingers, they give them a Manumission; and with
the Young man in the Gospel, Go away; and with Orpah, salute, and forsake
together.

Fear, if with Scylla, they could see a Crown on the Liver of the Sacrifice,
the Wages of Godliness, the Divinations of Riches and Honor; they would become
Disciples; but when they Observe all that will live Godly in Christ, must
suffer Persecution, and through many Tribulations we must enter into the
Kingdom of heaven, they are offended at the Cross of Christ, they think there
is a Lion in the way, that affrightens them from any Essay of walking in them.

These sins hinder men from being Catechumens, but which is worse, some that
are Baptized blast their Profession by a Flagitious Life, live without God in
the world, that it had been better for them they had never known the Way of
Truth. Such are they that think it below a Brave Spirit, to tremble at a
Threatening, but stifle the Warnings of their own Bosom, and live in Chambering,
and Wantonness, Rage, and Riot, Swearing, and Uncleanness, that a man without
the Breach of Charity may say, they have no Faith.

But Apostasy, from Faith, and Obedience, does Obliterate all the Characters of
a Form, and makes Shipwreck of Profession, and renounceth Communion with the
Visible Church. There were three sorts of these Apostates in the times of St.
Cyprian; the Traditores, that gave their Bibles, in stead of their Bodies, to
be burnt; the Thurificati, that offered Incense to Idols; and the Libellatici,
whose Denials of Christ were more Private and Auricular, but bought Tickets
from the Magistrates, to preserve them from that Bloody Inquisition. Now an
Apostate cannot be an Hypocrite, for he is gone out of the Precincts of the
Church; They went out from us, because they were not of us, says St. John,
they have broken themselves off from that Body into which they were implanted
by Baptism, and are Strangers to the Covenant of Promise: Thus we see the
Dignity, and Defection of a Form, how it is to be exercised, suspended, and
moderated, and how to direct its course between a Rude, and Rigid Zeal, and a
loose and Skeptical Profession; we see the Grounds and Gradations of its
Dishonours, and Decays, how that it departs from some men as the Glory of the
Lord did from the Temple, and Altar, and Threshold of the house, in the Vision
of Ezekiel: and when the Leaf thus falls and withers, the Tree is Barren,
and Corrupt, for that is the Climacterical time to show its Disease is Mortal,
and therefore it must not cumber the Vineyard, but be cut down, or plucked up
by the Roots.

But it is high time for us to come to the Power of Godliness, which has so
much Goodness in it, that it should not be accounted an Offense; and so much
Wisdom, that it should not be accounted Foolishness; the Necessity of it is so
great, that it should not be Delayed, and the Excellency so Glorious, that it
should not be Denied: therefore, as all men should acquire it for Salvation, so
our Present Duty is to inquire, wherein it Consists, and Discovers it self.

I have already explained the Phrase, that the Reducing of the Habits, and
Vital Principles of Grace into Act, is the Power of Godliness; the Philosophy
of which Leads us to the Consideration, That Habits of Grace are those Divine
Qualities, infused into the Soul by the Spirit of God, which incline the Heart,
and sway the Conscience to an actual Obedience, to the Will of God, with
Facility, and great Delight. They are therefore called by the Fathers, and
Schoolmen, the Springs, and Fountains of Grace, not like the Fountain in the
midst of Paradise that flows with continual waters, but like the waters of
Siloam, that spring from the foot of mount Sion, qui non jugibus aequis sed
certis horis diebusque ebullit, whose Streams are not always Current, but in
the due seasons of time: The musical knowledge of a Lutanist in his Quavers,
Rests, and Motions, whereby he is able on all occasions to play those
delightful Airs that commend his skill, is the Habit of the Artist, but
suppose the Hand of the Lutanist be wounded, he has still the knowledge, and
Habit of his Faculty, although the Exercise be prevented by the Indisposition
of that necessary Instrument of his music; so the Godly man that has these
principles of a Celestial Original, has upon all occasions his senses
exercised by reason of use, suitable to those commands the law of God requires,
and those Emergencies the Providence of God expose him to: and although the
Acts of Grace may be suspended sometimes by Natural, or Civil actions,
sometimes by inevitable Infirmities, yet still he has a New Nature, the
Unction of the Holy one, and the seed of God abiding in him: for our clearer
understanding of which, we are to consider.

1. The Plenty of Godliness consists in the Habits of Graces; The Righteous are
said to be Trees Planted by the Rivers of water, and the Trees of the Lord are
full of Sap. The Radical moisture of these noble Vines may Retire to the Root
in Winter, yet at the return of the Sun they send forth their Grapes in
Clusters, and their Perfume as the smell of Lebanon, as a homage of gratitude
to the Influenences of Heaven, and the Blessings of God. These are the Gifts of
a Liberal God, like those of a Prince in his Inauguration and Festivity, for he
sheds abroad the washing of Regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost
abundantly upon us; that we may abound in the work of the Lord. And as there is
more light in the body of the Sun, then in all the beams that shine on the
World; for, suppose they were all Eclipsed, the Sun in a moment, or
imperceptible time, could supply them all, by one Irradiation; so if the Acts
of Grace were all vanished, they would be Renewed by the treasures of their
Causes. The Acts of Grace are Transient, but the Habits are Permanent, and
Replenish the soul with innumerable Activities, to the Comfort of the Believer,
and the Glory of the Giver. This is called, a Living by Faith, therefore acts
flow from the Habits of grace, as beams from the Sun, and streams from a
fountain, are many, mighty, pleasing, vigorous, and delectable, they are free,
frequent, natural, and numberless.

2. The Power of Godliness, is the reducing the Habits of Grace into Exercise,
and Operation. The same word does the Apostle use to his son Timothy, Be strong
in the Grace that is in Jesus Christ; go on from Strength to Strength, till
thou appear before God in Sion; shine like the Sun, more and more, till the
perfect Day, who from the Twylight of the morning, Runs his Race like a Giant,
till it comes to its meridian brightness. The Initials of Grace are weak, like
an Embryo, infirm as an Infant, but by superadded acts, the Smoking Flax is
kindled into a Flame, and the Bruised Reed becomes a Cedar, the Habits grow in
strength, and stature, by the addition of one grace to another, which is the
supply of every part extensively, adding to faith virtue; and intensively, by
the addition of one degree of Grace unto another, till it comes to the measure
of its stature; when righteousness is revealed from faith to faith; Grace is
never commensurate in the beauty of proportion, till it is consummate in the
beauty of perfection. They that were divorced from their sins, as Phaltiel was
from Michal, who went weeping after her to Bahurim; when this Gift of God is
stirred up in them, contemplate holiness with joy; they that did deprecate
Wrath with Fear, implore Mercy with Confidence; They that sought after him whom
their soul Loved, when, with Andrew, they have found the Messiah, Lean on his
bosom, Love him dearly, Esteem him highly, Follow him fully, and Live with him
eternally.

The weak in the faith, and the feeble-minded, wrestle not with Principalities,
and Powers, but with God himself, give all diligence to make their Calling
sure, press forward to the Price of their high Calling, abound in the work of
the Lord, till by uncessant Labors, they rest in the Fruition of him; as if we
might suppose a spark of Fire unextinguishable, it would be in continual
Ascents, till it came to its own Country, and Region, under the Concave of the
Moon

1. There is a mighty Tendency and Impulse in Habits to exert themselves into
Act, they are the full Breasts of Consolation, that are uneasy till they are
Drawn, and Dispensed, they are as seed cast into the Earth, that lives and
grows up into an Harvest; They are Talents to be improved, and Lamps to be
furnished; and because Flames are soon spent unless God be in the Bush, and
Streams soon vanish without an Ocean, it being God that works in us both to
Will, and to Do, that gives Life and Motion to these Qualities of the Soul;
we must have still Recourse to the Influences of his Power, and the supplies of
his spirit.

2. There is a Gratitude in free and frequent acts to further the Growth,
Strength, and Radication of their Habits; as natural Qualities are intended by
natural Actions, so are supernatural, as the more a man plays on a Musical
Instrument, the greater are the habiliments of his art; So Hoseah. 6.3. Then
shall ye know the Lord, if ye follow on to know the Lord; infused knowledge
should be increased by a studious meditation; So Coll. 1.10. Filled with the
Knowledge of his will in all wisdom and spiritual understanding, there is the
Infusion of the Habit, That ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto all well
pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, there it is reduced to act,
increasing in the knowledge of God, there is the Radication of it, For he that
will do Gods will shall know of the Doctrine whether it be of God. Joh. 17.7.
they are not Lazy and Languid things, but are discovered by the facility
strengthened by the frequency of their own Actions. The habit and the act are
thus bound up together in the Bundles of life, combine in Vigor, and Virtue, in
Influence, and Causality on one another; and hence it is that an Habit of Grace
is a Quality difficultly removed, and although it may be interrupted and
suspended by impetuous Temptations, and imperious Lusts, yet in this Hostility
and Conflict it is Restless till it is prevalent, and have Dominion, as the
Sympathy of a Needle touched with a Lodestone makes it unquiet in its greatest
trembling, and disturbance, till it Rests, as in its Center, in a Direct Line
poynting at the Polar star; And as in an uneven Ally a Bowl may run one way
when the Bias inclines it another, so a Godly Man may be Disturbed by
Surreption and Infirmity, though the Habit does sublimate, and sway the heart
to the service of God: The habits of Grace will not be kept in arcta custodia,
but will break prison, and walk at Liberty.

This Power discovers it self.
1. In Resisting strong Temptations, to express it in the Allusion of the
Apostle, it quits it self like a Man in its spiritual Olympicks, when the
messenger of Satan buffeted our Apostle he besought the Lord thrice, the
assault of an Enemy excites the valor of a Veteran Soldier, so the urgency
and vehemence of Temptation made him ingeminate his requests to God.

2. In mortifying strong corruptions, dethroning Satan from his strong holds,
captivating every Imagination, that towreth against the commands of Christ,
destroying every Reigning sin, as Josuah did the Kings of Canaan.

3. In Acts of eminent Obedience; A sacrifice can be worth but little, that
costs nothing; Abel offered up his Best, Abraham was willing to sacrifice his
son, St. Paul himself, he was ready to be offered; This Power animates and
enobles the heart, to hate father, and mother, to cast away his chiefest Joy,
as a snare, to cut off the Right hand, and pull out the Right eye, to fling
away the most precious Treasure, as a Torment, at the command of Christ; if a
man have Wit and Learning, this divine power is as a spring of Motion to him,
to be useful and profitable in worthy Instances, and Institutions; in
meditations on Gods Word, Defense of his Truth, Instruction of his People, and
inquiry into those mysteries, that is, the Emulation of Angels to pry into: if
a man has Honor, this Power makes it a Champion for the Patronage, and Luster
of Religion, it Humbles him, to fling down his Coronet at the feet of the Lamb,
and Advances him, because he has something the world has an Esteem for, to
Deny for his Savior, which is beyond the Proportions, and possibilities of
ordinary Christians: if he has Riches, this Power turns his Almoner, feeds the
Hungry, clothes the Naked, Erects Hospitals, builds Schools of Learning, and
makes his life the definition of the Law of Charity: all his measures in
religion are laudable, and transcendent, not only thrust down, and shaken
together, but running over.

But do not these Gloryes of the Power of Godliness, discourage those that are
weak in grace? I answer, that it may be propounded as a Problem, that the
Newborn Babe has more strength, then the Old man, the infancy of grace is
more powerful, then the Decrepid Age of an inveterate Lust, as there is more
vigor in a few Drops of Spirits, then a great quantity of water; so there is
in the smallest seed, and sparkle of Godliness, then the greater measures of
Corruption: for this seed grows in the midst of all the Tares that would choke
it, and this sparkle lives in the midst of all the waters that would extinguish
it, and the smoking Flax, and bruised Reed, break forth into Victory, against
all the Winds and Tempests that oppose them: which strange vigor does not
arise from the immortality of any Grace in it self, but from the supplies of
that spirit, that is greater, potentior, says Beza, stronger in us, then he
that is in the world.

I shall conclude all by an instance, how to reduce the Habit of Love, that
Powerful, and Operative Grace into act; which when it is once Kindled in the
Bosom of a man, he finds his Heart, like the Disciples going to Emaus, burn in
the flames of a most Seraphical Affection. The Master of the Sentences denies
any habit of Love in the soul, but asserts, that all its Emanations flow
immediately from the Person of the Holy Ghost: but seeing the Apostle expressly
distinguishes between the habit of Love, and the Spirit, as between the
Effect, and its Cause, when he tells us, That the Love of God is shed
abundantly in our Hearts, by the Holy Ghost; and the Acts of this Love are
Defined to be, the Fulfilling of the Law, the Bond of Perfection, and the end
of the Commandment, we may reduce this habit into act by Examples, and
Arguments.

1. By Argument, Enter then, O my soul, into those Galleries, wherein the King
of Glory Walks, and is Detained; and Observe how he has commended his Love
toward thee, All the Dimensions of his Love, its Height, Length, Depth, and
Breadth are so many Topics to persuade and allure thee, to be Espoused to him,
as thy Bridegroom.

The height of this Love is Ecstasy; that God over all, blessed for ever,
equal to the Father, in whom are hid all the Treasures of wisdom, and
Knowledge, whom the Angels worship, should have his heart Ravished with a
Creature, polluted with Blood, defiled with Sin, subjected to Damnation, that
when thou wast upon the Precipice of Ruin, stretched forth his hand to save
thee, and draw thee into his Bosom. Can thou, O my soul! forbear to say with
the beloved Disciple; To him that Loved us, and washed us from our sins in his
own blood, and has made us Kings, and Priests unto God; To him be glory and
dominion, for ever and ever.

The depth of this Love was humility, he humbled himself to assume our nature
in the Form of a servant, to bear our miseries, and become obedient to death.
David and Jonathan were a famous pair of Lovers; Jonathan, who was heir
apparent to the Crown, Knew David was designed for it by the Almighty, yet was
faithful to him in his secrets, sollicitous for him in his Dangers, and gave
him his hand to advance him to his own Throne: But the Love of Christ is
without a Parallel, That supreme power should assume the Form of a Servant,
infinite glory should submit to a Reproach, exquisite Purity, should suffer
imputed sin, that the Son of God's Complacency should bear the Viols of his
Wrath, should descend from heaven, come out of the Bosom of his Father, to
enter into a Grave; what greater token of his Love could he give thee, then his
Agony, his Blood, his Life? Surely, O my soul, thou art harder then Iron, if
this Loadstone will not draw thee. Well might Solomon rifle all the Rarities of
Nature, to be Symbols of this Love, to which the whole Creation is not
sufficient to be an Allegory. For greater Love then this has no man, then to
Lay down his Life for his friend; but herein he commended his Love to us, that
while we were sinners, he died for us. Consider the High Priest of our
Profession, hanging on the Altar of his Cross, with his arms stretched wide
open to receive thee, and can thou forbear Leaning on his Breast, and prying
into the secrets of his Love, the Knowledge of which passes Understanding.

The Breadth of this Love is Universality: so immense it is, that it has mercy
for thousands, a Plenteous Redemption, salvation to the uttermost; he tasted
death for every man, and Laid down his life for the world. No man ever perished
for want of Bounty, or Bowels, the Passion or Compassion of a Savior, but
because his sensual Part is offended at Christ's Cross, and commands. Consider
then, O my soul! how delectable are his Laws? how glorious his Cross? Obedience
is essential to Love, and where it is habitual, there is as much Pleasantness
in his Precept, as there is Sweetness in his Promise: if thou prefer profit
with Judas, pleasure with Zimri, honor with Diotrephes, an Obliquity before a
Right path, thou do not only sin against the Precept, but the Grace of God
that would assist thee to observe it. Faith looks at a future Retribution, but
love immediately at the Merit of the Lawgiver and the kindness of his
Commands; and if the Amabilities of them, were once presented to thee, it would
be as uneasy to thee to be vicious, as it would be to a vicious Person to be
Devout; thou would see Liberty in his Yoke, and Lightness in his Burden, it
would be as a Wing to a Dove, an help in motion, as Ballast to a ship, an
hindrance against fluctuation. As his Commands are Pleasantness, so is his
Cross peace, our Savior to commend his Love to us, consulted not the Dignity
of his person, the Tragedy of his Passion, but longed for his Sufferings,
thirsted after his Cup, hungered after that Passover, which he was to eat with
such bitter herbs. Esteem then O my Soul! but all things as Dross to know the
fellowship of his sufferings, which are Seals of thy Adoption, Pledges of Gods
paternal Love, and and work an eternal weight of Glory.

The length of this Love is eternity, its an ancient Love, from everlasting, he
loved us first; its durable to everlasting, he loved us to the end; it is not
Critical, or Captious to take offense at every lapse, or Omission. And if it be
lawful to speak of the Duration of God, by the Measures of time; this Love was
as great in the first Moment as it can be to Eternity: for then did the
admirable and astonishing Wisdom of the blessed Trinity consult the Salvation
of thy Precious Soul; by the Incarnation, and Passion of the Son of God, when
the fallen Angels were left in a State of irrecoverable Perdition: That he that
is Glorious in holiness, should be a Sin and a Curse for us by the Projects set
up from everlasting, is so stupendous a Depth that unless it had been
manifested in the Gospel, had been the highest Blasphemy to imagine it, and
what the Wisdom of the three Persons did contrive, the Love of the second did
bestow, he loved us, and gave himself for us, Thou must then O my Soul! either
account all this a Golden Dream, or a well devised Fable, or else not suffer
the world to be a Rival in thy Estimation, and Affection with the Son of God,
if these meditations be seriously believed, and judiciously weighed, thou can
not Expostulate what is thy Beloved more then another Beloved, who is the
chiefest among ten thousand, altogether Love, and altogether Lovely.

2. Converse with divine Objects and Examples. As Flame Kindles Flame, so do
examples excite Love, and Objects not only Attract the heart but Ravish and
Transform it; if David muses, the fire will burn, if Moses be in the mount his
face will shine; the Butterfly does adorn her self, and the Be enrich her
self, by dwelling on the Flowers of the field; if a Ray of Love may spring from
a Glance, how much more from a Vision face to face, a full contemplation of the
beauty of holiness? I shall consider but three friends of the Bridegroom, and
their Delicious Intimacies with him; Mary Magdalen she loved much, and kissed
the feet of Christ, to acknowledge her subjection to him, she washed them with
her Tears, and wiped them with the Hairs of her head: if there were virtue in
touching the Hemme of his Garment, much more in kissing his feet that were so
Beautiful that his very footstool was glorious, and the Throne of Grace; St.
John (we may say) kissed the hands of Christ to acknowledge his Dependence on
him, whose hand was the great instrument of Bounty, whose Bosom, in which he
Lodged, the Treasury of Grace and Cabinet of secrets, where he had the
mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven revealed to him; could a man choose a
diviner mansion, or inhabit a better Tabernacle? The Spouse kissed the Lips
of Christ to show her Communion with him. Those Lips that had Grace powered
into them, and spoke the Words of eternal Life; such Examples will excite the
heart to Emulation and make it sick of Love; I will give him then ten thousand
Kisses, and embraces, I will serve him, praise him, Trust in him till my love
is consummate, by being for ever with the Lord; And then O my Soul, if he
should ask thee as he did Peter, Simon Bar Jonah Love thou me? thou will
answer as he did, Lord, thou know all things, thou know that I love thee.

By this instance we are directed to exercise any other Grace of the Gospel.

FINIS.

