A WARNING TO THE NATIONS, To Lay aside all Prejudice and Enmity, The Ground of
Strife and Wars; And to come and Embrace the Light, Christ Jesus, that they may
see themselves, and come to be Saved and Healed, and United in the Love of God.
THe Indignation of the Lord is upon all Nations, and his Fury upon all their
Armies; he will greatly distress the Inhabitants of the World; he will now
plead the Cause of his Covenant of Light against all those that withstand his
Glorious Appearance, and Work of Restoration, in this the Day of his Mighty
Power, wherein he is giving the Kingdom of his Everlasting Peace to Israel's
Seed under the whole Heavens, who fear his Great Name, and tremble at his
Almighty Word of Life, which shakes not only Earth, but Heaven also: And now
is the Lord God Almighty bringing forth his Glory to light, and creating the
New Heavens and new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness, according to his
Promise, Isa. 65. 17, etc. wherein the People beat their Swords into
Plough-shares, and their Spears into Pruning Hooks, never to learn War any
more; but every one now that believes in the Truth, Christ Jesus, the Light and
true King of Righteousness and Peace, shall sit under him, the true Vine, and
none to make them afraid, Isa. 2. 2, etc.

And now, even now is the Lord God Almighty arisen, and got up into his high
Throne of Majesty and Everlasting Glory to Reign; and of this his Peaceable
Kingdom, which he has begun to set up in his Trembling People, there never
shall be End. The true Israel of God is now coming up out of the spiritual
Egypt indeed, to possess the true Land of Promise, the Inheritance and free
Gift of our God; and no Enchantment shall now stand against God's Spiritual
Host, nor Divination against the Redeemed of the Lord, who have known his
Wonders in the Deep, and known the Outgoings of God's Power against Pharaoh,
and all his Host in the Red Sea of his Fiery Indignation. And now will God be
exalted in Judgment, and avenged in Righteousness upon all Nations and People
under Heaven, who hold the Truth in Unrighteousness, and will not that God's
Holy Son Christ Jesus the Light should reign, though he be come to Reign and
Judge in the Earth. For to him, the Light who lights every man that comes
into the World, is all Power in Heaven and Earth given. And his Light shines
freely into all your Hearts, O all People of the Earth; and shines in the
thickest Darkness to make manifest the Creator's Will to all your Consciences,
though your Darkness, O People, comprehends it not; but it comprehends you, and
all your dark Ways, and destroying Thoughts; and lets you see plainly, That
for all your great Workings, and toilsom Labor in an Outside Profession in
your Earthly Wills, you have wrought no Deliverance in the Earth; but your
Souls Enemies still stand in strength. And it lets you see, that for all your
Striving, and Fighting, and Killing and Spoiling, and Destroying one another
about Earthly Things, you have done no good at all; but brought God's Judgments
upon all your Souls, and pierced your selves through with many Sorrows.

And therefore the Heavenly Voice sounds through the Earth, and calls aloud in
your Ears, and knocks at the Door of your Hearts, O all People of the World,
High and Low, Professor and Profane, Jews and Gentiles, Christians, so called,
and Turks; Arise, Arise, Awake, Awake, turn in your Minds to the pure Light of
Jesus Christ the Judge of Quick and Dead, the Son of the eternal God, Creator
of Heaven and Earth, who died for your Sins, and rose again to give you a New,
Holy and Everlasting Life in himself through Faith in his Name. And behold, he
lives for evermore. And all see and search diligently in your selves, what you
know of his Holy Life made manifest in you, to destroy the Body of Sin and
Death in you, which in the days of Darkness has filled your Vessel, and
brought your very Soul, Mind and Heart into the Thraldom of that Wicked One,
who is called the Devil and Satan, and compassed with Terrors and Fears and
Affrightments your very Life, and whole Man, because of the Wrath of the
Almighty, which you by your Sinful, and Unrighteous, and Unholy and Cruel
Doings both against God, and your Neighbor have stirred up against you. And
behold, the Earth languisheth because of these things; And the Children of
Light, who are redeemed to God, out of these sore Evils and grievous Plagues do
mourn for you, and bewail your Misery Night and Day, as well knowing in the
Light of the Lord, what your woeful End will be, if these Briars and Thorns and
noisome Weeds (the proper Fruits of the Curse) be still suffered to grow in
you, and cumber God's Ground. Oh! how nigh unto cursing is that Field, which
God's Rain rains upon, and yet brings forth no better Fruit, then Killing, and
Slaying, and Spoiling, and Cousening, and Cheating, and Defiling, and
Oppressing one another, besides Lying, and Swearing, and Cursing, and
Drunkenness, and Pride, and Persecution of God's Righteous Seed, with all other
Abominations of the World against the Holy Light, etc. Checks and Reproofs of
the good Spirit of the Almighty, both in their own Consciences, and the Mouth
of God's Servants, and Holy Witness of Truth in the Scriptures; which
notwithstanding all these their Abominations many of them profess to be their
Rule. But know, O Man, whoever thou art, or whatsoever Profession thou art of,
that that is thy God and Ruler, and Father, and Teacher, and Way, whose Commands
thou love, and whose Works thou do and whose Will in the inward of thy Mind
thou closest with: as Christ said to those Liars, false Accusers and Murderers
in his Day, Joh. 8, 44. etc. Ye are of your Father the Devil, for his Works ye
will do; he was a Liar and Murderer from the beginning. So thou that go from
he Light of God in thee, which shows thee thy Sin, and the Evil-Lustings and
Desires of thy Flesh and Mind, thou go from God, and from his Fear, and from
the Way of Peace: And so, thou going from this, and joining to Evil Motions of
Sin in thy Flesh and corrupted Mind, thou joynest to the Devil, and so bring
forth Sin, which is the Devils Work; and the Wages of every such Work is Death.
And so in the very moment of time, in which thou do the Evil Work, whatsoever
it be (contrary to God's Light in thee) thou dyest the Death; and so remainest
dead from the Life of God, and his blessed Righteousness, until the Day of true
Repentance and Amendment of Life: And then what will it profit thee to have
gained the World, or Victory over thy Neighbor, or Satisfaction to thy Lusts
to the Loss of thy Soul's Life?

Therefore Arise, Arise, Awake, Awake, O all Nations and People! come forth to
the Judgment of this great Day of God Almighty: For now is the effect of every
Vision to be known and felt in the Earth, and the High Towers of the City of
Confusion, the Mystery Babylon the Great, the Mother of Harlots, shall fall to
the Ground; and the Mountain of the House of the Lord shall be exalted over
all; yea, the Lord alone, and his Righteousness, and Truth, and Peaceable
Kingdom on the Top of all shall stand; and no Weapon formed against him and his
People shall ever prosper any more.

And how is it, O all Nations, Kings and People, that ye are not yet willing
after so long a time knocking at the Gates of your Cities and Doors of your
Hearts, that ye will not open to the King of Glory, Christ Jesus, the Light,
that lights every one that comes into the World, that he may come in, and be
Judge, Lawgiver and King in the midst of you, that the Desire of all Nations
may come, and be Head in all? For what is it that the Soul that God has made
in all Nations does desire, but to see it self unburthened of that grievous
Corruption, which has defiled it, and to be delivered from that Body of Sin
and Death, which has and does so imbondage it from the beginning, until the
Day of Christ's Power be known within, to work the Work of God, and to destroy
the Work of the Devil, and to save the Soul from its Sin, and to present it
spotless to God, which is the true Salvation indeed?

Now this is my Witness for God amongst the Servants and Redeemed of the Lord
this day, whom the World in Scorn calls Quakers (who am a Sufferer with them
for the Kingdom of God's sake) That there is none can thus know the Day of
Christ's Power to Salvation, but as they believe and receive that Light of God
and Christ, which they be freely enlightened withal, which shines in their very
Hearts and Consciences, which searches their very Hearts and Reins, and makes
manifest to man his Thoughts, and from which none can hide any thing; but all
things are naked and bare before him, the Light Christ Jesus, who lights
every man that comes into the World, Jew and Gentile, one and other, who
searches the most hidden things of man, and brings them forth to the Judgment
of his Righteousness. For though the Night may hide the Adulterer and the Thief
from man, it hides them not from God; there is one Nigh in the Heart and
Conscience, that tells Man and Woman all that ever they have done, and do daily
do, even their secret Thoughts; Is not this the Christ of God, the true
Messiah? that was to come, and is come, and dwells amongst us, and we look not
for another, and of his Fullness, have all we received, and do daily receive,
who believe in his Light, which shines in our Hearts, according to the
Scriptures of Truth. And this the Fullness of our Blessed God and Savior Jesus
Christ, the Light, is it which fills all that come to him with all spiritual
Blessings, and Heavenly good Things; and without whom all is Darkness,
Emptiness, Death and Desolation, as all the poor, deceived, lost Sons and
Daughters of the fallen Adam do sooner or later know, and are made to confess.

But Blessed are they that consider of things in time, and say things to heart,
before it be too late; For there are but Twelve Hours in a day, in which men
may work, says Christ, and then the Night comes, in which no man can work:
But the Door will be shut upon all who have slighted and neglected the Day of
their Visitation.

Oh England! England! and all Lands far and near, that you had known, or could
yet believe the things that belong to your Everlasting Peace, before they be
hid from your Eyes. Therefore turn ye, turn ye at the Reproofs of God's Wisdom
and Spirit of Light and Truth, which sounds through all, and lets you see the
Vanity and Evil of all your Works, and Fraialty of all your Lives, how soon the
Thread of your Life is cut off; and then, where are the great Emperors and
Kings, with all their Crowns? And where are the great Captains and Commanders,
with all their Bloody Victories? And where are the wise Ahithophels and cunning
Counselors of the Earth, with all their Admirers? And where are the covetous
Oppressors, with all their Houses full of the Spoils of the Innocent? Yea, in
that day, where is all the Glory and Lusts of the World, with all the Lovers of
it? Surely in Darkness and Misery shall they lie down together, and Death shall
have Dominion over them, even all who have not believed in the Light, Christ
Jesus, and who have not followed him in the Regeneration, that they might be
saved; but have spent their days in the Pleasures and Lusts of the present
Evil World to De u ction.

Now therefore, O all People, Hearken to the Counsel of the Lord in this your
Day, and learn of the Lamb, the Light, who calls you to Repentance from all
your grievous Ways. How long shall the Spirit of the Lord strive with you?
when will you cease learning War, and Destruction, and Oppression, and Spoil? O
when will you beat your Swords into Plow-shares. and your Spears into
Pruning Hooks? O when will you go and say one to another, one Neighbor to
another, and one Nation to another, Come let us all be humbled before the Lord
God of Heaven and Earth, who made us all of one Blood, to dwell together upon
the Face of the Earth in Truth, Goodness and Love to serve one another, and so
as Branches of one Tree to receive Life, and Virtue, and Power from our God
into our Souls, to strengthen us unto his holy Work; who came not to destroy
Men's Lives, but to save them; whose Kingdom is not of this World, and
therefore is not set up or maintained with carnal Weapons, Violence and Spoil;
but by the Eternal Spirit of our God, whose Fruit is in all Goodness, and
Righteousness and Truth? And let not the wicked Devil, the Destroyer, deceive
us any more by his Lies and Delusions; but let us all with one Heart and Soul
resist his Temptations. When he persuades us to seek to be great in the Earth,
and be avenged on them we count our Enemies, let us not hearken to him; but let
us overcome their Evil with Goodness; and not to seek the Destruction of their
Persons, or spoil of their Estates, as the Heathens do that know not God; but
let us follow the Example of Jesus Christ, God manifest in Flesh, who when he
was reviled, reviled not again, but prayed for such as despightfully used him.

O come, let us follow this meek Lamb in Righteousness and Truth, and learn of
him in our Heart, who is Meek and Lowly, that we may find Rest for our Souls;
Who rebuked his Disciples, who would have had Fire to come down from Heaven to
destroy the Samaritans, that would not at that time receive Christ. For what
know thou, O Man, but the Samaritans may in time, come to a better Mind; and
then thou will see it was thy Will, and not God's, that desired their
Destruction in their Sins. For Christ would have all to be saved, and come to
the Knowledge of his Truth: But many will not come to him, that they might have
Life, and so their Destruction is of themselves and their Condemnation just.
And who are those now therefore that withstand the Doctrine of the Truth, which
said, love your Enemies; and seek not the Destruction of their Persons, and the
Spoil of their Estates; but seek by good Doctrine and good Life to bring them
out of their Sins: And if they will not, but rather hate thee for thy good
Will, be content; thou have quitted thy own Soul, and art clear of their Blood;
And so thou becomest a Sufferer with Jesus Christ, and shall reign with him in
due time. I say, who are these now on the Earth, that withstand Truth, and
continue in the hateful destroying Ways of the old Jews and Gentiles, but such
as will not be counseled by the Lamb of God, the Suffering Seed, who said,
Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in Heart: But are Men of corrupt Minds,
who account Gain, and Worldly Honor, and Promotions more then Godliness, who
cries Peace to themselves in their Sins: And that same Spirit in them which
cries that false Peace in them, is the same that stirs them up to Kill,
Destroy, Oppress and Spoil one another for Selfish and Worldly Ends.

But the Lord is arisen to judge all these Evil Things and to redeem a Seed to
serve him, as in the beginning of the Gospel, before Antichrist the Murderer
got up amongst them, that professed Christ in Words, but denied him in Deeds;
who had a Name that they lived, but were Dead from that true Life, which was in
Christ Jesus, whom in Words they professed.

And though the Passage we feel now to be as hard of coming from amongst the
false Christians and Turks, as it was for the first true Christians to come
from amongst the Jews and Gentiles; Yet the Almighty Power of our God is able
over all, and through all to carry us on to the end, whom he has called and
saved with a mighty Salvation (ever-praised be his Name) and who will yet save
his Beloved Seed Israel, and gather them from the East and West, and from the
North and South to sit down with Christ in his Kingdom: And this is no ill News
to any, but who are glewed to Deceit, and married to Iniquity; But it is good
News and Glad-Tidings indeed to all that love their Souls, and the Honor and
Glory of Truth more then the things of this perishing World. And I could desire
that all who are apt to reason, as the Jews did, when they heard the
Declaration of the Gospel of Peace, and Kingdom of God, which stands in
Righteousness and Peace, saying, If we let this go on, then the Romans or
Others will come and take our Place and Nation. I say, that they would
consider, That the very Course which they, to wit the Jews, in the Denial of
the Truth took for saving of themselves, brought utter Destruction upon them
and their Nation.

But what l^^ shall vain man in his foolish fallen Wisdom and earthly Reasoning
think to be Wiser then God, and to have a greater Care and Love to the
Creation, then God himself, who made it, has? What! shall Angels at the Birth
of Christ sing, Glory to God on high, and Good Will to men; and yet when the
Way of God in Christ is published, for bringing this great Work of Salvation to
pass, vain man must come in with his False Mind, and say, This is the way to
confound all Order, and destroy all Good; And that this Doctrine turns the
World up-side down; And that the Messengers of Christ are pestilent Fellows,
and Movers of Sedition?

O Earth, Earth! Tremble before the Lord; for thou shall never have Peace in
thy own ways, thou shall never be saved by thy own Strength, thou shall never
be established by thy own Counsels, thou shall never have true Peace, nor any
Plenty within thy Borders, until thou believe the Gospel, which says, Learn
of Christ, whose Kingdom is not of this World, and whose Weapons are not
Carnal, but Spiritual, mighty through God; not for the pulling down of outward
Walls and Bodies, but for raizing, and pulling down, and destroying the strong
Holds of Sin and Satan in the Hearts and Lives of the Children of men: For
after that, says the Apostle, The World by Wisdom knew not God; it pleased God
by the Foolishness of Preaching (to wit, such Doctrine as this, which is a
Cross and Stumbling Block to all corrupt Flesh) to save them that believe.

So lay things to heart, ye people of the World, and Inhabitants of all the
Earth; for God's Purpose is not to exalt any man or men of this World, or to
glorify any Flesh; but to exalt his own Son, Christ Jesus, the heavenly Man,
the Lord from Heaven, the Truth overall, of whose Kingdom and Government there
shall be no End. And all that obey his Voice, and for Obedience thereunto are
made willing to Suffer with him, shall Reign with him for evermore: But all
others, whether they be called Christians or Turks, or whatever else, shall be
as the Dust or Chaff before the Wind to be scattered, as the Lord by his Spirit
from the beginning has said, and at this time speaks in his Servant.

Thomas Tailor.

THE END.

