Tell-Truth's Answer TO TELL-TROTH's LETTER To the Right Honorable the Earl of
SHAFTESBURY, In Vindication of his LORDSHIP; By as downright an ENGLISHMAN as
himself, Without Scandalous REFLECTIONS.
SIR,
I Have lately seen and perused a Letter in Print, to the Right Honorable the
Earl of Shaftesbury, from one that styles himself Tom Tell-Troth, a downright
Englishman. I must confess he begins well, and expresses himself in very good
words, to the due honor of that truly Noble Lord, as owning him to be, (as
indeed he is) a stout Asserter of the Protestant Religion and Interest; and
tells us, that Monarchy and the Protestant Religion do suffer, in respect of
the present Designs of Papists and Common wealths-men; but what he meant by
coupling good Common-wealths-men and Papists together, I could not understand,
till Reading his Letter a little farther, I quickly found and discovered that
he was a Wolf in sheeps clothing; and it will be Strange if I do not find him
to be a Jesuit, or one as bad, before the end of this Letter.

Yet very honestly he in the next words tells my Lord, that Ruin and
Desolation, Confusion and every evil work, will come swift upon us, (nothing
more sure) if some speedy Remedy be not instantly proposed by the wisdom of the
great Council of this Nation, (by that great Council) I suppose he means the
Parliament; and therein he writes honestly and truly, (for I will give the
Devil his due) but it is to be feared, if they do not sit speedily, it will be
too late to prevent that Ruin and Desolation he truly fore-tells is coming
upon us, though I believe he writes Ironically and in a jeering way.

In the next place he comes with many words, though to little or no purpose,
from 41, to the happy Restoration of the King (in which glorious work I am
persuaded he was no way instrumental) for His Majesty was, thanks be to God,
wonderfully restored to His Royal Throne by Gods Providence, and some worthy
Instruments, the Earl of Shaftesbury being one eminent in that great work.

Then he would make a parallel between 41, to this present time, concerning the
person of the late King, Church and Government, and that they were the Results
of such pernicious Counsels and Designs as are now hatching by these Sons of
Belial, to the present disturbance of our Church and Kingdom.

If there were Sons of Belial, as you say, and I believe there were in 41, I
mean the Jesuits and the Popes Emissaries; as Dr. Oats, that worthy person,
and ever to be esteemed, has made appear there were, those I suppose are
generally dead, gone to Purgatory, or somewhere else. But you say there are now
Sons of Belial, that study all the mischief they can to King, Church, and
State. I suppose you writing so confidently of it, must be well acquainted with
them, and be of their Councils, and therefore you would do good service to
discover them, (which I would do, did I know them) if you will not, you must
give me leave to tell you in downright English, that you are either a Jesuit
of the Church of Rome, or a Masked Protestant in the Church of England; for I
am a truer downright Englishman, and Protestant, than I find you are.

In the next place, he tells us, That in Forty and after, the Papists seeing
our Church so well guarded with Purity of Doctrine and Faith, (that is true,)
behold what Emissaries were sent out, and with what clothing to deceive: (what
clothing indeed) the Puritan is the man he names, and three persons that are
dead, and then tells us, that Archbishop Laud must be the first called into
question, and butchered, for being a Papist, or Popishly inclined. This I deny,
but must needs say, that Archbishop Laud was an Eminent Assertor of the Rights
of the Church, and a true Protestant, as his Learned Books against Fisher the
Jesuit do declare; (for I knew Bishop Laud I think better than you did) but by
your leave Sir, as old as you are, Bishop Laud suffered for other matters, as
the Articles that were against him will inform you.

Then he comes to tell us, that the Rabble in those times cried down Evil
Counselors, their design being to bring in Popery, and destroy Liberty, (ay
Liberty of the Subject) in a jeering scoffing way. Sir, know, it is our
Birthright, and you are an unworthy man if you are against it, and ought never
to enjoy it, but live and dye a slave. And then he mentions Ship Money (a huge
burden) was against Magna Charta; so it was, though but small in it self, as
also all other Monopolies in those days, contrived by Ministers which were
conscious of their ill deserts, to keep off the sitting of the Parliament,
(which they knew would call them to account) for above Ten years; in which time
had the Parliament sat, it would no doubt have supplied His Majesty with much
more in a legal way, and the Subjects would have been ready and willing to have
paid it. But do you not remember, you old Englishman, (as you style yourself in
the latter part of your Letter) what became of those persons that kept off the
King from His Parliament for so long a time? if you do not; I do: I wish we had
not some such persons now adays; if we have, they must look for the same
success as they had then in the end.

A King of England in Parliament is Absolute, and as Redoubtable as any Monarch
in the world; nor did ever any King that relied upon, and agreed with his
Parliament, miscarry. As on the other side, when ever base Flatterers, to serve
their own ends, and to secure themselves from Justice, have persuaded a Prince
to slight, grow jealous of, or be estranged from Parliaments; it has always
proved of fatal Consequence to the King and Kingdom.

Pray God bless and preserve his Majesty from all Popish Conspiracies, as he
has hitherto done, that he may more and more discover his real Friends from
his pretended ones; and then his Majesty will find, that those persons, whom
this Scribler terms Meeters in Clubs, at Taverns and other places, are his
Majesty's best and faithfullest Friends he has; for they meet only to enjoy
the Society of one another, and to study the Preservation of his Majesty, the
Protestant Religion, the Peace and Quiet of the Kingdom, against the Attempts
and Plots of the Devil and the Pope, and all their Party; who still study how,
and nothing more than how, Ruin and Destruction may be brought upon King and
People, as this their late Hellish and Damnable Plot sufficiently and fully
have discovered. Though Sir, you, to exasperate the people, and tell of 41, to
put this Plot aside, say, Then comes forth a Plot full of Treason and Popery;
and is there not just cause to suspect you to be concerned in it, since you
write so slightingly of it, as if there were no reality that there was this
Hellish Popish Plot? But you say it came forth. So it did, blessed be God that
it was discovered by Dr. Oats with others; (...)ere none of them. Your Brother
Coleman and others might y^^ have been living, if it had not been discovered,
and we had been in Blood and Confusion before this day: What may become of us
yet, I know not; for I fear the Devil and the Pope, with all their Hellish
party, are still Conspiring and Plotting against the peace of our Sion; but God
who has, I hope will still preserve his Majesty and poor England from all
their wicked Designs. I do not like your slighting expressions, to say it came
forth; but must give you one word more concerning it: It came forth from the
Devil first, from the Pope next, and thither let it return again, with all
those that were Instrumental in it, and will not truly repent of it, but
labor all they can to suther it.

Then you say, The D. must needs be the Foundation of this Damnable Plot. If by
your Capital D. you mean the Devil, I have already agreed with you; but if you
mean by your D. His Royal Highness the Duke of York, you are a very unworthy
man, and deserve to be punished: For what good Protestant, or sober man, can
think the Duke of York would ever own so Damnable and Hellish a Plot, being so
brave a person, and having had to his Father the best of Kings Deceased, and to
his Brother the best of Kings Living, (whom God grant may long Live and Reign
over us.) And God preserve the Discoverers, who, as he styles them truly, have
been blessed Instruments to save us at this time from the Paw of Antichrist;
though I would not have them (as he jeeringly expresses) revered as Demigods;
but I could wish they were better rewarded, as they well deserve, and I hope
they will one day be. Then he tells of a Hurly-burly, which caused the King to
Dissolve the Parliament, and to Prorogue them from time to time; but what he
means by it, I know not.

And it is no wonder you should fling a stone at Mr. Marvel's Grave, for any
whiffling Cur will venture to beard a dead Lion: it is well known, that little
Andrew (as you contemptibly call him) had Wit and Policy enough to silence the
greatest Droll and Scribler that ever troubled the Nation; and other Treatises
that are for the good of the Nation, cannot escape your Scurrilous Reflections.
And do not these Blisters on your Tongue betray the venom of your heart, and
plainly show, you are no true friend to the Church of England, but rather a
Jesuit, or a favourer of Popery, since you would hush us to sleep with
apprehensions that there is no fear of it till our Throats are cut?

There are several other passages in your Letter which might deserve
Animadversions, but by what I have said already, I doubt not but each
considerate Reader will be sufficiently informed of your design, and armed
against your wheadling insinuations: and so I shall leave you to pursue your
Game, (But know, in vain is the net spread in the presence of any Bird.)

Now, Sir, I am drawing to a Conclusion, and it may be you will say its time.
When I first read your Letter, I thought it not worth the while to give an
Answer to it; for Solomon says, Answer not a fool according to his folly, lest
he be wise in his own conceit. Pardon me, Sir, though I express my self thus
freely to you; for I assure you, I do not in the least think you to be a Fool,
but one that God has given great Parts and Abilities to, and I wish you may
have grace to make a good use of them, in order to which, I shall give you a
few cautions by way of advice, and I do it for your good.

1. Be sure you print nothing for time to come to please the men of the times,
and to humor them, that may be displeasing to God; for if you and I, and all
men must one day give an account of every idle word, yea, of our secret
thoughts and actions, then you must give an account of this you scribbling
Letter, and the ends and grounds you had to make it public, and I the like for
my Answer; and then it will be made appear, who aimed most at the honor of
God, the peace and welfare of the Kingdom, and advancement of the Protestant
Religion, you or I.

2. Print no more for time to come, but what you know to be true, else you
wrong your self and the Readers, and you must give an account for that also one
day; and write no more in a jeering way under a pretense of reality, in which
you show Hypocrisy and Dissimulation, which you have done in many places in
your Letter, though to no purpose at all.

3. Follow the Advice you give to that Noble Lord, study to do your own
business, and write no more Letters to such Honorable and worthy persons: you
show great presumption and sawciness: you think you may write any thing, and to
any person. Better you had an Employment in the Penny-Post-Office of carrying
Letters, than writing any more.

4. If you are now of the Church of Rome, as I think you are, come away from
them to the Church of England, which is the best Church in the world for
Doctrine and Discipline; and come away quickly, ^or Antichrist will speedily
fall; he has but three horns left of ten, and one of them begins already to
decline and forsake him, yea, to push at him: but if you are of the Church of
England already, declare it really.

Sir, I have done, and must assure you, that I am no affector of Complements,
and therefore shall not tell you that I am

Your Servant, Though to my King and Country, and the Protestant Religion A
faithful Subject and Sincere well-wisher.
POSTSCRIPT.
I Would have set my Name to this my Answer, for I am not ashamed nor afraid to
own any passage in it; but you not setting your Name to your Letter, makes me
forbear setting mine to my Answer.



FINIS.

