Ignorance and Error REPROVED: BEING AN ANSWER TO SOME QUERIES That one JOHN
REYNOLDS Wrote to Two of the People called QUAKERS.

By THOMAS TAILOR.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, next Door to the Meeting House in
White-Hart-Court in Gracious-street; and at the Bible in Leadenhall-street near
the Market, 1697.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER. 1662

WHEN the Lord God of Eternal Power began, by his Spirit, to move in these
Nations, in the late times of Trouble, and there was an Opening in the times
for the Zeal of the Heart to work out it self, then every one betook themselves
to that Fellowship and People that agreed most with the Working Principle that
was in them, and so there came a distinguishing and knowledge of those seeking
Souls, according to some thing most obvious to the Eye of the World, and so
they called some by the name of Presbyterians, some Independent, and the like:
For, as for those called Prelatical, they were not of such a pressing Nature,
as to seek forward much after the Spiritual Kingdom, but rather Breathed after
their Old Form, how they might come to this again, (without the former
Troubles) to lie down in that: But those called Presbyterian or mixed
Independent (in answer to whose Queries, or one of them, the ensuing sheets
are) they seemed so Zealous while the Worlds Power countenanced them, as though
they would have taken Heaven, as it were by force; and not only so, but even of
late also, since the Second Charles came in, and they began to be put out of
their high Places by some old Incumbent, as they call them, or upon some other
Account, as Zealor so, yet did some of them keep up their Custom of Preaching
amongst People in public, where they could get place or audience, in so much
that the boasting Spirit began to get up in some of them, as in this John
Reynolds, as though nothing should stop their passage, and so would have all
accounted Liars that had said to the Contrary: But behold the Wisdom if God in
suffering things so to come to pass, that all things might be fully manifest:
And so an Act of Parliament must come out against them, unless they will
Conform. And then lo, behold this shower of Rain forces in their tender Heads,
as not being able to endure the sharpness of the Storm, for want of the true
Spiritual Armor: For Words and Profession could never secure any from the
Fiery Trials that are still ordered in the Wisdom of God for the manifesting of
every Seed: So if these ensuing answers may be serviceable unto any of these
Zealous Hearts to provoke them to a further search of themselves, and be a
means now when they are something low, to give them a sight of any thing
wherein they have Sined against God, and Erred from his way of Life, and so to
move them to Repentance, it will be well, and a gladding of my Heart, and of my
Brethren, who cannot but desire and endeavor, not only theirs, but even the
good of all Men; yea, of them, that either in times past have, or at this day
do show the greatest Enmity against us; for we know, they none of them
understand aright the Innocence of our Hearts to them, and the Fear and Love of
our Souls to God and his Truth; for if they did, how could they forbear to Love
us: But Glory to God for ever, that bath given us, not only to believe, but
even, as need is, to suffer for his Name and Truths sake, and to pass by great
Offenses done to us, which in Love to the Soul we could desire might be also
the Portion of all that name Truth, Rests God Servant,

Thomas Tailor.

Ignorance and Error REPROVED, etc.
JOHN REYNOLDS, A Paper of Queries (coming to my hand) as seems from thee to
John Finch, and John Payton of Dudly, and weighing it well, I could not but in
obedience to God write something to it, not so much for the use of these two
young men, who by the Light that God has raised in them do see thy deceit
therein, as for the sake of some simple people who are as yet admirers of thee,
and deceived by thee, and such like who under a pretense of zeal for the letter
of Scripture, and things you have set up in your wills under the name of
Ordinances, not knowing nor considering that Christ is come, the end of all
things to them that believe: Though you may sometimes unwillingly light on
Scriptures, that speaks the thing; and so if by what here may be said, the
Truth may more appear, and their simple Souls be helped, God will be Glorified,
and that will be Reward sufficient: But before the Queries themselves be
answered, something may be said, to that which goes before them in that Paper,
and from that I have noted the nature of thy Fawning, Flattering,
Self-contradicting and Confused Spirit; but to hide that from the Light, thou
backs thy sayings with quotations of Scripture, as though mentioning what the
Holy Men of God spoke by the true Spirit, could prove that to be a true Spirit
which acts in thee: Nay, nay, the day is dawned Praised be God; and the
Sheepskin no longer can hide the Wolves from being seen of the Lambs of Christ,
for such hear Christ's Voice and follow him, and so are Children of the Light,
but the Stranger they will not follow, though he may Paint him self over never
so cunningly with words, but all your fair words in the beginning of your work,
ye Fair-sayers, whether in Pulpit or in Press, is but to make way for your
sting that follows, for you resemble the Soorpion whose sting is in his Tail,
mentioned in Revelations: for the end of all thy fair words here, is but to
draw these young men from the simplicity that is in Christ, and his Light that
Lights every man that comes into the World, for the great Malice of thy
Heart, is against the sufficiency of Christ's Light in every man; and so would
have something to be added to it from without, that so thou may bring in thy
own traditions; but what condition shall one gather by thy words, these two Men
John Finch, and John Payton, were in at the writing of these Queries to them,
for one while thou seem to apply Scriptures respecting the conditions of the
unbelieving Jews to them, and another while thou applies those that respect the
condition of pretty well-grown Christians: But however the sum of all is, to
persuade them from following the Light of Christ in them, as not being
sufficient, and so thy love is not testified unto them in Deed and in Truth, as
thou say it is, but in mere Hypocrisy and Deceit, as may further appear:
But what is that Soul enlightening Commandment Psalm 29. 8. Whereby thou seem
to desire they may be enlightened? Is it this letter without, or the Light of
Christ within? If thou say the letter, as thou must say, or else thwarts the
whole current of thy Doctrine, and then all that have Eyes may see thee to be
an outward Jew only: But if thou say with us, it is the Light of Christ that
shines in Darkness, John 1. which at the Commandment of God shines out of
Darkness, 2 Cor. 4. to give the knowledge of Gods Glory to Man in the Face of
Christ, then the business about Sufficiency of the Light between us is at an
end, and the Truth stands over the from thy own words. The next is, when thou
hear the Scripture mentioned thy Windy, Slightly, Crafty Doctrine of
Deceivers, Ephesians 4. 14. then thou shoots thy Sting at the Innocent and would
have People believe that is to be applied to us who Preach Christ and his
all sufficiency in, and for every one that can Receive Him, who is near every
Man, and by his Light shines to Conviction and Judgment in every Man, who
would have all Men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of his Truth, which
is nigh in the Heart and in the Mouth; but this was the Apostles Doctrine, and
so not to be condemned in us, but thou go on, telling of two ways of
Deceiving, the one thou namest the upper way (which thou say) is by
Philosophy, the Traditions of Men, Rudiments of the World, and Sciences falsely
so called: And Praised be God, thou art as it were forced by the Light in thy
Conscience to acquit us from being of this Number; but truly the Light in our
conscience tells us expressly, that thou John Reynolds art one of them that are
^n this upper way, as thou call it, of deceit, for of Philosophy, Traditions
of Men, Worldly Rudiments, and false Sciences is the Body of thy Divinity made
up, as well as other of thy Brethren the Hirelings thou would condemn, for
the difference is not in the nature of your Doctrine, but in the form. And so
though an Idol of Gold appear more beautiful than one of baser mettle, yet it
is an Idol still, and so you are both in the Fighting and Persecuting nature,
as all Idolaters are; Ephraim against Manasseh, and Manasseb against Ephraim,
but both against Judah; one for the Common Prayer, another for the Directory,
but neither will own the Lambs Light in you, to Teach and Guide you; and so
though you may have a Form of Godliness more Painted than they, yet denying the
Power (Christ in man) you are all alike to be turned away from: And so John
Finch, and John Payton in turning from thee, as well as the other Formalists,
are excuseable; and though thou go about to persuade them from the Truth, by
telling them of a lower way of deceiving by a voluntary Humility, and
neglecting of the Body, and wearing a rough Garment to deceive, which thou
would intimate to be our condition, yet this will not deceive their minds,
if they keep to the true Light of Christ in them, for in that they feel our
Garment to be smooth and sweet, through the Fathers Love, not rough or hairy;
as the Hypocrites is, who kill one another about their ways of Worship; but for
voluntary Humility in the will offered up by heaps, which is no better than
filthy smoke in the nostrils of a pure God in this day; and Praised be God that
has brought us from this into the true Humility: but how thy words of accusing
us here of neglecting the Body, and afterward of Drunkenness, can agree, let
the wise in Heart consider; but all in thy changeable nature and unstable must
needs be Self-contradictors; and so who be the Thieves that Christ in this day
is Crucified between, is thus far in part, and will afterward God willing more
appear. Also it is observable from that Preface of thine further, where it is
said that this latter, viz. Namely, the lower way of deceiving may possibly
prevail, though not with the present Multitude, yet some unstable Souls that
have been none enlightened and have tasted the good Word of God, and the Power
of the World to come, but are not yet rooted and settled in the Truth and grace
of the Lord Jesus Christ; then I say, thou need'st not fear any of thy
followers to be deceived on this manner, for none can be savingly enlightened
who denies the sufficiency of Christ's Light, the Grace of God, which has
appeared to all Men; yea, in their Darkness shines, though the Darkness
comprehend it not, as thou do not; and none can say in Truth they have tasted
the Good Word of God who puts the Letter for it, and denies the sufficiency of
Christ's Light, which is his Word nigh in the Heart and Mouth, as thou do; nor
none can truly be said to taste the Powers of the World to come, who deny to
bow their Hearts to the least Measure of Christ's Light in them, accounting it
insufficient, as thou do: And so it is the real Believers that had need to
take heed of being Deceived, with fair Shows and rough Garments, for the
Hypocrites are deceived already: But what Doctrine John Reynolds does judge in
these he calls silly Seducers and Quakers, to be amiss, and by these two men he
writes unto to be taken heed of, may gathered out of these Queries, to instance
some.

1. Because they say Christ Lights every man with a sufficient Light that
comes into the World

2. Because they say, That the Measure of the Spirit of God in man is the true
and certain trier of all Spirits.

3. Because they say, Christ himself and not the empty declaration without, is
the Word of God.

4. Because they say, Christ the better hope, being come, sinless perfection
thorough him is attainable here.

5. Because they say, Judgment is committed to the Saints even whilst they are
in the Body, and therefore such may Judge; and yet, say they, it is not flesh,
but Spirit that Judges all things.

6. Because they make Conscience of saying Thou and Thee to a particular, which
is the plain Language.

7. Because they say, that all Honor, and Glory, and Worship is to be given to
God alone, and not to any Creature.

8. Because they say, The true Church is in God, and so no Unrighteous One in
it, or of it, and so can neither call the Wicked God's Church, nor a House of
Wood and Stone his Church.

9. Because they cannot own the Worlds Sprinkling of Infants with a little
outward Water, for Christ's Baptism; and because they cannot own that for a
right Communion, which is in Sin, and who eat Bread and drink Wine in
Remembrance of a Coming of Christ, which they say shall never be while they are
here, and the like.

But now something, the Lord assisting, may be spoken particularly in Answer to
the Queries themselves; and the first of them is this,

Query 1. First Question; If that Light which is within every Man that comes
into the World, be sufficient without the Preaching of the Gospel, how is it
that Heathens know little or nothing of the True God?

Answ. To this I answer, That thou run'st here upon a false Ground, and so
draws this and the rest of thy stumbling Consequences from thy own
Imaginations, not from our Words, for we do not Exclude the Preaching of the
Gospel from the Light, nor the Light from it; but say, That is the true Light
that Lights every Man that comes into the World; one loves the Light,
believes it, and follows it, and is led to God, and so saved by it
sufficiently; the other hates it, and it is his Condemnation: And this is the
Gospel Preaching, and this Light of Christ in every Man is the Light of the
Glorious Gospel, whether it be declared of to the outward Ear in Words or not;
but he that Preaches not this True Light, Preaches another Gospel, though there
be not another Gospel: And I say unto you, all People, if a seeming Angel
Preach not this Gospel of Light, this Grace of God which brings Salvation,
which has appeared to all Men, and is the Saints Teacher and Keeper, he is to
be accursed: But whereas thou cell'st of Heathen: Answer, All are Heathens now,
and Ignorant of the True God, who know nothing of the sufficiency of the Light
that Lights every Man that comes into the World; but thou ask in the end
of that Query two very Childish, Questions: The first, Why we exhort all Men to
follow the Light within, if that be sufficient? I answer, Because it is
sufficient, therefore do we Exhort all Men to follow it, for that which is not
sufficient is not safe to follow: And so you that are so full of words, and
ignorant of the Sufficiency, beat the Air and deceive the People, keeping silly
Women ever Learning, and never able to bring them to the knowledge of the
Truth, which perfects to God all the comers thereunto. Thy second Query there,
How could the Word of God be called a Mystery hid from Ages and Generations,
but now is made manifest, if the Light within be sufficient? And then quotes
Ephesians. 3. 9. Col. 1. 25, 26. Mat. 11. 25. I answer, That it was within, and
sufficient when it lay hid as a Mystery, till God's full time came of revealing
it; and therefore Christ compares it to many Powerful and Precious, though
hidden things, and of little account to the outward view, as to a Grain of
Mustard Seed in the Earth, to a little Leaven within much Flower, to Treasure
hid in the Field; and Christ said to the Pharisees, that God's Kingdom was to
be found in Man, he excludes none, and those Scriptures thou sett'st down prove
for this Truth, and against thy roving Mind which is in the outward observings,
thinking to find the Kingdom there, when Christ says, it comes not that way,
see Luke 17. 20, 21. What, will thou conclude it was not, because it lay hid?
What Logic is this? Does not Paul there say, that the Mystery which was so
hid, and which he by the Spirit now Preached, which was Christ in the Gentiles
the Hope of Glory? And Christ was Light, and to this Light he warned every Man
to take heed; but the little Children, not the Masters, obey the Voice, and so
are led into the Understanding, of the Mystery.

Qu. 2. In the next general Query thou ask, Are not the Scriptures the Words
of the Lord, whose Words are they? And why is the Scripture so often called the
Word of God, and the Word of the Lord? And for this thou brings many
Scriptures, as Exodus 24. 4. 2. Kings 20. 26, 27, 28, 29. Psalm. 12. 6. Jer. 36.
4, 6, 8, 11. Acts 19. 10. 2 Cor. 2. 17. 1. These. 1. 8.

Answ. To this I say, First, That the Holy Scriptures were given forth by Holy
Men of God, as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, and so they may be called the
Words of God, or of the Lord, not that Spirit and Living Word, but that those
Scriptures prove what thou bring them for; to wit, that the Scriptures or
Writings without, is there called the Word of God, 1662
is not true; it is said indeed in that of 2 Kings 20. 16. That Isaiah said
unto Hezekiah, Hear the Word of the Lord; and Hezekiah said, Good is the Word
of the Lord; and in other places of Scriptures, that the Word of the Lord came
to the Prophets; and that in the forementioned place of Acts, and Corinthians,
and Thessalonians, mention is made of the Apostles Preaching the Word of God,
all this is true; but of Exodus, and Psalms, and Jeremiah, mention is made of
Words; but what does all this prove, but only that the Word came to Holy Men,
this Word was God, and as this Word moved in them, and gave them Wisdom and
Utterance, they writ or spoke forth Words as a Declaration of what was in the
Mind, or Word of God, or what God was; and what, though the Scriptures may be
thus called, The Words of the Lord, or his Prophets, or Apostles, Acted by his
Power, which we never denied; this is nothing to the Hypocrites, who use their
Tongues to say, The Lord says, when he never spoke by them, but make a Trade
of the Scriptures for filthy Lucre, and by their much pressing the Declaration
to be the Word of God, have quite clouded the Word if self (Christ, from whence
true Words come) from the Peoples Minds, so that scarce any have any true
Living Feeling after God in his Word Christ; for in the beginning was the Word,
before all Declarations, and shall be after all the Peaceable Life of all that
Believe for ever! So that the Lord saw it good to stir up a People in these
days to be True and Living Witnesses of the Word, for the stopping of the
Mouths of all such as have gotten the Words, as Thieves from others, and so
kept People in the form with themselves, always Professing, but never
Possessing the Power which the Scripture Witness unto, and so the Letter and
empty Words killed and do kill; but now the Living Spirit and Living Word being
Witnessed, the Scriptures is owned in its place; and Resurrection to Life being
felt, the Crown is set upon the King's Head, whose Name is called The Word of
God, who was, and is, and is to come, over all God Blessed for evermore; and it
is considerable, that the Ministers of Christ are never called Ministers of the
Letter, or Words, but of the Word and Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. and that Christ and his
Apostles mentioning the Prophets Words, usually called them Scripture, and not
The Word of God, as the custom of Hypocrites is now; All Flesh is Grass, and
all outward Sounds and Signs vanish, but the Word of the Lord that endures for
ever; and this is that Word which, by the Gospel, (the Power of God) is
Preached, and by nothing else savingly; which, when understood, People are One,
but not before; for it is the weakness which is like the Woman's speaking, makes
Dissension; so let the Scripture have its due, and the Word of God its due, and
all is Beautiful in its place.

Query 3. In thy third, thou ask, How shall we know whether the Spirit that
speaks in us be the Spirit of God, or an evil Spirit, but by trying them by the
Scriptures? And for this thou bring 1 John 4. 1. Isa. 8. 19, 20. Acts 17.
11. John 5. 39. then thou replies, and as it were says, If you say we know the
Spirit to be of God, because it convinces of Sin; then I ask, how do you know
that to be Sin, but by the Scripture? For this thou bring 1 John 3. 4. Sin
is a Transgression of the Law; and afterward says, If we say that Spirit tells
us it is of God, or that we know it but by its Fruit, how do we know it not to
be a lying Spirit; or how do we know the Fruits of the Spirit but by Scripture?

Answ. Now, I say, by all this it plainly appears, that thou art no
Gospel-Minister, no Minister of the Spirit of God at all, but art a mere talker
of the Letter and Law, not knowing what it says, nor whereof it affirms; for
does not the next Covenant run thus, I will put my Law in their Hearts, and in
their Minds will I write it, Jer. 31. 31; and Heb. 8. 8. and the Apostle that
said unto his Brethren, Try the Spirits, in that place 1 John 4. 1. did not
say, you have a writing without by which you know all things, but you have an
Anointing from the Holy One, and this abides in you, and by this they know all
things, 1 John 2. 20, 27. according to what Paul in 1 Cor. 2. 15, 16. says,
The Spiritual Man judges or discerns all things, but is judged or discerned
of none; for the Natural Man knows nothing aright, though he may have all the
Scriptures to talk of without him; and though he may cry up in appearance, even
as Isaiah said to the Law and to the Testimony, yet he never goes to the Law or
Testimony at all, for the Law is Spiritual and Inward, and the Testimony of
Jesus is the Spirit of Prophecy, as says Scripture Declaration; and by that
Spiritual Law Paul came to the knowledge of his Sin, to Humiliation; but while
he was but a Professor of the Law in the Letter, he was alive without Law; but
when the Commandment in Spirit came to be felt nigh in the Heart, then Sin
Revived and he Died: And so will John Reynolds dye when the Law indeed he comes
to feel, but he is yet alive without Law, and from that Ground comes all these
Queries of his to stop, if possible, the Holy Seed from coming out of Egypt;
but the Lord will break all Bonds for his Elect sake; so that in a few words,
take away from thIs John Reynolds the Letter, and by his own words he is as
blind as a Beetle; for he Questions how a Man can either know the true Spirit,
or Sin, or the Works, or Fruits of either good Spirit or bad, but by the
Letter, so that his Eye is in the outward Book, and so no Letter, no Preacher.
For, John Reynolds, did the Apostles hold sorth a Letter without them to be an
Eye to the World? Nay, nay, they were to turn the People to the Light of Christ
within them, that thereby they might see the Light out of all Darkness and
false Worships; For in thy Light, says David, we shall see Light: O the Riches
of the Grace of God that has deliver^ John Fince and John Payton from this
Blind Guide John Reynolds, whose Eye within is yet shut by the god of the
World! 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4.

Qu. 4. Thou Queriest, whether the Saints in your times are more perfect than
Saints in Scripture times? And the rest of this Query is to plead for Sin, and
against sinless Perfection; and in the Conclusion of it, thou say, we cannot
show you one Man that ever attained it.

Answ. Yea, to this I say, Through the Lord's great Love we are able to hold
forth to thee, and all the World, one perfect Man; yea, such a One, in whose
Mouth there was and is no Guil; who did, and does good, and sinned not, nor
does sin; who was in a sinless Perfection, and of such a Man will we glory, not
of Self, nor of Flesh, but in him who is made unto us of God, Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, who is more perfect than
Thousands under the Law were. Go to then, to stop all Mouths, the Gospel-day is
Witnessed, Praised be the Lord, and in Perfection of Beauty do true Believers
now Worship, and the Righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in such who walk not
after the Flesh, but after the Spirit; so John Reynolds to thee, and thy
Company, I say, Arise, stand up from the Dead, come out of your own times where
there is none perfect, for your times pass away into nothing; but for Scripture
times (that is large, it is not, as thou would Infinuate) ended yet, for the
Scripture is the Lord daily fulfilling, and will do it until time shall be no
more; which he that has an Ear to hear, ^^t him hear; and not only they, but a
Hundred Forty Four Thousand sinless perfect Ones are mentioned Rev. 14. 25.
with many more; see also Chap. 7. Verse. 9. 14. an Innunerable Number.

Qu. 5. And for thy fifth Query, where thou say, If those that are called
Quakers esteem themselves the only true Christians in the World, then would I
know where has been their Church this 1600 Years.

Answ. To this, I say, here thou manifests thy self again; what stumbling is
here in thy dark Mind? This is like the Papists Arguments to Protestants; but
to this may be easily answered, that if it be manifest to the Conscience of
any, as Praised be God it is to many, that we are of God, such a one will never
ask such a Question as this: But now to you who cannot own the Light in your
Consciences, we cannot be manifest, because the World knows us not; and then
ask, where has your Church been? I say, it has been ever where it is at this
day; to wit, the Church which is in God and Christ; which, when thou come to
the Light of Christ within thee, then thou will see, but till then we must be
content to lie hid from thee, and all Dark Minds, and so to bear Christ's
Reproach; but to all my dear Brethren in Christ, I say, Behold what manner of
Love the Father has bestowed on us, that we should be called the Sons of God,
Fellow-Citizens in the Heavenly Jerusalem with all the Church of God,
Firstborn of God, whose Names are written in Heaven, therefore the World knows
us not, because it knew not our Head first, 1 John 3. Heb. 12. But as for thy
telling of Esteeming Self, and the name Quaker, and the like, thou may take
those words in again from whence they came, for Self and Names of Men's giving
we deny; and Glory in the Cross of Christ, where the Name of God is known; and
as for the rest of thy Queries, which tell of our unableness to give a Proof of
such People as we, before the last twenty Years, or so; who placed Religion in
Thouing and Theeing, and refusing to put off their Hats, and wear Decent.
Ornaments in their Apparel, and it is such frothy stuff that it Shames thee and
thy Profession; but thou may know, that though you may do what you will that
are without Law to God, yet we are taught to fear the Lord, and whatsoever is
pure, to mind that, and so our Religion stands in Christ, not in outward
Appearances, though the outward be all thou can see, and so stumbles at the
meanness of it; but what are those Decent Ornaments in Apparel thou tell on?
Is needless Points, and Laces, and Ribonds, and such filth? Then surely all
Saints are one with us here; but for that thou say, we Rail against Priests
Tithes, Idols Temples, and Idols Worship, being such as yours; I say, though
Railing we deny, yet we can easily prove by Scripture, that Holy Men Cried
Vehemently against false Worships and Worshipers, who were guided as you are in
all Ages; but as for that, thou say, We Rail against Baptism and the Lord's
Supper, and Singing of Psalms, thou art found a great and false Slanderer in
this, for to let pass the word Railing, we deny that we so much as speak
against Christ's Baptism, or Supper, or his Singing, or that we take upon our
selves to condemn any to Hell; but this we say, That no Unrighteous One, or
Hypocrite has any Inheritance in the Kingdom of God, or of Christ, and he that
is not with us is against us; which Words will-be hard and heavy for many to
bear; and as for Christ's Baptism, and Supper, and Singing in and with the
Spirit we dearly own, but the Hypocrite and their Leaven we deny.

Qu. 6. The next Query is something to the former purpose, and so that which is
said may serve for that; but thou addest a great and wicked Lie and Slander, in
saying, we condemn the most Eminent Saints and Martyrs, for thou say, they
were not of our Minds, and thou seem much Troubled, that thy self also (whom
thou have so high an esteem of) could not pass the Censure of those thou
scornfully calls Quakers, have any of them called thee Deceiver, and the like?
I say, see if it be not true that might be thus spoken unto thee, for it is no
Derogation to the Honor of Truth, to say, the Truth it self may call a
Deceiver, false Accuser, and Reproacher, by their proper names: For in Matt.
23. and John 8. see Christ's Language to the Hypocrites of those Days; so the
Error was not in Christ his calling them so, that were so, but in those
Pharisees there calling Christ a Deceiver, and Devil, when he was not so, nor
could be; and for the most Holy and Zealous Christians amongst you, that thou
say, had the like Names from us: I answer, if any under the Name Quaker
called thee or any of thy Company otherwise than they, in the Light, saw true,
or could make good, they were to blame; but if any in Truth have declared your
Inward Condition to you, though under such Terms, you ought rather to repent,
than to kick and spurn at it in your hard Hearts; for it will be hard for you
to kick against the Pricks; and for Spewing, you may take that to your selves,
whose Throat is an open Sepulcher, wide opened against all that are Holy and
Zealous in Christ, to separate from you, and witness against your Deceit: And
so if those thou call Holy and Zealous Christians amongst you, together with
thy self be weighed in the Balance of Truth, it will appear you are as far
from that State, as the East is from the West.

But I demand how thou know the Saints and Martyrs were not of our
Persuasion and Practice? for thou do not judge with the Light that is Pure
and Spiritual, as is manifest, nor see with a single Eye, but only judges with
thy Evil Thoughts and False Imaginations; for we say in a few words, that our
Mind and Practice is to believe on the Name of the Son of God, that true Light
that Lights every Man that comes into the World, and to love one another,
and to labor to keep a Conscience void of offense toward God and all Men: And
I Read that the Saints and Martyrs were of this Persuasion and Practice with
us, and so we have a Cloud of Witnesses, both Ancient and Modern, of the Truth
of this our way; and so if thou have Books that tell of other manner of Saints
or Martyrs, I deny both them and thee, in calling them Saints, who are not; for
the Saints of God and Martyrs of Jesus are one Body in all Ages, not loving
their Lives to death, that so they might always keep to God's manifest Truth in
them without denying it before Men; and this is that which the Lord God has
wrought in us poor Despised People, to the Glory of his Grace in this his day,
that no Flesh might Glory, but as it is written, Let him that Gloreth, Glory in
the Lord, who alone is worthy.

Qu. 7. But in thy seventh and next Query, thou think thou have gotten
something against us, because, say thou, we use to cry against you as
Hirelings, and that you would Preach no longer than People put into your
Mouths; but now, say thou, it is manifest that many of these are ready to
lose all for the Testimony of Jesus, and to Preach the Gospel freely though it
be in danger of Imprisonment.

Answ. To which I answer and say, That the Testimony of those thou scornfully
call Quakers, against you, stands firm and true, for all these thy high
swelling Words of Vanity; for we know none of you Preaching freely as yet, and
the reason why you talk in the form, you do it because you cannot keep your fat
Benefices; O Hypocrites! What Whining and Complaining is there by you in these
days for your Belly? But for Preaching the Gospel, you have manifested your
selves to be Ignorant both of Christ and of the Gospel, by denying the
sufficiency of the Light which Lights every Man that comes into the World,
John 1. 9. and then put the Letter for the Light, and so sight and strive with
your Brethren about your form and several Imaginations of the Letter; one cries
up a Bishop, another a Presbyter, and both of you Ignorant of the true Bishop
and Elder. But John Reynolds, would not thou and thy Brethren be at the Gain
from your Quarter again, if Common Prayer could be dispensed withal? Oh if you
be brought into such a suffering Frame! How is it that we have no more of your
Company in Prison? Nay, nay, your old Heart is in you yet, and ye would be
sucking Lambs Blood still if you had Power, and that the God of Heaven sees,
and will take Vengeance on you for it; and that which you cannot do with your
Hands, you are doing with your Tongues and Pens, as is manifest. But I have
often said, if you could Preach freely; that is, without a set or forced
maintenance, in the state where you are, that would not at all commend you to
God or his People: For you have run, and God never sent you; and therefore you
remain so ignorant of him, and profit not them that follow you; for when did
Christ bid you go to the Universities of the World to learn him there? And when
did he bid you go to such a place, and such a place, and there sit down and Eat
the Fat, and Cloth with the Wool, and Preach the Thoughts of your vain
Hearts, as you have done, and would do, and be guarded by the Magistrates
Power, that none should speak to you in your high Places, nor going nor coming
from thence? O call to mind the day of your fullness, and of your Pride; the
same measme you mete to others is God measuring to you; you must be broken to
pieces, because you turn not to the Lord for all this: And to the despised
thing, the Light in your Conscience, you must come and how before it, as others
have done, before you be healed; and if it give you a word to speak, you may
speak it; otherwise you must be silent, or you perish: The Lord is arisen, and
so if indeed you can kiss his Rod, you may find Mercy; but if you still go on
justifying your selves in his sight, you shall certainly moulder to nothing;
the Lord has said it, who is daily gathering his Lambs out of the Mouths of
all Devourers, Glory to his Name for ever. But what Testimony of Jesus can you
either give or suffer for, who have so Vilified and Reproached the Spirit of
Prophecy in Sons and Daughters, in Servants and Handmaids in these Days? For
the Testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of Prophecy.

And now all People, I shall lay before you, a little more, the Condition of
this John Reynolds, and such like boasting Men, who now thus cry up themselves
for suffering Ministers of Christ, as to this particular thing. In the former
times, before the Wars when the Bishops had Rule, there were some such that
could not conform to all the Fooleries of those Days, and so could not enjoy
their fat Benefices (though they loved them well enough) and so instead of
suffering in Old-England fled into New England to avoid the Cross, and so in
process of time it came to pass that they got the Magistrates on their side
there; and then their Old Wolfish Hearts being still in them, they fell on
Persecuting the Servants of God that came amongst them to witness to Truth,
insomuch that of late years they have sucked the Blood of several of our Dear
Members in Christ; Three they hanged on a Tree, cut the Ears of others,
Tortured the Bodies of many with cruel Whippings, spoiled the Goods of many,
and Banished others for no other thing, but for owning the Truth as it is in
Jesus, and meeting to wait upon him.

Qu. 8. The Eighth and next Query is such a vain and empty one, that the very
setting of it down will be in great measure an answer to it, and it is this.

If there be no honest Men in the World that are not Quakers, then is it not
certain, that no honest Men ever turned Quakers? Then is it not certain, that
none but the Wicked ever turned from us, and then where is our shame? Again, if
all are Graceless Persons that are not Quakers, then how can any Man turn
Quaker if he will not first acknowledge himself a Wicked and Graceless Wretch?

Answ. O Crooked, Twining, Twisting Serpent! How Cunning and Crafty would
thou here appear in thy vain Philosophy, and false Science, to cast a Mist
before the Eyes of the Simple? Yet, Praised be the Lord, the least Child of
Light sees thee well, and the Seed of the Woman shall bruise thy Head, and thou
shall not proceed far, but thy Folly shall be manifest to all, as the Sorceries
of Jannes and Jambres, thy Fathers were; for the Lord is already at work the
second time to deliver his Israel out of Egypt, and no Weapon formed against
his Seed shall ever prosper; but the Horse and his Rider shall fall, and the
Beast and False Prophet shall be taken alive and cast into the Pit, and
Everlasting praises shall be Sung to the Lord God Almighty by the Lambs of his
Holy Fold, as it is in Zion this day.

But let us see how this reaoning of thine would have helped the Jews and the
Gentiles in the first times of the Gospel against the Christians, and so
setting down thy words for them, only instead of Quaker putting in the word
Christian thus:

If there are no honest Men in the World that are not Christians, then is it
not certain, that no honest Man ever turned Christian; and if so, where is
their Glorying? And if all are wicked that are not Christians; then is it not
certain, that none but the Wicked did ever turn from us; and where is our
Shame? Again, If all are Graceless persons that are not Christians; then is it
not certain, that none but the Wicked did ever turn from us; then where is our
Shame? Would this have been good Reasoning, either to have disproved the
Christians Doctrine withal, or to have kept the unbelieving Jews and Gentiles
in a safe Condition where they stood? Nay, all must bow to the Son of God in
his rising and going forth; for his going forth is prepared as the Sun in the
Morning, who rejoices as a Giant to run his Course, and to this Just One must
every Knee bow, and Tongue confess; for his Way is in his Light Shining more
and more until it be high Noon and perfect Day: And the Gentiles, though as
honest as Cornelius, Acts 10. and the Jew, though as blameless concerning the
Law as Paul in his first state was, Phil. 3. must bow to him: Yea further, Let
all the Angels of God Worship him. But as for the Worlds Inhabitants, both
Honest and Wicked, we know that the whole World lies in Wickedness: And so,
before you turn such Christians as quake and tremble at God's Word, and work
out their Salvation in Fear and Trembling, you must be content to own your
selves to be little less than Dishonest, Wicked, and Graceless Wretches, though
into the Truth Sinful Flesh and Blood cannot enter; and though you will not now
own the Grace of God to be your Teacher, and so in that respect may be called
Graceless; yet you will one day know, that the Grace of God which brings
Salvation, and would have taught you, did appear unto you all; and so God will
be clear of all your Blood, and your Destruction will be of your selves; and so
because you have not received this manifest Truth, the Grace of God to be your
Teacher, therefore me you given up to believe Lies, as is manifest.

Qu. 9. Thy Ninth and next Question is about Ordination; and then Queries, To
what purpose did the Apostles, Evangelists, and Presbyters ordain Elders in
every City with Fasting, Prayer, and Imposition of Hands, if every Person that
will, may run and ordinarily Preach without any such Ordination? And thou
say, you may see how Persons were sent forth to Preach in Scripture, Acts.
13. 23. and 14. 23 1 Timothy 4. 14.

Answ. To which I say, that the purpose of God in ordaining Elders in every
City, as is mentioned in that Acts. 14. 23. was not that proud and covetous Men
(who have a little Worldly Wisdom only to talk of the Letter and wrest
Scripture by) should perk up and set up themselves in the place of God's Elders
in God's Church: But that in this Church, by his Spirit in those Elders, the
Body might be Edified, and all kept in good order amongst them through Love:
Mind, this was the Church of God which was in God, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 1. the Body of
Christ, of his Flesh, and of his Bone, Ephesians. 5. 23, 24. Not a Worldly People
gathered in the Will of Man into a vain Form without the power; not I say, the
Synagogue of Satan, who denies Perfection, and the Sufficiency of Christ's
Light: And that there is none knows any thing aright, but by the Letter, as
this John Reynolds pretends is not true; for the Church of God was taught of
God, and the Elders in this Church were not brought up at the Worlds Schools of
Learning, nor called of Men Master, nor Hirelings, nor Persecutors of the
Innocent, as the Presbyters of these days are; but they were Holy Men of God,
of mean account in the World, raised up merely by God's Power, out of the
Heathenish and Jewish Worships, to know Christ's Spirit, and his Anointing in
them which taught them all things; and they were not such as got the Magistrate
to help them to great Livings and fat Benefices, and compel all by his Iron
Sword to come in to them, but they were Sufferers under the Powers of the
World, as we are at this day.

But whereas thou speak of every Man that is not so ordained, running in his
own will ordinarily to Preach, thou may take that to thy self, and your
selves, who never were ordained by the Holy Ghost, as they were; for when did
the Holy Ghost in your Assemblies say, as in Acts. 13. 2. Separate such and
such, for the work I have appointed them unto, Nay, nay, you have run and God
never sent you; for you never heard his Holy Voice at any time; and therefore
you profit not the People at all, but make them more Cunning to Dispute against
the Truth, than they were before they followed you.

But what Ordination of Man had Paul at his first going out to Preach? See Gal.
1. he received not the Gospel by Man, and went not to Man, no not to the
Apostles themselves for Ordination and Commission to Preach, but immediately
Preached Christ, as many have done, and do at this Day, who go under the
Reproach of the name Quaker. And so God is Restoring his Church to us Primitive
Purity and Power, to the stopping of the Mouth, and confounding the Wisdom of
all Flesh, whether called Pope, Cardinals, Bishops or Presbyters that the true
Eldership and Body of Christ, to God's Glory, may again appear: And what Rules
and Orders are, and shall be in this true Church, is known to God, and by him
Manifested, and to be Manifested to the Body it self, and not to the World; for
the World must neither have the right Understanding nor Management of those
things, no more than they had in those Days, when it was said, I stand not to
Man's Judgment; for the Holy Anointing must be all in the Church of God for ever.

Qu. 10. Thy Tenth and next Query, is a plain discovery of thy Folly, and of
thy manifest Enmity against the simple Appearance of Truth in any discovery;
and though thou say, the Scripture is thy Rule, yet by it thou can not endure
to be Ruled, but plain Language it self is thy Burden; and therefore thou
ask, how it can be said that ever Christ, or his Apostles, or Patriarchs, or
Prophets used the words Thou and Thee, when they never spoke English? And how
can it be unlawful for us to use the word You to each other, since the same
words in Hebrew, Greek and Latin that signify Thou, signify You in the
Singular Number also, and may be Translated You as well as Thou, and so it
seems thou say, 2 Samuel 15. 27.

Answ, John Reynolds, Did thou Read this Query twice over? Or did thou at
all Consider what thou said in it? Was either the Fear of God, or Care of
thy own Credit before thy Eyes when thou writest it? Surely neither. But thou
have judged in thy self with thy vain Thought, that because thou have used to
blind thy poor Hearers, and make them believe any thing for Truth thou speak
or writest; therefore it will be so with others: Nay, nay, the Day is dawned,
the Lord has given his People an Eye whereby all Covers are seen through; and
to this Light thou have manifested as much Nakedness and Blindness to be in
thee, as in the grossest of them that say Mass at Rome, or read Common Prayer
in English: Nay, I do believe many of them would be ashamed to argue thus, as
thou do; to wit, because Christ, his Apostles, Patriarchs and Prophets did
not speak in the English Tongue, that therefore they used not the words Thou
and Thee: How came the Translators to Translate their Words, when they speak to
a particular Person, Thou and Thee, and never You, as may all over Scripture be
easily found; thou may as well say, Christ, his Apostles, Patriarchs and
Prophets said nothing at all that is Recorded in Scripture in the English
Tongue, because they spoke not English; so the Lord has catched the Wise in
his own Craftiness; but thou go on, and say the same words in Hebrew,
Greek and Latin, that signify Thou, signify You, in the Singular Number also,
and may be Translated You, as well as Thou; which, I say, is altogether false;
for You is not at all Singular, but Plural altogether, and so the Translators
of the Bible knew, and therefore never Translated their Singular Term in the
foreign Language to you in English, but Thou and Thee, as is before mentioned;
and for that place in 2 Samuel 15. 27, thou set'st down, and says, it seems that
You is used to a singular there, it shames thee; for if envy to the Truth had
not Blinded thee, thou might (...) that the King speaking to Zadock, and
saying, Your Sons and you, speaks not of Zadock and his Son, but of Zadock and
Abiathar and their Sons, as the very words next after; and in Verse 29. plainly
show, and so here thou have committed that great Error thy self, that thy
Generation use to Charge falsely upon us; to wit, in taking a piece of a Verse
that seems to make for thy purpose, and leaves out the rest that shows fully
the Sense.

Qu. 11. Thy Eleventh and next Query is for the World, where thou undertakest
the part of an Advocate for Flesh; not only pleading for the Honor that is
below, but also for the Manner of it. Thy Doctrine is very pleasant to the
fallen Man, and the World cannot hate such Preachers as thee; for ye are not
only of the World, but chief Master Builders of the old House of the fallen
Adam, who loves the Earthly Honor. But now that Chrst the second Adam is come,
the Lord from Heaven, above the Earthly Man, let all Flesh bow before him, and
give up his Honor to him; otherwise this shall be fitly applied unto you that
Christ said unto the Jews, How can you believe, that not only receive, but also
seek, and plead for Honor one of and from another? John 5. 44. For Christ
received not Honor from Men, Verse 41. So that though there was a time that
Angels were bowed unto, which were greater than Flesh, Genesis 19. 1. yet a time
came that Angels denied that Honor, Rev. 22. 9. For now the Son himself was
Glorified, of whom it was said, And let all the Angels of God Worship him, Heb.
1. 6. And at his Name shall every Knee bow, Phil. 2. 10. And Christ said to the
Devil, who was like his Children, that would now be Worshipped, Thou shall
Worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve: The Devil and Haman
would be bowed unto, but the true Jew will bow only to God: But thou queriest,
and say:

Qu. Whether did the Saints in Scripture-times Sin, in giving Honor; that is,
(say thou) A Civil or Inferior Honor unto Men, and upon occasion
Testifying the same by Honorary Words or Deeds?

Answ. To which I answer and say, 1626 All that the Saints before the coming of
Christ did, is not to be an Example to us now; but we must all now, that would
be approved to Christ, take him for our Example, and to follow no Man for our
Example, further than they followed, or do follow him; and when the Apostles
speak of Honoring all, it must be understood (as in some place is mentioned)
in the Lord; and that is not with Cap and Knee, and false Flattering Titles,
and Gestures, as the World uses; but in Heart and Truth, as the Spirit of God
moves: So that a Man must first be in the Lord (out of the first fallen false
Mind) otherwise he knows not at all how to Honor either God or Man, but is a
Dissembling Wretch, making fair Shows outwardly of Love, where nothing but War
and Self-love is in the Heart: See 2 Samuel 20. 9, 10. Jude 16.

Thus Children being in the Lord, do, through the Lord, Honor Parents aright;
thus Servants in the Lord, Honor their Masters after the Flesh aright; and so
Church Members the Elders, Wives their Husbands; the Ruled the Rulers: Yea,
thus they Honor their Faithful Brethren aright; and in a Word, all Men; and so
the Scripture is fulfilled in them: But what Honor do these Faithful Ones look
for from Men? Nay, nay, believe and seek for that Honor that comes from God
only; and so the Scripture will not help the fallen Man now to his Honor,
which is his Life; but as the Scripture says, He that would save his Life,
must loose it. And so all you, Hypocrites of the World, who are giving Honor
to Proud Flesh, and receiving Honor from it, cease your Work, and let Christ
have his due, or verily he will break you all in pieces with his Iron Rod. But
in the end of thy Query, thy Conscience a little checking thee for this vain
Work, thou would daub over the matter, by telling People the Honor from
below, which thou have been pleading for, must not be in Opposition to, but in
Subordination to God's Honor: Nay, nay, I say, the true Christ, the Son of God
is come, and all Power in Heaven and Earth is given to him; and so all Honor,
and Glory, and Worship is his due (and the due of none else) to whom be it
given of all his Angels and Servants, both now and for evermore. So all People,
hearken and hear a word for your good; would ye be Honored? Then Honor the
Lord by obeying his Voice, and he will Honor you in due time, though for doing
his Will you loose the Worlds Honor, as assuredly ye will, if once ye be
Faithful.

Qu. 12. The next Query Consists of a great Boast of the Ministry, as though
it were Unrebukeable. And thou queriest, whether that Ministry can be lawfully
Condemned as Antichristian, which the Lord has owned and sealed with the
Conversion of many Souls.

Answ. 1662.
To which, I say if your Ministry were such as this thou speak of, then
indeed it were not safe to condemn it: But where are these Converts thou
speak of; to be a Convert, is to be turned from Darkness to Light, and from
the Power of Satan unto God; bring forth the Man that can witness thee to be a
Minister of the Gospel this way, that he may give us an Account of the true
Hope, if he have it in him: But Men cannot gather Grapes of Thorns, nor Figs of
Thistles; so thou being such an Evil Tree, as thou have manifested thy self in
these Queries to be, how can a true Convert be expected from such a Ministry?
But thou say, its in Power, etc. and that many stubborn Sinners have been
brought down unto their Faces, and to confess that God is in you of a Truth:
But I say, it will be hard for thee to bring forth such a Man; for when I use
to come amongst you to declare Truth against your Deceit, as the Lord ordered
me, I found a heap of hard-hearted Sinners, more like to destroy the Creature,
than to be Witnesses of Truth. O shameless Men that bring forth such bad Fruit!
And yet, with a Whores Forehead, dare take the Scripture which speaks of
Prophets in God's Church in God's Power, and apply it to your selves, who deny
the sufficiency of Christ's Light in Man; and know nothing but merely by the
Letter without, as thou for thy own particular have made manifest, and so are
sensual, not having the Spirit, as was noted in the third Query.

I observe also, in this present Twelfth Query, the Ignorance of the Grace of
God; for when thou have falsely Boasted of your Ministry what is has done, thou
say, is not this the Grace of God that brings Salvation? Tit. 2. 11, 12. I
say no; your Ministry, not being the true, is far from being the Grace of God
there spoken of; But if it were the true Ministry, it were not that Grace there
spoken of; for the true Ministry is but a service to that Grace, not the Grace
it self; for the Grace of God is that which has appeared unto all Men, and
that which brought Salvation to Jew and Gentile, as God's Gift without Words or
Works, and which was the Teacher of the Apostles themselves, as well as others:
And so when People would have been setting up Paul for his Ministry's sake, he
denied it, as nothing in comparison of the All Sufficiency of the Grace of God,
and the Word thereof, to which only at best he was but a Servant. But if it
could be manifest, that any under or amongst you were Convinced of the Evil of
their Ways in some measure; and so in their Dark Minds set upon a seeking after
the unknown God, which is the most can be found amongst you, and that rarely
neither; this is no warrant, either for them to stay with you, who are Ignorant
of the Way out of Sin unto God, neither is it any proof for you to be
Gospel Ministers, nor your Ministry to be a Gospel Ministry: For the
Gospel Ministry is not only Convincing, but Converting and Perfecting, Ephesians. 4.
11, 12, 13. which work ye have utterly denied, and so shut out your selves for
ever from the Gospel Ministry; and amongst the Priests of the Letter, Law at
best, must you be reckoned, which made nothing Perfect; and hence it is that
you are such bitter Enemies to the Spiritual Ministration, or New Covenant
mentioned, Rev. 8. And such earnest Contenders for the outward Shadows, outward
Law, Tithes, Temples, Days, Priests, etc. as is now every where found. But for
the True Power, and Gospel-Ministration, it is risen above all your Languages
and Tongues, and has darkened the Glory of all your Fleshly Forms and
Likenesses: And the Babes of God are in Obedience to God turned, and turning
from you unto this his Power that perfects to God for ever: And Pharaoh and all
his Host will not now be able to hinder Praises to the Lord God for ever.

Qu. 13. In this next Query thou go on seeking false Covers to hide thine
and your Nakedness, asking; How can the Quakers Condemn your Congregations,
because of some Wicked Unprofitable Hearers, when Christ himself (say thou)
did not Convert all his Hearers? And for this thou bring, Mat. 11. 20. and
Mat. 23. 37. and Isa. 49. 4. I say, all this will not cover your Nakedness, Oh
ye Teachers! nor your Congregations; for what have you to do to compare your
selves with Christ and his Holy Prophets? You that deny the Immediate
Revelations and Teachings of God's Infallible Spirit in these Days, and instead
thereof, set up Schools of Humane Learning to make Ministers by. O Hypocrites!
When will you give over perverting the right Ways of the Lord, and leading the
Blind into the Ditch? You that love to be called of Men, Master, Greetings in
the Market, uppermost Rooms at Feasts, chief Places in the Synagogues, as the
Pharisees did, all which Christ dis-allowed: What have you to do to compare
your selves with Christ and his Prophets? They are not Hirelings, and Fighters,
and Pleaders for the Worlds Gain, as you are: And so, though all that heard the
outward Declaration, or Sound of Christ, or his Prophets Words were not
Converted, yet that makes nothing for you, who have only a Sound, and so
Convert none to God: But, as I said before, beget them into your own Images,
making them more able to Dispute against the Life of Truth than some others,
and so greater will be your Condemnation: But now your Sheeps-Cloathing being
pulled off, the Lord will be Glorified in his Power, in the Conversion of many
to himself without you: For he has rejected your Confidence, and laid waste
your Mountain, and the Mountain of the Lords House is on the top of all your
Mountains in this great Day of the Lord, wherein in all the Children of the
Lord are taught of the Lord, and walk only in his Light, which comprehends and
teaches to avoid all the cunning crafty Ways of the Serpent; and now, not in
your Congregations, but in that Holy Assembly, is the Swords beaten into
Plow-shares, and the Spears into Pruning Hooks, and no War any more learned,
but under the Vine and Fig Tree all sit eating their pleasant Fruits, and
taking the Cup of Salvation, and both Praying unto, and Praising the Name of
the Lord.

But thou say, we have Drunkards, Fornicators, etc. among us, as well as
you, and that they are with us at our Prayers (if we have any) and that they
are not so severely dealt withal as yours are; for, thou say, some of yours
cast them out, which we do not.

Answ. Yea, thou false Accuser, such are cast out from us, and from the Church
of God, and with us they can neither Eat nor Pray, but with such as are
Ignorant of Christ, and the Sufficiency of his Light, and know no Light nor
Teacher but a Letter without (as thou have manifested in thy Queries) they may
both Eat, and Preach, and Pray; and when you cast out Drunkards and Fornicators
from amongst you, you must cast out your selves, for in that Nature you and all
Hypocrites are; and so some of you are Drunk with Wine and strong Drink, and
some with the Cup of the great Whore, some in the outward Fronications, others
in the inward, and some in both; so that your Tables are full of Vomit, and
every Bed defiled amongst you. And for the outward Drunkards and Harlots, and
such like (though we cannot but reprove and cast them out in that State) yet
this we say of them, that they may sooner enter into the Kingdom of God than
you that judge your selves free, and are not; for you are so Painted and
Conceited, that it is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of Needle, than
for you to enter in, and this makes your Wound more Uncureable, for you neither
enter in your selves, nor suffer others.

And for those words in thy Parenthesis, whereby thou questionest, Whether we
have any Prayer amongst us, shows thee to be a great stranger to us and our
Practice; for Prayer with the Spirit, and with Understanding we allow, and are
taught to practice, and say with the Apostle, Pray continually; but the wicked
Hypocrites the Lord rejects, whose Prayers to God are Abomination; and so it
would have become thee to have said less of us, and to have judged more soberly
and moderately of us, until thou have known us better than thou have done; for
thou have little knowledge of us, it seems, by coming into our Assemblies, but
only judge by Here-say, and false Reports, which brings thee under
Condemnation and Shame, when the Light now searches all things; but your Ways
and Practices are well known to such as are now come from amongst you, and so
in that they cannot be deceived. And now, John Reynolds, to proceed, I see much
of the Wisdom of God in bringing thee forth thus to manifest thy self in thy
Queries; and the next three Queries that follow, do, with those already
mentioned, fully manifest thy great Ignorance of the Reformation of things
brought to pass in Christ; for the Law had but a Shadow of the good things, and
yet thou stickest not to plead for it; and so thou had need learn the first
Principles of the Christian Religion, which thou remainest Ignorant of, before
thou be a Christian thy self, much more seeing thou take upon thee to be
Teacher of others; but to set down thy Queries themselves, or so much of them
as is the substance of the whole.

Qu. 14. And thy fourteenth Query, is, Had not the Saints, in Scripture-times,
their set places for public Worship as well as we? Had they not their Temple,
1 Chronicles. 6. which Christ calls his Fathers House of Prayer, and whips the
Buyers and Sellers out of it? etc.

Answ. To which I answer, You have indeed an outward Temple or House made with
Hands to Worship in of your own devizeing, the Old Popish Mass-house, and so
cannot be called the Fathers House of Prayer so well as the Jews was; for the
Temple at Jerusalem was made by God's Appointment for the outward Circumcission
to Worship, in during the Law, as a Figure of Christ's Body to be Magnified,
and therefore he whipped Buyers and Sellers then out of the Figure, as he does
now out of the Substance; but you have not only the Enemies Nature in you, but
you have brought forth his Work into open view in your outward Temples also,
which were never Built by God's Command, and so there is Buying and Selling
amongst you, as was amongst them, as every Eye sees: For there you Men made
Priests, sell Words, the Words out of dead Books to the People, and they give
you their Money, Glebe-land, and Tithes for them: O filthy Merchandise! The
Lord has shaken his Hand at your dishonest Gain, and is whipping out such
Merchants by his Powerful Truth out of his House; and your dead Works, which
you sell at so dear a Rate in your Stone-houses, which you call Churches, shall
no Child of Light ever buy of you: For the true Bread of God, his free Gift, is
now witnessed, Praises for ever: One sort of Merchant Priests sell their
Sermons and Mass to the People for Money, another sort their Common Prayer and
Sermons, and the third their Sermons and Directory.

And thou, John Reynolds, pleadest also for Synagogues and Pulpits, and when
thou have set down Scriptures that tell of the Jewish Temple, Synagogues, and
Pulpit, thou ask, if Christ and his Apostles did not report to these places
to instruct the People? To which I answer, First, That whilst the Jewish People
stood, Christ and his Apostles did sometimes go into their Temple and
Synagogues to Preach the Gospel of the Kingdom, and so an end of those things,
and to bring them out of these things which they and you so much dote on, and
plead for: but they did never Command Christians to Build such amongst them,
but told them, Their Bodies were the Temples of God, 1 Cor. 3. and that those
that abide in the Faith, were the House of God, Heb. 2. And these Christians
never so confined themselves or others to any such place for the Exercise of
their Conscience in the Worship of God, but met as the Lord Jesus and his
Apostles did; much less did they stir up the Magistrate, and drive the Jews out
of their Temple and Synagogues, and the Gentiles out of theirs, that so they
might creep into their Houses, and under another Form of Worship live upon the
Jewish Priests Tithes, Offerings, etc. nor upon the Maintenance of the
Idolatrous Priests of Diana, and the like Idols; as you Priests, to the shame
of your Profession, have done, and do at this day: What, have you driven the
Papists out of their Mass-houses, and do live upon their Priests Maintenance of
Tithes, Glebe-lands, Smoke-mony, Garden-pence, Handmony, and the rest of their
Foolish things? What, cannot a Man be Born, Marry, Live, nor Die, but you must
have Money for it! O Horrible and Filthy thing! stop your Mouths for ever, for
your Folly is manifest to all, and you can proceed no further: And so you
Priests of the last Order, called Presbyters, did not you drive out the
Prelates out of their Houses, which they had gotten from the Papists, and there
you sat down Feeding upon the Spoil of the People, as your Fathers had done,
and now think much that you are driven out again? And thus you fight with, and
drive out one another like wild Beasts, striving each of you to get Power of
others to be great in the Earth, and do what you will in your fat Pastures.
But, as I said, the Lord is arisen to whip you all out, and to pull down your
Nests, and to restore all things to their Primitive Purity, as in the beginning
before the Temples, Tithes, Pulpits, and such things were.

Secondly, I consider, that though I read that Christ and his Apostles went
amongst the People in their Temple and Synagogues, as we do at this day, to
Preach the end of these things, and so to bring People to the Word that was in
the Beginning, before all things, that the Worship might be in Spirit and
Truth, as it ought to be, John 4. Yet I never read, that either Christ or his
Apostles got up into their Pulpit, nor ever Commanded his to perk up into a
Pulpit of Wood over the People, as a Master of a Synagogue, to tell his
Thoughts of the Letter, as you do: For though Ezra, a Priest of the Law, had
his Pulpit or Tower of Wood to Read or Expound the Letter in, in those days,
before the Life was manifest; yet now the Life Christ Jesus is arisen, whose
Voice in the Heart, and in all places is to be heard, without a Pulpit, and
without Money, and without Price; and the Apostles Preached this Gospel in Towns
and Countries, where neither Temple, Synagogue, nor Pulpit was, but Tumults
rather; and so the Gospel is not a thing that will set up its Servants in
Worldly Honor, but indeed the contrary, which he that has an Ear may hear,
but the Wicked is so Proud in Heart, that neither Preacher nor Professor
amongst them will stoop to the simplicity of it.

The next thing Considerable in this Query is, thy twisting and striving to
keep up the Honor of the old Mass-house, however, if it be but a Name, though
it want the Nature, yet if thou can save that, thou think better that than
nothing; and say, What, though the Saints of God are called the Church; yet
that cannot hinder the House, where the Church meets, from being called a
Church? A Profound Reasoning! What, is this the Fruit of your cried up
Universities? What, must every Place, where any People meet, be called by the
Name of that People? What Logic is this? Surely the Wisdom of the World makes
haste into its Nothing again; God is utterly Confounding it. Do you call the
place where the Parliament or Privy Council sit, the Parliament or Privy
Council? Do you call a Barn, or such a moon place, where the Saints of God now
adays often meet, by the Name of a Church? If we should Reason for the places
where we meet, as you do for yours, surely you would Laugh at us, and might
then well call us filly Women and Seducers indeed.

But, to go on, thou bring a Scripture as though thou would prove the
thing, and it is Acts 19. 37. but the place being well weighed shames thee the
more; for the words in that place are the words of a Town-Clark, a Worshipper
of Idols, and they are these, For you have brought hither these Men, which are
neither Robbers of Churches (as K. James's Translators of the Bible have it,)
but in the Translation of the Bible by Beza, it is, You have brought hither
these Men, which have neither committed Sacrilege; nor, etc. if Paul had
spoken to him or others, and called a Stone-house a Church, as ye do, it had
been something to the purpose; but the Heathen speaking there of Sacrilege,
improperly Translated Robbing of Churches, can neither be understood to speak
of a Christian Assembly, nor the place where they Assemble; for the Covetous
and Idolatrous Copper-smith, and his Rude Fellows, matterr'd little what Paul
had done to these; but this Sacrilege, whatever it was, it must needs respect
something that the Heathen had in great Esteem: But thou bringing this to prove
that a House may be called a Church, because of the Church that may meet in it,
is nothing at all to the purpose; for thou will not say, it is like that the
Worshippers of Diana were the Church; for he that runs without Light must needs
stumble, if not fall often. So J. R. walk more soberly, and take some Light
along with thee, when thou have to do in such things.

Then the last thing in this thy Query is a secret Confession of a weakness of
thy own Arguments in this matter; and thou say, What though the Worship of God
be not so tied to any place, as formerly; yet there should be convenient places
for the Church to meet in?

Answ. I answer, The Worship of God now is not tied to any set place at all,
and so all your set places, that you plead for, are in the will of Man; and the
true Church God both has and will order it, and provide convenient places for
it to meet in, though the World cannot hardly afford it on Earth a place to
meet in at all. And for that thou concludest and say, What though our
Churches have been formerly Abused to Idolatry; So were the Temples and
Synagogues abused to Idolatrous and Superstitious Worship, yet nevertheless did
Christ and his Apostles make use of them: I answer, What use Christ and his
Apostles made of Temple and Synagogue of the Jews, is in part before declared:
To which this may be added;

As for Christ, he was, according to the Flesh, of the Jews, made under the
Law, and so he was to cleanse the Temple, a Figure of his Body, and fulfill the
rest of the Laws, Shadows and Customs, and so end them all, and through the
Gospel bring Life and Immorrality to Light, and to Consecrate the New and
Living Way through the death of all old things; for he Nailed them all to his
Cross, and they died with him; but he arose from the Dead, and not to bring up
the old Dead things again, as thou J. R. and thy Generation would have, but to
make all things New; for says he that sits on the Throne, Behold, I make
all things New, Rev. 21. 5. Glory to his Name for ever; but none can see God in
his Throne, but in the Light that comes immediately from him, which Lights
every Man that comes into the World; which the Worlds Builders did always deny
and reject, as they do at this day: And for the use the Apostles made of the
Temple or Synagogues of the Jews, it was, as is formerly set down, to reason
with them there of things pertaining to the Kingdom of God; the Jews, not the
Christians, being Assembled there, as the Servants of God, called by the World
Quakers, do at this day, to bring People both then and now from the Shadows
unto the Substance Christ Jesus, who has said of his Body, Destroy this
Temple, and I will build it again in three days; and so the three days being
come and finished, the Temple that is Holy was built again, and God Worshipped
and Glorified in it; but nothing that is defiled or loves a Lie can enter into,
or be joined unto it: But the Jews were more reasonable in one thing than you
Priests of England are, for they suffered Paul, it seems, to Reason with them
several of their Sabbath Days in their Assemblies quietly; but now, if any come
amongst you upon the like account that Paul did, it is hard for such to escape
your Furious Hands, or a Prison in these days: Whereby it appears your time is
but short, you are so unreasonable and full of rage.

But the use that those Gospel Ministers the Apostles made of the Jewish
Synagogues, will not serve your turns, O Parish-Masters! for unless you may
have them in your own dispose to bring the World into them, to call you Master,
and put into your Mouths, it will not answer your lustful Mind: And so indeed,
with you that have put the Name of Church and Saints upon the Wild World; a
great Stone-house Fashioned to Solomon's Temple, with an addition of an high
Steeple ( Babel-like) with Bells in it, seems most convenient, though it was
not only acused too, but even built for Idolatry so much: But for the little
Flock of Christ in Cities, Towns and Villages, a less House when they they need
one, will be as much, if not more convenient: And to conclude, whereas thou
intimatest, that your great Stone-houses, which thou call Churches, though
formerly used to Idolatry, yet now they are free; I say, thou will want proof
for this, so long as you continue in the Worshipping and Serving of Creatures;
(and Paul's Doctrine continues true, which says, Covetousness is Idolatory;)
unless you repent and bring cleaner Vessels into your Temple than you do.

Qu. 15. Thy Fourteenth Query was for Set-places, now this the Fifteenth is for
Set-times; and thou ask, Had not the Saints in Scripture their Set-times for
Public Worship as well we?

Answ. Yea, I say, the Saints amongst the Jews had their Set-times for their
Worship better than you; for they were under the Law, and that was their
Warrant; but you are neither under Law nor Gospel in Truth, but any Carnal
lmitators in your Will, sometimes of the one Customs, and sometimes of the
other, as your Self-willed and Self-ended Hearts in your blindness Prompts you
unto; and so for this, I say, Love the Light which Christ has lighted you
withal, and it will lead you to Repentance from all your vain Observings; and
in the Light wait, that God's good Spirit you may know, and receive to Teach
you, and lead you into all Truth, according to the Promise; and so wait in the
Light that lets you see your wants, that is the Holy Place, and wait there for
him in his Fear, that comes in his own, not Man's time; and be not as the
Heathens, that think to be heard for their much wording of it, nor spread
abroad the Sails of your vain Imaginations, when you Pray as the Hyportes do,
lest Satan Transformed carry you about, and fill you with the Wind of his
Frothy Spirit, making you believe you Pray with Gods Spirit, when it is his own
lying Spirit, as his Custom is amongst you to work.

Qu. 16. So thou having spent thy Strength in Pleading for your Set-Places and
Times, in Imitation of the Jews, thou go in this Query, endeavoring to
prove your Work on these times, in those places, from the likeness of them, to
theirs then. And thus as you do, so do the Papists for their Customs, for they
Reason as thou do: For had not the Jews, say they, a Temple and Synagogues;
So we: Had not they One High Priest? So we, who is called a Pope, had not they
an Altar, and Sacrifice outward? So we; Had not they their Set-Fasts, and
Music in their Temples, and Quiristers, and Tithes, and Offerings, and such
things? And so have we, say they: So says John Reynold here in this present
Sixteenth Query: Had not the Saints in former Times the Scriptures Read in
their Congregations, Acts 15. 21. Luke 4. 16. and sometimes Expounded, Neh. 8.
7, 8. and Prayed there, Verse 6. and Singing David's Psalms there, 1 Chronicles. 16.
7. etc. and Blessing the People in the Name of the Lord, Number. 6. 23. etc. Well,
this was so under the Law, but what will thou infer from this, that you may
continue the Customs of the Jews in such things; that follows not, unless you
will deny the Ascension of Christ, Ephesians. 4. from 8. to 17. for the Jews were
under the Law, and so they had a Worldly Sanctuary, and a Worldly Service, with
diverse Ordinances of that Nature, until the time of Reformation by Christ
raised up, and come again in Spirit, and then says God, Behold I make all
things New; and so he that is in Christ is a New Creature, Old things passed
away, all things become New; New Temple, New Offerings and Service, New
Prayers, Singings, Preachings, which no Worldly Man can get into, but all with
the Holy Spirit and with Understanding: But thou bring several places out of
the Writings of the Apostles, and Luke, as in Acts, Corinthians, and Hebrews,
to prove that the Apostles and Saints use Praying, Preaching, Psalms, and
Blessing amongst them: Yea, but what is that to you, that deny that Infallible
Spirit of God to be Head in you that guided them; and so get the Worlds Wisdom,
Acts, and Helps instead thereof, to make you Ministers and Saints by. You have
indeed in some things a Form of their Works, but the Power being found, not
only wanting amongst you, but denied by you; the Children of Light are
necessitated to turn away from you, and thus to witness against you.

But thou say, Christ did not only Read the Letter in the Jews Synagogues,
but also Preached from a Text of it: To which I answer, For his Reading, he did
upon account of being a Jew, to fulfill all that Righteousness of the Law in his
day till his Offering up; but that he Preached from a Text, as you Priests do,
I utterly deny. For his doing at that time was only this; He being Reading in
the Prophet, as is mentioned in that Fourth of Luke, and in providence meeting
with that place, which said, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, for he has
Anointed me to Preach the Gospel, he has sent me to heal the broken hearted,
etc. And the Spirit of the Lord arising in him in Life and Power, and
Witnessing in him to the fulfilling of that Scripture in himself, He was
overcome with Love and Glory, and so closed the Book, and gave it again to the
Servant, and sat down; and so the Eyes of the People were sasiened on him
through Admiration, and Ravishments of Love and Spirit that was upon him; and
so as that Living Spirit gave him Utterance in the Silence of all Flesh, he
spoke to them, and Preached in many Gracious Words the fulfilling of that
Scripture in the Ears of that Day: And this was Christ's doing there.

But, O you poor naked Teachers of England! etc. What have you to do to boast
of this Example for warranting your Practice? There was no choosing a Verse in
a Chapter in the Will of Man, which you think you can raise most words from,
and so consult with your own Imaginations and old rusty Books, how you may
raise an Hours Discourse from it, and so divine to please the itching Ears of
Carnal Professors, that they may give you outward Honor, Glebe-lands, Tithes,
Augmentations, Easter-Reckonings, and the like to please your Lusts; and if
need be to Fight for you, and lay their Sword and Law upon all that will not
hold you up, and Cry Peace to you: O Hypocrites! How have you deceived the poor
People with your long wrestings of Scriptures? But now that the Spirit of Truth
is come, it is leading us into all Truth without your help, Praised be the Lord
for ever.

And so for Christ his Expounding out of Moses and the Prophets, and opening
the Understanding of the Disciples to know the Scripture mentioned, Luke 24.
And Paul's Expounding and Testifying of the Kingdom of God, and Persuading the
Jews concerning Jesus, both out of the Law of Moses, and out of the Prophets
mentioned, Acts 28. is nothing to you who nowadays (instead of Testifying to
the Kingdom of God, and opening the Understanding to know Scriptures, and the
Light of the World, which they witnessed unto) do Testify of this World,
Pleading for your Carnal Ordinances, Set Places, Set Times, Bowing one to
another, and the like, as is manifest in these Queries; and so instead of
opening, shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against Men, and so with those of old,
will neither enter into the Kingdom of God your selves, nor suffer others; but
are under the Woe, as you and the People, may Read all along in Mat. 23. And for
Singing of Psalms, it does not say, that the Saints Sung the very words of
David, and no other, and that in Rhyme and Meeter, in Worldly Tunes, after Men's
Inventions, or with Organs, or so; but they Sing as the Spirit gave them
utterance in plain words, as thou may Read in Acts. 4. 24. etc. Which thou
bring for Singing, if that may be called Singing, this was a Song by the
Persecuted, not the Persecutors, which in the Persecuted Church of God at this
day is often Sung, worthy Consideration, but a shame for all Persecuting
Priests and Professers to take these words into their Mouths: And the same
Apostle in that place, 1 Cor. 14. 26. that says, every one has a Psalm,
says, I will Sing with the Spirit and with Understanding; so then a Psalm was
a Gift of the Spirit spoken forth from the Understanding to the Edifying of the
Hearer; and they were to be silent when that Gift was Exercised as well as
others; but your Confused Noises and Temple-songs is but as Howling in God's
Ears, and his Childrens Ears in this day; for there the Proud and Scornful Sing
Falsely, and say, that they are not Proud and Scornful, because David said so,
Psalm. 131. and so with, and amongst you is David's Psalms in words used, but
the Holy Life and Innocent Love that he Lived in, in Deeds denied, and so the
Lord can take no Pleasure in you.

And for that Scripture thou bring of Aaron and his Sons Blessing the Tribes
of Israel in the Name of God: And Paul's commending of the Churches in the
closure of his Epistles to the Grace of God, makes as little for your customary
Blessings of, and speaking Peace to the Wicked for self ends, as the Preaching
of Christ does for your Daubing and Divining for Money; for you are neither of
Aaron's Order, nor of Christ's Anointing; and so wash you, and make you clean,
and put away the Evil of your Doings, and God will Bless you, but not
otherwise; and better will it be for you to have the lowest place in that
Blessing, than the uppermost Room where you stand in the Cursed Ground.

Qu. 17. Thy Seventeenth and next Query is; Has not Christ Jesus sent out his
Ministers to Disciple him all Nations, and to Baptize them in the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and Promised to be with them to the end of the
World? Mat. 28. 19, 20. Is not that Baptism with Water? And having set down
some Scriptures that speaks of washing with Water, thou criest, Are not they
then contrary to Christ and his Apostles that deny Water Baptism?

Answ. To which I answer, That all this, if it were granted thee, is nothing at
all to thine and thy Brethrens Practice, who take a little Water and sprinkle
it on a Child's Face, calling it Christ's Baptism; for there was Discipling, and
Confessing of Faith, and the Holy Ghost, before Baptizing, which cannot
groundedly, by you, be said of Infants of a day old, or so; and this thou
saw, which made thee so busy in the words of that Query there following, to
prove Infants sprinkling: And first, Thou go about to prove it, by saying,
The Scripture intimates that the Children of Believing Parents are Disciples,
Acts 15. 10. I say to the Children of Light, this Scripture intimates no such
thing at all, but plainly holds forth the contrary; for the words there are,
Why tempt ye God to put a Yoke upon the Disciples Necks, which neither our
Fathers nor we were able to bear? Now these Disciples here spoken of, were not
Natural Infants, but grown Men, Christian Believers, as the First, and the
Twenty-third, and Twenty-fourth Verses of that same Fifteenth Chapter do
plainly show; and so if thou had not been a Blind follower of the Blind Guide
Richard Baxter, whose Argument this is, thou would not, it is like, have
offered to bring this for this purpose, for it shames you all for ever: But
this Argument being too weak for thee, thou endeavourest by another Argument,
as little to the purpose, to prove the Natural Infants Subjects of
Water Baptism, because, say thou, they have received the Holy Ghost, or else
how could the Kingdom of God consist of such? To this I answer and say, But
which of the Natural Infants which you sprinkle has the Holy Ghost, and which
not? How come ye to see this difference? Or you will say, that all have it; if
so, then may People have the Holy Ghost ordinarily by Natural Birth, without
hearing; then where is your great Glorying of your Words or Sermons? But to
proceed, thou say, Can we imagine that God will give them the Kingdom, and
deny them Water Baptism? I answer, God will give the Kingdom of Heaven to whom
it belongs, and it consists not in outward Observation or Washings, as
Dipping, or Sprinkling, or so, but in Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy
Ghost: And thou that, with the Papists, attributes so much to Water Baptism,
how comes it to pass, that after all your Sprinkling the Children, as they grow
up in Years, many grow up in so much Wickedness and Vanity, as is every where
manifest? And as concerning Children of Believing Parents, we deny them to be
Believers that hate the Light, and believe not in it, but say, it is
Insufficient, as before is declared. But as for that Mat. 28. which thou and
thy Brethren usually bring for your Custom of Preaching and Sprinkling of
Infants; I say, it makes nothing for you, who sit down in some Fat Benefice or
other, as times favor you, and there Divine from the Letter, as is said, an
Hours Discouse or two in a Week to the People for Money: Why go you not into all
Nations, as they did, and Disciple the Turks and Indians, if you will be
warranted by this Scripture? But whereas you take the Apostles for your
Example, I query first, When did ever the Apostles go to the Schools of the
World so many Years to be made Ministers? Did ever the Apostles seek to the
Magistrates to compel People to pay them Wages, as you do, or compel People by
their Sword to conform to Christian Doctrine? Or when did they sprinkle
Infants, receive Tithes of the People, or Sing David's Prayers, Quakings in
Rhyme and Meeter, as you do? When were they called Master, as you are? And many
the like things, wherein you differ as much from the Apostles, as Darkness from
Light, whereby you show your selves to be Guided by a contrary Spirit, (to wit)
the Spirit of Error: So for ever be silent, and stop your Mouths, for you are
both out of the Apostles Doctrine and Practice, as your Fruits make you
manifest.

Qu. 18. Thy Eighteenth Query is concerning the Supper; and thou ask, Has
not Christ Jesus given us his own Example for the Celebrating of his Last
Supper? And has not the Apostle Paul delivered it to the Church, and Commanded
the Saints to do it in Remembrance of Christ, and thereby to show forth the
Lord's Death till he come again?

Answ. The Lord's Supper we own; for Behold I stand at the Door and knock,
says Christ, and if any Man hear my Voice, and open to me, I will come in and
sup with him, and he with me: And for the Doctrine of Christ, his Eating and
Drinking with his Disciples, so we own it in its place, and for its time; but
what is that to you, who are both out of the Doctrine and Practice of the
Apostles, as by your Fruits is manifest? And so you Eat and Drink unworthily,
and thereby are guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ; and so Eat and Drink
Damnation to your selves, and do not discern the Lord's Body: And so in
witnessing against you and your Practices in this State, we neither Vilify
Men, nor Jesus Christ. And thou say, What a vain pretense is it to say, We
Eat Christ Spiritually? I say, it it vain, if it be but in Pretense; but if it
be in Truth, it is the greatest thing, for it is Eternal Life; and he that thus
Feeds upon Christ's Body is Alive to God: But you in all, your other Eatings
and Drinkings, are Dead whilst you Live: And so of you, that would keep People
always in the Figures and Signs, saying, The coming of Christ, spoken of 1 Cor.
11. 26. is never to be witnessed here: I demand, Whether that Cup which the
Apostle said, The Cup of Blessing which we Bless, is it not the Communion of
the Blood of Christ; And the Bread which we Break, is it not the Communion of
the Body of Christ: For we being many are one Body, and one Bread; for we are
all Partakers of that one Bread, 1 Cor. 10. 15, 16, 17. I say, Whether was this
outward Bread and Wine, yea or nay.

Qu. 19. And in the next Query thou come over with these things again,
saying, How can those Persons be Faithful to Christ Jesus, and Obedient to his
Gospel, that refuse to Pray, and Sing Psalms, and Baptize with Water, and
receive the Lord's Supper?

I answer and say, If any disobey God in any thing he commands them unto,
whether in any of these things, or in any other, they are not Faithful to
Christ and his Gospel; but those People thou here secretly shoots at, are
taught to obey God in all his Requirings, and so to Glorify him in their
Bodies and Spirits, which are his; and so are we clear before the Lord from
this thy Charge, and also from that which follows; for we Revile none, much
less those that in Conscience of their Duty to God observe them or any thing
else: And so the Reviler must lodge in thine own Bed, who fears not to Revile
and speak Evil of such in these days, as in Conscience to their known Duty to
God, Worship him in Spirit and in Truth.

But you whose Fear toward God is taught by the Precepts of Men, in vain is
all your Worship; for I Testify for the Lord, that whatever you do, though it
had the very Form of the Saints Practice of old, which yours have not, and not
led thereinto by the Motion of the Eternal and Infallible Spirit of Life, it is
nothing but the Precepts of Men, and Will Worship, and no better than Offering
Swines Blood, or cutting off a Dogs Neck: and for the endeavoring to keep up
your Custom of Praying, and Singing in mixed Congregations, from the Example of
Jews, or them that follow Christ; I say, your Hypocritical Praying and Singing
is good no where, but Rejected of God; and I see thy P^ide all along, that
would be comparing your Congregations to those that followed Christ: Nay, nay,
for though there was One Devil, yet there was Eleven Saints; but when you are
searched, scarce One of many Twelves that has any true Fear of God before
their Eye is to be found amongst you.

Qu. 20 And whereas in thy last Query thou ask, Whether those Persons that
have Experienced the Operation of the Spirit of God in the Gospels Preaching
and Administrations, Convincing their Consciences, Melting the Hearts, Humbling
the Spirits, and Turning them from Darkness to Light, and have afterward
Tasted much Sweetness, and have felt Soul-Ravishing Comforts in the Enjoyment
of God in Ordinances, have not the Witness in themselves that God does own
these, and Bless these Privileges to them. I answer, Yea, it is thus with all
that* in Truth, have the Witness in themselves, that God does own these, and
Bless these Privileges to them. But those People that go under the Name
Quakers, have, to the Praise of God's free Love, the Witness in themselves of
such Fruits as these amongst them, from the Virtue of the Everlasting Gospel,
and its Administration. And therefore we can Witness, that John Reynolds, and
all such as Condemn this Ministry and Work of God amongst us (as Heresy, or
so) are Deceivers, and that they are Strangers to Spiritual Communion with God,
1670
whatever in words they may Boast, who cannot meet with, and enjoy God where we
(to his Immortal Praise, be it in Truth spoken) do experience that loving
Kindness and Goodness which is better than Life it self: And therefore, how
long may this John Reynolds, or any other Seducer or painted Sepulcher talk,
before ever they can persuade these whom the Lord has so loved, not to believe
their own Spiritual Senses and Experiencies? But to conclude, Whereas this John
Reynolds in his high swelling Words of his last Query, and the 12 th, boasts
much of his own and his Fellows Experiencies of Spiritual things, I refer the
Reader to the rest of his Queries, and especially the 3, 5, 8, 10, 11, 14, 15,
16, and to the answers to them all; and to weigh all in the Balance of Just
Judgment, and it will appear to him beyond words what may be Judged of them and
us.

Thomas Tailor.


